Rome's Conviction: OR, A DISCOVERY Of the unsoundness of the main Grounds of
Rome's Religion, in answer to a book, called The right Religion, evinced by L.B.

Showing, 1. That the Romish Church is not the true and only Catholic Church,
infallible ground and rule of Faith. 2. That the main Doctrines of the Romish
Church are damnable errors, and therefore to be deserted by such as would be
saved.


Nos autem non moveat aut turbet haeretici istius perfidi abrupta dementia, qui
cum in tam ingenti dissentionis and schismatis crimine constitutus, and ab
Ecclesia seperatus sit sacrilega temeritate non dubitet in nos sua crimina
retorquere. Cum sit enim a seipso nunc factus immundus, sordibus sacrilegis
inquinatus, hoc nunc nos esse contendit, etc. Cyprian libell. ad Novat.
Haeretic. By WILLIAM BROWNSWORD, M.A. and Minister of the Gospel at Douglas
Chapel in Lancashire.

London, Printed by J.M. for Luke Fawn, at the sign of the Parrat in Paul's
Churchyard. 1654.

Brownsword's Romes Conviction.

Christian Reader.
COnsidering the multitude of Popish as well as of other corrupt Books
dispersed amongst us, the greater activitie of the Romish party in oppugning,
than of ours in propugning the Truth, the reproaches which the true Reformed
Protestant Religion, by reason of the Schisms, Heresies, Blasphemies,
Perjuries, Treacheries and other gross enormities of some pretended Professors
thereof, lies under: It must needs be a work acceptable to God, and good men,
to speak a word in season to roll away the reproach of Sion, to make good her
ancient plea against Babylon, and to manifest that we have neither lost nor
left our Religion. The which is the pious design of this Author in this answer.
As therefore upon perusal of it, we have judged it to be solid as well as
seasonable, so we shall pray, and hope that it may be serviceable to the Church
of God.

Richard Hollinworth. Edward Gee.


To the Worshipful, WILLIAM ASHHURST ESQUIRE.
SIR,
IF either particular favors exhibited to the Author of any Book, or public
zeal for truth in the exhibitant (two of the main grounds of Dedicatory
Epistles) may oblige to a Dedication; I know none whom I can so readily look to
as your self, from whom, as the Church of God has received much good,
(especially, whilst the Lord did employ you in a public trust) so my self in
particular have shared of your influences. Your actings in public seasoned
with wisdom, piety, zeal and fidelity have made you precious in the godlies
sight, both in this and our sister Nation. Your seclusion from that trust has
made you less seen, not less virtuous: your influences are not bound up, but
contracted, that they might be more forcible where they fall. Our cold Religion
has more of warmth by your presence, Whilst you are an example to some, and
an encouragement of others to their duty. Your constancy, zeal for Truth, love
to the Ministry, diligence in frequenting Ordinances, besides your Family
worship, (and that in these fickle and cold times, wherein Ministry, Ordinances
and Duties are every where cried down) do render you a worthy example to frozen
souls. Your respect to the Ministers of Christ, (to whom your house is as
Obediahs to the Prophets) learned from the example of your religious father, is
a great encouragement of them to their duty. Hereof as others, so especially my
self have been a witness, and a large partaker, receiving the greater influence
by my nearness to you, being for some time of your family, and still owned as
your Pastor.

As a small acknowledgement whereof, I humbly offer these first fruits of my
public labors, for under your wing they were sown, quickened and brought to
this ripeness. They beg your acceptance and patronage, which if the Author
obtain for them, He matters not the blustrings or hatred of Popish adversaries
against him. The weakness of the work may receive strength^ Cum sapimus
patr^^s: years may teach more knowledge: In the interim your favor may much
strengthen it, but especially Gods blessing, to which I commend both your self
and it, and rest,

Yours in all Christian duty perpetually obliged, WILLIAM BROWNSWORD.

To the Orthodox READER.
AMongst all the Darts that Satan uses for the subversion of the Church there
is none more dangerous, nor more used then his Arrow of Division. Hereby
apishly imitating God himself, who by dividing their tongues overthrow Babels
Builders, and by an evil spirit between Abimelech and the men of Sechem
destroyed them both. When Satan had endeavored, but could not hinder the
Churches Resurrection in Great Constantine, what hot divisions did he raise
within her by Arian Heretics? what contentions did the Church groan under in
the time of zealous Luther, when Zion had newly delivered her self from the
daughters of Babylon with whom she had dwelt? In our own times since the Church
began to ascend to more then ordinary Reformation in Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline, and Government, and that the Reformed Churches were drawing to the
nearest union; even in this juncture of time does this old Serpent practice his
ancient policy: This he does by his agents, amongst whom in these last ages the
Romanists (first Heathen, now Christian idolaters) are chief. These have been
the usual Fomenters of Protestant differences, using it as a main stratagem to
divide us, that so they may overcome us; witness the advice of Cardinal Allen,
mentioned by the Cheshire Ministers in their attestation. Chesh. attest. p. 34.
And the project of the Spanish Court, attested by Sheldon, sometimes a Popish
Priest, Sheld. Survey of Miracles of Antichrist, page 179, 180.
and conversant in it. His words because considerable, I have at large
transcribed, Wheresoever (says he) and whenever I have heard (as I have done
often) some, no small ones of those countries, and of those Courts, debate upon
88s overthrow, they ever resolved that Elizabeth living (so they termed that
renowned Queen's Reign) there was no such like attempt to be made; but she
being dead, then if variety of Competitors (which they hoped for) did bring
confusion it would be good fishing; otherwise if there follow a Successor
peaceably to the Crown -- then they resolved, that all means possible were to
be used, that peace -- might be concluded, which being made then by the secret
endeavors of Priests and religious men (who might be sent hither with more
security then before) we must draw, said they; if not wholly, yet to be at
least our indirect favorers and friends, some of the Commanders, and those who
cannot be won by pretense of religion, must be purchased by gifts and large
promises. But above all we must labor to shake hands with some of those to
whom the care of the Navy, the Ports, and Seacoasts is committed; that if any
such like attempt hereafter be thought upon by the Pope, or his Catholic
Majesty, we may find some favorites. This is their grand Project, and whether
they are not now acting it, let the Considerate judge; for my own part, I have,
and still do look on the Papists as the principal Instruments in our divisions,
and there are these five special Considerations move me to it.

1. The many Popish Errors instilled into, and broached by such as leave the
truth, Who that knows Anabaptism, but is acquainted with their Popish Doctrines
of Free Will, Justification by works, Possibility of keeping the Commandments,
etc. It was Mr Love's Observation to his people a little before his troubles,
that there were about twenty Popish errors broached by them. Was not the
Foundation of that Babel the Anabaptistical party were lately erecting, (if God
in mercy to his Church had not broken them in pieces) a popish principle, viz.
that Dominion is founded in grace, and therefore they, the Saints, must rule
over the wicked, as any that professed the true religion, and had estates,
would have been. Is not the Quaker religion a mixture of Popery with other
errors, else what means those Tenets, charged upon them by the Ministers of
Newcastle: That we are not justified by the righteousness of Christ, A book
called The perfect Pharisee under Monkish holiness, etc.
which he in his own Person did fulfill without us, but by inherent holiness
which Christ within us inables us to perform. 2. That man by his own power may
stand perfect, and that men may be perfectly holy in this life. 3. That there
is no entrance into Heaven for any not perfectly holy, unless by Purgatory. 4.
That every man in the world has a light within him sufficient to guide him to
salvation. 5. That the Scriptures are not a rule for us, nor are the spirits to
be tried by Scripture, nor are we to study them or give any sense of them.

2. The Apologies which have been of late made for Papists and Popery by the
Authors of the Beacon quenched, the Catholic Moderator, with many other books
pretendedly printed in France, but really in England, as the Beacon on fire
undertakes to prove.

3. The discovery of some Priests and Jesuits, and their secret actings tending
to divisions, themselves going under the names of converted Jews, or gifted
men, or such as have left Popish Seminaries out of discontent with Popish
errors, or Gentlemen that have been traveling and return unto us for their
healths sake, or friends to some private Papists, whom they can accompany into
the society of such as they have hopes of seducing.

4. The many wandering persons, strangers in the places where they come, without
any call or imitation, gathering assemblies, thrusting themselves into the
company of honest but simple persons, and dispersing books pretending to, and
holding out some Truths, but not without mixture of Popish errors.

5. The intolerable enmity in the sectaries of our days against those who most
earnestly oppose Popery, and according to their Covenant seek the extirpation
of it. Nothing has so much been declaimed against, none so much opposed as the
Ministry and Ministers of Christ who have set themselves against these errors.

Against this evil there is a twofold remedy. 1. Discoveries of true solid and
fundamental Doctrines, which has been excellently done by the reformed
Churches in their Harmony of Confessions, by the reverend Assembly of Divines
at Westminster in their Confession of Faith and Catechismes, and by many
particular Divines in their sums of Divinity. 2. Opposition of the enemies of
the Churches peace and unity. In which many have bestowed much labor to good
purpose, (some resisting one error, and some another) weakening the power, and
stopping the progress of false teachers. Though the former be more excellent,
as more familiar and public in its use (every one not being able to wade into
Controversy) yet this latter has its profit, and is also necessary: and
therefore the Apostle requires that a Bishop be able by sound Doctrine, both to
exhort and convince the gainsayers, Tit. 1.9, 10, 11. and his reason is, For
there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers, specially they of the
Circumcision, whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole houses, teaching
things which they ought not for filthy lucres sake. Of this nature is this book
before thine eyes, composed and set forth upon serious and considerate grounds.
The occasion offered has an influx upon its composure, the seasonableness of
it (as the Author conceives) occasions its publishing. The occasion was this; a
Popish Gentleman with whom I had some converse having had the loan of a
Protestant Author of mine, in requital brought me this Popish Doctor, as worth
my reading, expecting (as I conceived) that I should say something to it, which
at first I thought to do very briefly and suddenly. But finding the book full
of errors, and the study of a reply delightful and suitable to my studies,
wherein (by occasion of the place and persons amongst whom Gods providence had
cast me) I had been most employed, next to my special Ministerial duties,
especially, supposing it might be an Antidote both to my own Congregation, and
others, against this and such like infectious writings, I proceeded to this
answer, which thou now see; which I conceive very seasonable in these times,
being moved hereunto by these reasons.

1. This is the great Controversy: Popery is the main error which the Church
of the New Testament has to oppose; Its the mystery of iniquity upheld by the
man of sin, The Antichrist.

2. Its at present least opposed of any other. We abound in controversies
amongst our selves, whilst Papists set by unopposed, taking it (to use the
Cheshire Ministers language) as if God had set us together by the ears to make
some sportfull spectacle for them to behold.

3. Its most active, (though more prudently, and with less noise managed) then
other errors. The man of sin was acting in the Apos^les days, much more now,
seeing his time is shorter than then it was. Popish books are compiled,
translated, printed and dispersed over the Nation; Priests abound, and are
active amongst our people both with books and tongues, and make great use of
our divisions to persuade to Popery.

4. Its the judgment of some learned men, that Antichrist shall have a time of
prevailing before his death, and if so, the people of God must have a time for
their trying, and it cannot be far off. Now when this comes, the question will
not be whether we be Episcopal, Presbyterian, or Independent; this and many
such like differences, which through meekness of spirit might be easily
reconciled, shall then with shame be laid aside, and questions of higher
concernment will be put to us; as whether we believe the carnal presence in the
Sacrament, the Popes-Headship in the Church, and the Roman Churches Headship
over the world: whether we believe the Scriptures, or not rather the Pope to be
the rule of faith; whether we allow of Free Will, Merit, Justification by
works, Prayer to Saints as Mediators, half Commu^ion, which with other
errors, this Book of my Adversary endeavors to persuade you to, and that with
great hastiness.

5. The thoughts and study of this Controversy may be a means to divert that
heat which fly into o^r faces one against another. We have an enemy that seeks
the ruin of us all, and is getting ground of us whilst we are contesting with
our selves. Should we not unite against him? Papists are no despicable
adversaries, they are politic in getting, and cruel in their possessing power
over us. Should they prevail, they would soon put a period to many of our
controversies, to a deal of our fury against Ministers, Ordinances, Truths. I
know it will be said, this Controve^sie is old, and very much is already
learnedly written against it, and there needs no more.

To this I answer, 1. Though the Controversy is old, yet it still continues.
We have not yet seen the expected fall of Antichris^. It would favor ill to
persuade an Army to leave off a Siege, because much powder and bullets have
been shot against it. B^bylon is not yet sto^med, and taken, and ruined. 2. I
acknowledge, that much has been lea^nedly written against it, I reverence the
memory of learned Whitakers, Reinolds, Chamier, Cameron, Perkins, Rivet, with
many others, with whom Papists may cavil, but shall never confute: My design
is not to add perfection to their labors, nor to oppose them mainly with whom
they have contested. If I mention Bellarmine, Baily, etc. its only because they
comply with, or dissent from my present Adversary: my purpose is only to
imitate them who opposed Popery in such as maintained it in their times: I rake
not amongst the dead, but meddle with a present writer. If Papists will writ
anew against truth, it cannot be unseasonable to write anew for truth. Many
errors long since confuted, and laid in the dust, yet rising again are
assa^lted by later Divines. I had rather say much for truth then too little.

What I thought necessary to say against this Author, I have spoken avoiding
invectives, and needless digress^ons, endeav^uring to prevent some charges in
thy buying, and some pains in thy reading of it, and some railing from my
Adversary if he should reply; I commit thee and this labor to Gods Blessing.
If thou reap benefit by it, give God the praise, and let the Author have thy
prayers, whereby thou shall oblige to further service,

Thine and the Churches Servant in the Work of Christ. William Brownsword.

The Contents of this Book.
CHapter 1. Of Happiness. Page 13 Chap. 2. Of the way to Happiness. Page 14
Chap. 3. Of the diversities of Faiths, Hop^s, and Charities. Page 23 Chap. 4.
Of the Churches Power and Infa^ibilitie in matters of Faith. Page 27 Chap. 5.
O^ the possibil^tie of keeping the Commandments. Page 69 Chap. 6. Of Religion.
Page 93 Chap. 7. Of the Unity of Religion. Page 79 Chap. 8. Of the Spirit of
Spiritists. Page 103 Chap. 9. Of the Spiritists rule of Faith. Page 113 Chap.
10. Of the Protestant Church. Page 130 Shape 1. Page 132 Shape 2. Page 153
Shape 3. Page 159 Shape 4. Page 173 Shape 5. Page 182
Chap. 11. Of the Roman Church. Page 231 Chap. 12. Of certain Objections made
against the Roman Church. Page 272 1. Objection Page 273 2. Objection Page 299
3. Objection Page 321 4. Ob^ection Page 324 5. ^b ecti^n Page 340 6. Objection
Page 348 7. Objection Page 363
The Epilogue. Page 380
Romes Conviction; OR A DISCOVERY OF The unsoundness of the maine grounds of
Romes Religion.
WHen I look upon this book, I cannot but remember what that blessed Apostle
St. Peter foretold should come to pass -- There shall be false Teachers amongst
you, who privily shall bring in damnable Heresies, -- and many shall follow
their perniciou^ ways, by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken
of; and through covetousness shall they with feigned words make Merchandise of
you, etc. 2 Pet. 1. What feigned words this Author uses whereby to bring in
his damnable Heresies, and to make Merchandise of souls, besides the book it
self, the Epistles, and Epilogue do clearly evince. I shall therefore take a
view of them as they lie in my way, and first for the Epistles, one is directed
to the Catholics of England, the other to the Reader; whether he intends to
exclude his Catholics from reading his Book, because he distinguishes from
the Reader; or that he mainly designs it for the use of others, (it may be the
Protestants of England) whilst he only calls for the Patronage of Catholics,
let the Reader judge. Certainly there are strong endeavors to enlarge the Popes
Chair by the seduction of English Protestants, as appears by those many books
lately printed in London in the behalf of that Seat.

The former Epistle is divided betwixt murmuration; and adulation: There are
sad complaints that truth is grown so loathsome and hateful, that whosoever
goes about to tell it indangers displeasure, they despise and malign what
ought most of all to be cherisht and loved, of whom it is said they preferred
darkness before light, Joh. 3. Were it the truth indeed that you speak of, I
should join with you in complaining, and rather entitle your language to a
serious and sad complaint, then an unjust murmuration: It was once the sad
language of the Prophet, That truth is fallen in the streets, yea truth
fails, and he that departs from evil makes himself a prey, Isai. 59.14.15.
And through the privy introduction of Heresies amongst us, it has come to pass
that the way of truth is evil spoken of, and the language of the Prophet is in
the mouths of thousands of Gods Saints: But blessed be God for this good news
from Rome, that Popery is grown so loathsome and hateful, that whosoever goes
about to tell it indangers displeasure; and let me tell you, that I hope that
God will raise up Governors in this Land, that with other Protestant Princes
shall hate the Whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her
flesh, and burn her with fire, Apoc. 17.16. and that as God has cast it out
from being the publicly professed way in this Nation, so he will root it out of
the hearts of people in this Land more and more, though your selves be
murmurers, etc. 2 Pet. ^.

2. Your adulation is most palpable: Catholics are renowned Catholics; the
best and greatest conquerours, brave champions, great, glorious, good
conquerours, overcoming themselves, and what not? Their sufferings are many,
glorious, Such as blessed Saints have passed through.
for the truth, for God, and God with them, in them, and for them, God has
just cause to reward them. But alas how groundless are all these Titles. 1.
What great, or how many sufferings have your Catholics undergone in Engl^nd?
Have you been burnt at Stakes, or drawn into close inquisitions, and there
tortured, rackt, murdered? Have your bodies been mangled and cut in pieces?
Have you been gathered into Companies, and then burnt? Have your Wives been
ravished and ripped up, and their children tossed on Pikes? Have you been whipped to
death? Have the chief of you been designed to speedy ruin, as our King and
Nobles by you in the Gunpowder Treason? Have foreign Nations been sent for to
come and destroy you? yet such usage as this have Protestants had from you. How
many Protestants have been murdered by you in the days of Q. Ma^y in this
Kingdom? How many thousands have suffered miserable tortures by you in Ireland
within these few years? And its more then probable, the slaughters that have
been in these late Wars have proceeded from you, time would fail to tell of
foreign murders committed by Catholics: The Duke of Alva boasted that he had
slain 36000. Protestants in Belgium only in a very few years: France can give
sad instances of very many murders, and yet our English Papists are great
sufferers by Protestants, as if Papists might cut our throats lawfully, yet it
were unlawful for us, yea grievous persecution to hold their hands. 2. How come
your sufferings to be glorious? or how are they for truth? What truth is it you
suffer for? Popery is a combination of Heresies, old and new; with the
Valentinians and Gnostics you add to holy Scripture a number of Apocriphal
Books and Traditions; Iren. adv. Haeres. lib. 1. c. 16, 17, 18, 22, 30. and
lib. 2. c. 39.
you use Extreme Unction, you cry out against Marriage, and abstain from flesh;
you worship the Image of Christ, you make Christ's body fantastical, being one
thing, and seeming another; with the Ebionites you adore places, you use
strange language before the people who cannot understand you; how then can you
suffer for truth which you do not hold? but supposing Popery to be the truth,
do you suffer for it? Can you name one Papist that is a great sufferer, and
that merely for his Religion? Its true, many of you stand sequestered, and some
of your estates are set to sale, but this is only upon a civil account, had you
lived peaceably out of arms, you had still enjoyed your estates for ought I
know, neither are you alone sufferers this way, but have Protestants going
along with you, you suffer as evil doers, murderers, busibodies, thieves; your
oppressions and murders of the Parliaments friends whilst you were in power,
may put you in mind that you suffer not for Truth or Religion, your sufferings
have still been for Treason; such were the sufferings of some of you in Q.
Elizabeth's, K. James, and King Charls's Reign, and such is your present
suffering, you being the kindlers of those flames that have burnt down the
glorious Towers of this Land: The truth is, your Religion is Treason, and as
such might well be rooted out from amongst us, but yet you have not met with
such strict measure from us; your Doctrines put us in fear of you, left if we
bind you not to good behavior, we may come to loose our lives by you; we know
that in the Popes Books we stand as Heretics, such as are not to be suffered,
and that you are the Popes Slaves ready to execute his Decrees without scruple,
you are all Cross-bearers, actors of the Popes pleasure, whether against Prince
or people: Its one of Bellarmines Positions, Bellarm. tract. de Pontif.
potestate advers. Guil. Bard. cap. 20. p. 191.
Non licet Christian tollerare Regem infidelem aut alios pervertintem; and he
gives this reason why the first Christians rose not up against their
Magistrates, Hoc fuit quia tum Christianis deerant vires temporales: So that if
you had power in your hand you would not sit still, and its your weakness that
makes you loyal Subjects, what we do therefore to you is for our own security,
your practices and Doctrine put us upon it, your sufferings are just, and that
deprives them of glory and merit, yea and of being imitations of the Saints
sufferings; neither are you for all your obstinacy so much as Conquerours, much
less the best and greatest conquerours, etc. Had the Spanish Armado, or the
Gunpowder Treason taken effect, or had the Irish fury gone on without stop, it
may be you would have proclaimed your selves Conquerours, Champions, etc. But
blessed be God, that those snares were broken and were escaped: I shall
conclude with this prayer, that this cry of persecutions which is made by these
late Popish writers with one mouth, be not a Trumpet calling up a discontented
Party in this and other Nations about us, to execute an Irish fury upon us in
England.

The Epistle to the Reader.
OF many Religions professed in this Land, several Writers (even of approved
integrity, and profound learning) have so clearly demonstrated that there is
only one true rule, and that the Roman is it, that I cannot but impute the
ungeneral acknowledging of the same to prejudice or impatience of labor; to
prejudice in them that have read their works, and yet do not believe
accordingly; to impatience of labor in others that will not bestow the pains
to turn over great volumes.

A. 1. I may well retort your words with a little variation, and say, that of
several Religions professed in the Christian world, and in special in this Land
(if we may justly call the several opinions and ways of worship many
Religions) several writers, men of approved integrity and profound learning
have most clearly demonstrated, that there is only one ttue, and that not the
now Roman, but that which the reformed Churches do hold and maintain is it: So
that men's rejecting of it cannot be imputed to any want of truth, evidence of
this Religion, but to other causes, amongst which your two shall have the
leading in my Catalogue. 1. Prejudice in them that have read our works, yet
give no credit to them; nor can it be otherwise with you, whilst your faith is
pined upon others sleeves: Let us speak never so much reason, let our
assertions be plain Scripture, yet if your Priests affirm it not, you will not
believe us, yea many times when you are convinced of the truth of our
assertions, you will not believe them because they are ours, as if a truth
might be an error because we hold it: When Augustine had affirmed that the
Jewish Sacraments, though differing in signs, yet were the same in
signification with ours, because the Apostle says, Mald. in Joan. 6.11.60.62.
they did all eat the same spiritual meat, 1 Cor. 10.3. Maldonate answers, that
he is persuaded, that if Augustine had lived in these times, he would have
thought otherwise, especially perceiving the heretical Calvinists to be of his
opinion, and says further, that he rather approves of his own opinion then of
that of Augustine, because this is more contradictious to that of Calvin. How
can these men read our books without prejudice, when they will not receive a
truth professed by ancient and eminent Fathers, because we hold it? Sure if we
have thoughts of convincing these men, we must write for Popery, and then they
will become Protestants for fear of joining with us in our opinions, which are
dangerous, merely because we hold them.

2. Impatience of labor, Papists will not set themselves to read our books, or
if they read, not to study them; should I go over these parts where I live, I
believe I should not find one Papist that does seriously read our books, nor
can tell you truly what we hold, they spend their time in other things, and
will not be persuaded to employ themselves this way.

3. The restraint that is laid upon them that they dare not read them, Pope
Pius by his Bull forbad Papists to look into the books of Calvin, Bucer,
Bullinger, and such like Heretics as he calls them, contrary to the practice
of Protestants, who are permitted to read Popish Books; Dr. Reynolds takes
notice of this injunction ( Reynold. praelec. 3. de lib. Apocr.) and says,
Licet. Pontif. Romans prudentiam admirari qui suis interdicit ne legant, habeant
ve librum aliquem haeresiarcharum istorum quos appellat; (nempe) si Calvinum,
Bucerum, Bullingerum, inspicere sinerent; viderent quales Medii sint ipsorum
Magisiri: Hic in officinis and Bibliothecis nostris cujus legendi permittuntur
haeresiarchae Pontificii, fortasse nimium peccamus in alteram partem. Nay such
is the care of these men, that what we hold be not known to their people, that
the controversies written by their own men, wherein our Doctrines are
discovered, and weakly confuted, are not suffered to walk publicly where the
Pope bears sway, its observeable what Sir Edvin Sands writes: Those principal
Writers who have employed themselves wholly in refuting from point to point the
Protestants Doctrine and Arguments are so rare in Italy, as by ordinary enquiry
not to be found -- the controversies of Bellarmine I sought for in Venice in
all places; neither that, nor Gregory of Valenza, nor any of such quality could
I ever in any such Shop in Italy set eye on, but instead of them an infinite of
mere invectives and declamations; yea further, they are not ashamed to censure
some of the Holy Writers, as seemingly at least consenting with us, as the same
Author notes, ( Europ. Specul. page 156.) The Papists (says he) are very
jealous of S. Paul's Epistles, and think them dangerous, so that some of their
Jesuits of late in Italy in solemn Sermons, and other of their favorers
elsewhere in private communication, commending S. Peter for a worthy Spirit,
have censured S. Paul for an hotheaded person, who was transported so with his
pangs of zeal, and eagerness beyond all compass in sundry his disputes, that
there was no great reckoning to be made of his assertions, yea he was dangerous
to read, as savouring of Heresy in some places, etc. Certainly Papists are
much afraid of books whereby the judgment might be informed, lest their
Disciples reading them, should with that Author who was set to confute Calvin
by our books, be converted to the truth, while they find our arguments solid,
and those accusations of Heresies cast on us by their Rabbi's, to be nothing
but slander; and therefore most prudently (the children of this world being
wiser in their Generation then the children of light) do they confine them to
some kind of books, whereby a kind of devotion may be excited in them, but
little of sound knowledge attained by them, or rather tying them to Beads
instead of books, to dumb Pictures instead of the Gospel, those lively
representers of Jesus Christ, and to railings and invectives instead of
controversy. When I consider these things, I cannot but pity the common sort
of Papists, and withal admire the impudency of their Priests, who while they
cry up the peoples freedom of will, yet flatly deny them to have any judgment.

2. I desire to know who these Authors you mention are, and whether they are
yet unanswered? I Am sure there are many learned answers extant to the Popish
books formerly written, and for the late ones they are not yet grown common, as
they come to the knowledge of learned men, I doubt not but they will receive
their answers: In the mean time, (though the meanest of that Tribe that
desires to be learned) I have attempted to answer your book, to which I now
(depending on the assistance of Gods Spirit) do address my self.

CHAP. I. Of Happiness.
WHen I had considered this Title, and read the Chapter, and compared it with
others following, I presently thought of those Locusts that came out of the
smoke of the bottomless pit, and of the shape wherein they are represented to
us, ( Apoc. 9.7.) On their heads were as it were crowns of gold, and they had
brest-plates as it were brest-plates of iron, and the sound of their wings was
as the sound of charets of many horses running to battle, and they had tails
like unto scorpions, and there were stings in their tails, etc. This Chapter is
the crown like gold in the head of your Book; one or two of your Chapters
following have the faces of men, the countenance of truth, though not without
some excrements of the Romish Whore; the rest of your Book is military, and
has a sound of War; and the tail of it, which is your Epilogue, is the tail of
a Scorpion, and has a sting in it wherewith to hurt the simple. I shall
therefore pass over this Chapter, which is Christian, to come to that in the
others, which is Popish.

CHAP. II. Of the Way to Happiness.
SEct. 2. you say, God has appointed the means to man's natural happiness to be
acts of his understanding and will; for by them he may seek and find out God,
as he is the Author and End of Nature; by these cleave and unite, and so enjoy
him: to man's supernatural happiness, to be a Conformity of Faith to the Church,
a Conformity of Hope to our Lords Prayer, and a Conformity of Charity to the
Commandments. Reply, 1. Are not the acts of understanding and will means to
supernatural happiness? for by them he seeks and finds out God as he is the
Author of Grace; by these he cleaves and unites, and so enjoys God his Savior
and Redeemer. When you say, Sect. 3. that by faith a man comes to the knowledge
of God as he is the Author and End of Grace, do not you think that faith is an
act of the understanding or will? But you were so big-bellyed with the Church,
that you traveled to be delivered of it, and therefore not heeding what you
have said, you tell us of a Conformity of Faith to the Church. 2. I confound
Means of diverse natures, viz. those that are proximate, and have an agency or
activity in them, as understanding and will; and those that are remote, and do
only dispose and help those proximate and active means toward their intended
end. The proximate means of natural and supernatural happiness are the same,
only those faculties are helped as to natural happiness by the Books of Nature
and the Creatures, as to supernatural happiness by the Word of God contained in
the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament: See Romans 1.19, 20. 2 Timothy 3.15,
16.17. John 17.3. 3. Your Conformity of Faith to the Church in a Popish sense,
is a novel phrase, not used by the first Christians nor the Apostles of Christ
in any of their writings; nor did they ever bid men believe as the Church
believed (though that was of greater authority then the present Church is,) but
still called their faith to the Word of God; contrary to which, if Paul, or any
other Apostles, yea or Angels from Heaven, did preach, the people were to
reject them; and no doubt if Paul had preached such stuff, as now Popish
Sermons are filled with traditions and new decrees ungrounded on Gods Word, the
Beraeans had rejected him and his praying. It was for want of this Conformity
of Faith to the Word of God, that our Savior upbraids the two Disciples that
traveled to Emaus, Luke 24.25. He says not, O flow of heart to believe all
that the Church believes, (this as I said was no Scripture language, nor known
to primitive Christians;) but to believe all that the Prophets have spoken: And
that he may lead them to this Conformity of Faith, he expounds not the Decrees
and Constitutions of Scribes and Pharisees (who sat in Moses Chair) whereof
there were many; but it is said, Beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, he
expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things concerning himself, verse.
27. Sir, I believe you are so dutiful a son to the Church, that had you been in
Christ's stead, you would rather have told them of Popes decretal Epistles then
of Prophets, writings of Traditions rather then Scripture, if such things then
had had a being. But 4. Why could not you say a Conformity of Faith to the
Truth revealed, as well as a Conformity of Faith to the Church revealing the
Truth? The Truth revealed, not the Church revealing it, is the Rule of Faith,
as I shall show hereafter. 1. You might have done well once for all to have
told us what you mean by The Church; for the word is diversely attributed even
by those who in general agree that it is only the Roman Church, as you seem by
your Epistle to the Reader to understand it.

2. You urge Scripture to prove your Assertion, viz. three Texts, Mat. 28.19.
Luke 10.16. Mat. 16. The two first do not so much as mention the word Church;
the last mentions the word, but proves not the thing you bring it for.

1. Mat. 28. Going, teach ye all Nations. Ans. I wonder in what word the proof
lies. I suppose it is not in Going; and I dare say Teaching proves it not; for
then every Teacher should be a Rule of Faith: besides, the Apostles were not to
teach men to hang their faith upon themselves or others, whether of the Roman
or any other Church; but they were commanded to teach men to do whatsoever
Christ had commanded, verse. 10. amongst which this was the principal work, to
believe on him whom God had sent (Joh. 6.29.) viz. Jesus Christ, to whom they
were brought by the Apostles preaching, as living stones to be built upon a
foundation.

2. Luke 10.16. He that hears you, hears me. Ans. I suppose this Text is
brought to explain the other, which had need of a Commentary to make it speak
your language. But, 1. This is spoken primarily and absolutely of the Apostles,
who were Christ's mouth in delivering the Scriptures, and therefore infallibly
inspired by the Holy Ghost, that they could not err in what they delivered to
us. That which Moses was to the Jews in delivering the Law, the same were the
Apostles to us in delivering the Gospel: So that he that hears the Apostles,
hears Christ, because it was the word of Christ which they did speak; and
this way we hear the Apostles speak yet, whilst w^ read or hear the Scriptures
which they penned: but what is this to the present Roman Church and her
unwritten Traditions? 2. As it is understood of ordinary Ministers in the
Church, it can only be understood conditionally; He that hears you (while
your doctrine agrees with the Word of God) hears me: so that faith is not a
conformity to any Teachers or their doctrine, but so far as their doctrine is
agreeable with the Scriptures, which indeed are the Rule both of their
preaching and our believing. Consonantly hereunto the Apostle says, If any man
teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord
Jesus Christ -- he is proud -- from such withdraw thy self, 1 Timothy 6.3, etc.
The Scribes and Pharisees, who were the Church in a Popish sense, were to be
heard, but it was whilst they sat in Moses Chair, that is, whilst they
preached not their own traditions and phancies, but Moses doctrine. Arias
Montanus says, ( Elucid in Mat. 23.) Christ bids them do what the Scribes and
Pharisees commanded, Ex praescripto legis, id est ex Cathedra Mosis. So Origin,
(Origin apud Lyran.) Super Cathedram, etc. isie sermo de me est qui bona d^ceo
and contraria gero. 3. The Text speaks not of the Church, for particular
Ministers in the Church are not the Church. Now your Rhemists expound it of
them in these words, It is all one to despise Christ, Rhe^. Annot. on the Text.
and to despise his Priests and Ministers in the Catholic Church, to refuse
his doctrine and theirs: And indeed it must be understood of those who labor
in the Word and Doctrine, not of non-preaching Popes and Prelates.

3. Mat. 16. you would say, Mat. 18.17. which you read thus, He that hears
not the Church, let him be as an Heathen and a Publican. Not to say any thing
of your false quotation or reading (a fault common throughout your Book)
Protestants may take notice what great cause we have to put these men into our
bosoms, as they expect, whilst they profess we are no better then Heathens or
Publicans, though I am sure their usage from us has showed us Christians. But
to the Text: How little it makes for your purpose the Context, words themselves
will show: It speaks not of Conformity of Faith to the Church, but of obedience
of the offending party to the admonition of the Pastors of the Church. Thus
Lyranus, Si non and. Eccles. pr ceptum praelatos contemnendo. Lyr. in loc.
You might as well say, that faith is a conformity to our selves, because it is
said, If he neglect to hear thee, verse. 15. or to two or three witnesses,
because it is said, If he neglect to hear them, verse 17. whereby is implied that
he ought to hear them: Hence it might well follow, that faith ought rather to
be resolved upon a neighbor that is a private man, then upon the Church,
because the offended party is first to be heard before the Church: And then
Sir, who is guilty of the Private spirit that you anon talk of? Sure your
selves, and not the Protestants.

In stead of these misapplied Scriptures for you, I shall give you one or two
plain Scriptures proving the Word of God to be that whereunto a Christians
faith is to be conformable. The Apostle continued witnessing both to small and
great, saying, None other things then those which the Prophets and Moses did
say should come to pass, Acts 26.22. This was his teaching: And for his own
faith you have it, Acts 24.14. This I confess unto thee, that after the way
which they call Heresy, so worship I the God of my fathers, believing all
things which are written in the Law and the Prophets. I shall put you in mind
of what one of your Proselites writes about this Point: I found that by consent
of all Christians, Dr Vane, Lost Sheep return, p. 5, 6.
this knowledge of the means to attain to happiness, was not to be gotten by
clear and evident sight, nor by humane discourse founded on the principles of
Reason, nor by reliance upon Authority merely humane, but Only by Faith
Grounded On The Word of GOD, revealing unto men things that were otherwise,
only known to his infinite Wisdom, -- seeing the Church to the worlds end must
be built on the Apostles, and Believe Nothing as Matter of Faith beside that
which was delivered of them, as St. Paul says, Ephesians. 2.20. Your self also,
when you come to the Point to speak of the Rule of Faith, say, that the Truth
of God revealed and expressed to us, is the Rule of Faith, Chap. 9. If Faith be
grounded on Gods Word, and that this Word of God be the Rule of Faith, How can
the Church be it, seeing there is a vast difference betwixt the Truth and the
Church, as betwixt a Rule and him that bears it: Can you say properly, that a
man that keeps the standard in his house is the standard, or that the post that
bears it is it, or that the ship that carries the compass is the compass? Now
you only say, that the Church is the Pillar of Truth, i. e. it does but bear
it. If the Church be the Rule of Faith, then I wonder what Rule they have, sure
not themselves; and they being men like us, they cannot be without a Rule, no
more then they can be Christians, and yet want faith.

3. You say, By the first Conformity man comes to the knowledge of God as he is
the Author and End of Grace; by the second he relies upon his Mercy and
Goodness, etc. Ans. 1. You seem to make faith a bare knowledge, distinct from
reliance on Gods mercy and goodness, whereby you give too little to faith,
whose acts are not only to discern God and divine objects, but to rely upon
that merciful and good promise of God, whereby he offers himself and divine
objects to be received by us: By this receiving is faith expressed, John 1.12.
If faith be no more but bare knowledge, then Devils, yea Reprobates may have
true faith, yea and may hope in Gods mercy, for faith is the foundation of
sound hope. Your Vasquez is more ingenious then most of you, for he
acknowledges that besides a dogmatical or historical faith, Vasq. in 1. 2. To.
2. disp. 209. c. 1. and 4.
which he calls Catholic, there is also a peculiar faith, whereby a Christian
believes that he is or shall be justified or saved. And this faith is the
foundation of that hope you mention, and not much differing from it, only that
as hope looks at the thing promised, so faith does more directly reflect upon
the promise, though Vasquez says the same of faith that you of hope, -- Cujus
generis est fides qua aliquis credit se a Deo per orationem obtenturum id quod
petit, etc. I shall conclude this with the words of learned Rivet; Ineptiunt
ergo ne quid gravius dicam qui cum tribuant fideli spem and fiduciam circa
electionem gratiam and salut m Propriam fidem tamen negant. Rivet. sum. Cont.
Tract. 4. q. 16. ss. 6.
But as you cast faith here below it self, so in the next Chapter you set up
Charity above it self, making it the soul of faith.

CHAP. III. Of the Diversities of Faiths, Hopes, and Charities.
IN this Chapter I shall only take notice of two passages. 1. You say, The
means of habitual and actual divine (Faith, Hope and Charity) is the Tradition
of the Church. Ans. 1. If by the Tradition of the Church you mean the true and
right Exposition of Scripture made by faithful Pastors and Teachers of the
Church, as Vincentius Lyrinensis understands it, then I shall easily consent to
you; for it is no more then the Apostle himself asserts when he says, Faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God, Romans 10.17. But 2. If you
mean the Churches opinions distinct from Scripture or unwritten Verities, as
they are called by you, then I affirm that these are not means for your
proposed end; the Scripture it self, without your additions, being sufficient
to make the man of God perfect in all graces: And this you are not altogether
unconvinced of, as appears by your Preachers, who in their Sermons do ground
their discourses upon Texts of Scriptures, and I suppose their Sermons are
intended to be means of faith, hope, etc.

2. You say, St Paul -- gives to Charity the preeminence: And not undeservedly;
for she is the enlivening Soul of Faith and Hope, etc. both they -- being (out
of her company) as dead bodies without life or motion, etc. Your assertion is
grounded upon two Scriptures, viz. 1 Cor. 13.13. and James 2.26. For the first,
I freely subscribe to the preeminence of Charity, but upon the Apostles reason
(not yours,) which is the continuance of Charity when Faith and Hope fail: Thus
the Apostle is understood by your ordinary Gloss, Primasius, Augustine, and the
generality of Expositors: In presenti tria haec, Lyran. in 1 Cor. 13.13.
in futuro sola charitas permanebit; Majus est ergo quod semper erit quam quod
aliquando cessabit. But you say, It Is the Soul of Faith, etc. This I deny: For,
1. Your own Authors do earnestly contend that true faith, yea that faith that
justifies, and is joined with hope and charity, 1 Cor. 13.13. may be without
charity; charity therefore cannot be the soul of faith; for the enlivening soul
cannot be absent from its body, and yet that body remain a true living humane
body. 2. The Apostle says, that faith without works is dead, as the body
without the soul; yet you will not say that good works are the soul of faith,
whereby it has life and motion. Your Rhemists assert it, that the Thief on the
Cross wanted good works, and thereupon conclude, Rhe^. Annot. on Luke 23.43.
that Faith, hope, etc. will be sufficient, and good works not required, where
for want of time and opportunity they cannot be had. Now can you say, that his
faith was without life and motion? It had so much life and motion, that it
brought him to Heaven by your own confession. Now if the body move, it has the
soul in it, be its motion never so little, or of so short continuance. 3. Faith
is before Charity, and that not only by priority of nature, but of agency or
activity: Faith is a leading grace. Men first believe to righteousness, and
then make confession to Salvation. Faith first apprehends and lays hold on the
mercy and goodness of God in the promise and then for that his goodness and
mercy toward us we do love him and keep his Commandments. This is clearly
taught by our Savior, Luke 7.47. as Salmeron, Tolet, Stella, and others, even
Papists, acknowledge. Now in Nature the Soul precedes the body in its activity.
4. If charity and good works were the soul of faith, they should be intrinsecal
to faith, for the form is not out of the matter, nor the soul out of the body:
but so they are not. Hence it is that some learned men call charity an external
form of faith, and other virtues; and by spirit in the Text they understand the
breath, making the sense this, Even as the want of breath argues a dead body,
so the want of works a dead faith. Estius ascribes this Exposition to Cajetan,
Estius in Jam. 2.26.
who as he says was moved to it by this reason, because works are not the form
of faith, but certain concomitant effects; but the soul is the form of the
body. Azorius clearly adheres to Cajetan, Azor. instit. Moral. lib. 9. c. 3. q.
6.
denying charity to be an intrinsecal form of faith, or other virtues, because
they have their proper fruit, and produce works without charity; only he calls
it an extrinsecal form, which will never prove it to be the soul of them. Par.
in loc.
Pareus does well observe for this purpose, that it is not said, (...), but,
(...), not without soul, but without spirit or breath. Bernard speaks most
suitably to this Exposition, Sicut corporis vitam, etc. As we know the life of
the body by motion, so the life of faith by good works. If this Exposition
please not, I shall commend to you that acute one of Mr Perkins; says he,
Perkins on Galat. 5.6.
Here is a false composition of the words; Faith that is without works is dead,
is true; but to say, Faith is dead without works (as though they gave life to
faith) is false. To conclude; Though we deny charity or good works to be the
enlivening soul of faith, yet we assert them to be the inseparable concomitants
of a true faith: so that as good works cannot be without faith, so neither can
faith be without good works. As faith looks toward the promise by believing
it, so does it reflect upon the Will of God by obeying it; these are its two
vital acts, that is internal, this is faith's external act, neither of which
can a living faith not exercise.

CHAP. IV. Of the Churches Power and Infallibility in matters of Faith.
IN this Chapter you come to the Churches Infallibility as a main part of
Religion, and a leading Article in the Creed, to whom you are so liberal, that
you leave little to Christ or his Father. It Is the observation of one of your
own men, that throughout your Ladies Psalter the Name of God is changed into
the Name of our Lady: so the Name of God into the name of Church, and the
Attributes of God are predicated of the Church, as here, Infallibility,
answering herein the Apostles description of Antichrist. That he opposes and
exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that
he is as God, sits in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God. 2
These. 2.4.

But to your Chapter. You might have done well (seeing the Church must come in
first) to have defined to us what Church it is you speak of, before you tell us
of her Infallibility; as, whether it be the Church virtual or representative,
or essential: did I know which you meant, I could speedilier answer you; but
seeing I do not, I shall show the fallibility of each of them, lest I should
happen to miss of you. 1. Then; Infallibility is not a Jewel annexed to your
Popes Crown. Lyra commenting on the words of Christ, Mat. 16.18 The gates of
Hell shall not prevail against it, Lyran. ibid.
A vera fide subvertendo-scil. says, Ex quo patet, etc. Whereby it is evident
that this Church (which has this promise) does not consist in men of
ecclesiastical or secular power or dignity, because many Princes and Popes
(summi pontifices) and others inferior have been found to apostatize from the
Faith; wherefore it consists in those persons in whom is true knowledge, and
confession of faith and truth. Some of your Popes have been deposed for
Heresy; as Eugenius by the general Council of Basil; Council. Basil Ses. 34.
apud Binnium. Heart Answ. to Reynolds, p. 246.
Honorius by the sixth general Council was condemned, and that justly, says
Heart in his Answer to learned Reynolds: Innocentius was little better then an
Heretic, who held, that the Sacrament of the Eucharist was necessary for
children. Nor was he alone in this Heresy, for it continued in the Church 600
years, as Maldonat observes. Maldon, in Joan 6. Council. Trid. ses. 21. Can. 4
ap. Bin.
Now that it was an Heresy, appears by the Curse laid upon it in the Council
of Trent. If you say the Pope taught it not; I answer, How then durst the
Church believe it, and for so long a time? whereas the faith of the members
must be conformable to the belief of the Churches Head: Or why did not the Pope
hinder it when he saw it was believed in the Church as a necessary truth? It
cannot be imagined how the Pope should be free when the Church was so infected.
2. Infallibility is not the inseparable Privilege of the Church representative,
or a General Council; for according to Papists it has no infallibility in it
self, but depends upon the infallibility of the Pope, which I have showed to be
a Chimaera. Azorius tells us, Azor. iustit. Moral. part. 2. l. 5. c. 12. q. 1.
that it is agreed upon by all Catholics, that a General Council may err in
faith and manners, if it be not called and confirmed by the Authority of the
Pope of Rome: And he instances in the Council of Ariminum, of 600 Bishops who
erred with Arius; The Council of Constantinople, of 300 Bishops who erred with
Leo the Emperor. This is the meaning of Lorinus as I conceive, Lorin. in Act.
15.7. p. 583. Col. 2.
when he says, Wise or learned men are to be consulted with, but all the
infallibility is in him alone. Now let any Papist show any reason why in a
Council the Pope should be infallible, and out of it should be as other men.
But Councils called and confirmed by Popes, have with Papists themselves been
accounted fallible. The Council of Basil was called by Eugenius, and had the
Popes Legates sitting in it, yet pleased not the Pope by their decree in the
second Session, That the Pope ought to be subject to a general Council. This
was also the decree of the Council of Constantinople, which notwithstanding was
called by John the 24. and confirmed by Martin the 5, two Popes. 3.
Infallibility is not subjected in the body of the faithful: for it is a clear
truth, which Dr Featly observed, Whatsoever the Romanists say of the
infallibility of the Church, they resolve it at last into the Authority of the
Church. Indeed if we speak of the universal visible Church as comprehending all
Believers in the world, it is not possible that all should err, for then Christ
should want a Church: but for particular Churches, it is most evident they are
subject unto error; Papists profess it openly of other Churches, and sometimes
confess it of the Roman. The Council of Trent decree to reform many things in
manners and doctrine in that Church, and there was great need so to do.
Cassander ingeniously acknowledges a defection from the primitive Church,
Cassand. Cons. Act. 7. p. 929.
both in regard of integrity of manners and discipline, and also in regard of
sincerity of doctrine; and further says, that this Church has provoked her
Husband multis erroribus and vitiis, with her many errors and vices. From all
this it is most infallibly true, that the Roman in none of their Considerations
is infallible. I will now come to examine his Arguments.

Page 12. he begins with a supposition, saying, Supposing it for granted, that
Christ's knowledge of Gods revealed Truth, and his power to convey the same to
belief, raised his preaching and teaching to the full height and perfection of
a Rule of Belief to the first Christians; it cannot in reason be denied, he
having communicated his said knowledge and power to the Apostles, and in them to
the succeeding Churches (as appears by his own words, Joh. 15. Joh. 20.) but
she may challenge a like interest and right in respect of after-Christians:
whence it follows, that all matters of Belief (as well other Points as
Scripture) are to be taken up upon her account and credit; and that whatsoever
comes upon any other score, is to be reputed Apocryphal, and no way
appertaining to the obligation of Belief. In answer hereunto I will first
consider the Supposition, and afterward the inferences and proofs of them.
There are diverse things herein questionable, if not simply false. 1. It Is said,
Christ's preaching and teaching was a Rule of Belief. Ans. If by these acts you
understand the materia circa quam, the matter of his preaching, viz. the
Scripture or Word of God; then it is true that his teaching was the Rule of
Faith, i. e. that which he taught and discovered to them was the Rule of Faith:
but if you understand it of his transient preaching, as if by these acts he
propounded to them a Rule of Faith (for so your words seem to import,) it is
false; for Christ by his preaching did not propound a new Rule of Faith, but
did only reveal that rule of Faith which was before laid, and was contained in
the Scriptures of the Old Testament. Hence it was, that Christ sent his hearers
to the Scriptures, John 5.39. and himself did preach out of the Scriptures,
Luke 24.25.26, 27, 44. etc. Luke 4.16. and that for this end, as Beda notes,
that he might manifest himself to be the same that spoke in the Prophets, Beda
apud Lyran.
and that he might remove that sacrilegious conceit, that there was one God of
the Old, another of the New Testament. Yea further, Thus did the Apostles after
him, Act. 26.22. they preached nothing but what was contained in the Law, and
Psalms, and Prophets. 2. It Is said -- was a Rule of Belief to the first
Christian^. Ans. And is it not a Rule of Belief unto us who are
after-Christians? Had the primitive Christians one Rule of Faith, and we
another? If there be one Faith, why not one Rule of Faith to all Christians?
why does the Apostle exhort the Philippians, and in them all Christians to walk
by the same rule? In eadem regula fidei; Phil. 3.16. Gloss. interl.
If there were one rule, does that blessing, Gal. 6.16. extend only to the
Primitive Churches, and not rather to all Christians who were to walk by the
same rule that they walked? The teaching of Christ does not make one rule, and
of the Apostles another, but both reflect upon, and explain one and the same
rule of Faith. 3. Whereas you say, Christ's knowledge of Gods revealed truth, and
his power to convey the same to belief, raised his preaching, etc. Pon might
have done well to have explained what knowledge and what power this is you speak
of, which is sufficient to qualify a person for propounding a rule of Faith: I
conceive its requisite (1.) that this knowledge extend to whatsoever Faith is to
belief; for seeing the rule of Faith must be exact, containing neither more nor
less then Faith is to belief; hence it will follow, the Propounder of this rule
must know what is the adequate object of Faith. This universality of Christ's
knowledge is hinted in one of the Texts you mention, viz. Joh. 15. All I have
learned of my Father I have made known unto you. Here is first an universal
knowledge, and then the proposal of a rule suitable to this knowledge. 2. That
this knowledge be most certain and infallible; no teaching can be a rule of
belief, but that which is grounded on infallible knowledge: conjectural knowledge
may be a ground of opinion, not of Faith: Hence is that expression, Joh. 19.35.
He that saw it bare record, and his record is true, and he knows that he
says true, that ye might believe. Now this infallibility in the subject
knowing arises, either 1. from the Divine Nature in the person: Thus the
persons in the Trinity are only infallible; and for this cause it is that many
learned Papists do deny, that our Faith is resolved into the authority of the
Church, and Azorius tells us, that in his time it was the common opinion of
your Divines, that Faith was ultimately resolved into God, Inter Cathol. tres
sunt opiniones, una est asserentium primam rationem in quam fides nostra ultimo
resolvitur esse Deum revelantem quae sunt fidei; Deus enim est prima and summa
veritas quae falli ullo modo nec fallere potest, ac ratio credendi debet esse
talis ac tanta ut ei falsum subesse non possit. Haec opinio quam sequitur
Cajetanus est communi consensu in Theol. Scholis modo recepta. Azor. instit.
Moral. parl. 2. l. 5. c. 24. q. 2.
the revealer of the objects of Faith, and that upon this account, because he
could neither deceive, nor be deceived, being the prime and chief Verity, and
the reason of Faith must be such as cannot deceive; and for this reason he
rejects Durand, Scotus, Gabriel, and Almain, for concluding that the authority
of the Church is the reason of our belief of the things of Faith. 2. From
immediate inspiration of the Spirit. Thus the Apostles were immediately
inspired; so that in their delivering of the truth, they could neither fallere
nec falli, neither deceive, nor be deceived; this is taught by the Apostles
Paul and Peter, 2 Timothy 3.16. 2 Pet. 1.21. The later of whom persuades us, to
give heed to the word of God, because the holy penmen of it were inspired by
the H. Ghost.

Again, for power which you leave unexplained, it may be observed, that there
is a twofold power in order to this effect belonging to Christ. 1.
Authoritative, which is his designation or appointment hereunto; this may be
understood by that text you cite, As my Father sent me, etc. 2. Qualitative or
dispositive, this is Christ's (...) the other is his (...); the one is his
power, the other his authority. Again, this power is exercised two ways: 1. By
discoveries of the truth revealed to him: Thus its said, All things that I have
heard of my Father, I have made known unto you, Joh. 15.15. This is his outward
teaching. 2. By commanding the heart to believe, and consent to those truths he
reveals; this power is spoken of by the Psalmist in Psalm. 110. Thy people shall
be willing in the day of thy power. Christ does command the soul to receive the
truth, by stamping upon it a divine authority and Majesty, and withal by his
Spirit discovering to the soul this authority and Majesty so stamped upon it:
This way does Christ exercise his power in bringing the soul to close with the
Scriptures, as the rule of its belief.

2. I proceed now to your consequence: He having communicated his said knowledge
and power to the Apostles, and in them to the succeeding Churches -- but she
may challenge a like interest and right in respect of after-Christians. Ans. 1.
You tell us of succeeding Churches, but lest you should seem to forget your
dear Mother, or give other Churches liberty to claim equal privileges with
her; whilst you talk of Churches, you neglect construction, and come in with a
She may challenge. 2. It Is false, that she may justly challenge a like interest
and right in respect of after-Christians, as to the propounding of a rule of
belief to them. For 1. There is no need of another rule for them, the rule that
Christ propounded being suited to all Christians, and fully sufficient and
perfect, as your self confess: If that Christ's teaching has the full height
and perfection of a rule, i. e. be a complete and perfect rule, what needs
another rule? or can this other rule be higher then that which has its full
height? or have greater extent then that which is perfect? the perfection of
Christ's rule shows, that nothing can be added to it: If you say it was perfect
as for the first Christians, but not for after Christians, I desire to know the
ground of this distinction, for I am ignorant of it. 2. The succeeding Church
has not communicated to her the same knowledge and power that Christ had, her
knowledge is not universal; there has been in every Age since your Churches
Apostasy, an addition of supposed truths, which the former Age believed not.
Your Pius 4. has added some Articles to the ancient Creeds, as necessary to be
believed unto Salvation, which formerly were not so imposed, if once thought
of; sure then the Church before the Trent Council, either knew not the whole
revealed will of God, and so could not by their preaching lay an exact rule of
belief, or you propound a larger object then Faith will well admit. Again, her
knowledge is not infallible, as I showed in the beginning of this Chapter, the
present Church of Rome has notoriously swerved from Primitive purity in their
late Articles of Pope Pius his Creed: Besides this, it cannot claim either of
these means of infallibility which I mentioned before; the same may be said of
power, its not the same with Christ they want both his power and authority, as
I have explained them: Indeed if that which the succeeding Churches preach and
teach, be the same that Jesus Christ and his Apostles preached and taught, then
it is a rule of Faith to us; but thus, its not the teaching of the Church that
makes it a rule, but its identity with the Scriptures, the marrow of Christ's
and the Apostles preaching. Thus the assertion is true, otherwise the Churches
teaching without respect to Scripture is not a Rule, as I have already showed;
and this is my Antagonists meaning, as appears by his next words, All matters
of Faith, as well other points as Scripture, are to be taken up upon her
account, etc.

2. Consequence, or rather the first consequence arising from that, is in these
words: Whence it follows, page 13.
that all matters of belief, as well other points as Scripture, are to be taken
up upon her account and credit. Ans. 1. If by other points, you understand
other points of Faith then are contained in Scripture, you take that for
granted which is notoriously false, viz. that there are points of Faith which
the Scriptures contain not and consequently that they are imperfect, and
insufficient to be a rule of Faith, and this is most false. For 1. Whatsoever
was contained in the ancient Creeds, which were rules of Faith to those
Christians that used them, that was all contained in Scripture; and more was
not imposed as necessary to be believed to Salvation: I deny not but your Trent
Creed contains more then Scripture, even many Articles which learned men say
cannot be proved but out of unwritten Traditions; but as it contains more then
Scripture, so is it much larger then any Creed that was used before it; so that
either their Faith was imperfect, having an imperfect foundation, or yours is
redundant transgresseing the bounds of a right and ancient rule. 2. The
Scriptures testify their own sufficiency, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16. I desire you to
consider these two following Texts, Act 26.22. with chap. 20.27. Lyran.
He had declared the whole counsel of God so far as concerned Salvation, and
yet preached nothing but what the Scriptures did contain.

Ans. 2. If you mean that we are to believe that the Scriptures are the Word of
God, and that other fundamental points besides this [The Scriptures are the
word of God] are the truths of God, and to be believed, merely because the
Church asserts it; so that the Churches affirmation of them should be the
formal cause of our belief of these truths (as I suppose you mean) this I deny:
For, 1. The Scriptures contain in themselves arguments that may convince a true
Christian, that they are the Word of God: Many notes are given by Protestants,
which to you pulling them in pieces, and viewing them singly, seem weak; which
conjunctim, or all together, have much strength in them. He that reads the
Scriptures with a spiritually enlightened mind, cannot but confess, that never
mere man spoke like the Holy Writers, and that flesh and blood revealed not
those things to them which they declare, but God only. 2. Upon what account was
this truth taken up by the first Christians for the space of three hundred
years after Christ? they could not take it up upon the Churches account and
credit, for your Authors hold, that its only in the power of Ecumenical Sinods
to define which are the Scriptures, and for this time there was no such a Sinod
called. The first Sinod that I find delivering the Canon of Scripture, was
that of Laodicea, held about the year 364. Afterward the third Council of
Carthage, both Provincial Sinods only, though afterward confirmed in a General
Council. 3. Upon what account or credit does your Church take up this truth,
that the Scriptures are the Word of God: Sure you are so great an Enemy to
Spiritists, that you will not think of extraordinary Revelations, or
Enthusiasms; I hardly think that ever the Holy Ghost fell upon your Popes or
Councils in fiery Tongues, or that they had either visions or dreams; nor do I
think that you will say, that your Church propounds the Canon of Scripture,
merely upon the supposal of former practice, that former Churches did allow and
believe the Scriptures now received are Canonical, for this is only a testimony
concerning matter of fact, in which it is confessed the Pope may err through
wrong informations: There may be spurious Canons foisted into former Councils,
like Pope Zozimus Canon of the Nicene Council, whereby he maintained his
Supremacy; I therefore suppose that your judgment must be, that your Church
assisted by the Spirit, does from internal notes of Scripture conclude the
divine authority thereof. Hence it is that Councils proceed by argument and
reason, and there is an acknowledgment of the truth before they proceed to
definition or Decree. Now if the Church take up Scripture upon this account,
that she through the assistance of Gods Spirit discerns the notes and marks of
Gods Word, why may not a Christian by the same assistance discover these notes?
and so believe that the Scriptures are Gods Word, upon the same account that
the Church takes up this belief, though withal he does, and ought to reverence
and highly account of the judgment of the Church, or Pastors of it, as that
which has a Priority, and is an occasion of Christians private judgment, and a
confirmation of it; yet as I hinted before, it must not be denied that
Christians have a divine light in themselves, being taught of God, Joh. 6.45.
which is for the discovery of divine objects, as natural light or reason is for
the discovery of natural: This Bellarmine confesses; saying, Bellar. de lumine
fid. Conc. 1.
Quemadmodum omnes homines, etc. As all men are endued with a certain natural
light, whereby they understand the first principles to be true, without labor,
without arguments, nor is there any that demands reasons and arguments when
those principles are propounded: So also all Christians enlightened by God with
a certain divine and supernatural light, do acknowledge the first principles of
our Faith, though difficult, and exceeding reason to be most true. Origin in
his Book (...), where he proves the Divinity of Scriptures by diverse arguments,
Origin. lib. 4. (...), cap. 1.
as Protestants do, has a notable speech to this purpose; Si quis cum omni
judicio, etc. If any one does judiciously, and with that reverence that is meet
consider of the Sacred Writ while he reads, and diligently searches into it,
most certainly (having his mind and senses affected with some divine
inspiration) he acknowledges that the word he reads is not the word of men,
but of God, and of himself, perceives (ex semetipso sentiet) that these books
are written not by humane art, or mortal eloquence, but by the hand of God.
Thus I suppose it was with the first Christians, of whom you cannot say that
they believed the books of Scripture to be the Word of God, merely because the
Apostles and others held them they were so, but upon other account; this
overthrows your Position. What I have said of the Scriptures may be said of
other points of Faith, that they are not taken up merely or mainly upon the
Churches credit, and account, but rather because God has revealed them in his
Word, wherein they are therefore written, that we might have a sure argument
for our Faith. But I come to your next inference.

2 Consequence or Conclusion: Whatsoever comes upon any other score is to be
reputed Apocriphal, and no way appertaining to the obligation of faith. Magna
Diana Romanorum, Great is your Roman Goddess, but its only with the
Shrinemakers of Rome; your conclusion is very high, but notoriously false. For
1. Its not the Churches definition that makes any book Apocriphal, but the want
of divine inspiration in those who wrote them; so that whatsoever is not
written by the Prophets or Apostles (the Subjects of divine inspiration) that
is certainly Apocriphal, whether the Church receive them or not. Hence many of
your learned men reject those books as Apocriphal, which the Council of Trent
declared to be Canonical; the Apostle says, All Scripture is by divine
inspiration; 2 Timothy 3.16.
the Scriptures of the Old Testament are called (...), 2 Pet. 1.19. read Luke
24.27. 2. It was six hundred years after Christ before any General Council
delivers the Canon of Scripture; now will you say, that till that time the
books of Scripture were Apocriphal, and no way appertaining to the obligation
of Faith. 3. The Spirit of God may work Faith in the Soul while it is
reverently reading the Word of God, without the testimony of the Church (the
person for the present being ignorant what the Church teaches of particular
points) this is clear by the place of Origin even now mentioned. Lyranus speaks
of a teaching of the Spirit, Lyran. in 1 John 2.27.
Vbi deficit humana Doctrina. 4. When the Thessalonians received the Apostles
Doctrine, not as the word of men, but as the Word of God, Greg. Analus fid.
lib. 1. c. 15.
was this Doctrine no way appertaining to the obligation of Faith? Your Gregory
of Valence confesses, Multa sunt, etc. There are many points of Christian
Doctrine, which of themselves, can procure to themselves credit and authority.
Lastly, the Greek Church, with the reformed Churches, receive all the Articles
of the Apostles Creed, because consonant to Gods Word, not because delivered by
your Roman Diana; are those Articles therefore to be reputed Apocriphal, and no
way appertaining to the obligation of Faith? Sure you cannot be so impudent as
to assert it, though we know Jesuitical impudency is not little.

For your Scriptures Sect. 2. When I see them reduced to arguments, I shall
endeavor to answer them, for the present I understand not what they should
prove, and therefore dismiss them without any answer.

In your third Section you go about to prove the Churches infallibility, as a
qualification of her for the delivery of a Rule of Faith, and you urge diverse
Arguments, which I now come to examine and answer.

Arg. 1. God has endowed her with inerrability, whereby to convey the truth
safely, and without danger of miscarrying, by arming her proof against all the
enemies of truth, against ignorance -- error -- darkness -- weakness. For this
you urge diverse Texts. In these words, though they seem an intention of but one
argument, yet there are these two, viz. 1. If the Church cannot convey truth
safely, and without danger of miscarrying, but by the gift of inerrability,
then Christ has endowed her with it: But she cannot convey truth safely, and
without danger of miscarrying, but by the gift of inerrability: Ergo, etc. 2.
If Christ has armed his Church against the enemies of truth, viz. ignorance,
darkness, error, and weakness, then has he endowed her with inerrability; but
he has so armed her: Ergo, etc. To these in order.

Ans. First, to the first I answer: 1. By denying the consequence of the major
Proposition, the reason of my denial is this, Christ has not made the Church
the principal, much less the only means of conveying truth safely. Though yoor
Pope, Cardinals, Jesuits, Priests, yea General Councils should err, yet there
remains a safe way of conveying truth without miscarrying, that is the
Scriptures, 2 Pet. 1.19. Beda paraphrasing upon those words, In a dark place,
Beda apud Lyran.
has this note, In hujus saeculi nocte, etc. In the night of this world full
of temptations, vices and errors, where there is hardly one to be found without
error, against which this light is necessary. So that you see the Scriptures
convey the truth safely against temptations, vices, errors, in the judgment of
this venerable Author. It may be you will object, that infallibility is
necessary for the Church, that she may safely convey these Scriptures wherein
the truth is: But I deny this to be true. For 1. It cannot be denied, but God
did make use of the Jews to preserve the Scriptures, Romans 3.2. yet by the
leaven of their Doctors, the Pharisees, the Commandments of God were
transgressed, Matthew. 23.5. Yea, it evidenceth their errability, that they
mistook the sense of the Law, and when Christ came, Mariana tract. pro edit.
vulgat. cap. 7. p. 50.
that they did generally oppose and resist him; and yet I believe the
Scriptures, yea I had almost said the very iota's and titles of them were
preserved from miscarrying. Your Authors confess of the Hebrew text, that there
is no substantial error in it. 2. The Law was by Gods providence kept safely a
great while in the House of the Lord, unknown to any, till Hilkiah the
High Priest found it in the days of Josiah, 2 King. 22.8. Now you will not
ascribe infallibility to the House of the Lord. 3. You acknowledge not the Greek
Church to be a true Church, yet the Scriptures have been safely preserved by
them, whilst the error of the Chiliasts, and of those who laid a necessity on
Infants to receive the Eucharist, remained in the Church, which was for some
100. of years, yet then the Scriptures were preserved from miscarrying. The
truth is, Gods Providence is chiefly engaged for the preservation of these
books, and that concurring, any means that God uses may suffice, though they
were Turks and Heathens that had the keeping of them.

2. I answer by denying your Minor, and say, the Church may convey the truth
without the gift of inerrability bestowed on her, as well as other Churches
subject to error have done. Thus we confess that your Roman Church has
preserved the ancient Creeds, the Commandments, and Scriptures, though we deny
you to be sound members of the Catholic Church: We admire and adore Gods
providence, not your inerrability; had not a Divine hand overawed you, I fear
the Scriptures would have fared little better then the Fathers have done, whose
writings you have notoriously corrupted and falsified, as has been manifested
against you by our learned Writers.

2. Arg. 2. To your second Argument I answer by distinction, viz. a subject,
and particularly the Church, may be armed against ignorance, darkness, error,
and weakness, either in regard of hurts, blows, and lesser foils, or in regard
of total ruin, or a final overthrow; or if you will, these may be considered
either as total, or only partial: It Is exemption not only from total and
ruining ignorance, darkness, error and weakness, but from inferior degrees
hereof, that can prove infallibility in the subject so exempted. So then if the
Church be exempted from all degrees of these evils, so as they cannot at all
hurt her, then your Argument is good, but this exemption I utterly deny: Christ
has only so far armed his Church, (whilst Militant) against these, that they
shall not ruin or destroy her gross ignorance, and obstinate error, the
forerunners of ruin cannot happen to the Church, but lesser degrees of these
may. This is confessed by your own Authors, of each of these 1. Ignorance.
Lombard says, Lomb. l. 4. did. 18. f.
Deus non semper sequitur ecclesiae judicium, etc. God does not always concur
with the judgment of the Church, which judges sometime by stealth and
ignorance. 2. Darkness; Ccc. Dial. p. 1. lib. 5. cap. 28.
Occam says, Circa illa, etc. Concerning those things that are not necessary
to be believed expressly, its not necessary that the Churches judgment be
always certain. Sure uncertaintie of judgment must arise from darkness. 3.
Error. Thus Picus says, Fieri potest, etc. It may be that the Vice-head may be
distempered as the natural, Franc Picus Theor. 23.
and as this noxious humor, so that may diffuse into the body unsound
opinions. Stapl. Relect. c. 1. q. 4. Art. 5. Not. 1.
Stapleton confesses, That perfect holiness in regard of Doctrine is not in
all times and places, because great men may not only doubt, but err in some
points of Doctrine, and yet the true Church remain with them. 4. Weakness. Thus
Turrecrema says, Quamvis ecclesia, Turrecr. sum. d. Eccles. 2. c. 112.
etc. Although the Church be supported by divine power and authority, yet
inasmuch as it is a Congregation of men, something through humane weakness is
acted by it which is not divine. Thus it is confessed, that the Church is not
totally exempted from these enemies. But because you bring Scripture to
patronize your cause, let us see whether it speak for you.

1. Against Ignorance, you urge Mat. 13. To you it is given to know the
mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven. Ans. 1. I wonder your Rhemists had nothing
to say for the Churches infallibility from this Text, all that they conclude
from it is this, That to the Apostles, and such as have the guiding and
teaching of others, deeper knowledge of Gods word and mysteries is given, then
to the common people, as also to Christians generally, that which was not given
to the obstinate Jews; which makes nothing from a total exemption of them from
ignorance, if it did, much more would that place of St. John (1. Ep. 2. cap.
27. where it is said, The anointing which ye have received of him abides in
you, and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches
you of all things, etc.) Prove such an exemption for private Christians, and so
lay a foundation for their infallibility, which would derogate from the Honor
of his Holiness of Rome. 2. It is most evident, that the Disciples of Christ to
whom these words were spoken had ignorance in them, and that of such things as
were needful to be known (See Mark 9.31.32. Luke 9.45. Joh. 12.16.) viz. the
Death and Resurrection of Christ, etc.

2. Aagainst Darkness, you urge Matthew. 6. but it is Matthew. 5.14. You are the
light of the world. Ans. 1. If you mean that the Apostles and their Successors
are so light, that they have no darkness in them, you are no better then a
blasphemer; for it is said of God (and cannot be spoken of any other) God is
light, and in him is no darkness at all, 1 J^h. 1.5. Aug. in Ps. 10.
2. S. Augustine alluding to this place, compares the Church to the Moon, which
you know has her dark spots, though the Sun to which Christ is sometimes
compared, be altogether transparent and bright. 3. They are called a light, not
so much in regard of their inward qualification, Lyran. in Mat. 5.14.
as of their office, which is to instruct, and direct others in their way, as
Gregory, Burgensis, and Cyran^s note. 4. Learned Cameron conceives, that this
is spoken of the Apostles as Apostles, which is probable, because our Savior
speak to them, as related to an Apostolical or Universal charge; and thus it
proves nothing for your present Church. Lastly, I fear that whilst your men was
writing for inerrability, your thoughts were possessed with the Churches
visibilitie, which your Doctors of Rhemes would prove from hence. But then why
did you not bring in the next words? To. 17.3.
A City set on a Hill, which would more directly, with a little variation of
number, have pointed at your Holy Mother on her seven-headed Beast.

3. Against Error and Falsehood you urge Joh. 14. I will send unto you the
Spirit of truth, to remain with you for ever: And Isa. 62. Thou shall no more
be called forsaken. To your former I answer, it makes nothing for you, for it is
one thing to have the Spirit of Truth, to lead into truth, and another thing to
have it making us infallible. I conceive there are few of your Priests or
Jesuits, but think themselves to have the Spirit of Truth, yet are not
infallible: Nay private Christians may have this Spirit of truth, and by it may
be kept from damnable or Soulruining error, yet who would say they are
infallible. It Is a groundless distinction of the Rhemists, to say, That the
Spirit for many other causes is given to diverse private men, and to all good
men to sanctification; but to teach all truth, and to preserve in truth, and
from error, he is promised and performed only to the Church, and the chief
Governor and General Councils thereof. The contrary to this is affirmed by
themselves in another place, Joh. 17.17.
saying; Christ prays that the Apostles, their Successors, and all that shall
be of their belief, may be sanctified in truth, i. e. may have the Spirit of
truth, and be freed from error. The Spirit then may be had, and yet
inerrability be wanting to a person. To your other Text: It seems to be put in
to make up a number of Texts, not of Proofs; I believe you neither considered
Text nor Context when you brought it in. I profess, I cannot see the least
shadow of proof in it for the Churches infallibility, it being spoken to the
Jews in regard of their desolations, and therefore contains a promise of Gods
returning with mercy and loving kindness, which was suitable for their comfort
in their low condition.

4. Against Weakness, you urge 1 Timothy 3. She is the Pillar and ground of truth:
And Mat. 16. Hell Gates shall not prevail against her. To the former I answer.
1. If any particular Church be here spoken of, it is not the Roman, but the
Church of Ephesus, where Timothy governed, which by your own confessions might
err. 2. The words may be referred to what follows: It Is not said expressly, She
is the Pillar, etc. as you abusively read it. Cameron does refer them to the
next verse, and gives diverse reasons why they should be so referred, Verba ista
(Columna etc.) sunt conjungenda cum sequentibus: ratio, 1. Alioqui erit Oration
Apostoli hiulca and suspensa si legamus, -- Domus Dei columna, and fundamentum
veritatis and sine controversia, etc. est (...) non coherent ista. 2, Non solet
Apostolus novi Argumenti tractionem incho^re a conjunctione. 3. Haec est
usitatissima formula inter Judaeos, quum quis profitetur se traditurum
praecipua dogmata Religionis, ut illud pronunciat columnam esse and fundamentum
veritatis vel sapientiae quod traditurus est: Et solent Apostoli uti phrasibus
receptis in ecclesia judaica, sed accommodatis ad rem quam agunt. Cameto.
showing amongst other things, that this was a manner of speech which the Jews
did frequently use, when they delivered some main and principal points of
Faith. And hereunto the Apostle Paul, who was well versed in the customs of
the Jewish Rabbis, being now to deliver the main points of our Faith
concerning Jesus Christ might well allude. If we take it thus, it is not the
Church, but the truth it self, especially those principal points of Religion
mentioned in the next verses. Thus Irenaeus says, That the Gospel which was
preached by the Apostles, was afterward by the will of God delivered to us in
writing, (Fundamentum and columnam fidei nostrae futurum) that it might be a
ground and Pillar of our Faith. 3. Supposing it be spoken of the Church, Iten.
advers. haeres. lib. 3. c. 1. init.
yet this is 1. In regard of the Word of God which is preached and continued in
the Church; if God remove his Word from a Church, as from the Churches of Asia,
etc. that Church cease to be a Pillar and ground of truth. 2. In regard of
true Believeers who are truly the house of the living God, and adhere to the
Word of God, others are not, De compage domus, they are not of the House.
Augustine has a notable saying to this purpose, Aug. praefat. in Ps. 47.
he tells us the Church consists of Saints, such whose names are written in
heaven, steadfast ones, hear (says he) and acknowledge that this Church in the
Apostolical Epistles is called a foundation. 3. In regard of the first
Christians and Ministers, not succeeding Churches (unless in such regards as I
shall show hereafter) the Apostle speaks in the Present tense. The authority
of the Primitive Church is greater then of the present Churches. There is a
clear testimony, and much to our present purpose, in your Lovain Doctor
Driedo, Dried. lib. de dogm. vari^s.
who acknowledges that the Primitive Church was of greater authority in
teaching and delivering Doctrines of Faith, then the present Church, because of
the Apostles qui ^cclsiae illius columneae, Gersom de vita spirituali animae f.
61. R.
who being Pillars of that Church, were eyewitnesses of that which they taught.
Thus Gersom (expounding that Speech of Augustine, you much glory in non
crederem Evangelio, and I had not believed the Gospel, unless the authority of
the Church had compelled me thereto) says he, taking Church there for the
Primitive Congregation of the faithful, who saw and heard Christ, and were his
witnesses. Suppose we grant this Church was the Pillar and ground of Truth in
your sense, what would your present Apostatized Roman Church gain by hat? Your
Prelates are no such Pillars as the Atostles, nor your Church such a foundation
of truth as theirs. Lastly, supposing it were meant of the present Churches,
particularly of the Roman: It Is being called the Pillar and ground of Truth,
does not prove it is infallibility: James, Cephas, Gal. 2.9.
and John were Pillars, yet who would infer from thence that they were
infallible? Gersom is by one called, Constantiensis Concilii columnam, a Pillar
of the Council of Constance, yet he was not thought infallible. All that can be
proved from these titles is this, that God makes use of the Church (both
Pastors and faithful people according to their places) to hold forth and
preserve the truth, which is accomplishhd in every particular Church, so long
as it continues a true Church of Christ, but this does not exempt it from
ceasing to be a true Church, or from erring. Thus it may truly be said of the
Churches of Asia, and of Rome, that while they continued true Churches of
Christ, they held forth and preserved Gods truth; but neither this, nor those
were exempt from erring. Adam in the state of Innocence might have been truly
called the Pillar and ground of truth, and goodness, holiness, and
righteousness; yet Adam was created with a posse errare, a possibility of
erring, as we know by woeful experience.

Your other text is Matthew. 16. I answer. 1. By Church we are to understand true
Believers. Augustine expounds this place by Matthew. 7.24.25. Aug. de unit.
eccles. c. 18. See Lyran.
These cannot be finally prevailed against by the Gates of Hell. There will be
a number of true Believers, and these visible, let the Devil and his
Instruments do what they can. 2. By Hell Gates the Fathers understand
persecutions and sins, and will you say that the members of the true Church
cannot be persecuted nor tempted to sin, the contrary is undeniable.

3. Its one thing for Hell Gates to wound us, and cause us to shrink, another
thing to overcome us utterly; our weakness lays us open to blows and wounds,
such weakness was in Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, who denied or forsook
Christ; such weakness was in your Pope Liberius, when he subscribed to the
Arian Heresy: Though God does always strengthen his servants against total
Apostacy. 4. Tell me Sir, suppose I had brought this place to prove the
certainty of the Saints perseverance? would you have been persuaded that they
could not err so much as in the least truth, or fall into the least sin?

3. Arg. Your third Argument is taken from Christ's promise of his presence,
Matthew. 28. I am with you alwayos to the end of the world. Ans. 1. This promise
is made to all the Apostles and their Successors; Page 15.
and therefore if it proved infallibility for any, it would be for the
Apostles Successors in other Churches as well as Rome, which is not harmonious
music to Popish ears. 2. Its made to the Successors of the Apostles, as
employed about the ministerial acts of teaching and baptizing; and therefore if
it proved infallibility, the Pope must part with a privilege you ascribe only
to him. 3. What is more promised here then Joh. 14.23. where Christ promises
his presence, and abode with private Christians, even such as love him, and
keep his word, whom you account not unerrable. 4. There are three things
contained in this promise, a threefold effect of Christ's presence, with the
successes of the Apostles. 1. His special support and assistance for the
discharge of their duties. Thus Chrysostom says, Quia magna eis injunxerat,
etc because he had laid a great task upon them, to comfort them he says,
Chrysostom. Hom. 91. in Matthew.
[Behold I am with you, etc.] q. d. lest you should complain that your work is
difficult, I will be with you, who make all things light. 2. His protection of
them, that there shall never cease a Succession of Pastors in the Church to the
end of the world, Ephesians. 4.11.12.13.14. 3. Ordinary illumination and
direction; I say ordinary, to distinguish it from that extraordinary
illumination which the Apostles had, and which was suitable for them by whom
the Scriptures were written, and the Churches first founded, but is ceased with
them; so as Gods Timothies must give themselves to reading, meditation, etc.
which the Apostles were not tied unto: Hereupon your inferences fall to the
ground, in that you say, Either Christ was not of power to keep his Church from
strayings, or that he wanted fidelity to make good his word. Christ's power is
larger then his will or promise, and therefore sufficient to perform what he
promised: Nor is there any defect in his fidelity; whatsoever he has
promised, he will perform it to his Church, but he never promised her
inerrabilitie, she is not therefore to expect it from him.

4. Arg. Your fourth Argument is in these words, The certainty Divine Faith
requires to be built on, is a further evidence of the Churches infallibility;
ibid.
for how is it possible Faith can be certain, if the Church that is to
ascertain it be uncertain and fallible? The Argument is reducible to this form;
That which Divine Faith does build upon must be certain and infallible (else
Faith it self could not be certain) but it is the Church that ^ivine Faith does
build upon, therefore the Church must be certain and infallible. Your major I
easily grant, but deny your minor Proposition, which being only questionable,
you should have brought some proof for it, as well as for the other, which no
man doubts of; but it has been observed to be the practice of Jesuits;
Probare concessa, leviter pertransire dubitata, whom you are pleased to
imitate: The reasons of my denial are these. 1. Its the privilege of the Word
of God written, or the Scripture to be the ground of Faith. These things are
written that ye might believe, Joh. 20. ult.
i. e. that your Faith might have a certain foundation, revelations, or
traditions, being more uncertain, and easily pretended where they have no
existence or being. Compare with this, 2 Pet. 1.18.19 Ye have a more sure word
of Prophecy, that is, In quo magis confirmetur auditor; whereby the hearer may
be more confirmed. So that the word is more sure, and that to us, inasmuch as
we are thereby more confirmed. Hence it is that our Savior sends his hearers
to the Scriptures, that therein they might find what they have to believe,
Joh. 5.39. So does the Prophet, Isa. 8.20. and Abraham in the parable, Luke
16.29. which your Lyranus comments thus upon, Lyran. in Luke 1 is. 29.
Habent Moysen, etc. they have Moses who taught moral actions, and the
Prophets who delivered mysteries of Faith, and these suffice to salvation;
therefore it follows, let them hear them. This was the measure of the Apostles
preaching and faith, Act. 26.22. Act. 17.10.11.
By this the Bereans tried the truth of the Apostles preaching, and for its
conformity thereto, Annot. of Divines on the Text.
did receive it into their belief, it is said; therefore many of them believed,
i. e. because of the testimony of the Scriptures: So that we may truly say,
that if the Apostles had preached any thing beside, or contrary to Scripture,
the Bereans would not have believed their preaching, and the Apostle himself
would have justified them herein, Gal. 1.8.9. On which Text Augustine has this
note, Qui praeter -- greditur, Aug. apud Lyran. in
etc. He that goes beside the rule of Faith, does not walk in the way, but
departs from it -- Neither would the Apostle himself have us found our hope on
him, but on that truth which he declared: That which was spoken by him was
better, then he by whom it was spoken. From whence what can be more clearly
inferred then that. 1. The Word of God preached is the rule of Faith: And 2.
That faith is not resolved into persons preaching the truth, but into the truth
preached by them, contrary to both which is your minor Proposition. 2. Ans.
Supposing it true, that the Church must be the ground of Faith; yet I affirm
that this is not yours, or any other present Church, but only the Primitive
Church, which as I have already showed, is of greater authority then the
present Church, which is in a kind grounded upon the Apostolic Church, or that
Church which contains the Prophets, Apostles, etc. All succeeding Churches are
built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, whose testimony,
because of their visible converse with God and Christ, becomes efficax ad
credendum, effectual for the grounding of Faith. Its observeable, that whereas
Abraham might have told the rich man, that his Brethren had a present Church to
hearken to, yet he only mentions Moses and the Prophets. 2. I affirm, that if
your Church be a foundation of Faith, yet this would not be a Divine, but only
an humane Faith. And indeed this is the very reason why your Doctors commonly
held, that Faith is ultimately resolved upon God himself revealing the truth
(as Azorius observes) because Divine Faith must be resolved into a Divine
testimony, which the testimony of the Church is not, and they prove it by
diverse arguments, especially by four, which I have transcribed out of Azorius:
And though he do not altogether adhere to their opinion, Ratio: 1. Ecclesiae
testimonium est quidem divinum sed participatione non per se and sua natura: at
Dei testimonium est divinum per se and sua natura, and fides divina resolvi
debet in testimonium quod sit per se non autem participatione divinum. 2. Quae
sunt fidei revelatione Divina, non naturae lumine sunt patefacta, at Deus est
qui revelat ac pandit res fidei, non ecclesia. 3. In Angelis, Prophetis,
Apostolis and caeteris Librorum Cananicorum Scriptoribus fides non resolvebat,
in ecclesiae testimonium, sed in Deum per se pro xime revelantem: at fides
nostra est ejusdem speciei cujus fui illa. Ergo in eandem rationem credendi
reducitur. 4. Quamvis ecclesia sit testis -- non tamen Condit aliquem articulum
fidei sed declarat and explicat quae sunt fidei, etc. Azor. Instit. Moral.
Parl. 2. l. 5. c. 24. q. 2.
but allows something to the Church; yet he acknowledges that it is ex accidenti,
by accident, that our Faith is resolved into the Churches authority. Again: 2.
Many learned Papists believe and teach, that it is only an humane Faith,
whereby we believe, that this, or the other Pope is Peter's Successor, and
Christ's Vicar on earth, because it depends on this Proposition, that this, or
the other Pope, is orderly and Canonically chosen to the Popedom, which is
also objected against General Councils. Now how can we believe a Popes Decrees
for a Divine Faith, when its only an humane Faith, whereby we believe that he
is Pope or Peter's Successor. Becanus clearly resolves, That if any stay in the
resolution of the Church, and ascend not to the Scripture his assent, who
believes, because of the authority of the Church is not an assent of
Theological Faith, but of an other inferior order, viz. that which Scotus
calls an acquired Faith, and says, is only conceived by the Churches
testimony, which indeed is nothing else but an human faith, for its such a
Faith whereby we believe one, that may both be deceived himself, and may
deceive us, although we believe that he will not deceive us. Sot. lib. 2. de
Not. and great. c. 7.
Hereupon Sotus acknowledges of him that he held the authority of the Church
to be only humane; than which, what can be more contradictory to your
assertion. 3. Ans. I grant that the testimony of the Church is an external
motive to belief, as is also consent of people, conformity of the things
believed to natural light, accomplishment of Prophecies, Miracles, Gods
Judgments against the Enemies of Truth, etc. The testimony of the woman of
Samaria was an external motive to the Samaritanes belief, not the formal cause
of it; so the preaching of Godly Ministers, is a means whereby men are brought
to believe, yet you will not conclude that Faith is built on them, and they
infallible: It is the Church by which (as a means) not for which (as the formal
ground) we do believe.

Your fifth Argument is taken from the Churches composure and nature, 5. Arg.
p. 18. 16.
in these words, Look on the Churches composure and nature, and her strength
will appear yet more, by reason she is framed, and made up of men, Genesis 22.
dispersed and spread over the world, Act. 1. who by this means being of several
Nations, Ps. 11. different tempers and interests, Luke 24. neither could, nor
can meet, or conspire to cheat themselves or posterity with a lie. Which may
be reduced to this Syllogism; If the Church be composed of men of several
Nations, different tempers and interests, then it is infallible; but it is so
composed, etc. therefore infallible. A. To your minor I shall only say, that
if I were not otherwise persuaded to believe it, then by your proofs of it,
which are to be sought like a Needle in a Bottle of Hey, I should doubt of the
truth of it: Sure you intended your proofs for your Romish Catholics, who you
know read not Scripture: But what needs all this ado, this senseless urging of
holy Scripture to prove that the Church is composed of men, men of several
Nations, different tempers and interests. But leaving this for your brutish
admirers to ruminate on, I deny the consequence of your Major Proposition,
which is this, That society that is framed, and made up of men dispersed and
spread over the world, etc. is infallible. What Schoolboy that knows what
infallibility is, would assent to this? Who knows not, that Herod and Pontius
Pilate, the Jews and Romans, men of several Nations, of different tempers, and
interests, yet conspired in resisting the Gospel, and crucifying of Christ? Are
not the Mahometans men of several Nations (yea more then true Christians
possess) different tempers and interests, yet damnable erroneous? What do you
think of the 72. Interpreters, Oyril. Caled. 3. page, 99.
who were sent by Eleazer the Priest to Ptolemy, to translate the Hebrew Text
into Greek, which they did without any discrepancie, eirher in sense or words,
though kept asunder one from another? Do you think they were infallible? The
Arian Church was composed of men dispersed over the world, of different tempers
and interests, yet most dangerously erroneous: Yet further, when our Savior
suffered some of your Doctors say the Church was only in the blessed Virgin;
how would this your argument have proved the Churches infallibility at that
time? Your citation of Genesis 22. and Act. 1. and Ps. 11. and Luke 24. would have
been to no purpose. Once more, shall not the Antichristian Church having these
qualifications, yet damnably err? 2. Tell me what you understand by different
tempers and interests? Is it that some are godly, some wicked, some promoters
of Christ's interest, some advancers of the Devils? By your tempers mean you,
that some are hot, others cold, and a third sort lukewarm? And by your
different interests, that some promote the Popes interest, others the interest
of Councils against the Pope. This is your Churches composure, but proves no
infallibility. 3. If the very seeming contradictions in Scripture overthrow
the Protestants Argument for its Divine Authority from its concent and
harmony (which Vane in his late books labors to prove) Why do not your real
differences which Bellarmine declares to the world, Vane's Lost Sheep. p. 16.
much more conclude against your infallibility? But you seem to be sensible of
the insufficient, of your Argument, and therefore before the end of your
Section, you fly to Gods assisting and strengthening of the Church, whereby
she becomes infallible. But this I have answered before, and avoid repetitions.

CHAP. V. Of the possibility of keeping the Commandments.
J Cannot but wonder what your method should be in this book, and how this
Chapter should come in next to the former. When you had spoken so much of
conformity of faith to the Church, which you account as the first means of
supernatural happiness, what rational man but would have thought, but that you
should have said something of the conformity of hope to the Lords Prayer; which
you laid down as a second means, and not have leapt to the third in such haste.
I could almost think that you are secretly proving adoration of that Roman
Creature, the Church of Rome; for in your former Chapter you have been freeing
her from Error, here you free her from sin; for if any be free from sin, it
must be the Roman Church: And your next Chapter is about Religion, or religious
worship: But seeing I have begun, I will continue to follow you. In this
chapter you weave Penelope's Web; what you say in the first and second Section,
you clearlie unsay in the third, which will therefore help me in answering your
former assertions. You begin with exceeding confidence, wondering that any can
make question of the possibility of keeping the Commandments; But the ground
of this your confidence is misapplication of Scriptures, as I shall through Gods
assistance make it appear in my answers to you. You urge Scripture, examples,
and arguments: The Scriptures you mainly urge are these, Deuteronomy. 30. and Mat.
11.21. 1 Deuteronomy. 30. They are not above, but very near us, in our mouths, and in
our hearts to do them. Its the Argument of your Donatists, but makes not for
you to prove possibility of perfect obedience; that which it proves is, the
perspicuitie of the Law, as to the Jews knowledge of it. Vatab. Annot. in Loc.
That word which you render above, is by Vatablus rendered Hid, non est occultum
a te. Its not hidden from thee. As if he should say to them, you have no cause
to plead ignorance of the Law, seeing its not hid from you, but published to
you, being in your mouths, i. e. in ore Levitarum, etc. in the mouths of the
Levites, who are of thy people -- that thou may receive from them those
precepts that concern a good l^fe, Id. ibid.
and that they may teach them thee without delay. This is more confirmed by his
Marginal Note, Praeciditur hic, etc. Here is cut off from the Jews all occasion
of pleading their ignorance of the Law. 2. These words do mainlie intend the
words of Faith ( Romans 10.8.) i. e. the application of Christ's righteousness to
us by Faith. Thus Lyranus explains it, saying; Lyran.
Ostenditur, etc. Here is showed the facility of that righteousness which is by
the Faith of Christ, which the Apostle opposes to righteousness by the Law,
Phil. 3.9. Vatablus is very clear in this point, understanding it of that
righteousness which is freely bestowed on Faith; his words at large are these,
Si de sola lege, etc. If this were spoken only of the Law, his argument were
frivolous, in that the Law of God is nothing easier to be done, by being before
our eyes, then if it were far off: Moses therefore in this Chapter, as in the
fourth, does commend unto the people Gods special good will (as appears by that
place of Paul, Romans 10 8.) in bringing them under his tutorage, which
commendation could not be taken from the naked Law: Nor does it hinder, that
Moses preaches of ordering their life according to the rule of the Law, for
the free righteousness of Faith has the Spirit of regeneration accompanying
it; therefore one is inferred from the other, because the observation of the Law
is through the Faith of Christ. This righteousness of Faith is easy in regard
of Law righteousness, which was to be done by us, whereas it is rather
fulfilled in us by Christ, Romans 8.3.4. This is further confirmed by the Jews,
who unanimously affirm, that this thirtieth Chapter belongs to the Kingdom of
the Messiah. 3. If they be spoken of the Commandments, and prove that they may
be kept, it remains yet to prove, that this keeping of them is an exact and
perfect fulfilling of them, indeed to those that are regenerate, the
Commandments are said not to be grievous, 1 John 5. but this is only because
they keep in them in such measure, that God is pleased freely to accept and
reward them for it. 4. These words are spoken to the people of the Jews in
general, even to all, and therefore to each of them, amongst whom there were
many unregenerate. Will you say now, that unregenerate and graceless ones can
keep the Commandments of God perfectly? Council. Tri. dent. Sess. 6. Can. 18.
This were to oppose your unerring Council of Trent, who limit this
possibility to the regenerate only.

2. Text. Matthew. 11.21. it is v. 30. My yoke is sweet, my burden light. A. 1.
By Yoke many understand the Gospel, not the Law; and by burden, Christ's
Discipline. Christ's yoke, says Chrysostom, Gloss. ordin. and Chrysostom. apud
Lyran.
is the Gospel which unites Jews and Gentiles in one Faith. Lyranus and Emanuel
so call it, Lex Evangelica. Now this is Faith working by love: This is the work
of God that we believe on him whom God has sent, Joh. 6.29. This is most
suitable to the context, for our Savior is speaking to poor souls, burdened
with sin, or the Laws yoke, as your Gloss and Lyra who calls the Law Onus
patribus antiquis importabile) speak. Now can we think Christ should send them
to the Law again? This were to deliver up a poor oppressed servant to his rigid
Master, which the Law forbids. Is it not rather more suitable to Christ's temper
to advise them thus, Poor souls, the Law has terrified you, by exacting of you
perfect obedience, or in case of defect subjecting you to the curse: Come
therefore to me, believe on me by a true Faith accompanied with love, applying
my perfect obedience for the covering of your disobedience; look upon my
stripes, see me become a curse for you, and rest upon my promise of application
of my obedience to you; this is sweet and profitable, whereas your own
righteousness is unprofitable, as to the acquitting of you from subjection to
the curse. (See this Phil. 3. init.) And though you meet with a burden of
afflictions and sufferings, these are but light, and they work for us a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. 2. If it should be understood of
the Law, it cannot demonstrate a facility of exact and perfect obedience: This
is most difficult; so as its hard you say, to name any particular man that
attains unto it; but of an inclination of the heart to, and an endeavor of
obedience, this is easy to one that comes to Christ, the Apostle shows this in
his own experience, saying; To will is present with me, but how to perform that
which is good I find not, Romans 7.18. Which is notably confirmed by S.
Augustine, Aug. apud Lyran.
Semper bonus vult, etc. A good man has always a will not to sin; but he
never attains to this perfection in this life, that he should not sin. There is
a kind of Emphasis in the Apostles word (...), he did some good, but he did
not thoroughly do it, he was not altogether free from concupiscense, Athan.
apud. Eund.
as that Father shows. Thus Athanasius propounding the question how the Gospel
is lighter then the Law, seeing the Law condemns evil works, and the Gospel
concupiscense, he answers; In Lege multa jubentur, etc. In the Law many things
are commanded, which the Apostle says cannot be done; in the Gospel there is
required the will -- which alone may suffice, and be rewarded. Certainly where
Grace is, there is an inclination to good, yea a delight in the Law of God
according to the inward man, yet there is no perfection. And hereupon the most
godly have their sighs, groans, tears, complaints, for their weakness and
miscarriages.

2. Your examples are many, some of them (say you) out of the Old Testament,
others out of the New; to which I say: 1. Those you mention of the Old and New
Testament, (viz. Noe, Ezekias, Josias, Josephat, Asa, Jotham, J b, Simeon, John
Baptist, Zecharias, Elizabeth, the B. Virgin) were all of them godly and holy
persons, and did keep the Commandments in such measure, that God in his mercy
did accept of them. But I deny that any of them did so perfectly fulfill the
Law, that they were able to stand the trial of Gods exact Justice: And
therefore read the lives of the most holy men that the Scripture mentions, and
you shall find their blemishes and sins, which are inconsistent with exact and
perfect obedience. David is said to be a man after Gods own heart, yet
committed two mortal sins (to use your word) Murder and Adultery; Noe was a
just man, but guilty of drunkenness, Genesis 9.21. a sin that excluded from
Heaven, 1 Cor. 6.10. Zecharias is taxed with unbelief, Luke 1.20. It Is easy to
instance in the rest, but for brevities sake, I desire you to find your own
quotations and peruse them; that which the Scripture asserts of these is, that
for the main of their lives they were blameless before men. This is fully
propounded by S. Augustine, in answer to your Fathers the Pelagians, whose
argument this of yours was: For speaking of Zacharias and Elizabeth how they
were blameless, Aug. de Great. Dei Contr. Pelag. and caelest. l. 1. c. 48.
he has these words; Dictum est, etc. It Is spoken (as it seems to me) of their
conversation, which was approved, and commendable in the sight of men, and
which none could justly accuse or complain of, etc.

2. There is one example which you bring in amongst the crowd of Scripture
examples, and if it were one of them, it is of Tobias, mentioned Tob. 2. I
shall answer this particularly, because fetched out of an Apocriphal book. 1.
Therefore I say, in the place you quote, I read nothing of Tobias that can
prove your assertion; to argue from one or two particular acts of charity, to
an absolute perfection of charity, is no good Logic. But sure Sir you were in
love with his name, and thought he was perfectly good, because his name was
Tobias, rather then because the second chapter of Tobit says any thing of it.
But what fault had good David made, that he could not have a room in the Old
Testament as well as Tobias? I believe he should, but then you could not have
told us, that Tobit was a Canonical book of the Old Testament, which now you
affirm: So that in this example you kill two Birds with one stone; Ecce duo
gladii. I pray Sir who told you that Tobit was a part of the Old Testament: 1.
The Jews told you not, for they (and to them were committed the Oracles of God)
received it not, but cut it off from the Canon, as Hierome in his Prologue to
this Book, Hierom. ad Chrom. and Heliod. in Tob. Prolog.
and the Annotator upon him does also confess. 2. Nor ancient Fathers;
Bellarmine observes, that many of the Ancients, as Melito, Epiphanius,
Hilarious, Hieronimus, Ruffinus, to whom add Cyril of Jerusalem, in their
delivering the Canon of the Old Testament, Cyril Catech. 4. p. 99. Stapl.
princip. Doctr. Christ. l. 9.
do clearlie follow the Hebrews. Stapleton also confesses, that this and other
such like books, were accounted by the most ancient Christians, but as doubtful
and Apocriphal. 3. Did the Councils affirm it to you: I know Trent did, but she
is a Novice, and of no great authority in this point. The Council of Laodicea
(confirmed afterward in a General Council) omits this book, when she delivers
the Canon of Scripture. Ans. Diverse later writers do refuse this book, as
Lyranus, and as I remember, Lyran. praefat. ad lib. Tobit.
Sixtus Senensis. For a conclusion of this, I shall tell you, that there were
some adjudged Heretics by the General Council of Vienna, amongst whose errors
this is the Leader, as mentioned by Caranza, Quod homo in vita praesenti,
Caranz. Sum. Council. p. 434.
etc. That man in this present life may attain to such and so great a degree of
perfection, that thereby he becomes altogether impeccable. I pray show us the
difference betwixt this error, and your supposed truth of possibility of
keeping the Law.

3. Your Arguments now come to be considered of. The 1. is, Gods conditional
promises to David and his Posterity, could be termed no better then jeers,
unless the Commandments were possible. A. I deny your consequence: For 1. God
may accept of that which man can perform; though he do not perform what he
should: You know Hezekiah's prayer occasioned by a multitude of people that had
not cleansed themselves, and came to eat the Passover; The good Lord pardon
every one that prepares his heart to seek the Lord God of his Fathers, 2 Cron.
30.18 19.20.
though he be not cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary; and
the Lord hearkened to Hezekiah. Here was a defect in their obedience, and yet
Gods acceptance and performance of his promise to them, which was the benefit
of this Sacrament, as Lyranus tells you: God did fulfill his promise to David
and his Posterity, as Solomon acknowledges -- Who have kept with thy servant
David my Faiher, that thou promised'st him; 1 King. 8.24.
thou spakest also with thy mouth, and have fulfilled it with thine hand, as it
is this day. Yet you cannot say that David or his Posterity yielded exact
obedience to Gods Commandments, for they fell into grievous sins, but the main
of their lives was holy, and this God was pleased to accept of. The Falls of
the Saints do not nullify the Covenant of God, though sometimes they bring Gods
Rod upon them. Ps. 89.28. etc.
I should suppose that your self hope for an accomplishment of Gods promise,
yet I hardly think that you dream of yielding exact and perfect obedience to
Gods Law, before you can obtain the promise. 2. God does not jeer men by
exacting obedience which they cannot yield: For 1. He requires nothing but what
they owe him. 2. He requires nothing, but what he gave them once power to pay
him. 3. He requires nothing but what Jesus Christ is able to pay for them, and
God therefore exacts it of them, that they may seek unto him on whom he has
laid help. This is clearlie taught, Isai. 55.3.4. I will make an everlasting
Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David, says God. But Jesus Christ
must be given, or else this Covenant cannot be sure. See Romans 8.3.4. a most
plain text for this purpose.

2. Argument is this. To what purpose is so much persuasion in books and
Pulpits to live well, if the Commandments be impossible? Is living well, any
other than keeping of the Commandments? It is assuredly as ridiculous, as
impious, to term him a good liver, that steals, murders, and commits adultery,
etc. A. 1. Those persuasions are regulated by Gods command; God commands men to
live well, which, as you say, is to keep the Commandments, and Ministers in
books and Pulpits persuade men thereto. But to what purpose, say you, are
these, if the Commands be impossible? I answer, it is to much purpose: As 1. To
show men what they ought to do. It Is a noted Speech of that great Anti-Pelagian
St. Augustine O homo in praeceptione cognosce etc. O man in the precept know
what thou ought to have. You persuade many to join themselves to your Roman
Church, as the way to salvation, which its impossible for many of them to do,
if you consider either Gods decree, or their stability. They should deceive if
it were possible the very Elect: but its impossible: that's implied. Now if we
ask why you persuade such? I know no better reason you could render then this
that you show them what (according to your judgment) they ought to do. 2. To
beat down pride and conceit of justification by works: whilst we see that there
is more owing to God than we can pay. This appears in the Apostles speech. Romans
7.9. I was alive without the Law once, but when the commandment came, sin
revived and I dyed. This the Law is a worker of fear and bondage, and a killing
letter. 3. To drive them to Christ and the Grace of God through him. Propterea
enim mandatur (says devout Bernard) Therefore God has enjoined as to observe
his Commandments, Bern. in vigil. Not. dom. Ser. 2.
that seeing our weakness and defects, and that we cannot do what we ought we
might fly to the mercy of God. Thus the Law is a Schoolmaster to lead us to
Christ, making us ready to hearken to his invitations to lay hold upon his
promises: meditate on that text. Math. 11.30. If this end were not in it I know
not why it should persuade those in an unregenerate estate to obey the
commands, for its impossible they should keep them as all except Pelagians will
grant. 2ly. Whereas you say, Is living well any other then keeping of the
Commands? I Answer, Living well, and absolute perfect obedience to Gods
Commands are not convertible. You say of many that they live well, but confess
you cannot name one man that perfectly keeps the Commandments. It would be a
harsh note if I should tell you that I know not one Papist in England that
lives well. Or if some Traveller should affirm that he met not with one man in
all Popish Dominions that he could say lived well. You are abundant in
mentioning the good lives of Catholics, and their holiness of life is become
a note of your Church. Sure you do not mean that Papists absolute keeping of
the Commandments is your Note. The truth is, he lives well who for the main of
his life endeavors to conform himself to God, sorrowing for his failings and
inability to do what God requires, and flies to the mercy of God for the
remission of all the miscariages of his life: he that lives thus, lives well,
and if he dies, he dies well. Blamelessness before men sometimes, yea usually
denominates a good life. The perfect life wherein is no sin is the life of
Angels and Saints in Heaven, where there is perfection of knowledge and grace:
This perfection the Apostle Paul aimed at, but confesses he had not attained,
Phil. 3.12.3. Whereas you speak of tearming him a good liver that steals, etc.
I know not who asserts it, nor to what end you urge it. Its one thing to live
directly contrary and another thing to live according to the Law, though it
come short of Angelical perfection.

3. Argument is this, The justness of Laws that inflict severe punishments upon
the breakers of the Commandments are not at all consistent with the
impossibility of keeping them: Necessity is a good and forcible excuse against
the strongest charge. Supposing you to speak of humane Laws: I answer, 1. No
humane Laws take hold of any for want of exact and perfect obedience: Exact
obedience refers to thoughts, which human Laws reach not to, either to reward
or punish. 2. They suppose a possibility of outward conformity to them before
men: this was in Paul before his conversion, who as touching the righteousness
of the Law was blameless, but this was no more but outward conformity, for he
wanted grace whereby only your perfection is attainable. 3. What you say of
necessity is vain, for 1. There is no necessity of coaction whereby man might
be forced to transgress the Law: the will of man is free from this necessity.
2. If there be any necessity to transgress, its contracted by our selves
through our own fault, and therefore is not a good and forcible excuse against
the strongest charge. Do you think when God shall ask natural men at the last
day why they did not keep his Commandments, that their necessity will be a good
and forceable excuse against Gods charge? And your self cannot deny but that
natural men as such are unable to keep Gods Commands unless you profess
Pelagianism.

4. Argument, you say, The very light of reason gives testimony to the
Commandments possibility, they being all grounded upon reason, and suited to
her bent and inclination: the wickedst man alive cannot say that he breaks
any Command without some secr^t check of conscienco. Answ. 1. What could
Pelagius have said more for his error? Does not your argument prove his
opinion? to say the Commandments being grounded on natural reason, its in the
power of nature to keep them, is the grossest Pelagianisme. 2. I will grant to
you that the commandments are suited to reason as it was in its primitive
purity, but not as depraved. The Commandments therefore were not impossible to
Adam in whom reason was pure and right, nor should they have been impossible to
any of us, if we had stood innocent but now they are impossible to us, because
reason in us is depraved, and they are not suited to depraved reason, there are
neither fewer nor easier Commandments given to us then to Adam, but the very
same. If you say grace supplies reasons defect. I answer, it is true that Grace
does reform Nature, but brings it not to its primitive purity: there is no man
reaches to that height of reason that Adam had, and to that consonancy of it
to Gods Law. Adams posse non peccare is in no son of man. 3. Whereas you say
the wickedst man alive, etc. I question the truth of it, when your Church
through the hypocrisy of liars brings in Doctrines of Demons, forbids to
marry and commands to abstain from meats which God has created to be received
with thanksgiving of them which believe and know the truth. Do your conscience
check you? Are they not rather seared with an hot iron according to the
Apostles prediction? Do wicked men's consciences checks them for every thought
of their hearts that is evil. It may be, the commission of the gross external
act of theft, or adultery, or murder, and the like is usually atended with some
check in most men: but the commandments reach further then to the outward act,
to men's thoughts and words, and gestures, and few men will know that these are
sins; now there must be science before conscience. 2. Suppose it true, all that
it proves is this, that there are some footsteps of reason and conscience in
men, which we deny not: but it proves not that reason has its perfection in
them, or that the Law might be kept by them, though its probable that they
might break it less then they do. See Romans 1.18, 19, 20, 21.

4. Having ended your Arguments, you come in the next place to answer some
seeming objections against you.

1, Object. God only requires man's endeavor: To this you Answer, 1. This is
repugnant to Christ's express words, which are not, Math. 19. If thou will come
to Heaven endeavor to keep, but keep the Commandments. Many a good endeavor,
as many a good purpose, burns in Hell. Heaven is the reward of doing not of
endeavoring.

Reply 1. (Not taking notice of the objection which is your own figment) I say
God does require endeavor (which by urging that text, Math. 19. you seem to
deny) yea there are as many Commandments of endeavors, as of actual obedience
in the New Testament: yea further there are promises and those of Heaven made
to endeavors. L^ke 13.24 Strive to enter in at the strait gatte, etc. Mat.
7.7, 8. Ask and it shall be given you seek and ye shall find, etc.

Reply 2. Though God do not require only endeavor yet God accepts of endeavor
where there cannot be action. God commends and accepts of David's intention of
building him an house though he built it not. If a good intention may be
accepted instead of action which your Rhemists assert, why not a good endeavor.

Rep. 3. Endeavor is the utmost that is attaineable in this life according to
the judgment of your best School-man Aquinas Aquin. 22. q. 24. 7. c.
who shows that that perfection of charity whereby the whole heart of man is
continually and actualy carried toward God is our perfection in our Country,
but not p^ssible in this life, in which because of human infirmities its
impossible always actually to think of God or to love him: but there is another
kind of perfection, which is, when a man does wholly endeavor to devote
himself to God and Divine exercises, omiting other things, unless so far as
humane necessity does require, and this is possible in our way, etc. Whence I
infer that seeing charity reaches only thus far that a man should endeavor to
devote himself to God, and divine exercises omitting other things so far as he
can. It cannot therefore extend to perfect and absolute obedience to Gods will.
This endeavor was all that St. Paul attained to Philip 3.11, 12, 13, 14. Its
most false and an uncomfortable Doctrine to true souls to say many a good
endeavor burns in Hell. For either such endeavors were not real or not
seasonable and so not good. But prove that a real a seasonable endeavor burns
in Hell.

2ly. You answer Its equally unnatural to endeavor impossibilities, and to
desire things unknown, Who would chose but smile to see one leap and skip as
aiming to soar and fly in the air, knowing it to be possible only for birds
that are fitted with wings and feathers for the purpose. Reas. 1. There is a
twofold impossibility, 1. Natural or simple impossibility when a thing cannot
naturally be done. 2. Moral, when the thing is in its own nature possible; but
there are diverse intervening obstructions which for the present make it
impossible. 2. therefore I answer, things that are simply or naturally
impossible are not to be endeavored; we are not to endeavor to be Gods to
make a humane body without the quantity and qualities of such a body, to place
one body in two places, or two bodies in one, or as your instanc is to fly in
the air as birds (though perhaps art might make this possible.) But if the
things have only a moral impossibility, there is no question but they may be
endeavored. And this way only are the Commandments of God impossible to us:
they are not contrary but according to right reason, only reason being crazed
its unable to be conformed to this rational Law: this is asserted by St. Paul,
Romans 8.3.
What the Law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh, etc. The
impossibility is not in it self, but in our flesh: that is, our corruptions. It
were not unnatural for a poor man that owes a sum of money to endeavor to
pay it, though at present he be unable to pay any considerable part of the
sum: Nay it were wickedness in him to lay aside endeavor because of present
impotency: qui non potest quod debet, debet quod potest. Hereafter we shall be
able to do Gods Will, at present we rather endeavor to do it, then actually do
it; only here is our comfort we have a gracious father who will accept of his
childrens endeavors, as if they actually did what he commanded them.

2. Obj. There are no particular persons can be pointed out of whom you can
say, these keep the Commandments.

Answ. 1. Indeed to point at any particular, that does keep the Commandments is
hard, no man knowing Eccles. 9. whether he be worthy of love or hatred. Reply,
You have but worded it all this while, now you come to speak indeed, and now
you are rather with then against us: The Commandments (say you) may be kept but
its hard to point at any particular, etc. 1. Hereby you tell us that your self
have performed a very hard work, for you have given us diverse examples of
particular men and women that have kept them. 2. You comply with old Pelagians
whose answer you borrow: for when they were bid to instance in any that kept
the Commandments they answered that they said not who did but who might keep
them: to which Hierom replied Egregii Doctores, etc. Brave Doctors who say that
may be done which they cannot show us was ever done. Hierom.
You are the posterity of these Brave Doctors, and the same weapons that slew
your Fathers will kill you. 3. The text you urge shows only that by outward
events none kows whether he have the love or hatred of God, outward events
coming alike to all.

Answ. 2. But that all in general may keep them Christ himself assures it, 1 Timothy 2. Wiling all to be saved. God wills no thing impossible, and he that
wills the end, wills the means. Rep.. You ventured very far in your last answer
even to the wounding of your cause, and therefore do wisely to come off and
apply a plaster to your wound before you make a fresh assault. This assertion
is as wicked as the other is vain. Can all in general keep the Commands? Is not
faith a branch of the Commandments? Yet the Scripture expressly says of some
that they could not believe. John 12.39.
Is it possible for reprobates vessels of wrath to keep the Commandments?
Aquinas in that place I lately mentioned shows they cannot? How then can all
in general? 2. The Text you urge as the words of Christ himself, Aug. Enchir.
c. 103.
do not prove any thing but that God would have some of all kinds of men saved,
Kings, Private men, Noble, Ignoble, High, Low, Learned, Unlearned, as Augustine
truly expounds it. 3. You falsely suppose that perfect personal obedience is the
means of salvation. If you had spoken of man under a covenant of works you had
said truth, teaching that as God wills man's salvation; so he requires as a
necessary means thereunto that man in his own person should perfectly obey Gods
Commandments: But blessed be God who has made a New Covenant with us through
Jesus Christ who is become The Lord our righteousness. 4. If this perfect
obedience be the necessary means of salvation, then its not only possible that
some may keep the Commandments but its certain that all that are saved do keep
them, and then it were not such an hard matter to name such as have and do keep
them. You that can Canonize Saints, can tell who are saved; your hope having
the Keys of Heaven at his girdle can tell who goes in, and consequently who
has kept the Commandments.

3. Object. Our condition excludes capacity of perfect obedience. Answ. Its in
the power of men to love God so far forth as the capacity of their condition
reaches -- this is sufficient to denominate, and render the subject it is in
perfect. Reply, 1. The former part and indeed the main of your assertion is the
same with what Protestants say against you. We say and profess it that so far
as the capacity of our condition reaches, its in our power to love God, and
hence we infer, that we cannot keep the Law perfectly, because we are in an
imperfect condition our knowledge is but in part, and our love is no more. Adam
could have loved God perfectly, for the capacity of his condition reached it,
so shall we do in Heaven, Aquin. 12.9.109.
when that which is imperfect shall be done away: But its not thus with any man
at present: regeneration is not perfect, there are seeds of corrouption as
Aquinas confesses. 2. The later part of your assertion is clearly false, That
power which is according to the capacity of our condition is not sufficient to
denominate or render the subject, it is in perfect or an exact keeper of the
Law of God. If a debtor owe twenty pound, and has but five pound, which he
pays to his Creditor: does the payment of this five pound (which is as much as
the present capacity of his condition reaches to) denominate and render him a
perfect payer of his debt, I trow not, and pray Sir show the difference betwixt
this and your assertion.

CHAP. VI. Of Religion.
1. YOu assert that Religion consists in belief not humane grounded upon reason
but relying on the Churches authority and the assistance of the Holy Ghost,
Religio est virtus perquam homines Deo debitum cultum and reverentiam exhibent.
Aquin. 22. q. 81. 1. c. religio est quae cultum and honorem Deo tribuit. Azor,
instit. mor. p. 1. l. 3. c. 26. and l. 9. c. 5.
p. 23. Answ. 1. The proper act of Religion is to worship and bring honor to
God, with relation to whom only, Religion is defined by your Schoolmen and
others: This worship is due to God only, and is that whereby we give up our
selves unto God, as the supreme Lord of all, and do place our hope and that in
him, as Azorius defines it. According to this, faith is a part of divine
worship, an act of Religion, but relating to God the supreme Lord of all, not
to the Church, which is only a servant under him, or if you will, an assembly
of his servants, and indeed its reason that faith should refer to God, it being
the principal act by which a creature honors God, and therefore is more
pressed then any other Evangelical duty, and besides its requisite it have a
settled object to rest upon, which is Gods authority, for the Churches is not
always visible Abraham believed, but his faith relied not upon the Churches
authority. The Blessed Virgins faith could not rest upon any authority of the
Church, especially at Christ's death, when your men affirm that the Church was
in her only: but even then the Word of God, the material object of faith had a
visible existence, and the fidelity of God faiths formal object was present
with her to lean upon. The Scriptures you urge to prove that faith relies on
the Churches authority (viz. Mark 16. John 14.) make nothing for you, the later
speaks only of the Disciples instruction by the Spirit of God. The former
proves that we must believe the Gospel, the material object of faith, but says
not a word of the Church: it says not, he that relies upon the Churches
authority shall be saved. Whosoever believes the Gospel whether he receive it
from the Church or not, shall be saved. I challenge you or any that dotes on
the word Church, to give me any Scriptures that teaches to believe in or on
the Church: and think you not the Apostles knew how to speak as well as you.

2. I have already showed that the Churches authority is but humane in the
judgment of learned Papists, and that the Spirits assistance makes her not
infallible, nor a guide, or rule of belief. Your self do in effect confess at
least of the present Church, For you say, page 16. To be the guide of belief
requires further ability and skill, to lay open immediately to belief Gods
reveled truth, a prerogative belongs to the Church, and no other; as to whom
alone revelation was made. Now this ability is not in the Church she lays not
open immediately Gods reveiled truth, whether hereby you mean that the Church
speaks to the heart the seat of faith, or that she does it not by means of the
Scriptures: the Church lays open divine truths by the means of Scripture.
Besides the Church is not the subject of revelation which you say is the
foundation of this prerogative. Your Logical proceeding in councels show your
want of revelation. Your consciousness hereof makes you say revelation WAS,
made it was, but is not so now.

3. Your inference hereupon is, 1. Thus, The Religion of sectaries is vain
their b lief being grounded on some humane respect, not upon the warrantable
authority of the Church. ibid. Answ. There may be belelief gounded neither on
the authority of the Church nor on humane respects. Consult Azorius, and he
will tell you that there are Cath^liques who ground not their faith on the
authority of the Church, and yet ground it not upon humane respects. The Word
of God revealed unto us by the light of faith wrought in the soul by the spirit
is no humane respect: and this Orthodox Christians build their belief upon. 2.
Inference: For them to deserve the name of true Christians, and to be styled of
the right Religion, their only way is to level at perfection, that takes its
rise from an absolute resignation of their wills to the will of God in order to
the Church, which is to become spiritually little ones. Matthew. 18. Answ. 1.
Where do you learn that this grounding our belief upon the authority of the
Church is the way yea the only the way to be true Christians and of the right
Religion. Are not those Papists who differ from you in this point (and such
there are as I have showed) true Christians, and of the right Religion. I am
sure they are Papists for the main, and therefore cannot be of a wrong Religion
if popery be the right. 2. Who told you that that Text of Matthew was to be so
expounded. I have seen diverse expositions of the fathers on this Text different
from yours; but I find not one that from it does teach us to ground our faith
on the Church, as the only way to true Christianity and the right Religion. 3.
Its a good lesson to teach us to submit our wills to the Will of God: but it
does not appear that we should ground our faith upon the Churches authority:
the Scriptures are altogether ignorant, and destitute of expressions of such a
duty.

CHAP. VII. Of the unity of Religion.
JN the beginning of this Chapter you assert that True Religion is One, but
presently fall upon the unity of persons in this one Religion, and to the means
whereby they come to be united, which means you propound in these words; viz.
Experience shows that this unity of Religion is an effect of acknowledging the
Church for the rule of belief, it being visible to the eye that all that square
their belief to the Church are one in religion; whereas they that take to
themselves other rules descent and jarre etc. p. 28. Asw. 1. Whether those who
acknowledge the Church for the rule of belief, be so one in Religion, as that
they neither dissent nor jarre, I refer it to any man's judgment who has but
ordinary insight into the writers of Popish controversies. I wonder whose
experience it is that finds it? Or what Alseeing eye it is that discerns All
acknowledgers of the Churches authority to be one in Religion. Have you seen
All Papists? If you have, are men's judgments and thoughts visible to the eye?
Or did they all write their judgments, and give you them that your eye might
see them? But I shall confute this hereafter. 2. Why do you vary your phrase:
for first you say this unity is an effect of acknowledgi^g the Church for the
rule of belief. And then as thinking you had missed it you speak of actual
squaring men's belief to the Church. There is a great difference betwixt these.
A Papist may acknowledge the Church to be the rule of faith, yet through
ignorance of what the Church holds or some other cause, he may not square his
belief to the Church. Experience tells me that many Papists in these parts
acknowledge the Church to be the rule of belief; yet its hard to find one that
does not in some point or other, differ from the Church: I have found many that
in some points dissent from her. Soto and Catharinus who were both present at
the Trent Council could not agree what was the Councils meaning in the points
of Original sin and justification, but wrote one against the other of those
subjects. So that though both of them might acknowledge the Church to be the
rule of faith, yet they could not both square their belief to the Church,
unless she be a maintainer of contrary Doctrines. 4. May not experience carry
it as much for the Scriptures, and show that they are the rule of faith, for
its most certain that all that square their belief to the Scriptures are one in
Religion. Thus the primitive Christians did square their belief to the
Scriptures, and were unanimous. Its men's leaving the Scriptures and building
upon their own fancies, or building their faith upon changable, and unstable
men that makes dissentions and jarring. The Word of God being always the same,
there cannot be dissension where is conformity to it.

2. You give a reason hereof saying, Of which no other reason can be given, but
that the Church is always constant and certain; other rules subject to
uncertainty and change. Answ. 1. What mean you when you say that the Church is
always constant and certain? is it in regard of existence, I grant it of the
Catholic, but deny it of your Roman Church. God had a Church before there was
a Roman Church, and when Babylon the great is fallen, there will be the Church
still. I know no warrant you have that your Church shall always continue: there
is much in Scripture to persuade the contrary. Or, 2. Is it in regard of
holding and manifestation of the truth, but this way it has not been always
constant. Time was when it was Arian under Liberius, and the Orthodox
grievously persecuted in it: time was when it administered the Lords supper to
Children even for 600 years: Time was when the Bible of Clement was commanded
under the danger of a curse to be received as only Authentical: now Sixtus his
Bible must be so received upon the same danger: Time was when your twelve
articles of Pope Pius's creed were not enjoined as necessary to be believed to
salvation as now they are. Again, Sometimes it has happened that the Church
could not, would not, or durst not manifest the truth: Where was then its
certainty? The question about the effic^cy of grace was twice brought to the
Apostolic chair (forsooth) and after many years disputation, in regard of its
subtilty it was sent away with the difficulties and in determination wherewith
it came thither. Questions it seems must be easy or else your vertual Church
cannot certainly determine them What certainty is here, when subtilties can
stop the Popes determinations, Your decrees concerni g the virgins
impeccability in the Council of Trent are dark and of no great certainty. 2.
Its f^lse that other rules are subject to uncertainty and change. The
Scriptures are more certain and unchangable than your Church: they are called a
more sure word of prophecy to which we do well that we take he^d But that we
might think that you reverence Scriptures you say, True it is that Scripture in
itsel, that i^, as it is the Word of God dictat^d b^ the Hol^-Ghost is certain
and infallible; but to us, 2 Timothy 3. to wi^, as it is liable to this and to oath
rs priv^te interpretation it is as uncertain, and ^allible as man, witness the
many contrary interpr^tations, etc. Answ. 1. The Scripture is not only certain
in it self, but even to us, and therefore the Apostle speaking to private
Christians: 2 Pet. 1. says, We have also a more sure word of Prophecy
whereunto ye d well that ye take heed as unto a light, etc. The Scripture often
declares its own plainness and certainty as to us. Prove. 8.9. All the words of
my mouth are plain to him that understands: they are plain, obvious, Vatabl.
and easy to be understood Psalm. 19.7. The testimony of the Lord is SVRE,
making wise the simple. Psalm 1^9.130. The en rance ^f thy Word gives li^ht:
it gives und^rstanding un^o the simple. 2. Th u h particular men may mak^
wr^ng interpre ations of some plac^s, yet th^s is when they use not that
diligence, and those means that they ought to use, as viewing antecedent and
subsequent Scriptures, comparing like places, considering what words are
figurative what proper reading and pondering the interpretation of the learned,
bringing all to the rule of faith, i. e. plain places wherein the articles of
faith are clearly propounded, Tertul. l. de veland virgin.
or if you will the Apostles Creed, which Tertullian calls the immutable and
unalterable rule of faith. And your selves grant that the virtual Church may
err if she use not diligence 3. May not the same you say of Scripture, be.
said of your Popes Decretals, Councils, Canons, etc. may not these have wrong
interpretations? No doubt but they may: witness the difference betwixt Soto and
Catharinus. Certain it is that the Scriptures in points necessary to salvation,
are more clear than your Decrees and Canons. Lastly, I know not what you quote
2 Timothy 3. For, I find nothing for you in that Chapter, but rather against you.
Timothy had known the Scriptures from a child, and they are said to be able to
make him wise to salvation through faith, which is in Christ Jesus. Here is
study of the Scriptures note of the Churches Canons. Here is faith in Jesus
Christ; not in the Church. The Scriptures, as I said, or ignorant of such
expressions.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Spirit of Spiritists.
WHen I had read this Title and compared it with the Title of your tenth
Chapter, I thought Spiritists and Protestants had noted two distinct kinds of
persons: But the matter of this and the next Chapter show, that in the language
of the beast they are the same. Its strange you bring not in Scripturists, and
Christians, they are equally strange to you who glory only in the name
CATHOLIC: but why do you use these names. Is it that being Priests you tell
the world (though against your minds) that in your contention with us, you are
Anti-spiritists, Anti-scripturists, Anti-christians, which is your name given
you in Scripture. In your Chapter after a subtle distinction betwixt the
spirits virtue which you say is in all, and the effects of it, which are
confined within narrow limits, you come to show who they are that have the
gracious effects of Gods Spirit or his favor in them, in order whereunto you
say -- To know and disscern who they be, the only way is to see their warrant,
and examine their works. If their warrant prove that of miracles, and their
works good, doubtless they have the favor of Gods Spirit; if otherwise, they
are at the best but pretence-makers, and ush^rs of innovation. Answ. 1. How, or
upon what ground you distinguish warrant from works as marks of Gods Spirit, I
know not, this is a warrant for my belief, that I have the Spirits favorable
presence with me, because I have good works which cannot proceed from any other
fountain. And hereby Christ and St. Paul (as you say) taught us to try men by,
and it stands with reason upon those accounts that you give. Yet, 2. Its false
that they that want miracles have not the favor of Gods Spirit. Amongst all the
marks of a reprobate or enemy to God I do not find want of miracles to be any:
nor is the having of miracles a sign of one pe^taking of the Spirits favor;
have all your Catholics the gift of miracles, or have none of them that want
it the favor of Gods Sp rit? You had need to arm them with a cordial Epistle
against this uncomfortable doctrine* Nay further Are all your Popes workers of
miracles (if we should suppose their works good) I have read of the miracles of
many of your Saints, but I find little of the miracles of Popes. Monks and
votaries carry away the bell for miracles, and dare you say your Popes have not
the favor of Gods Spirit? Lastly Sir, are your self and companions workers of
miracles? If you be, pray what are they? Can you drink poison and not be hurt
(why then did not your Monk of Winstead Abbey live after his potion?) Can you
tread upon scorpions, and they not sting you? Can you speak with strange
tongues which you have not learned? Can you raise the dead, make the lame to
walk, and the blind to see? I know not that any of you claim a power of doing
these. Your pretense of casting out devils is a Jesuitical delusion of poor
credulous idiots, as I shall perhaps hereafter show. 3. I suppose your meaning
is this, they that hold their doctrine to be true (which truth of Doctrine is
an effect of Gods Spirit) must prove it by good works and miracles; so as that
Doctrine that is not thus confirmed is false Doctrine, as you assert in your
next section. But this is also untrue. For, 1. Miracles are not absolutely
necessary for confirmation of Doctrine, or of their calling who deliver it.
Unless, 1. That which is taught be such as cannot be believed without
miracles, in regard of the strangness and newness of it. Such was that Doctrine
or teaching that Jesus the son of Mary was the Messiah promised, that the
Jewish ecclesiastical policy should see altered. The ceremonial Law cease and
that such and such events should happen in aftertimes, these were our Saviors
and the Apostles Doctrines, and being such as I have showed, they needed
confirmation by miracles. 2. Unless those who Preach pretend to extraordinary
inspiration and mission: thus the Apostles and Prophets (though not all of
them) showed their extraordinary calling by miracles. 3. When the Gospel began
to be first planted, and a Gospel Church gathered out of the World, which did
not acknowledge the Scriptures for true, and therefore needed conviction some
other way. Hence it is that miracles were common in the infancy of the Church,
but are not so now. Sedulius (upon 1 Cor. 14.22. where it is said, Sedul* apud
Lyran.
Wherefore tongues are for a sign, not to them that believe, but to them that
believe not) has this note hic ostendit, etc. Whereas it said that signs were
given in the behalf of infidels, its manifest that faith increasing, they
cease: to which your Rhemists consent saying that the extraordinary gift of
Tongues was a miraculous sign in the primitive Church, Rhem. on 1 Cor. 14.22.
to be used especially in the Nations of the Heathen for their conversion.
Gregory says What, shall we not beli ve if we do no miracles? These were
necessary in the beginning that faith might be cherished with miracles, Greg.
and Theoph. apud Lyran. in Mark 16.17.
but now faith being confirmed they are not necessary, but it suffices that
Doctrine be confirmed by the good works of those who preach and publish it as
Theophilact speaks.

I conceive your conscience checked you for speaking of miracles, and therefore
your proofs in the next Section make only for good works, which we grant.

2ly. From your Doctrine you make this inference -- whence it is plain that the
Spirit of Spiritists is a false imposture, a mere figment and delusion. Answ.
This is nothing but a Jesuitical goundless imputation raised upon three gross
lies.

1. -- Inasmuch as its destitute of miracles. Answ. 1. The Doctrines we teach
being the Doctrines of our Savior and his Apostles has been confirmed by
miracles in the primitive times, both in them that taught, and in them also
that believed it, Mark 16.17. and this suffices to entitle us to miracles to
this purpose is that of Chrysostom Si quis dicat, sed non vid^^us haec signa
nunc fieri, etc. If any say, but we see not these signs to be done now:
Chrysostom. Tom. 5. de resur. ser. 33. p. 521. c
It may be answ^red, there is no difference whether they be done now, or were
done in time past. Indeed for present miracles as we have them not, so we need
them not. Our ministers pretend to no extraordinary inspiration, nor to any
Prophetical or Apostollical mission; we make no alteration of the state of the
Church from what it was by Christ's institution, nor teach any thing but what we
ground upon the Word of God. When you ask us to show miracles, we answer you in
the words of your St. B^net when he was urged to raise up a countrymans son.
Recedite fratre^, recedite: haec nostra non sunt etc. Go your ways brethren,
Gaz. in Cassian Collat. 15. c. 2. Aug. apud Gaz. ibid.
go your ways from us, miracles belong not to us, b^t to the holy Ap stles:
why do y^u lay burdens upon us which we cannot bear? Its no less than a
tempting of God now to attempt them. Notable is the speech of Augustine to this
purpose Quando tibi hoc suggerit inimicus, etc. When the enemy suggests this to
thee: what a man art thou? What a Christian? Have thou wrought so much as one
miracle? Have thou by thy prayers raised up the dead, or r st^red them tha^
have been sick of f^a^ers? If thou were of any worth, thou would do some
miracle. Answer and say, it is writ^^n thou sh^lt not tempt the Lord thy God: I
will not therefore tempt God, as if I belonged to God if I did a miracle, or
did not belong to him if I did it not. This is our answer when you demand of us
miracles as evidences of the Spirits favor.

2. You say, The Spirit in us induces to ill, it persuading a disloyal
de^ection fr m the Lords prayer, the Commandments and church. This is a most
gross and impudent slander: we neither teach nor practice defection from the
Lords Prayer, the Commandments, or that faith which the Apostles preached, and
the primitive Christians received from them. We reverence and use the Lords
Prayer as the most exact and perfect pattern of Prayer. We insert it in our
Catechisms, teach it our children, earnestly seek after those blessings it
contains, we have honorable and precious thoughts of it, as of whatsoever
Jesus Christ delivered to us. We receive the Commandments as the rule of our
obedience, the guide of our way, and as the Lord enables us do conform our
selves thereto. The like we say of the Church. We reject no Doctrines that we
know to be Apostolical (Its our cleaving to the Apostolical Church which makes
us to be hated of Papists.) What Creeds the ancient Churches of Christ have
received, we freely own, and believe all things written therein, though we
ingeniously profess our dislike and rejection of your late coined articles, as
not being received by former Churches: Finally the Spirit that is in us does
not induce us to any ill: we have indeed corruption in us which induces us to
ill, but we pray and strive against it. I dare affirm it (and disprove it if
you can) that our reformed Ministry is as holy, if not more than your
Priesthood, our people that receive the truth into their hearts walk as closely
with God and as free from sin as most of your Catholics: yea its observable
that the more free any parts are from popery and papists, the more zealous and
religious they are, and more careful sanctifiers of the Lords day. Since it
pleased God to set me in the place where I now live which is in the midst of
Papists, and popish persons, I have given my self to observe their ways, and I
find the best of them notorious profaners of the Lords day, spending it either
in drinking, or walking about from house to house, or sporting: and if they
have Protestant servants, employing them about their worldly businesses as much
as on any other day. But Sir* I may say of your self and such like as Hiero. of
some, Q^um bona imitari non queant, etc. Hierom.
When they cannot imitate the good is in us (which they can only do they envy
us, and in this think themselves very learned that they can detract from us.
You cannot imitate, therefore envy; its one piece of Jesuitical learning to
slander. What you bring those names of our Authors in your margent for, I know
not I am sure were they alive, they would accuse you of slandring them.

3. You say This Spirit in us prompteth things contrary and inconsistent each
with other. Ans. The Spirit in us is the Spirit of truth, and leads us into
truth not universally and infallibly, as if we knew all truth and erred in
nothing, for its not given fully and perfectly, though there be light in us,
yet its not without darkness, if it were we should be Angels rather than men,
comprehensors rather then travelers. This spirit keeps us from the
destructivenesse of error, not from error: yet I say the confessions of the
reformed Churches are most harmonious, our Churches teach not things contrary,
nor inconsistent each with othea, though particular men in our Churches may
dissent in some points, as in all Churches.

3. In your last section you bring in and answer two Arguments formed (as I
suppose) upon the anvile of your own brain. 1. God is no accepter of persons,
his Spirit being free may breath on whom he pleases. To this you answer, This
is out of the matter in hand; here being no dispute of Gods power, what he may
do, but of his will what he does. Reply When I know whose argument this is, and
see the form of it I shall vindicate it from your answer, if I like it: at
present I shall shall only desire you to remember your answer when you come to
the point of transubstantiation. 2. Arg* and Answ. their other ground for
ins^iration upon the assurance of Conscienc^, St. Paul and St. Augustine
convinced long since of weakness and coufinage. Reply, This argument came out
of the same mint with the other: for which of us lay any claim to inspiration?
2. It Is true we say that the Spirit bears witness with our spirits that we are
the Children of God, and does not the Apostle say so, Romans 8.16. Your Rhemists
confess that by this testimony the Children of God have an attestation of his
favor toward them. 3. Whereas you object the example of St. Paul and Austin,
pray tell me, can conscience never tell true because sometimes it erred? there
is an erring conscience, is there therefore no rightly informed conscience? You
make notable inferences. 4. May not conscience mistake in its judgment about
works as to their goodness or badness, nay was it not about works that St.
Paul and Augustines conscience did err; you acknowledge it was the one
persecuted the Church, the other the Truth. Why should not the Spirit when by
conscience it testifies of it self be regarded, as when it testifies of works?
You say conscience can have no greater certainty then the understanding that
gave it being, and the understanding often misseth. I grant that the
understanding of it self is errable and subject to mistakes, but being guided
by the spirit its certain, and so is conscience. The Apostle says, We know
that we dw^ll in him and he in us, 1 John 4.13.
because he has given us of his Sprit, and we see and do testify etc. Upon
which words your Gloss says, Per hoc, etc. Hereby we prove that he has given
us of his holy Spirit, because we see, that is through the Spirit of
inspiration by faith we know, and by the testifying spirit do we witness, etc.

CHAP. IX. Of the Spiritists rule of Faith.
YOu begin with a distinction about the rule of faith, which (you say) may be
considered in it self, or in r spect of us: In it self, its Gods reveal d
truth; in respect of us, its the same truth expressed to us. Thus far (say you)
Catholics and S^iritists agree: their difference i^ about the expression.

Answ. 1. I conceive your distinction is vain (and can hardly believe that
Spiritists agree with you thus far) For, 1. I conceive the rule of faith as
such cannot be considered but as to us, it being a relative term cannot be
considered without relation to believers who are its correlative you might as
well tell of a father considered in himself, or in respect of his Child. A
father abstract from relation to his child is no father, no more is the Word of
God abstract from its respect to believe in a rule of Faith. 2. You are extreme
quick and witty in distingishing betwixt Gods truth revealed and the same truth
expressed. I wonder what is the difference; does not God when he reveals his
truth express it to us, revelation is nothing else but the expressing of some
thing formerly unknown. Spiritists say Gods truth revealed or expressed to us
in Scripture is the rule of Faith and manners to believers.

2. You say, Their difference is about the expr^ssion; These (Spiritists)
holding that it is that of their private Spirit, joined to to that of Scipture
only, those (Catholics) that it is that of the Church, Scripture bearing
witness to her truth.

Answ. 1. If Spiritists (for I use your own word) and you agree about the rule
of Faith both in it self and in respect of us that it is Gods revealed truth,
and the same truth expressed to us: Why then do you entitle your Chapter The
Spiritists rule of Faith? as if we had one rule of Faith, and you another:
whereas you assert that the difference is not about the rule but the expression
of it. You explain the difference thus, Spiritists hold that the rule of Faith
is Gods reveal^d truth expressed to them by their private Spirit joined to the
expression of Scripture only. Catholics teach that it is God revealed truth
expressed by the Church, Scripture bearing wirness to her truth.

Ans. 1. For your opinion, I say, 1. What mean you by Gods revealed truth? I
perceive you understand not the Word of God revealed by the Prophets and
Apostles in Scripture, for you seem to blame us for our expression of Scripture
only, and accordingly oppose the Scriptures sufficiency in your next section.

2. How comes it that the Spirit of God has no place with you in expressing
the truth of God? Must your Diana shoulder out the Scripture and the Spirit
too? The Spirit is much beholding to you for your opinion. Are you not
Antispiritists in this your doctrine, and clearly destitute of the favorable
effects of the Spirit of God.

3. Has the Scripture no use or employment with you but to come in and bear
witness that the Church is true? Does it not witness for Gods truth as much as
for your Churches truth? Is it not the testimony of the Lord Jesus? But as the
thing Church is the Pillar of Truth, so the word Church is the very Pillar and
Prop of Popish Errors, and therefore you use it usque ad nauseam. 4. Are not
you like a turning mill-horse, or like the wicked in the Psalms, (Impii
nmbulant in circuitu.) You say the Scripture is the Rule of Faith (at least
partial) as the Church expresses, that is expounds it, and if you be asked
how you know the Church expounds it right, you answer, by the Scripture which
bears witness to the Churches truth. The Scriptures bear witness to the
Churches truth, and the Church bears witness to the Scriptures truth. But your
tenet is so clear with you (though most gross and wicked) that you add no
confirmation of it but what arises from the opposition of ours as you have
delivered it. Therefore, 2. I come to defend ours against you, but first I will
lay it down in other terms, it is this, we say that the rule of divine belief
is the Word of God contained only in Scripture, the means whereby we understand
it is principaly the Spir t of God which enlightens our minds and e^ab^es us by
the use of those means God has appointed us to use (amongst wh ch we number
the consent of learned men in former and in the present age) for the findi^g
out of the Scriptures mea^ing. Now if this be the private Spirit you speak of,
we acknowledge it and own it, and account what you say against it to be sinful
and foolish, as will presently appear. Against us, 1. You affirm that this
Spirit is false and spurious. Answ. 1. Is the Spirit of God in private persons
false and spurious? Or have they not this Spirit? Take heed of blasphemy, for
you are at the brink of it. The Spirit is promised to private Christians as
well as to others, and does testify as truly, though not always so manifestly
and fully in them as in public persons convened in Council. I could quote
many particular Doctors of your Church preferring their own expositions of
Scripture before the expositions of the Church and Fathers; but for brevity to
refer to Dr. Mortons learned Apeal lib. 9. c. 29. I will only say one thing for
your self, that in your expositions of Scripture (so much as it is) especially
in your reading of it you follow neither Church, nor Father, nor honest
Christian: witness the Scriptures you bring for your impudent assertion, 1.
text. 2. Pet. 1. No interpretation of Scripture by private Spirit. Excellently
read, you have found private Spirit in express words, yet let me tell you, had
you been put to read this Text instead of a Miserere mei before a Judge of
Assise, your reading would hardly have saved you from hanging. 2. Text, Math.
18.17. To bel^eve the Church. Admi^able! He^e is faith i^ the Church in express
terms, which none ever saw before. 3. Text, 2 Cor. 10. Where (say you) St.
Paul wishes to captivate the understanding to the obedience of faith. Yet more
falsehood! The Rhemists as well as we, and all men that are in their right wit,
and have any thing of ingenuity read it to the Obedience of Christ. I wonder
you read it not to the obedi-of the Church. And thus you would prove both faith
and obedience due to the Church, which in time might have procured you a
Cardinalship, 4. Text, Luke 16. None can serve two Masters. This reading is
tolerable: I will briefly now answer these Texts. 1. To the first I say the
words are these knowing this first that no prophecy of Scripture is of any
private interpr^tation, and they are spoken of the penmen of Scripture (not of
private Interpreters,) who did not use their own wills and counsels, verse. 21.
but were inspired by the Holy Ghost. The Rhemists reading shows that it belongs
to the Prophets, -- Understanding this first, that no prophecy of Scripture is
Made by private interpretati n: It Is spoken of the Composure, not of the
Exposition of Scripture. 2. Your second Text I have formerly answered. 3. Your
third Text Chrysostom understands of bringing men from the estate of death and
destruction into the estate of life and Salvation, subjecting them to Christ.
Your gloss, by All understanding conceives is meant all proud conceited persons
who are made subject to the faith of Christ which they had before resisted. 4.
Your fourth text shows (if it be any thing to our present purpose) that the
Spirit and your Roman Church are two Masters that cannot both be served, and
therefore its not strange you have opposed the Spirit whilst you have stood for
your Churches interest. But Sir, know that the Spirit of God and the true
Church are not contrary Masters; much less the Spirit of God in private
persons, and the same Spirit in public Ministers. The Spirit of God is in the
Church and in every particular and real member thereof, revealing himself to
each according to the capacity and need of every member.

2. You affirm concerning the Scriptures that the Scripture is deficient, which
you prove by Scripture and by Reason. 1. By Scripture, for Scripture attesteth
it in that it refers to the Church. Answ. 1. The Scripture never refers to the
Church for the perfecting of it, that so it may become a perfect Rule of Faith,
Azor. instit moral. part 2. l. 5. c. 24. ad finem.
if it do show me where, for I know not. 2. Your own Authors confess that the
Church cannot make an article of faith, how then can she supply the Scriptures
deficiency? 2. You attempt to prove it by reason, saying, reason makes it good,
because it declares not all points that Christians are bound to believe, which
they acknowledge themselves bound to believe. Answ. 1. I could bring many
testimonies to prove that Scripture is a rule, your selves grant it to be a
rule, when you call it Canonical, with exclusion of other writings: now its no
rule if it be not perfect, for the rule that faith requires ought to be as full
and ample as the duty of faith. 2. The Scripture asserts that whatsoever we are
bound to believe as necessary to salvation to be believed, is contained in
Scripture: that noted place, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16. makes it evident: the abundant
utility shows its sufficiency to instruct any to salvation: that speech of
Biel, Quomodo anima hominis, In Can. miss. lect. 7. f. 146.
etc. How can the soul of man live the life of Righteousn^sse and Grace,
unless it know Gods will, and those things which according to it are just or
unjust, to be done, or to be left undone, to be loved or to be hated, to be
feared or to be attempted, and what are to be believed, and what to be hoped
for, with what ever else is necessary to our salvation all which (sola docet
sacra Scriptura) the sacred Scripture alone t^acheth. Indeed we grant that all
things to be believed are not expressly set down in Scripture, nevertheless what
is not expressed may be deduced from that which is expressed, or analogically
reduced thereunto. But I come to your instances of points of faith, which
Scripture declares not.

1. Instance concerning Scriptures. You say they declare not that those books
of Scripture which are received for Canonical are so indeed; that some are
Canonical, other some Apocriphal; that they are determinately these or others.

^nsw. 1. They do declare that those books which are received for Canonical by
Protestants are such, and the Apocryphal books are not such. For, 1. One part
of Scriptures gives testimony of another. The New Testament bears witness of
those books that go under the name of Moses, the Prophets, and Psalms, again
they give testimony to the New Testament. Yea the whole Scripture does bear
witness to it self that it is the Word of God, having those intinsecal notes
whereby it may be known: thus it is with the book of the creatures which sets
forth the wisdom, power, and goodness of God, and is therefore a witness
thereof. Now if it be asked whence it appears that this is a witness? it must
be granted that it appears by that order which is in the Creation together with
the profitablenesse and usefullnesse of all things in their places. The
harmony, consent, spiritual profit, etc. of Gods Word in Scripture does
evidence that it is Gods Word and sacred Scripture. If it were not thus that
Scripture gave testimony of it self, how does the Church it self know Scripture
to be Scripture? She cannot plead Enthusiasme, and the humane testimony of
Fathers is no sufficient ground for infallibility.

2ly. All things are written by the Apostles which are necessary to be believed
by all men, Bellarm. de suffis. script. c. 11.
(these are Bellarmines words) but to believe the Scriptures to be the
Scripture is necessary for all men (say you) therefore it must needs follow
that its written by the Apostles that the Scriptures are Scriptures.

3ly. By way of retortion: I pray Sir how do you know that this or the other is
the true Church, for this Bellarmine says must be certainly known in as much
as all opinions depend upon his testimonies. The same way that you say the
Church may be known, even by it self, the same way do we know the Scriptures,
they give evidence to themselves.

4th. The exact knowledge of what books are Canonical is not absolutely
necessary to be believed. I deny not but the knowledge of Gods Word is thus
necessary, and this may be where that knowledge is wanting. It cannot rationally
be denied that Christians for some hundred years after the Apostles did know
the Word of God yet wanted exact knowledge of what books were Canonical, nor was
the knowledge of them judged necessary to salvation.

2. Instance, concerning the Jewish Sabbath: You say The Scripture declare not
that the Jews Sabbath ^s to be neglected and laid aside, and the sunday
solemnized.

An w. The Scriptures declare both. The first Col. 2.16, 17. Let no man judge
you -- in respect of the Sabbath days which are a shadow of things to come,
but the body is of Christ Azorius says the precept of the Sabbath, Azor. inst.
tuor. p. 2. l. 1. c. 1.
if you consider the determinate and set time did belong to the ceremonial Law,
and therefore was abolished by the death of Christ. Now the Scriptures are most
clear and full for the abolishing of the ceremonies. For the second the
Scriptures expressly teach the solemnization of Sunday. 1 Cor. 16. Apoc. 1.
Calling it the Lords day. Rhem. amot on Gal. 4.10.
The Rhemists say In the Apoc. c. 1. There is plain mention of the Sunday that
is our Lords day, unto which the Jews Sabbath was altered.

3. Instance, Concerning the Creed, you say, The Scriptures declare not that
the Creed is authentic and truly the Apostles.

Answ. 1. If you consider the matter of it the Scriptures declare that it is
truly authentic and the Apostles: for the articles thereof are Apostolic
Doctrine contained in the Scriptures. Every article may be proved by them.

2ly. If you consider the form or composure of it, that the Apostles made it,
each one of them addding an article to it, this is not necessary to be believed
being but grounded on humane fallible testimony.

4. Inst. Concerning things indifferent, you say the Scriptures declare not
that its lawful to eat strangled meats and blood.

Answ. 1. The Scriptures declare that every creature of God is good, and
nothing to be refused if it be received with thanksgiving, 1 Timothy 4.4. And that
Christians are not to be judged for their eating of any meats, Col. 2.16. So it
be not with the offense of our brother who is weak: thus Lyra on that decree of
the Apostles concerning strangled meats and blood, says, Those who were newly
converted from Judaisme did abhor these meats, Lyran. in Acts 5.20.
and therefore although it was meat that lawfully might be eaten yet for their
sakes the Gentiles were commanded to abstain from, as a man is to abstain from
that meat which is hateful to his companion; but afterward the cause ceasing,
through the clear discovery of the Gospel, the effect ceased. And this Gospel
light he fetches from Math. 15. and 1 Timothy 4. both which are Scripture.

2. It may be questioned whether it be necessary to salvation to believe that
things strangled, and blood may be lawful to be eaten. The Kingdom of God is
not meat and drink, we are not justified by meat. Its weakness to think any
meat unlawful, Romans 14.2. but not heretical, the eating or refusing of meats is
of that kind of things, quae dubium est quo animo fiant, not of those, quae non
possunt bono animo fi^ri, as Augustine distinguishes. Thus much for answer to
your reason and its confirmation.

Lastly, In the close of your Chapter you bring an argument to prove that
Spiritists do not make the Scriptures a rule of their belief, it is this, Were
Scripture the rule of their belief, though it contain diverse truths, yet those
truths meeting and becoming one in revelation, they woe ld all perfectly agree,
not only Lutherans amo g themselves, Zuinglians among themselves, Calvenists
among themselves, but likewise Lutherans with Zuinlians, etc. It being the
property of unity to unite and make one all that conform to the same.

Answ. 1. You suppose that all they who acknowledge one Rule must perfectly
agree amongst themselves which is evidently false: an exact walking according
the same rule is not attainable by any society on this side heaven. For 1. All
have not the same measure of knowledge whereby they should understand exactly
every point in Scripture, many things are Scriptural by consequence which must
be found out by argument, and are hardlier understood than other things. Though
in some places of Scripture a Lamb may wade, yet in others an Elephant may
swim. The Apostle says, Let us as many as be perfect be thus minded, and if in
any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you.
Nevertheless whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule
etc. Phil. 3.15.16. Its a perfection, an high attainment for Christians to be
perfectly one. Yea its a privilege of another life, Rhem. annot. on Phil. 3.15.
where knowledge becomes perfect, Ephesians. 4.13. with 1 Cor. 13. The Rhemists
acknowledge this as the judgment of Saint Paul -- acknowledging that in this
imperfection of men's science in this life every one cannot be free from all
error, or think the same that another thinks, whereupon may arise difference
of understanding, opinion and Judgment in certa n hard matters which God has
not revealed, or the Church determined, and therefore that such diversity is
tolerable and agreeable to our humane condition, and the state of the way that
we be in. 2. All have not the same measure of grace, and freedom from
corruption and passions, which prevail to draw men from a conformity to the
same rule. Some are of a cross, and peevish temper, subject to a spirit of
contradiction, maintaining errors, lest they should seem to be overcome by
others, or not to have been so sound as others are. Passion had a great influx
upon the differences of our first reformers: nor are you free from this evil,
this Spirit of contradiction. You reject clear expositions of Scripture because
we approve of them. When Augustine, comparing the Jewish and Christian
Sacraments says, fuerunt, etc. they were diverse in the signs, but alike in the
thing signified, grounding his speech upon 1 Cor. 10.3. Maldonate answers -- I
am persuaded if Augustine had lived in our age he would have thought otherwise,
especially perceiving the heretical Calvinists to be of of his opinions. And he
further adds, I rather approve my own exposition than that of Augustine, because
this is more contradictory to the Calvinists. Mald. in Joan. 6.
2. Your selves acknowledge one Rule the Church, yet cannot truly say that all
Papists do perfectly agree. I shall show the contrary hereafter. 3. Though
Protestants differ about particular truths, yet they all agree in this, that
whatsoever God reveals to them in Scripture they are bound to believe it.
Herein Lutherans, Zuinghans, and Calvenists (as you name them) do fully agree.
4. You falsely and ignorantly suggest to your seduced followers, that the
Protestant Churches are full of divisions and disagreements Calvenists
differing amongst themselves and from Lutherans etc. Sir I pray you read the
harmonious confessions of Protestant Churches, and if by them you be not
convinced of error, in your next give us some catalogues of those divided and
sub-divided differences you generally mention, till then we shall suspend our
belief of you.

Your reason in these words, It being the property of unity to unite etc. is a
piece of nonsense: If you had mentioned Rule instead of unity, it had been
most true, but nothing to purpose. It is the property of a rule to unite and
make one all that conform to it. So that to the making up of this unity there
must not only be an exact rule, but a perfect conformity to it in them whom it
does concern: which perfect conformity cannot be yielded by any living man to
the Word of God, because of ignorance and corruption which remain in the very
best of men.

The conclusion of your Argument needs no answer, the Premises being
overthrown. What you say of our doing homage to Luther, Calvin, and Zuinglius's
fancy, is simple and false. You know we abhor a blind obedience, and an
implicit faith. The books our people read ordinarily, are not Luther, Calvin,
or Zuinglius's works, but the sacred Scriptures, by which we examine all
writings, even theirs you now mention, if we meet with them. We look upon
Luther, Calvin, and Zuinglius as eminent lights in the Church of God, not as
Gods. We say not Dominus Deus noster Calvinus, etc. as some of you have said of
your Pope. We acknowledge them endued with the Spirit, but not infallibly
inspired, as holders forth of an old light, hid under a Romish bushel, not as
introducers of any new one, as reformers, not innovators. We reverence them as
pious men now with the Lord, but neither pray to them, nor keep holidays for
them: our homage we do is neither to men, nor their fancies, but unto God
himself.

CHAP. X. Of the Protestant Church
AFter an unconceivable distinction betwixt Protestants and Spiritists, is
Lutherans, Zuinglians, Calvinists, in the first words of this Chapter, you tell
us That this Chapter pretends to lay open the many shapes Protestants put their
Church into, to make her pass for true.

Answ. 1. The shapes you lay open are not many: It Is true you mention five, but
there are two distinct ones only to which all the rest may be reduced ( viz.
lawful Pastors and true Doctrine.

2ly. The shapes (as you call them) of Protestants, or the notes of the truth
of their Church, as themselves propound them are not many, but very few.

3ly. You lay not open what Protestants they are that form these several
shapes, that so your Reader might examine them himself, and see what they say
for themselves, and whether you deal heartily with them in reporting their
opinions. Your dishonest dealing with Gods Word, makes us suspect you deal no
better with men.

Before I come particularly to the shapes, I shall premise (for the Readers
information) that there are ordinarily two only notes whereby Protestants prove
their Church true; viz. the pure preaching of Gods Word, and the right
administration of the Sacraments, to which some few add as a third, the use of
right Eclesiastical Discipline. But this man, as if he had known nothing of
Protestants judgment, or had no mind to encounter with them in their way,
wholly omits the plea of right administration of the Sacraments, and brings the
other but in the last place, spending the most of his Chapter about personal
succession of Bishops; thinking himself (probably) best able to encounter with
us in this point, both because of their bead-roll of Popes, and Papists general
conceit that there were no Protestant Pastors in the World before Luther's
days, which is also this man's misconceit so far as I know. But I shall do him
the favor to reduce his five shapes to the former of our notes, supposing him
to say as Stapleton, Stap. princ. doc. l. 1. c. 22.
That the preaching of the Gospel is a very clear note of the Catholic
Church, so it be done by lawful Ministers. The question then is concerning the
lawfulness of our Ministry which is asserted and confirmed according to the
diverse times in which it has been questioned and contradicted particularly in
the days of Luther, and Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory together with the
times preceding them. Notwithstanding I will follow you in your method, viewing
the shapes and your answers to them in that order wherein you propound them.

SHAPE I.
PRotestants are a company of Christians under the government of Bishops and
Pastors, that have power and authority from Christ, and his Apostles to
administer the Sacrament, and preach the Word of God. but such a company is
the true Church, therefore Protestants are the true Church. To which you
answer, Neither Christ nor the Apostles conferred any power or authority on
Protestant Bishops and Pastors, they were dead and gone long before these had
any being: to give power and authority requires presence of the giver, etc.
Rep. 1. The foundation of it is sandy, its not universally true that to give
power and authority requires the presence of the giver, for it may be
otherwise, especially in two cases. 1. If the giver shall deliver some rules or
directions for persons receiving power, etc. a person after his death by his
will or testament gives power to another to be his executor. A King by his
Patten, (though himself be personally absent) gives power and authority to his
Commissioners, who therefore acts by the Kings authority. Your Popes derive not
their power and authority from any but from Peter, every Pope professes he
has the keys from Peter, that is by Peter's will or testament, or some
directions and rules of his, for he is not (I know) always present when the
Pope is ordained. 2. If the prime-giver do invest some person present with him,
with power to give the same unto others his successors: A King does invest a
Town or Justices of peace to ordain a Constable or some other officer in their
circuit. Its the Kings power that invests him in his office, and by oath he
promises fidelity to him, yet the King is not present, but as represented by
his ministers. Should I upon this ground infer that neither your present Pope,
Cardinals, Priests, Jesuits, no nor present Church has any of its power from
Jesus Christ, or his Apostles, what could you say to it? If you grant it, you
prejudice your Church for whatsoever spiritual power is not from Jesus Christ,
or his Apostles, is usurped and tyrannical: if you deny it, you cause an
earthquake in your argument, shaking yea overthrowing its very foundation that
to give power* and authority requires presence of the giver. For Christ is not
now present with your Pope, etc. as God was present with Moses, Exodus 3. Or
Christ with the Apostles, Math. 28. To say they have a mediate presence will
not serve your turn, for you require personal presence like that Exodus 3. and
Math. 28. where God and Christ did confer power immediately, by themselves, and
not by others. To apply this to our purpose, by way of reply to your answer, I
say, Protestant Bishops and Pastors have their power and authority from Christ
both those ways I mentioned. viz. 1. By deed and testament, Thus Christ by
himself and Apostles in Scripture authorize those who are qualified with gifts
and abilities for the Ministry to exercise their gifts, which they may do upon
some occasions, and in some times, even without a solemn installment by Bishops
and Presbiters, as when God does cast them amongst a people where the Gospel
has not before come, or where Presbyterial ordination cannot be had in regard
of the corruption* and wickedness of such as have power to ordain, or where
Pastors are few and unable for the service of Christ in his Church. Upon these
and such like occasions that respect each one should have to the promoting of
Christ's Kingdom puts him (so far as God qualifies him for it) upon the exercise
of this duty, provided there be not a contempt, or wilful neglect of that
trial of these gifts which Christ has committed to the Ministers of his Church
whom he has also entrusted with the power ordination of those who are gifted.
Thus it may be supposed to have been with Apollo's Acts 18.24, 25, 27. and you
read of diverse persons preaching whose ordination is not expressly mentioned
thus, though we should grant you that our first reformers had no ordinary
exernal calling, yet had they their authority from Christ, being by him
furnished with inward abilities (which ordination is but a solemn reflection
upon, and an acknowledgment of.) You confess that Luther was a man of learning
and parts. page 47. Surius affirms of Bucer, Sur comment. in An. 1526. p. 152.
An. 1531. p. 214.
that he was non parum doctus, not meanly learned. The Epitaph, this same
Author mentions to be written upon Oecolampadius shows him to be a man of great
learning the rest of them were men of good parts, and endued with a Spirit of
zeal for Gods truth: besides, with those gifts the present necessity did much
concur, those who had the key of order neither entering in themselves, nor
admitting others into it who sought the advancement of Christ's Kingdom.

2. By meditation of others who received authority from the prime-giver, thus
the Protestant Bishops and Pastors after the Apostles time received their power
from the hands of those whom the Apostles had before invested therewith; yea if
we speak of the first Protestant Bishops and Pastors they had their authority
immediately from the hands of the Apostles. The Waldenses who had Bishops and
Pastors amongst them are supposed by some of your side to have continued from
the Apostles and upon this account are judged more pernicious to you than any
other Sect. But to omit them: Rainer. de vit. and morib. Waldens. apud Usher.
de aeccles. Christ. success. and stat. p. 151.
The first and ancients Fathers of the Church were Protestants in their
Doctrines. You have been often challenged to show that the Bishops and Pastors
of the Church for many hundred years after Christ were not Protestants, but
Papists maintaining the articles of your Late Creed. It were easy to show that
those Doctrines of Protestants that you anathematize as heresies were with the
ancient Fathers received truth, thus were communion under both kinds, prayer in
a known tongue etc. by your own confessions. Its therefore false that the
Apostles were dead and gone long before these had any being. So then, we have
power and authority from Christ by meditation of others, succeeding the
Apostles. But against this I have said you object thus,

Object. By this is employed a continuation of succession in the Protestant
Bishops and Pastors, ever since Christ and the Apostles; it is not conceiveable
any other way how power could be transmitted from one hand to another, as is
averred,

Answ. 1. Here is not employed a continuation of succession, etc. if thereby you
understand such succession as admits of no interruption, and that in particular
Churches. The succession of Pastors in particular Churches may cease through
the violence and tyranny of enemies, yet the violence being over, there may be
a reestablishments of the Ministry, and that in succession to the former,
though the means of the new establishment be only the peoples choice, which in
some cases is most valued.

2ly. What if there has been a continuation of succession in the Protestant
Bishops, etc? You answer, They must then be visible, for as much as it was
their parts to preach the Word of God, and administer the Sacraments.

Rep. I grant it, who ever denied that the Pastors of the Church were visible?
We hold indeed that sometimes they may lie hid from their enemies, but they are
visible to their friends: though they be not seen in the streets of Rome, they
are visible in the mountains and woods, etc. when the Church is in the
wilderness, her Pastors are not visible in Cities and Courts.

2. But what if visible: You answer, If visible they may be produced, they
ought to be produced: they may, because that power is vain and fictitious that
is not reducible to act, Mat. 5. They ought, because Bishops and Pastors in
case of controversy are to give an account of their calling, Luke 7. as well
to settle the wavering, as to bend and make supple the stiffness of stubborn
misbeleevers, 1 Pet. 3.

Rep. 1. They might be visible in their times, yet now not producible. You know
what rigor has been used against Protestant books, you burnt Wicklif's works,
and have extinguished others* You deal with us (as Doctor Featly shows) as if a
theif should steal our purse, and make away our money, and then demand of us
what is become of our money, if we had any such sums of money in what bag,
and where those bags are.

2. There are of^ our Authors who have produced Protestant Bishops and Pastors
( i. e. such as have maintained Protestant Doctrine) in every age since the
Apostles.

3. Whereas you say They may, because that power is vain and fictitious that is
not reducible to act. Math. 5.

1. Your reason is a piece of nonsense, and having no relation to what it
should prove, the question is about the power of naming them, not the actual
naming them, if we had granted the power and denied the act, your Say had made
somewhat for you, as when you say the Commandments may be kept, but cannot name
one that keeps them, it makes against you.

2. Its a tautology, your word Reducible denotes power not act; so that its as
if you had said that power to act is vain and fictitious, that is not in power
to act.

3. Your quotation is impertinent so far as I know I have searched Math. 5. and
I find not any thing that may make for your purpose and I Am sure your axiom is
not there. Sure you mistook Matthew for Aristotle.

4. Its false, that there is a necessity of producing Protestant Bishops and
Pastors, we look more at succession of doctrine then persons, and think this
sufficient to denominate us the true Church, for which we have Tertullian's
judgment (in that book you even now cite) affirming That those Churches which
are able to produce none of the Apostles or Apostolical men for their first
planters are notwithstanding Apostolical for consent of faith, and
consanguinity of doctrine. When our Authors bring in Catalogues of Protestant
Pastors it is to stop the mouths (it may be) of unreasonable men that demand
them of us. Your reason to prove this necessity is this, Bishops and Pastors in
case of controversy are to give an account of their calling. For, 1. It Is one
thing for a Pastor to give an account of his calling, and another thing to give
an account of his predecessors. If you were a Bishop in some City, and were
demanded of the lawfulness of your calling, were the way to give them a beadrol
of your predecessors in that City? This would come short of giving
satisfaction, for they might be lawful Shepherds, and you who succeed them no
better than a ravening wolf.

2ly. The Text Luke 7. proves nothing for you, if you point at the account our
Savior gives of his calling to John's Messengers, v. 19, 20. You shall find no
naming or producing of his predecessors, but of his Doctrine, and works. Go
tell John (says he) what ye have seen and heard. So we, when you demand how we
prove our selves true Pastors, send you to what you hear and see, our Doctrines
and works conformable to the Word of God, the Law of Moses, and Gospel of
Christ.

3ly. Few that have a desire after truth, and regard our Doctrine, will waver
because of supposed want of succession, and for stubborn mis-believers, the
proof of succession will not bend, or make them supple, they that will not
believe Moses and the Prophets speaking in Scripture, would not believe though
one should rise from the dead, Luke 16.31. But to what purpose bring you the
Text, 1 Pet. 3. there is nothing in it for succession in order to the bending
of the minds of mis-believers, unless you understand the wives being in
subjection to their own husbands (whereby they that obey not the Word, may
without the Word be won) to be the wives proving their Episcopal succession.
But for the necessity of producing succession, you urge testimonies and
reasons, which I shall now in order examine.

The testimonies are these, viz. of Tertullian, Bidding the Sectaries of his
time let him see the beginning of their Church, and unfold the order of their
Bishops and Pastors. Likewise Optatus, lib. 2. Contr. Parmen. The Origin of
your chair show ye that needs will challenge to your selves the Holy Church.
St. Augustine (de vit. credend. ep. contr. Faust. manich) came not behind these
in pressing the necessity of succession and derivation, where he ingeniously
acknowledges them to be of force to hold and keep him in the bosom of the
Church. There keeps me said that great Saint in the Church, the succession of
Priests from the very sitting of St. Peter, to whom our Lord after his
resurrection committed the feeding of his sheep even oo this present Bishop.

Answ. There is no necessity of producing succession. for there may be true
Apostolical Churches without personal local succession as I showed out of
Tertullian and its confirmed by Azorius who gives these two only reasons why
the Church is called Apostolical because it was propagated by the Apostles,
Azor. inst. moral. p. 2. l. 5. c. 21. 9. 4.
and holds their faith and doctrine: the former reason points out the
primitive, this latter succeeding Churches though without personal succession.

2. There may be succession where there is no true Church, as I shall show
hearafter.

3. If the Fathers do demand succession of Bishops or Pastors, its in order to
Doctrine which they account the main yea the foundation of the other; thus does
Tertullian in the words I quoted, and Gregory Nazianzen, who says that the
succession of faith is the true succession: for those that profess the same
Doctrine of faith, are partakers of the same Throne. Naz. Orat. de Laud Athanas.
So Tertullian and Optatus, the one requiring from Sectaries the beginning of
their Churh, the other the Origin of their Chair, both which phrases refer to
their agreement with the Apostles, not to personal succession. Fathers urged
succession of Doctrine as necessary, but not the succession of persons. 2. Its
of such, as being an inconsiderable party, yet excluded all others from being
of the Church of God but themselves, such were the Valentinians opposed by
Tertullian, and those whom Optatus speaks of. Thus we might demand of the
Romanists and say, The Origin of your Church show ye that needs will challenge
to your selves the Holy Church: When did you begin to be such? When had your
Pope his universal power as Emperor of the World, etc. Or, 3. Its of some
Churches, not of all. viz.

1. Of such as had begun with the Apostles, not others which began long after,
and therefore could not show such succession.

2. Of such as were in their times, not of after ages, their demands extend not
to us: Present Churches are not so able to show succession, as those were in
whose times heretical Bishops had no place in the Church, as Austin shows, for
having reckoned up the Roman Bishops from Linus to Anastatius living then, Ep.
165.
he concludes, that in the rank of this succession, there was not one Bishop
found that was a Donatist, and also whilst there was a short space betwixt the
Apostles and them the latest of them living within four hundred years after
Christ: in which time there were no expurgatory indices, no ^^opping of their
mouths who wrote the truth. The Fathers of the first centuries were few, and
not subject to Popish purgations, whereas the case is now otherwise, we are not
much short of the 1700 years from Christ, our Authors that might show our
succession abused by you. Your argument therefore is not good, succession must
now be demanded and produced for so it was in the time of Augustine, Optatus,
Tertullian, 1300 years ago. 4. They rather demand the Origin and beginnning of
Churches than succession of Bishops leaving more to antiquity than to
succession.

2. You argue for the necessity of succession, thus, Derivation of succession
is so proper to the true Church that it can not agree to any false, as St
Hierom ( in Micam. 1.) observes, assuring heretics to have no such riches as
come to men by plain inheritance from their Fathers.

Answ. This is most untrue: Bellarmine dare not affirm it that its necessarily
inferd that where there is succession, there is the Church to whom Mr. Heart
consents, Heart. confer. c. 7. div. 9.
saying, Indeed succession of Bishops in pla^e is no good argument, unless it
be joined with succession of Doctrine. The reason is, this derivation of
succession may agree to a false Church, ex. gr. to the Church of
Constantinople, who reckon from Andrew the Apostle to the Bishop that sits
now, which Church notwithstanding you account unsound. Stapleton pronounces of
the Greek Churches in general that they can show a personal succession from the
very Apostles, yet you account them not true Churches for they are not under
your Roman Pope, but against him.

2. Your testimony of Hierom makes nothing for you. For,

1. It grants that heretics may have fathers, whose children they are, and
what is this but succession?

2. That which it denies is that they have such riches as come by spiritual
inheritance, i. e. divine and wholesome truth, the riches of the Apostles
successors. Its a simple conceit to imagine that succession is the riches that
men have by inheritance from their fathers; their inheriting of their fathers
riches is not succession, but succession is the cause of their inheriting, they
are but poor children that have only this that they can tell you they proceed
from their fathers, and succeed them. Such children are your Popes, they can
tell you who was their father, grandfather, and great-grrandfather, and this is
their riches; much good may they do them, Whilst Protestant Pastors have true
doctrine, the true riches of the Apostles.

To this Testimony of Hierom you add a reason to prove that derivation of
succession is proper to the true Church, saying Its evident in it self; by
reason the true Church was planted and established before any false began --
therefore must need be a non plus ultra, a stop and bar betwixt whatsoever
counterfeit Church and Christ to keep off the like continuation of succession.

Answ. 1. If it be so evident in it self, why do not all Papists agree with
you, but rather oppose you.

2. Your reason is most ridiculous, it is this, The true Church was before any
false one, therefore succession is proper to the true Church. If you had been
speaking of antiquity, your argument would have had some force in it, but
antiquity and succession are different things, constituting two distinct notes
of your Church. Antiquity properly points at the beginning of Churches,
succession only at the continuation of them. But I think your mind was upon
antiquity, for in your fifth Section you purposely handle it; and your meaning
here is this that false Churches cannot derive their succession to the first
foundation thereof which is Christ, for you say, There must be a stop and bar
betwixt whatsoever counterfeit Church and Christ, etc. To which I answer,

1. Heretical Churches as such cannot derive their succession from Christ, or
the Apostles for then they should derive their Heresies also. But, 2. Those
Churches that are now, or have lately been Heretical, may yet derive a personal
succession from Christ, in as much as at first they were planted and
established in the truth by the Apostles; but have since degenerated: Thus it
is with the Greek Churches, and your Roman Church, and probably was with the
Arians, who though they wanted doctrinal succession, yet might have personal
there being Bishops of note who maintained that Heresy. In the former regard
its true which you say, that the Arian derivation climbeth no further then
Arius, there is a great difference betwixt succession of Doctrines and persons,
though you seem to take no notice of it.

Lastly, you return to the Protestant Church, and whereas its said, There have
been named in several ages the Albigenses, the Apostolici, Wickliff, Hus. You
Answer, None of these were Protestants, etc. Rep. 1. Some of these were
Protestants, the Albigenses (otherwise called Waldenses) were Protestants:
Parsons, confesses that they devised and framed out of Scripture the whole
platform of the Protestant Gospel. Pars. 3. Con. part. 3. Hist. of France Book
1. page 15. edit. an. 1595. Id. p. 67.
A French Historian writes thus of them -- Who in spite of all the Potentates
in Christendom sowed about the year 1100. and even since their Doctrine smally
differing from the Protestants at this day; For the further clearing of this,
take this extract of their confession of Faith which they delivered to Francis.
1. Of France, about the year 1540. and which they said was taught unto them
ever since the year 1200. It contained the Articles of God the Father, Creator
of all things: of the Son adv^cate and Intercessor for mankind; of the Holy
Ghost, Comforter and Teacher of the Truth of the Church, which they said to be
assembled of all the chosen, having Jesus Christ for Head; of Ministers, of the
Ma^istrate whom they confessed ordained of God to punish Malefactors and defend
the good, to whom it suffices not only to carry honor, but also to pay Taxes
and Imposts without acception of state whatsoever; and that at the example of
Christ who did likewise practice it: Of Baptism, which they maintained to be a
visible and extenor sign, represe^ting unto us the Regenerati n of the Spirit
and Mortification of the Members: Of the Lords Supper, which they hold for a
thanksgiving and commemora ion of the benefit received by Christ: Of Marriage,
which they say was not forbidden to any; by h w much it was Holy, and ordained
o^ God: Of good work, wher^in they ought to employ themselves continually: ^f
Man's tradition, which they ought to shun, protesting in Sums, that the Rule of
their Faith was the Old and New Testament, and that they believed all which was
contained in the Apostles Creed. This positive Confession I have taken
verbatim, out of the French Historian, to which I may add a Negative one out of
Aeneas Silvius and others, viz. they held that the Bishop of Rome, was not
above other Bishops: That prayers for the dead and Purgatory, were devised by
the Priests for their own gain. That the Images of God and Saints were to be
defaced; that confirmation and extreme unction were no Sacraments: That it is
vain to pray to the Saints in Heaven, since they cannot help us: That auricular
confession was a trifling thing: That it was not meritorious to keep set Fasts
of the Church, and that such a set number of Canonical hours in praying, was
vain? That Oil and Chrism were not to be used in Baptism: That the Church of
Rome was not the Holy Church nor Spouse of Christ but Babylon the mother of
Abominations. If you desire to see more of them read Calverii Epitom.
Historian, page 555. where you have a large Catalogue of them, and now let the
reader judge whether they were Protestants or no. But you object two things to
prove that they were not Protestants.

1. They hold not in all points with them. For this you cite diverse Authors.
But I answer.

1. I confess the Authors you mention do severally attribute diverse errors to
them, but these witnesses agree not amongst themselves. Guido Carmelita
charge them with saying that Mass is to be said once only every year. Aeneas
Silvius contrarily says, that they hold that the Priest may consecrate at any
time, and minister to them that require it. The same Guido says they held that
the words of consecration must be no other but the Pater noster seven times
said over the bread, but Aeneas Sylvius, Antonius, and Luxemburg say the
contrary, affirming that they thought it sufficient to speak the Sacramental
words only. Prateolus charge them with Manicheisme, but Reinerus, the French
Historian and others free them from it.

2. Their confessions show that there is very small difference betwixt them and
the Protestants.

3. Though they should not hold in all points with Protestants, yet they might
be Protestants: perfect compliance is not absolutely necessary to constitute a
person, a member of the Church. Many of the members of the Church of Rome,
Corinth, Galatia, etc. did not agree in all points with those Churches, yet
were members of them. The French Papists go under the name of Catholics, yet
agree not in all points with the Church of Rome, for they deny the Pope to be
above a general Council, and that the Council of Trent was Ecumenical and
Lawful. The books of many named Catholics have been censured for unsound
speeches, and because they have not held in all points with your Churh, yet are
Catholics still. The Apostle supposes that though those who are perfect do
walk by the same rule, yet some may be otherwise minded, Phil. 3.15. which the
Rhemists in their note on that place clearly grant.

2. You object that they hold not in all points with themselves.

Answ. 1. We are beholding to you for your good opinion of Protestants; the
argu-is this, They that hold not in all points with themselves are not
Protestants. The Waldenses hold not in all points with themselves, therefore
are not Protestants. The ground of your Major must needs be this, Protestants
hold in all points with themselves. We grant and thankfully accept of your
Major proposition, together with its foundation, and desire you would remember
it when you come to tell us of our divisions.

2. For your Minor. 1. Its verified of their adversaries, the Authors you
mention, as I have particularly showed. 2. There is reason to think they held
at least in all main points with themselves. 1. Because of the Testimony of
Rainerus who says they believe rightly concerning God, and all other articles
of the Creed. 2. because they were men of good parts, and very pious. 3.
Because your assertion of their dissent is only general. When you show the
particulars I shall endeavor their vindication.

2. You answer, (supposing them Protestants) There was a great distance between
them and the Apostles, in which they could not be mentioned; forasmuch as they
were not begun, or were quite extinct.

Answ. 1. If you speak of them as Waldenses, that is, particular persons
followers of Waldus I grant there was a distance betwixt them and the Apostles.
Thus if you consider of your present Pope, its as true that he is none of
Peter's successor -- there being a great distance between him and the Apostle
Peter, in which he could not be mentioned, forasmuch as he was not then in
being. But,

2. If you speak of them as to their profession of the reformed Religion, not
confining your speech to those particular persons, but extending to all that
professed the same Religion with them, then there is no distance between them
and the Apostles, as I shall show when I come to your fourth Shape.

3. What you mean by their being quite extinct, I know not, sure you do not
take them to be Jewish heretics that were extinct before the Apostles; and
let me tell you that after their rise (notwithstanding the fury of Papists)
which brought many miseries upon them they could never be extinct, as the
French Historian above mentioned shows. But thus much for your first Shape.

SHAPE II.
LUther descended from Catholics, Catholics from the Apostles, therefore
Protestants had their Original from the Apostles; they deriving themselves
uninterruptedly from Luther. To this you answer,

Answ. Protestants derivation from Luther is frivolous and of no weight; Luther
wanting Episcopal authority, without which all ordinations are null and
frustrate by the confessions of the chief Protestants themselves: See Saravia,
Sutcliffe, Bilson, Andrews, White, Mason, Mountague, Hall, and others.

Rep. 1. Protestants derivation from Luther is of weight for any thing you do
say against it. Its most false that without Episcopal authority all ordinations
are null and frustrate. For,

1. Ordination it self is not of absolute necessity for the constitution of a
Pastor. In some cases a man may preach the Word without it. So did Origin whose
practice was justified by diverse Bishops. Cameron fully asserts this, Eusebius.
Eccl. Hist. l. 6. c. 20.

Came. Myroth. in Ephesians. 4.11.


that private men without formal ordination may teach and feed others with the
Word of God.

2. Supposing ordination to be of absolute necessity, yet that it must be done
by Episcopal authority (as distinct from Presbyterial) is not absolutely
necessary, so as that it should be null and frustrate without it, nor are there
any Protestants that I know of that affirms this with you; not those who are
named by you Sutcliffe, one of them speaking of our first reformers has these
words -- Neither is it material that the first Preachers of the Gospel in these
Countries were not Bishops, Sutc. review of Kell. Survey. c. 1. p. 5.
and so called as it was in England, for suppose no Bishop would have renounced
the heresies of Popery, nor have taught sincerely: should not inferior
Ministers teach truth, and Ordain other Teachers after them? Furthermore they
wanted nothing of true Bishops but the Name and Title. Finally the right and
imposition of hands by such as are called Bishops, is not so necessary but that
in a defection of Bishops of a Nation, and in case of other extreme necessity
Ministers may lawfully be ordained by other Ministers. And he gives diverse
reasons for it.

The rest of them are of the same judgment, to whom we may add Dr. Prideaux,
and Dr. Field who shows that not only Protestants, Pride. falac. controv. Theol.
loc. 4. sec. 3. q. 2. Field of the Chapter book 3. c. 39.
but Papists in former times were of opinion that in some cases, and at some
times Presbiters may give Orders, and that their ordinations are of force, and
he further shows that your Suffragens who are but Presbiters do give Orders.
All judicious Protestants have honorable thoughts of the reformed Churches
beyond Seas, and of their Ministry though they want Episcopal ordination. See a
Book of Master Baxter.

But you bring us in objecting, Luther received Episcopal power immediately from
God. To which you answer.

Answ. Such a power being extraordinary is always accompanied with that of
Miracles, as appeared in Moses, Exodus 3. And the Apostles Act. 2, 14. Luther
never wrought Miracle.

Rep. For any thing I see this might have made another Shape for its
independent on this, you lead us, as the Devil our Savior into the Wilderness
to be tempted, but as he evaded the Devils, so we shall do your temptations. We
say then. 1. A power received immediately from God is not always accompanied
with that of Miracles. The Prophets were caled immediately by God, so was John
the Baptist, and probably Phillip the Deacon, Act. 8.14. and the men of Cyprus
and Cyrene, Act. 11 Yet all of these were not invested with power of Miracles.
It was so with our Reformers, they did not work Miracles, nor (as you say) did
pretend to that gift. Yet had they sufficient testimonies of their calling, as
their true Evangelical Doctrine, seconded with the holiness of their lives, and
the wonderful success of their Preaching. These did evidence their divine
calling.

You object -- Luther's drawing so many after him maugre the Pope, Emperor, and
other Potentates, shows only a strange itching in men after novelties. and
pronenesse to libertinage. Arius in a shorter space led away far more.

Answ. 1. I speak not of his success only, or by it self but as accompanied
with truth of Doctrine and an holy life, and this does evidence a lawfully
called Pastor. Thus it was not with Arius or any other heretics who have been
erroneous in their Doctrine, and profane in their lives, or else successes, or
if they have had success they have but been short lived with it, none of which
can be affirmed of Luther or his adherents.

2. I deny that Arius was more succesfull than Luther, there is a great
disproportion betwixt them herein. For, 1. Arius had not that opposition that
Luther had. Arius's opposers were no inquisitors nor cruel Emperors, nor
cursing Popes, nor cutthroat Jesuits, but a mild Emperor and some modest
Bishops; the weapons wherewith he was assaulted were meek exhortations,
persuasions, entreaties, not bulls, curses, racks, tortures, that holy age knew
no such Ecclesiastical censures as Luther and his followers were acquainted
with. The French Historian gives this account of Protestants persecutions. page
38.
The Doctrine of Luther seemed to increase by the greatness of persecutions
which might be seen by the hot persecutions in the year 1534. for searches and
informations were no sooner made of the prisoners, but they were as speedily
burnt quick, tied to a stake, after swinged into the air were let fall into
the fire, and so by a pullise pulled up and down until a man might see them all
roasted and scorched by a small fire without complaining, not able to speak, by
reason that they had taken out their tongue and gagged them.

2. Arius did not set himself against the vices of an usurping lordly power,
which might have procured him hatred and revengefull opposition, but Luther
did, whose two vices, as Erasmus told Fredrick, were that he touched the
bellies of the Monks, and the Crown of the Pope.

3. Arius his heresy was not constantly maintained and stuck to; Arius recanted
and subscribed the Nicen Creed as did others his followers: but Luther's
Doctrine was constantly maintained by himself and followers without any
recantation or counterfeit compliance.

4. Arius his heresy did not seem cross to reason, but rather conformable,
but Luther's did cross carnal reason, the ground of Popish heresies. In these
regards, Luther might more truly becompared with the Apostles than Arius. And
indeed his Doctrine (though you are pleased to slander it as being acceptable
and pleasing to the depravednesse of Nature, and so contrary to the Apostles
Doctrine) is the very same for the substance of it that the Apostles taught,
being no way contrary to mortification of wills, religious fasting, chastity
and the like. And therefore it was not itching after novelties, and pronnesse
to libertinage, that drew many after him, but a desire of reformation both of
Doctrine and Discipline, which were exceeding corrupt in the Romish Church,
whereof very many were sensible, and under which they groaned, waiting for
freedom, and this is that which a great Papist says -- Neither did Luther in
this age come forth alone, Alphons. de Castro ado. haeres. epist. nuncup.
but accompanied with a great troop, as with a guard waiting for him as for
their Captain and Leader who seemed to have expected him before he came, and
upon his coming did cleave unto him.

SHAPE III.
PRotestants received their mission from Catholic Bishops in Queen Elizabeth's
days and since. You answer,

Ans. If some did which is to be proved, nay the contrary seems to be proved by
Doctor Champney it is evident the greater part did not, and what a Church must
that company make of which most are judged fit to preach the Word of God and
administer the Sacraments without Authority.

Repl. 1. We had Protestant Bishops in England before Queen Elizabeth's days
eminent oppugners of Popish heresies then in the time of Queen Mary, whom,
notwithstanding your fiery rage God preserved making them to survive her bloody
reign, by these were others afterways ordained as Bishop Parker who was
consecrated by the imposition of hands of Bishop Barloe, Bishop Coverdale,
Bishop Scory and two suffragans. So that I know no Protestant that needs to use
the shape you impose upon us, nor do I think any does, but you set up moments
and then shoot at them which is a very learned and ingenious prank, But,

2. Supposing it our Shape. I say to your answer.

1. Diverse Popish Catholics in Queen Mary's days, were Protestants in Queen
Elizabeth's, and these might have an hand in Ordinations afterward.

2. Though the greater part of our Pastors, received not Mission from Popeish
Bishops yet they might have authority. You beg the question, when you tell us
that they are not ordained by Popeish Bishops, have no authority: We had lawful
Bishops, and Pastors in England before your Pope or any of his gowned Factors
knew England. But you answer, 2ly. Admit the calling of Protestant Bishops and
Pastors were right in all of them, it would not follow that the Protestant
Church is true, so long as she advances Protestantism contrary to the meaning
of the Catholic Bishops, who never impow^red any; but in relation to the
setting up and upholding of Catholic Religion.

Rep. 1. If you admit this, it will follow (according to your principles) that
there is personal succession, and consequently a true Church inasmuch as
derivati n of succession is so proper to the true Church that it cannot agree
to any false as St. Hierom in Nucam. 1. Observes, Sir you remember the words,
they are your own, page 41. but oportet mendacem esse memorem.

2. True Religion is not to be measured by men's meaning, but by the Word of
God. So then if according to Gods Word protestantism be the true Religion, its
no great matter what your Catholics Bishops meaning be.

3. Catholic Bishops ought to ordain men in order to the setting forth of the
unsearchable riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3.8. To preach the Gospel. Col. 1.25. Mark.
16.15. This is contained in the Scriptures. If your Bishops ordain men to
preach any thing else, they are abusers of their power, their ordination is
impure and unlawful and so far to be frustrated. Thus our Protestant Bishops
and Pastors that have been ordained by you retain that which is pure, viz.
power to preach the word, and administer the Sacraments, but reject that which
is evil in your ordinations; we retain the power which is good and from God,
but reject those circumstances of yours which accompany the conveiance of it,
and are evil.

2ly. You say, Communion with the true Church being as necessary a requisite to
the making up of a true Church, as union of parts to the completing of a
natural body; what color for truth in the Protestant Church that is at
variance with the Catholic of whom she glories to have her power, and which
she confesses to be a true Church.

Repl. 1. I grant that communion with the true Church is necessary, but your
inference hereupon is vain. For,

1. We deny that the Popish Church is the Catholic Church. You appropriate
that name to your selves, but who gives it you? Indeed the Roman Church in her
purity before she was infected with the Leeven of Popery was a Catholic
Church, Eusebius. eccl. Hist. l. 4. c. 15. and l. 10. c. 7.

Socr. schol. l. 2. c. 2.


but so were other Churches called as well as she, with whom you hold no
communion now, nor they with you, as the Church of Smyrna, Alexandria, Carthage.

2. Its not necessary to the constitution of a true Church to have communion
with you. The Eastern Churches were as much at variance with you as Protestants
are, yet they were true Churches. The Affrican Bishops did oppose diverse of
your Popes, one after another, telling them they should have nothing to do with
the causes of men in their Provinces, nor receive any such to communion, as
they did excommunicate, yea Saint Cyprian, and a company of Bishops with him
did dye out of the communion of the Church of Rome, Bell. l. 2. de Conc. c. 5.
for any thing appear to the contrary: yet they were true Bishops and their
Churches true Churches. Yea further, supposing Communion had then been
necessary, it is not so now, the corruption of your Church being greater then
it was in Cyprians time; so that Gods command does take place with us, 1 Timothy
6.3, 5. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, etc. Apoc. 18.4. and the example of the Apostles, Acts
19.8.9.

3. Protestants have Communion with the Catholic Church, viz. that Church
which has ever since our Savior maintained the Doctrine of the Gospel, our
fellowship is with the Apostles and primitive Churches, whose Doctrine we
receive and profess; yea so far as there is any remainder of true Doctrine
amongst you, so far we have communion with you also.

4. You deliver two palpable Lies, 1. That we glory to have our p were from the
Popi^h Church: We look upon it not as our honor, but as their misery who could
not otherwise receive their power, We account it our honor and glory in it,
that we are out of your Bethaven, and that we have the ordinances of God within
our selves.

2. Lie, that we confess you to be a true Church. We deny the Church of Rome
to be a sound member of the true and Catholic Church. We say you were once
Bethel, now Bethaven. Rome was once a faithful City, but now become an harlot.
Her name is given her by God, and acknowledged by us, as belonging to her,
Apoc. 17.5. Mystery Babylon the great, the mother of harlots and abominations
of the earth.

3ly. You answer, Pro estants derivation from Catholics is not proo^ for a
personal succession of Bishops and Pastors agreeing in all points with
Prot^stants, which ought to be the scope and aim of that derivation, i^ being
not required of Protestants to deduce a succession from Christ and h s Apostle^
of men merely sent, but withal professing the Doctrine maintained in the
Church of England.

Reply, 1. I thought personal succession had been the main with you, it being
proper to the true Church only, as Doctrine, you say, is not. But I see now
succession of Doctrine is the more principal succession. So unstable are men,
maintaining errors.

2. In derivation of succession its not necessary that those we derive from,
agree in all points with us; If it were, I know where your succession from
Peter would be, you not being able to name one Bishop that for above 1000 years
after Christ did agree in all points with you Sometimes the Bishops and Pastors
of the Church who have the power of ordination may be corrupt, holding some
errors which the ordained may be free from, either altogether, or in some
measure, or if not when they are ordained, yet afterward. Now what rational
man can question the calling of those who are thus ordained?

3. We can show a derivation of succession, though not without some
interruption of Bishops from Christ and his Apostles professing the main points
of the Doctrine of the Church of England. I deny not but there might be
differences in lesser points, but these could not nullify our claim to them,
nor make that they should not be called Protestants. Your rule therefore is not
a very good one that Doctrine being in Nature much like unto number, the least
addition or Diminution altering its kind, and grounding a new denomination. But
supposing it good and true, we may thence unanswerably infer that your Religion
is not the same with the Religion of the Apostles or Primitive Christians, nor
yet with those who lived but a little while ago, your Church making frequent
additions to former Doctrines.

4ly. You answer, Protestants could not be mingled amongst Catholics inasmuch
as there is no agreement betwixt the Temple of God and Idols, no concord with
Christ and Belial. 2 Cor. 6. The Ark of God and Dagon may not stand together 1
King. 5. etc,

Rep. 1. Its one thing to be amongst wicked men, another thing to approve of
them. A good man may be in a corrupt Church in regard of presence, who
notwithstanding approves not of it. When Israel was most corrupt and overspread
with idolatry yet there were seven thousand that bowed not the knee to Baal.
Romans 11.4. When our Savior came, the Jewish Church was very corrupt, yet there
were some few in it, who groaning under the evils of it waited for the
consolation of Israel. The Prophet Isaiah speaks of a remnant that were left in
the midst of a corrupt Church. Isay 1.9. Yet none of these did approve of the
corruptions but rather mourned for them Ezekiel. 9.4. If God had not his people in
Babylon to what end does he say, come out of her my people, Apoc. 18.4. God had
a people in Babylon a people like corn among chafe, good fish amongst bad
ones. These till God gave an opportunity of delivering themselves did dwell
with the daughter of Babylon. Zech. 2.7. They had external communion, but
wanted inward affection to her, they had no concord nor agreement with her in
her grosser errors. But you say It were a strange example if the Church should
receive into her company liars and innovators, this would leave a stain upon
her reputation, make her sincerity be suspected, her Doctrine contemned and
despised, but she who is all fair, Cant. 6. without spot or wrinkle, Ephesians. 5. is
free from any such guilt.

Rep. 1. Its no strange thing that a true Church may have in it those who are
erroneous. It was thus with Rome, Corinth, Galatia, Philippi, and the Churches
of Asia. Rev. 2.14, 15, 20. There is no Church can claim exemption, The Popish
Church has had those in it whom you call liars and innovators and upon that
score have come into your expurgatory judices.

2. You assert that of the Church of Rome, which never any but Novatus and his
followers did attribute to the visible Church, viz. to be all fair, without
spot or wrinkle (a privilege belonging to the Church as triumphant or but
imperfectly agreeing to the true members only of the visible Church in this
World) and herein you show your self to be none of that society of Christians
who generally maintained and professed that their commission and power was to
preach and inculcate, that the Church of God militant was not without mixture
of bad. p. 81.

2. You take that for granted (which we constantly deny) that your Romish
Synagogue is the true Church and all fair and without spot or wrinkle, etc. and
that Protestants are liars and innovators, which you are yet to prove. 3. Yet
granting both these for Argument sake, I affirm that maintainers of false
Doctrine may be in the Church, without all that danger you talk of while they
lie hid, and conceal their opinions, and whilst the Church does what she can to
cast them out of her: These would be a plea for your Church, if the supposition
were true: But you urge further thus. Protestants, Bishops and Pastors, if
mingled with Catholics, did neither believe nor profess their Doctrine; but
only concealed and covered their own, for fear of the formidable rigor of
Catholics; and such could neither be true nor make a saving Church* Not true
because the mission of true Bishops and Pastors, being founded upon persecution
and suffering, Mat. 10. Luke 11.) it is proper to them to fear no Colors, nor
make up a saving Church, by reason profession of faith is necessary to
Salvation, Romans 10. Mat. 10. Repl. 1. It must not be granted that Protestant
Pastors did merely conceal and cover their own Faith and Doctrine: there was
much crying out against errors and disorders in the Popes Church by many,
though not without sufferings. Gersom, for speaking freely against the
disorders of the Roman Church, was deprived of his goods and dignities by the
Pope, and expulsed the University by the Sorbonists, Laurentius valla, was
exiled by the Pope. John of Vesalia a preacher at Worms, was sharply handled by
the inquisitors, for opposing indulgences, auricular confession, Pilgrimages,
Merit, etc. Berengerius openly declared against Transubstantiation, for which
he was not well handled: Read our Martirologies, and it will evidently appear
that Protestants did not only not conceal their own Doctrines, but opposed
yours. 2. Its not simply unlawful, nor altogether unsuitable to the true saving
members of the Church to conceal or hide the truth: Confession is a duty, but
the precept binds not ad semper; there are some cases wherein its not
necessary, viz. 1. When we are not brought before authority to be examined
about our Faith; but if we be brought before them, our Saviors precept, Mat.
10; binds us to Confession. 2. When by our profession there is no hopes of
doing good, or bringing any advantage to the truth, Hos. 4.4. Mat. 7.6. Thus
Protestants might conceal the truth, when they saw their Confession was not
advantageous to the Truth, or the Salvation of those with whom they were,
although when brought before authority they did still profess it, and dye for
it. 3ly. They might be lawful Pastors though they might conceal the truth from
their enemies for a time; else what think you of Peter, who did more then
conceal, even deny his Religion: Of Liberius, who accepted of Arianism:
Certainly, if these were not true Bishops, your Chain of Succession will be a
broken piece: Your Priests in England at this day hide their persons, and with
them the open confession of their supposed Truth, they preach not openly, they
administer not the Sacraments openly, they exercise not their mortal Devils
openly, and that for fear of apprehension and punishment, due to such
Vagabonds: and yet your ignoramusses depend upon their Benediction, as
Spiritual Fathers. 4ly. Your reason is diverse ways peccant. 1. Its improper to
say, the Mission of true Bishops is founded upon persecutions and sufferingse.
1. Are persecutions the Bases of pastoral Mission, then if persecution cease,
the Bishops and Pastors cease to be true Bishops and Pastors, the building
cannot stand when the Foundation is fallen: then your Popes or Cardinals etc.
are no true Bishops or Pastors, for they live in great pomp and ease, and
suffer nothing, unless that by their intemperance they get bodily diseases,
which is nothing to Truth. Indeed since (through your freedom from
persecutions) your Chal^ces were of gold, your Priests have been but wooden
Images. 2. You mistake the cause of their concealing the Truth, which was not a
distracting and a distrustful fear, which looks mainly at torments as you
imagine; but their fear was a sober fear. 1. Lest the Church of God should be
deprived of them, by reason of their profession of truth at such a time when
there was no visible advantage accruing to it. 2. Lest they should incur the
guilt of their own deaths, by unreasonable profession. See Mat. 7.6. Whence
Lyranus, infers, Lyran. in Mat. 7.6.
that the secrets of Faith are not to be revealed to obstinate unbeleevers,
because hereby may ensue the derision of the Catholic Faith, and the murder
of the Ministers: Our Savior gives liberty to his Disciples, if they were
persecuted in one City, to fly to another, Mat. 10.23. Yet bids them not fear,
Ver. 26. Clemens Alexandrinus sets this forth very well, speaking of flying in
time of persecution. Swadet fugere, etc. He persuades us to flee, not as if it
were evil to suffer persecution, nor that we should fear death; but he would
not have us authors, or abettors of evil, either to our selves, or him that
persecutes, or him that kills us; for he warns us that we be cautelous: but he
that obeys not, is audacious and rash, and unadvisedly casts himself, upon
manifest dangers; now if he that slays a Man of God, sins against God, he also
is guilty of this murder who does not avoid persecution, but through audacity
offers himself to be apprehended; for in as much as in him lies, he helps on
the wickedness of the persecutor: Otherwise, our Protestant Bishops and
Pastors, have as courageously professed the truth and for it undergone with
patience and constancy, as great torments from Popeish hands, as ever any in
any age of the world did: So that were you not blinded with rage against
Protestants you could not but blush to charge them with fearfulness of
professing the truth. For a conclusion of this: I desire you look home to your
English Priests, those Hedghogs, whose appearance is mainly in the night and in
darkness, who are so far from a voluntary and open profession of their faith,
that I do not know of any one that ever suffered upon this account, viz. the
open and public profession of his faith, though they pretend themselves
guarded with power of miracles, which might make them more valiant. 5. If your
self were of that stout Spirit you charge us with the want of, what needed you
to write Paris for London, or L. B. for your concealed name.

5ly. You conclude your Answer to this Shape, with an exposition of the
parables of the Wheat and Chaff, Mat. 3. and of the Fishes, Mat. 13. to which
you say, The comparisons are meant of private men for matter of manners, and not
of any mixture of true and false doctrine, Orthodoxal and Heretical Bishops and
Pastors t^gether.

Rep. 1. Its most certain that these comparisons do set forth the mixture which
is in the visible Church; which your self even now contradicted. Yea, 2. These
mixtures extends to mixtures of Doctrine and Teachers, as well as of private
Christians in manners, the ordinary gloss understands Mat. 13.25. Of the
mixture of Heretics with the Elect. Augustine also by Cockle, does understand
Heretics who in this world are mingled with the Orthodox, his words are full
against you. Aug. Ap.
Nec consequens est ut omnis Hereticus, etc. It follows not that every
Heretic, or Schismatique be corporally separated from the Church, for the
Church carries many in her, etc. The Apostle tells the elders of Ephesus that
of themselves men should arise, speaking perverse things to draw away Disciples
after them, Act. 20.29. and these are within the Church.

SHAPE IV.
THe Fourth Shape is this, In all ages since Christ and is Apostles, there have
been Protestant Bishops and Pastors; but through the negligence of men, and
hard fate of times, their names have miscaryed and perished: And as it is no
Argument, many famous Romans and Grecians are not named, therefore never were
any such men; so it is no less false a Sequel, Protestant Bishops and Pastors
are not mentioned all the way from Christ and the Apostles, therefore they were
sometime wanting: To this you answer.

1. Its not the same of private men, and of Bishops and Pastors; these have
Christ^ warrant and assurance of visibility, so have not those Mat. 28. Bishops
and Pastors are as Aqueducts, and Limbecks, through which the verifying Waters
of Christ's holy Doctrines are derived into our ears, and distiled into our
Souls; So are not private men: should they be at any time clouded and obscured,
Christ would be worse then his word, his Doctrine fall short, and not come home
to us.

Rep. 1. Its the same of private men and Bishops and Pastors in this case: Its
a false Sequel (speak of whom you will) to say they are not named, therefore
never were. Melchizedec's Parents are not mentioned, therefore he had none, yea
thousands of Popish Pastors and Bishops are now unmentionable; for I suppose
you cannot reckon up all the Bishops and Pastors that have been in every
Country, Town and Village since the Roman Church had its beginning (as you say
in the Apostles) yet you would not like the consequence, if I should therefore
conclude there were no such Bishops or Pastors in such places. The instance
that is given in the Shape will not be nullified by your distinction of
public and private persons; for the persons mentioned are public persons,
men of Renown and famous, such as Histories sometimes make mention of, and you
have no more but History to enable you to count your Bishops.

2. Your proof is most idle, and fitter to procure laughter then an answer;
it is this, Christ has promised to be with his Church to the end of the world,
Mat. 28. therefore all Bishops and Pastors for 1600. and odd years past, may be
mentioned and named: Gallant Logic. Prove your consequence Mr Doctor, you say,
They have Christ's warrant and assureance for a continuance of visibility, so
have not those, Mat. 28.

Answ. 1. Here is no assureance of a continuance of visibility. Christ is with
his Church when she is hid in the Wilderness, the Rehmists acknowledge it: yet
at that time she shall be hid, Apoc. 12.6. inhabiting in Mountains and Dens and
Caves of the Earth, as Andreas expounds it.

2. If it assure personal visibility its not continued, but successive, not of
the same persons for ever; but of a succession of persons, who in the several
ages wherein they live, shall be visible: The Apostles, nor their successors for
1500 years, are not now visible, it is so with our Bishops and Pastors, in their
times, wherein they lived, they were visible to their friends at least, though
they might hide it from their persecutors. But,

3. What is this to our naming of those who have professed the Apostles
doctrine ever since their time, is this in the promise? or is it a necessary
dependent on the Churches visibility in succeeding ages? you cannot for shame
say it, lest you condemn your selves whose Catalogues are of Popes not all
inferior Bishops and Pastors, who notwithstanding have as much interest in that
promise as any Pope, if not more.

2. You say, Bishops and Pastors are Aqueducts and Limbecks, if these should be
at any time clouded and in obscurity, Christ would be worse then his word, his
doctrine fall short, and not come home to us.

Answ. 1. You shoot very far wide of the mark: we are speaking of the naming of
those that we confess had a real existence, and you are proving a necessity of
their existence. Are entity and nomination reciprocal, so as while you prove
one, you prove the other also?

2. Does their being Aqueducts and Limbecks prove that they may all be named?
You may as well demand the names of all the pipes or troughs whereby waters
have been conveyed to such a place for 1000 or 1600 years; and say this is
necessary because they are pipes, etc.

3. Though all Bishops and Pastors of the Church should be corrupt, and cease
to be true Pastors of the Church, as it was in the Jewish Church when our
Savior came, Occh. dial. p. 1. l. 5. c. 28.
yet if you will believe your Schoolman Occham, God can prevent his Doctrine
from falling short, or not coming home to us, even by raising up Laymen, and
illiterate persons for the edification of the Church, grounding it upon, Matthew.
3.9.

3. You say, Visibility is not peculiar to Bishops and Pastors, but necessity
of visibility is Private men in this way of visibility being contingently
visible.

Answ. 1. Your distinction is excellent, but I wonder you missed telling us of
being visible Archipodialiter and reflexive which would have suited you as well
as this of necessary and contingently. Are not private persons necessarily
visible as well as public? Does not visibility agree to corporal substances,
and that necessarily? If private persons be but contingently visible, then they
are ordinarily invisible and consequently Spirits, unless their visibility be
in this, that your great Dons are pleased now and then by chance to look upon
them, which they do not ordinarily.

2. Your instance of whiteness in fowls is simple. For whiteness is not common
to all fowls as visibility is to all men. As you say, there are swans therefore
white, or there are bishops therefore visible, so may you as truly say they are
men and therefore visible, but what is all this to the meaning of Bishops and
Pastors though we should grant what you say for visibility?

4. You say Bishops and Pastors are necessarily visible either determinately or
indeterminately. Excellent, yet more fine beyond sea distinctions, but what
follows? Ergo, Bishops and Pastors are necessarily visible, and private men but
contingently: that is, Bishops and Pastors are necessarily visible, Ergo,
Bishops and Pastors are necessarily visible But are not private Christians
necessarily visible, either determinately or indeterminately. Indeterminately
all, for some are necessary to make a visible Church; determinately so many,
without which there could not be a suff^cient number to make a true visible
Church. I Am sure private Christians are necessarily to the constitution of a
visible Church, as well as Bishops and Pastors.

Lastly, You tell us That its necessary that Bishops and Pastors should be
visible after they are dead, for a visibility of them whilst they live would be
to no purpose, it not providing the the Church of means to defend and make good
her right in case of opposition. etc.

Answ. 1. For men to be visible after death is something accidental and
withal strange unless to a popish ear, or a necromancers eye, but supposing
charitably, that you mean that their names should be visible. I say, 2. There
is no necessity for evidencing a true Church that the names of all preceding
Bishops and Pastors thereof should be mentioned. Its sufficient that it be
showed that their Doctrine had its rise from Christ, and that the Apostles
professed and preached it. Thus we show the truth of our Church against your
Antichristian Temple. Its a truth subscribed to by all that the Doctrine which
had its rise from Christ, and was professed by the Apostles, had professors of
it in all ages, and these must needs be true Pastors, though without exact
succession. Your self formerly did confess that it is required of Protestants
to deduce a succession from Christ and his Apostles, not of men merely sent,
but withal professing the Doctrine maintained in the Church of England, though
now (forgetting what you had before said) you affirm that if Bishops and
Pastors be found succeeding each other without intermission its evident they
are true and Catholic, but this I have confuted before.

3. Your reason with its comparisons annexed to it, do not prove your
assertion, you say -- It not providing the Church of means to defend and make
good her right in case of opposition -- the question of the Churches right is
to be decided not unlike that of two great men laying claim to a principality
by virtue of some pretended descent from a certain Prince.

Answ. 1. It is unlike, if by descent you mean a series of personal succession
without interruption. For the Churches right is not decided that way Scribes
and Pharisees might have lineal descent from Aaron yet be thieves and robbers,
John 10.8 The Churches planted since the Apostles days could not have this
lineal descent from Christ and his Apostles, yea the Churches planted by the
Apostles might have their Hiatus. Yet both these later be true Churches of
Christ. You seem to grant ( page 56) that the Bishops and Pastors of some
particular Churches cannot be named in a constant succession. How then will you
prove the truth of those Churches, for it cannot be proved by this means you
plead for.

2. Supposing them like, yet its not the uninterruptednesse of succession, for
which they lay claim to the principality (for it may have been in the hands of
usurpers) but descent, together with the qualifications required in him, who is
to inherit, which are found in one, but not in the other: thus it may be said
of the Church whose descent from Christ together with her qualifications, viz.
investure with true Doctrine and right administration of Sacraments according
to the will of Jesus Christ does entitle her to the inheritance of truth.

2. Or to a river, whether it has its offspring from such an hill or
mountain, the surest way is to trace the river up to the head.

Answ. 1. It may be probably known by other means than this, viz. by compareing
the water of the mountain with this in the river, by the ascent of the water of
the rivers, etc.

2. Tracing it is not always a sure way; it may be mingled with other waters as
have not their rise from that mountain, it may run through a dead sea, and then
you may be at a loss whilst you seek an uninterrupted derivation of it from
its head. Yet,

3. I grant that when the head is near, and there is no mixture of impure and
different waters, your course is very good, thus the fathers who lived within a
few years after Christ, and before heretics came into Bishoprics and
Pastoral Churches, did make use of derivation of succession. But the case is
otherwise with us, we living many hundreds of years after them, and there
having been heretical Bishops in the Church.

Lastly, You say, The truth of Doctrine is discernable much after the same
manner, if it be found to have no way varied, but to have kept its own from
Christ and the Apostles, doubtless its Orthodox, if not, most certainly its new
and false.

Answ. 1. The former part is most true, but not the later, that Doctrine is
true, which though it have been varied in particular Churches yet at present is
the same with the Apostles Doctrine.

2. Granted is true, what will become of your present Church and its Doctrine
which you confess is not the same with Christ's and his Apostles Doctrine,
certainly it will follow that your new articles of communion in one Kind,
prayer in an unknown tongue etc. are new and false. The rest of your answer is
but a piece of railing rhetoric not worthy a reply.

SHAPE V.
THe fifth Shape is this, That Church is true and Catholic which professes
the Apostles Doctrine clearly delivered in Scripture, but the Protestant Church
does so, therefore, etc.

You answer, 1. True Doctrine is no mark of a true Church, it being often to be
seen among schismatics who for want of communion cannot make a true Church.

Reply, 1. The profession of the Apostles Doctrine delivered in Scripture is a
mark of the true Church as not agreeing to any other, which I prove by these
arguments drawn from your own assertions.

1. True Doctrine is the Churches inseparable mate. p. 40. But it could not be
her inseparable mate, if it could be separated from her, and brought into
society with a schismatical Church.

2. Christ has entrusted his Church with truth, and ordained her keeper and
preserver of it, and what comes upon any other score, than upon the Churches
account and credit is to be reputed Apocryphal and no way appertaining to the
obligation of belief. p. 13. Therefore whatsoever Doctrines are out of the true
Church are not truths. For that which is believed by men out of the Church
comes not upon the Churches account, and therefore with you is Apocriphal.

3. True Doctrine is Her (the Churches) Doctrine, p. 51. Therefore cannot agree
to others.

4. There is no agreement betwixt the Temple of God and idols, no concord with
Christ and Belial. You urge these words to prove that professors of error
cannot be in the Church, and it will as strongly prove that professors of truth
cannot be out of the Church, where then is your truth agreeing to a
schismatical Church.

5. Doctrine being in nature much like unto number the least addition or
diminution alters its kind and groundeth a new denomination p. 50. Now you
cannot name any number of schismatics that did not either add to, or diminish
something of the Doctrine which the Apostles taught in Scripture, hence it is
that both Augustine and Hierom tell us that there is no schism which does not
invent different Doctrines, and new heresies. Separation from a Church cannot
but suppose a different judgment in them that separate. The Donatists whom
Bellarmine brings in to prove your argument go under the name of heretics,
and did indeed hold doctrines different from the Apostles Doctrines.

To these arguments grounded on your assertions I will add two more.

1. Papists themselves urge consent of Doctrine with the Doctrine of the
Apostles and ancient Church, a note of the true Church, this is Bellarmine's
sixth note, but it seems Papists may make that a note of the true Church which
Protestants may not.

2. The Doctrine (say some of you in answer to us) is the form of the true
Church; therefore (In infer) it cannot agree to any false one, the form being
intrinsecall and proper to that which it does inform, not common to others: as
Rationality cannot be predicated of beasts, so neither can Profession of the
true Apostolical Doctrine agree to a falls and unsound Church according to your
judgments. But you urge two things, viz.

1. Doctrine is as diverse as there are diverse seeming Churches: and so not
affording any determinate notion draws in opposition of a mark of truth.

Answ. 1. The question is not whether doctrine indefinitely be a mark of truth
(as you propound it) but whether true Doctrine that is, the doctrine of the
Apostles clearly declaclared in the Scriptures, and professed by Christians, be
a mark of the true Church, we affirm it is.

2. Though Doctrine in general be diverse, yet true Apostolical Doctrine is
not diverse, but one and the same: as there is one Lord, one Spirit, one Church;
so is there one faith, which the Scripture reveals unto us.

2. Doctrine supposes Bishops and Pastors, as the means whereby it is conveyed
to us, -- therefore it imports as much to name Bishops and Pastors before,
may be given to mention Doctrine as it is necessary, passing from one extreem
to another to touch first the middle.

Answ. 1. But that your memory is weak, you might remember that we have been
mentioning Bishops and Pastors and that before we mentioned Doctrine. What else
is the subject of the four precedent shapes. 2. If you were acquainted with our
judgment, you might find that when we say, True Doctrine is a mark of the true
Church, we explain our selves to mean the preaching of true Doctrine, and this
does suppose Pastors and Teachers. 3. Truth of Doctrine is a more proper note
of the Church, and more necessary than Bishops and Pastors. That Doctrine which
is consonant to the Apostles Doctrine is always true; but Pastors that succeed
them are not always true Pastors, but sometimes Wolves; and therefore if you
had not misled us, we would first have begun with Doctrine as the more worthy.

2. You answer, It is no less untrue that Protestants maintain the Apostles
Doctrine delivered in Scriptures, they professing a Doctrine clean contrary
and opposite to that which in them is in plain and formal terms expressed.

Rep. Prove this and you carry the victory, but I know you cannot do it, your
instances are insufficient some of them being not in Scripture; others not the
Apostles Doctrine, which you were to have proved, not by consequence but
expressly in plain and formal terms. Lastly, some Texts are brought in against
us with which we fully join. But I will particularly examine your Instances.

1 Inst. Traditions. 2 Thessalonians. 2. Hold the traditions, whether it be by word or
Epistle.

Answ. 1. Its most evident that the Apostle by Tradition understands whatsoever
he had delivered to the Thessalonians either by preaching or writings;
(Tradition being then of a larger talent than now it is) and it is no less
evident that what the Apostle did preach, was nothing but Scripture, Act.
26.20.22. Especially see Act. 17.1, 2, 3, 13. where you find what Paul
preached at Thessalonica, even nothing but the Word of God contained in the
Scriptures. Annot. on Deutr. 4.2.
Your Dowaists say, unwritten traditions are contained, implied, included, in
the Scriptures; such the Apostle preached.

2. True and Apostolic traditions we willingly embrace, yea, we account them
worthy of Anathema who do not receive them. That which Clemnitius says, is the
judgment of Protestants. Apostoli multa tradiderunt una voce, etc. The
Apostles delivered many things by word of mouth, which their immediate
successors received from them, Exam. Council. trident. p. 1. d. trad. p. 68.
and delivered to their Disciples: but all these as Irenaeus says were
agreeable to Scripture, and we reject none of them, but whatsoever are
agreeable to Scripture, we receive and reverence. So another says, if Papists
will prove their Traditions by the ancient and Apostolic Church, and the
universal Church since even till our time we receive them; and this is
Apostolical Tradition according to Hierom. for conclusion, I appeal to Medina,
Medri. l. 6. de sacr. hom. Continent. c. 106.
whether we or not rather Papists be guilty of not holding Apostolical
Traditions of 84. Canons (says he) gathered together by Clemens and the
Disciples of the Apostles, the Latin Church scarce observes 6. or 8.

2: Inst. Real presence, Joh. 6.51.55, 56, 57. Luk 22.19. Matthew. 26.28.

Ans. This is a Jesuitical slander, for protestants do not deny the Real
presence, nor is the Controversy between the Papists and us about it, Rivel
sum. Contr. Tan. 1. Tract. 3. q. 18. Inst.
we both hold that the body and blood of Christ is truly and really present in
the Sacrament, as learned Rivet observes: this is also affirmed by Dr. White in
his reply to Fisher, who objecting that Protestants hold not a true or real
presence, but only a presence by imagination and conceit, is answered in these
words: His most excellent Majesty, and all his orthodoxall people believe
real presence. It Is true, we hold not a gross i. e. (as the same Author
explains it;) When the thing signified and presented, is according to the
natural substance thereof contained under the shapes of outward signs, and
together with them conveyed into the mouth, stomach and bodily parts; but we
maintain a true and effectual presence of the body and blood of Christ; so as
man receiving the external signs by his natural parts, receives also the
thing signified and presented by the action of his spiritual faculty, to wit,
by an operative faith; and this is most evident by that 6. of John.

3. Inst. Sacrifice from the rising of the Sun, to the going down, great is my
name among the Gentiles, and in every place there is sacrificing, and there is
offered to my Name a clean oblation, Mal. 1.

Answ. 1. This Text, is in none of the Apostles writings, however being
Scripture, I answer:

2. The sacrifice of the Mass is not in plain and formal terms expressed in
it: Its your falls reading that brings in the word sacrificing; Vatablus reads
it Incensum offertur Incense is offered. Pagnin and Arias Montanus speak to
the same purpose.

3. It may be more probably understood of persons brought unto Jesus Christ
from among the Gentiles, ( Romans 15.16.12.1. Isa. 66.20.) and of their religious
services as praise, Psalm. 50.13.14. Hebr. 13.15. Prayer, Rev. 8.3. The ordinary
gloss understands Thymiama orationum, the incense of Prayers; so does Paulus,
Burgensis, Orationes, etc. The Prayers of innocent and holy persons are
acceptable to me in every place. Thus Irenaeus -- Hos quoque offerre vult, etc.
He will have us to offer our gift at the Altar without ceasing; Iren. ado.
haers. l. 4. c. 34. ad fin.
Now the Altar is in Heaven, thither our Prayers and offerings are directed.
Remigius calls these spiritual sacrifices which succeed the Jews carnal ones,
than which what can be more plain against the sasacrifice of the Mass, which is
a carnal sacrifice, 1.3. We grant the Eucharist is a sacrifice in those
respects that some of the Ancients call it so.

1. In respect of the prayers and praises which we offer to God in the
administration of it. Thus Eusebius says, Itaque and sacrificamus, Eusebius. apud
Lyran in Mal. 1.
etc. Therefore we sacrifice and offer incense celebrating the memory of that
great sacrifice according to the mysteries delivered to us, giving thanks unto
God for our Redemption, and offering to him Religious Hymns, and holy
Prayers; we Sacrifice therefore to the most high God the Sacrifice of Praise,
etc. Hence is the name Eucharist given to the Lords Supper. 2. In respect of
Christ's Sacrifice which is there represented, and as it were renewed by the
memory of it. Cassand. Consult. Act. 24. p. 999.
Thus Christ is said to be crucified before the Galatians eyes, Gal. 3.1.
Cassander sets it forth thus, according to the judgment of Antiquity, Non hic
novum Sacrificium, etc. Here is no new Sacrifice, but the same which was
offered on the Cross, and a mystical commemoration of that Sacrifice which was
performed on the Cross, and a representation of Christ's Priesthood and
Sacrifice continued in heaven, whereby here is not wrought any new expiation,
or remission of sins, but we desire that Sacrifice which was oce offered on the
Cross, may become effectual unto us. To this purpose he brings in the testimony
of Ambrose or Chrysostom saying; In Christo semel, etc. They once offered up a
Sacrifice, Christ sufficient for our salvation; Why then do we every day
offer? Although we daily offer, its only in remembrance of Christ's Death. In
respect of the natures of Bread and Wine, which were brought by the people, and
as it were presented to God. In this regard, so far as I understand him,
Irenaeus calls the Lords Supper a Sacrifice, and he has diverse expressions to
this purpose. Lib. 4. c. 33. Christ gave counsel to his Disciples to offer up
to God the first fruits of his creatures. If you ask how we are to consider God
when we offer to him, he tells us a little after -- The Church in the whole
world does offer unto God, who gives us food, the first fruits of his gifts.
More fully to this purpose, c. 34. It behooves us to offer unto God the first
fruits of his creatures, as Moses says, thou shall not appear before the Lord
empty; and the reason is Gods Dominion over us; in regard whereof the Jews
had their Tithe consecrated to God, and we that have obtained greater liberty
then they, ought freely to devote what we have to the Lords use, as the poor
Widow gave her Mite into the Treasures. Again, in this same Chapter, we ought
to be thankful to our Maker, offering unto him of the first fruits of his
creatures, and this Oblation the Church only offers to God in a pure manner,
offering unto him of his creatures with thanksgiving. Now the Jews they offer
not, because their hands are full of blood, and they receive not the word by
whom we offer unto God. Mark it, not said whom, but by whom we offer unto God.
Now that this Father was ignorant of Transubstantiation, is most evident by
what he says, lib. 5. When therefore the Wine and Bread receive the Word of
God, they become the Eucharist of the body and blood of Christ, of which our
bodily substance is made and increased, which cannot be said of mere species of
bread, or Christ's body. Erasmus ingeniously confesses of him that he says
nothing clearly of Transubstantiation, I have been longer in this Father
because you seem to build much upon him.

4. Inst. Altars: We have an Altar whereof they have no power to eat, who serve
the tabernacle. Hebr. 13. Answ. Although many Protestants dislike the name
Altar. Yet the thing it self is not disliked by any, whether you understand by
this text Christ; as Theodoret [apud Lyran] and the gloss, or that which the
Apostle calls the table of the Lord. 1 Cor. 10.21. and which is called by
Gregory Nissen. (...), an holy table an Altar inviolable. One and the same
thing is an Evangelical Altar and an holy Table.

5. Inst. Power in Priests to forgive sins; whose sins ye shall forgive they
are forgiven them and whole sins ye shall retain they are retained. John 20.
Answ. No Protestants do deny power of forgiveness of sins to the Ministers of
Christ. The differenc betwixt you and us is not about the thing it self,
whether there be a power in them, but about the quality of it, as whether it be
a judiciary or a Ministerial power, whether they properly forgive, or but
declare Gods forgivenesses of penitent sinners. We deny them a judiciary, and
proper power of forgiveness, which belongs only to God but acknowledge their
Ministerial.

6. Confession, Confess your sins one to another. Jam. 5. And many of them
that believed came confessing their Sins. Act. 19. Answ. Protestants acknowledge
the usefulness of confession, when a Christian is troubled with the burden of
some sin, whether it be made to a Christian friend that is able to advise,
comfort, or pray for him, or to a Minister of the Word, but deny the absolute
necessity of set confession of all known sins in the ears of a Priest. The
Scriptures you urge prove not Popish confession. Not the former, for it bids us
confess one to another, i. e. according to the gloss. Coaequalibus, to our
equals; but your Priests would be loath to be numbered among the common people
as their equals only. Nor the later: for that speaks of some only that came,
and of their confession of their Deeds (as the Rhemists) only. And its very
probable, only their sorceries and witchcraft which they manifested their
dislike of by the burning of their books whereby they had learned to practice
their wicked deeds.

7. Inst. Justification by works. Do you see that a man is justified by works,
and not by faith only. Jam 2. Answ. We own and subscribe to the truth of St
James's assertion, yet believe it must not clash with that of Saint Paul, Romans
3.28. Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith without the deeds
of the Law. They must therefore be reconciled, which they may by saying that
faith only does properly justify us before God, and Works do justify our
faith to be a true faith, for as much as true faith is productive of good
works: for we abhor those men's conceit, who imagine that faith may suffice a
man though he live ill and have no good works. Or, 2. By saying that good works
do evidence our justification. Aquinas confesses that works [ in c. 3. ad
Gal.] are not the cause that any man is just before God, but they are rather
manifestations of Righteousness and Justification. Certainly Abraham was
justified in the sight of God, before he offered up his son Isaac, which is the
foundation of Saint James's speech. Papists are so much convinced of this that
to evade Protestant Doctrine (at least seemingly) they invent a distinction of
a first and second justification, from that they exclude all works, and
attribute it only to faith, and the other is not properly personal
justification.

8. Inst. Prayer to Saints. The Angel that delivered from all evils blessed the
Children Genesis 48. Answ. 1. Here is no mention of Saints much less of prayer to
them, not so much as an implicit hint of such a thing for I suppose Jacob was
not of the mind of the Grecian Demon worshippers; who said, it mattered not
whether they called the souls of the defunct angels or gods. 2. By Angel is
meant Jesus Christ the Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3.1. who is true God, and
he who delivered Jacob out of all his evils: Thus both Jewish and Christian
Expositors understand it. 3. I think you mistoo^ this for the latter part of
the verse, which Papists urge to prove invocation of Saints: But seeing you do
not urge it, I shall not at present answer it.

9. Inst. Prayer for the dead, It is an holy and wholesome cogitation to pray
for the dead, 2 Maccab. 12.

A. 1. This book is not Apostolical, nor part of the Canon of Scripture: the
Hebrews (keepers of the book of the Old Testament.) received it not as is
generally confessed; and though some fathers commend this and other books of this
nature to be read, yet they commended them only as profitable Treatises, not
as Canonical Scriptures, and therefore advise men to read them with
discretion and prudence; Christ, though he gives testimony to the Prophets and
Psalms, he gives none to these, or in special to this: besides there are
diverse things in this render it suspected. 1. The Author of this book (supposed
to be Josephus) professes it to be only an abridgement of Jason of Cyrene, c.
2.23. and the Holy Ghost is not used to Epitomize profane Histories. 2. He
makes an excuse for himself, and such a one as the holy Writers never used, nor
becomes a Divine History, c. 15. 38.

Answ. 2. The Text you urge may be diverse ways oppugned. 1. The words are not
rightly translated by you, the Greek is thus: (...). A holy and pious
cogitation: therefore he made expiation (or satisfaction by sacrifice) for the
dead to free them from sin; the words are not to be read without a middle
distinction. Vatablus who includes these words, Piam et sanctam cogitationem,
in a parenthesis refers them neither to prayer nor sacrifice, but to the
resurrection of the dead; saying, its an holy and pious thought to think that
the bodies of them who have deserved well of their Country, should rise again
and not perish for ever. 2. Supposing, Sacrificing or Prayer (seeing you will
have it so (for the dead were lawful, yet as to these persons it cannot be
allowed: For, first they were Idolaters slain for their idolatry, verse 40.
Dying (for any thing appears to the contrary) in a mortal sin. 2. They were
not in Purgatory the only place from whence Prayers bring souls; for at this
time Purgatory had not so much as an imaginary existence. 3. Supposing Prayer
for the dead, and holy and wholesome cogitation, and might be proved so from
this place, yet how can we be said to maintain a Doctrine clean contrary and
opposite to that which the Apostles in plain and formal terms expressed.
Though here be expressed the opinion of Judas or Jason of Cyrene, yet neither
Judas nor Jason were the Apostles of Christ, nor yet any of the Prophets of
God, the last of whom was Malachi. It is evident that you want spiritual
proofs for your charitable devotion, else you would not have urged against us
those books you know we account Apocriphal, and not bring one syllable of
Scripture; you must first prove unto us the Divine authority of the books of
Maccabees, and then prove our contrariety to Scriptures in dissenting from
them, till then you beg the question.

10. Inst. Extreme unction. Is any body sick amongst you, let him bring in the
Priests of the Church, and pray over him anointing him with oil in the name of
our Lord. Jam. 5. Answ. 1. Here are not the plain and formal terms of extreme
unction, nor do I think that you read them in any ancient Author; the word
Extreme shows your extram abuse of this ordinance as Lorichius (otherwise as
much for this supposed Sacrament as any oany other) clearly demonstrates in
these words; Abusus vocbuli est, quod dicitur extrema unctio, etc. Its an abuse
of the word to call it extreme unction For its not a Sacrament of dying men,
but of those who are sick, not relateing to their burial, but conducing to
their recovery. Whence it was that in the primitive Church, many when they were
anointed did recover health. And even at this day many would be healed, if this
Sacrament were rightly used. I observe that these Popish Authors who pretend to
follow antiquity do avoid this term Extreme calling this supposed Sacrament
either sacramentum unctionis aegrotorum as Lorichius; or simply, Cass. consult.
Art. 22. p. 985.
unctio infirmorum, as Cassander who also shows that its of use for the sick in
order to their recovery of bodily health, 2. This text of the Apostle proves
not your extreme unction. It speaks of that miraculous anointing which Saint
Mark mentions, [ Mark 6.13.] and which Bellarmine says was a sign used in
miraculous healing of the diseased, your Rhemists imply that it had a
miraculous medicinal virtue to heal diseases which you will hardly say of your
extreme oil. Cajetan expressly denies that this text of James, [Cajet. in cap.
5. Jac.] proves extreme unction, and proves it by diverse reasons. 1. Saint
James says, not if any man be sick unto death, but absolutely if any man be
sick. 2. The proper effect of Saint James unction is recovery of health; If he
speaks of remission of sins only conditionally, whereas extreme unction is not
given but at the point of death, and directly tends as its form stands, to the
remission of sins; besides Saint James requires that many Elders be called to
one sick person, both to pray with him, and to anoint him which is far from the
ceremony of extreme unction: thus far Cajetan. 3. Saint James's unction is no
Sacrament, it neither pretends to the name of Sacrament, nor refers to any
express institution of Jesus Christ, (which is the property of Evangelicall
Sacraments; but Popish unction assumeth to it self this name, and that in a
proper acception against both Scripture and antiquity. Scripture mentioning
only Christ's institution of Baptism and the Supper; and antiquity (when it
speaks of proper Sacraments) doing no more. Rabanus Maurus, who lived about 800
years ago, acknowledges no more but Baptism and the Lords Supper. Hence I
conclude that Protestants (though opposite to Popish fopperies) are not
contrary to Apostolical Doctrine.

11. Inst. The Bishop of Romes supremacy in spiritual matters. Thou art
Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church, Feed my sheep. To thee will I
give the keys of the kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose on
earth shall be loosed in Heaven; whatsoever thou shall tie on earth shall be
tied in Heaven, Matthew. 16.

Answ. 1. Why do you separate the Popes Spiritual from his Temporal power?
for we deny both, and they are alike expressed in Scripture. but 2. The Popes
Supremacy in Spiritual matters is not in plain and formal terms here
expressed. for 1. Here is no mention of any Pope or his Supremacy in Spiritual
matters; here is mention of Peter, but few of your Popes have had that name. 2.
What is commanded and promised to Peter, is commanded and promised to him, not
as Bishop of Rome, but as an Apostle, and therefore the same is commanded and
promised to other Apostles. The other Apostles are foundations as well as
Peter, and I am sure he is not the corner stone. The keys are promised to them
as well as to him, John 20.22, 23. the other Apostles are to feed Christ's sheep
as well as he; yea, it is the duty of all Pastors, Act. 20.28. 3. What reason
can be given why Peter's supremacy should descend upon his Successors at Rome
rather then his successors at Antioch. 4. If Peter had any supremacy it was in
regard of Apostleship, so as to be the prime Apostle, and have power over the
rest: but Apostolic power is not derived by succession upon any. The truth is,
Peter had no power over the rest from Christ, for Christ's gift of such a power
would have prevented the Apostles contention about supremacy, or would have
answered the question, better then those words wherewith Christ did answer. He
might easily have said, why do you strive which should be greatest? know you
not that I have made Peter your Prince, and have made him Supreme; but Christ
thought of no such matter.

Thus I have showed that Protestants do not profess a Doctrine contrary to the
Apostles, and I further add that the Apostles doctrine expressed in Scripture
is fully received by them. We believe all that the Apostles have taught so far
as God reveals their Doctrine to us. Its therefore a most false slander to say
that Protestants refuse some points the Apostles believed, p. 65. We hold the
Catholic faith entire and inviolate in Athanasius's sense, we fully believe
all the Articles of its Creed. Its true we deny diverse points that Papists
believe; we dislike the new articles of your late Creed, which Athanasius as
well as we received not into his Creed, nor were they believed by the Apostles.
But you object ( sect. 5.) It is evident they were there being the same ground
to assure us thereof, as of Scripture; or any other point they believed; and
that without which (under a miracle) there would not be the least knowledge of
the Apostles belief, to wit, the Churches constant tradition. Answ. 1. Its most
evident that the points Protestants deny were not believed by the Apostles.
For, 1. The Scriptures mention them not the writings of the Apostles approve
not of communion in one kind, private mass, prayer in an unknown tongue,
imagined worship, auricular confession, pardons, indulgences, restraint of
people from reading Scripture, or Clergymen from marriage, Popes
infallibility, sumpreamacy of temporal and spiritual power, purgatory, prayer
for the dead, or to Saints departed, etc. 2. The ancient Creeds do not mention
any of these points, (which they would certainly have done if the Apostles had
believed them) much less do they make them necessary articles of faith, See
Caranz. de council. conc. Nic. p. 51. Syrm. p. 89. Constant. p. 102. Tollet. p.
131. Ephesians. p. 151. Calced. p. 181.
Read the Creeds of the Apostles, of the Nicen Fathers, of Syrmium,
Constantinople Tolet. Ephesus (which Caranza calls a sum of all Christian
Doctrine) of the Romans with diverse others, and you shall not find one of your
new articles so much as hinted in any of them. 2. The proof of your evident
assertion contains diverse falsities, as, 1. That the Scripture is known only by
Tradition, or humane testimony, whereas it gives testimony to it self as I have
before showed. 2. That without the Churches constant tradition there would not
be the least knowledge of the Apostles belief. For, 1. God can make the enemies
of his Church the publishers, and propagators of his truth. Thus Cajetan notes
that by the Apostasy and obstinacy of the Jews we know which are the true books
of the old Testament. 2. The Scriptures might be preserved though there should
be a general apostasy, and these could testify of the Apostles belief, [2 Reg.
22.8.] as that book found in the days of Josiah testified of Moses's commands
and threatenings. 3. Christians for a long time had not the Churches Tradition,
i. e. the testimony of a general Council informing them what was the Apostles
belief, or which were the books of Scripture. 3. Those points of yours I
mentioned cannot be evidenced to be the Apostles belief by the Churches
constant tradition, you cannot name one Author in every age since the Apostles
out of whose writings you can prove that the Apostles maintained those
Doctrines which we reject, much less are you able to tell us of any visible
Church or national Council that will affirm it: Council. Constable. Sess. 13.
The Council of Constance acknowledges that Christ administered the Sacrament
under both kinds, and that the Primitive Christians did receive it under both
kinds. Can we then think that the Apostles thought communion under both kinds
unlawful? How then durst he so administer it? Was his practice contrary to his
belief? This would be a great wickedness not to be imagined of an Apostle. 4.
We approve of the Churches tradition as a witness of what the Apostles
believed, but only in subserviency to Scripture which does principally discover
what was the Apostles belief: if your Councills had told us that the Apostles
administered not the Sacrament in both kinds, or that they allowed of prayers in
an unknown tongue, we would not believe your Councills because the Scripture
speaks contrary to them, and it is first to be regarded. But you reply to this,
p. 67. As Scripture, so what it contains would be as to belief hid and unknown,
but for the Churches information. Answ. This has been formerly confuted.
Scripture gives a firmer and more convincing testimony to it self, then men can
give to it. The efficacy of the word in the heart of him that reads and
meditates in it is more powerful to persuade him that its the Word of God then
a 1000 Fathers or Popes; the same may be said of the truth contained in it.
When the error of administering the Sacrament of the Supper was the Doctrine of
the Church; I appeal to any man to tell me whether the Scripture would not have
manifested what was truth, better then Pope Innocentius or any of his erring
nephews: I Am sure the Pope would not have informed what was truth according to
Scriptures in that point, and yet there were means of finding out the truth,
else all his Proselites had erred with him which would be dangerous to affirm.
It is the Scripture that declares and manifests the Church, and therefore must
be more mafest than the Church: But you prove it thus, The knowledge faith
requires, must be supernaturally certain, and consequently an effect of the
Holy Ghosts p^culiar assistance, which is only warranted to the Church, and
not to every private reading and reasoning.

Answ. If you speak of the Holy Ghosts infallible assistance, we grant the
Apostles had it and therefore their knowledge was certain, and their writings
we ground our faith upon, but this assistance is not now given to any. You
plead but for the Holy Ghosts peculiar assistance, how this is warranted not
only to the Church, but to private Christians. For first Christ promises it
to them, Jer. 31.34. and assures them God will give it them if they ask, Luke
11.13. 2. Christ invites them to seek it, Apoc. 3.18. 3. The Apostle affirms
that private Christians have it, 1 John 2.27. The pride of Popish Prelates is
intolerable, they (forsooth) and none else have the peculiar assistance of
Gods spirit to enlighten them. Poor Christians must be robbed of their
spiritual Pastor, that Popish Priests may be the only teachers. But I think
your conscience struck you when you were penning this sentence, and therefore
to evade it in stead of saying, Not to provide persons, you say not to every
private reading or reasoning which makes as much against your Popes and
Priests, as private Christians; if those do ever read and reason in private. I
grant that the Spirit is not given to every private person in every reading and
reasoning. No more as I said is he given to every, or any Pope in every private
reading or reasoning. When the Pope speaks not ex Cathedra, he is as subject to
ignorance and error as the poorest Christian and may err by your own
confession, and he is not always in his chair: But I dare affirm that private
Christians in their serious reading of Gods Word joined with Prayer and
diligence, may expect the peculiar assistance of God to lead them into the
knowledge of Gods truth, this is clearly promised Psalm. 25.9.12.14. upon our
asking of him, James 1.5. If any man want wisdom, Spiritum illuminatorem
(says the gloss) Let him ask it of God, etc. The Psalmist prays that God
would open his eyes that he may understand wonderful things of Gods Law, so
should private Christians do: through the want of spirit the Jews though they
read the Scriptures they understand them not, the vail is upon their eyes, but
it is to be done away in Christ by the Spirit of the Lord. Here is not a word
of the Churches taking away this vail. 2. You prove it by S. Paul; S. Paul is
plain, Let men esteem us as the Ministers of Christ, and dispensers of Gods
mysteries, 1 Cor. 4.

Answ. The words indeed are plain and easy to be understood, but I know not how
they make for you; they do not prove that the Apostles had the peculiar
assistance of Gods Spirit, much less do they prove that private Christians are
not capable of it. All that they prove is this, that the Corinthians ought not
to contemn or vilify Paul or any, but account of them according to their
calling as Christ's servants, and dispensers of divine mysteries 3. You prove it
by experience, saying, Experience confirms no less in Seperatists, who laying
aside the Church, and presuming upon their own readings and reasonings, have
vented as many absurd, and extravagant impieties, as they had base and
exorbitant passions, p. 68.

A. 1. When men presume upon their readins and raesonings, without having
respect to the Spirit of God, it is no wonder if they err; Reason is no
sufficient guide in exposition of Scripture. Flesh and blood reveals it not to
us, but the Spirit. Hence it is that those Heretics in Jude are noted by
their want of the Spirit, and this was the cause of their erring. 2. The Church
never put forth any Public Commentary, whereby the sense of Scripture might
appear, and therefore the Churches Exposition is a mere Chimera: Suppose a
Christian should desire to acquaint himself with Scripture, as that which (you
say) contains part of Gods Will, but he dares not venture upon it himself, and
therefore desires to be guided by the Churches Exposition, now he knows not
where to meet with it; I pray Sir, could you direct him where he might find it?
The Fathers do not all of them always agree, and he finds their Expositions
often rejected by your learned Doctors, and sometimes they deserve not to be
received. Your Doctors of the Church are as different in their Expositions as
can be (as that Text of James, some understand it of Extreme Unction, others
deny that Extreme Unction can be proved by it) and for your Popes they seldom
expound Scripture, and when they do it, their Expositions are often irrational,
(as that of Romans 8.6. by Lyricus) and seldom obvious. In this case, either the
study of Scripture must be quite laid aside, or else there must be some other
guide thought of besides the Church, which can be no other then the Spirit of
God, by which we are enabled to judge which is the true sense of Scripture. Vid.
Can. loc. Theol. l. 7. c. 3.
Cajetan seems to approve of this, when he advises that no man dislike a new
sense of Scripture, because it dissents from Ancient Fathers, for God has not
confined the Exposition of Scripture to their senses, but to Scripture it self.
Which way of finding out the sense of Scripture by comparing one place with
another, is done by the help of Gods Spirit principally, though the advice of
Pastors may come secondarily in; as subservient thereunto. 3. Those who have
cried up the Church, as some of them vented as absurd and extravagant impieties
as any Schismatique: What more absurd and extravagant Exposition can there be,
then that of Lyricus on Romans 8. They that are married cannot please God (as if
all the Saints of God who were married cannot please God) or that of Harding,
that by Peter's Sword is meant the Popes Civil Power; or that of the Lawyers,
that by Cardines terrae, 1 Samuel 2.8. are figured the Cardinals, by whose
Counsel the Church of Rome is governed. (See Willets third Pillar of Popish
Doctrine) yea, and such as are grounded upon base and exorbitant passion, as
where they reject the Expositions of Fathers merely in opposition to
Protestants. See Maldon. in Joan. 9.62. and Bellarm. l. 1. de extr. Vnct. c. 2.
init. both which reject a generally received Exposition, because the
Protestants entertain it.

4. The Scripture it self rightly used and judged, gives sufficient information
of it is own meaning, especially in fundamental points, which are plain and
easy to him who uses discretion in searching of it. If it were not thus, to
what purpose did holy Writers set Pen to Paper? Yea, and write not only to
Bishops and Pastors, but to private Christians also: It were a vain thing to
write so, as that those they wrote to could understand nothing of their
meaning; besides, it is more then probable, that the Apostles Preaching was of
the same obscurity with their writing. To this you give us this answer, The
Apostles did set Pen to Paper for a greater confirmation of the truth, to bear
witness to the sincerity and candor of the Churches teaching and preaching, and
not for every one to be his own carver and interpreter.

Repl. 1. Your answer is more for than against us, for who are they that must
have the truth confirmed to them, and must have a witness to assure them, that
the Teaching and Preaching of the Church is sincere and candid? are they not
the People who are commanded to try the Spirits? 1 John 4.1. and are commended
for searching the Scriptures, to find whether what the Apostles Preached was
the truth? Act. 17.11.12. How can the Scriptures witness to them, that the
Pastors of the Church teach truth, if they cannot understand the Witnesses
language? or what confirmation can we have of truth, if we must not meddle with
that which is the Rule and Touchstone of Truth? The Apostle Peter commends
Christians for giving heed to the Scriptures, 2 Ep. 1.19. calling them a light
shining in a dark place; whereby he demonstrates their clearness and
conspicuity even to private Christians giving heed thereto. 2. Your words make
much against your selves, for they imply: 1. That the truth is more confirmed
by Scripture than by the Church, therefore the Church, as to confirmation of
truth, is inferior to Scripture. 2. That the Teaching and Preaching of the
Church is not to be believed upon that account; but because of it is consent
with Scripture, it receives its evidence of sincerity and candor from
Scripture, both which are certain truths, but not agreeable to your Positions.
3. That the Scriptures are to be translated into those Tongues People can
understand, else they cannot be assured of the truth by them, nor can the
Scriptures be a witness to them of the sincerity and candor of the Churches
teaching and preaching. Can an idiot know by Aristotle's Greek works, whether
Expositors deal sincerely and heartily in their commenting on him, or at his
works a greater confirmation of Philosophical truths to such a one, than their
Commentaries: If you have any ingenuity, you cannot affirm it. 4. That the
Scriptures are the rule of Faith, whereby even the Churches teaching is to be
tried. 5. Whereas you say, the Apostles did not set pen to paper -- For every
one to be his own Carver and interpreter. reply. 1. The Apostles did therefore
write that every one might hear, Rev. 2.7.17.29. and give heed thereto, 2 Pet.
1.19. and understand and believe, John 20.31. yea, and might teach them their
children, 2 Timothy 3.15. wtih 1.5. and others related to them, Acts 18.24.26.
Aquila and Priscilla instruct Apo^^os in the way of the Lord, which was done by
interpreting Scripture to him, concerning those points wherewith he was not
well acquainted, and yet Burgensis says of them, that they were simple
persons, persons of no great learning nor eminency in the Church, excepting for
piety. 2 It Is true, that the Apostles did not write with an intent that every
one should wrest it, as the Apostle says some did, 2 Pet. 3.16. (which may be
applied as well to Clergy men as private Christians) but they intended an
application of it to Christians particular use, and that even by themselves
privately, and not only publicly. But you urge for this you have said; It was
ever held an effect of great improvidence, and occasion of intolerable
confusion for the people in any Commonwealth, to have the freedom of
construing the Law; therefore wise Lawmakers, to show their care and foresight
for the good and weal-publick, as they caused their Laws to be written so they
appointed certain select persons of integrity and ability to dispense the
same: If this be true as it is, etc.

Resp. 1. Its most false that you say, It was ever held, etc. Tholosanus tells
you that Advocates are of little use in Poland, Tholos. syntag. juris L. 49. c.
6. Sect. 29, Azor. inst. Moral. part. 3. l. 13. cap. 29. dub. 2.
but every man is admitted to plead his own cause. Himself and other Casuists
when they tell who is prohibited from being Advocate, do not exclude private
men from pleading their own cause. See Tholos. and Ararius, who are so far from
holding it an effect of great improvidence, etc. that they allow it. You find
the Apostle Paul pleading for himself, Acts 24.12, 13, 18, 19. and 25. and 10,
11. in both which places the Apostle pleads for himself, and that by Law which
he interprets for himself. Now he would never have done this, had he thought it
an effect of great improvidence, or an occasion of intolerable confusion as
you suggest it. Advocates do not substantially but accidentally intervene in
public judicatories, as Zorius speaks. [ Sup. cap. 12. init.] Now that which
only accidentally intervenes, may sometimes not intervene. 2. The reason you
give of Lawmakers appointing certain select persons of integrity and ability,
to dispense the Laws, its an occasion of intellerable confusion, etc. Is not
the proper reason of that appointment; but rather the true and main reason is
this: All men are not able to understand the meaning and sense of Law, though
some may be able; now a good Law maker does consult the welfare of the meanest
subject: If some men should handle their own cause, they would endanger it
through their unskilfulness of Law and the subtilty of the adversaries. So that
the danger is not so much confusion and disorder, as the prejudice of civil and
particular rights, every man not being able to deal with every adversary, nor
to understand every case in Law. 3. All that you say makes only against a
public pleading in Courts of Judicature, which does not take away private men's
liberty of interpretation absolutely, but as to such times and places; and
there is none of us pleads for private men's interpretation of Scripture
publicly. 4. You confound construction of Law by right reason, and by corrupt
affection; this latter, no man that has right reason can plead for in the
behalf of any people, for indeed that would bring confusion: but the former
cannot be denied to any; for the Law is founded upon right reason, and so far
as this takes place, the expounding of the Law cannot be prejudicial to any
Commonwealth, though it be done by private persons. 2. You infer, If this be
true as it is, what an undervaluing must it be of Gods wisdom and providence
to think in a Commonwealth of his own immediate establishing, as the Church is,
he has left indifferently to all a liberty to make what sense they will of his
Law.

Answ. 1. We allow not that the sense men give of Scripture should be after
their own lusts or wills. If any man give a sense contrary to the mind of God,
it deserves to be rejected God has not left to any one man much less
indifferently to all, a liberty to make what sense he will of Gods Law. The
Pope can no more claim that liberty than the meanest Laick, and therefore you
either play the fool or worse, to disprove a liberty which no Protestant in the
World pleads for.

2. Yet I say God has not left any of his children without means in the use
whereof they may attain to know what is the Will of God in his Word. Romans 12.2.
Indeed God has set certain select persons of integrity and ability to dispense
his Law, but this is not opposite to private study and meditation in Gods Law,
the very principal charecter of a blessed man. Psalm. 1. and 119. and is not
study and meditation in Gods Law in order to the interpretation of it. The
Saints of God have earnestly studied Gods Law. Yet this was never thought to
tend to bring the peace and safety of the Church into danger of shipwreck, nor
to be the source of jars and garboils of Seperatists, as you wickedly suggest.
Misapplying and wresting of Scripture may have those effects you speak of: but
what is this to the reading and right interpretation of it. Your reason for
this your unsavory speech is (say you) clear, because all men are not apt to
understand alike; for being for the most part of different tempers and
composures, they have various fancies which of necessity will beget a diversity
of understanding Answ. 1. You are Aesops man qui ex uno ore calidum promis and
frigidum, in your fourth Chapter you proved the Churches infallibility by this
argument viz. that it was framed up of men of several Nations, different
tempers and interests, therefore neither could, nor can meet or conspire to
cheat themselves and posterity with a lie, p. 15, 16. But here the same
argument proves the Churches fallibility the fruit of diversity of
understanding. 2. I say, If Christians were considerable only as men of
different tempers and composures, as you represent them, and that their
different tempers and composures were the directive causes of understanding: I
believe what you say of seperatists would be true of all Christians, yea of all
men in the World, and there would be nothing but jars and garboils in every
place. Yea it may as truly be said of your great Rabbis the only interpreters
of Scripture, for are not they of different tempers and composures, and so
according to your doctrine have various fancies which of necessity must beget a
diversity of understanding. If you answer, that these have the Spirit of God to
guide them in understanding, I reply, so have all true Christians as I have
already proved. I deny not but there is corruption in the best, and darkness
in their understandings, they but see through a glass and that darkly, and
therefore may mistake a wrong exposition sometimes for a true one, and thus it
is not only with Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin (whose names will survive Romes
obloquy and reproach of them) but with your own Doctors whose expositions are
not always the same. But we must believe (if we will) that only schismatical
Protestants such as Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin have different understandings and
expositions of Scripture for say you they made no less then three contrary and
repugnant senses of those plain words, this is my body, this is my blood. p.
70. Answ. 1. You tell us not what these three contrary and repugnant senses
are, and I am persuaded they may easily be reduced to two; for though Luther
and Zuinglius differed about the sense of the words, yet I find not that Calvin
and Zuinglius did, and I rather think they did not, for the opinion that some
appropriate to Zuinglius, Bellarmine charge upon Calvin in these words,
Bellarmine says, the opinion of Calvin, revera nihil differt a sententia,
Zuinglii de Ludib. lib. 1. c. 1.
Haeresis erat, etc. It was the Heresy of some, that the Eucharist was only a
figure of Christ's body, this Heresy does Calvin teach. 2. If the words be so
plain, how comes it that Papists do so much differ in their Expositions of
them, every word almost brings variety of Popish senses. If we were to learn
what the Pronoun This, (the very first of those pain words) means, we might go
unsatisfied away for any resolution we should have from you. One tells us it
signifies Nothing; another, The Bread presently to be transubstantiate. A
third, an individuum vagum, contained under the forms of Bread. A fourth, the
Body of Christ. And now Sir, I dare be bold to say, that there is less
agreement amongst Popish Expositors, who yet profess to follow the Church in
all their Expositions, then amongst Luther, Zuinglius and Calvin: There being
but three, (rather two) Expositions of these words given by Protestants,
whereas there is at least four amongst Papists of one of the words.

For conclusion, you bring us in objecting for our selves thus: Those selected
Persons entrusted with the administering and dispensing of the Laws, utter by
mouth what they understand; and they understand no more, then what their
private reading and reasoning are able to inform them; so that even this way
men would be to seek. To this you answer: 1. Judges have not only their
reading and reasoning to inform and direct them, but likewise the practice of
former Courts from the very promulgation of the Law, at which time the sense
and meaning of the same was declared by the Lawmakers themselves.

Reply 1. You unlearnedly distinguish betwixt their reading and their knowledge
of the practice of former Courts; as if the practice of former Courts were not
known by reading, whereas you cannot mention any other means thereof unless you
can make out a constant unwritten Tradition from the Lawmakers themselves,
which has been propogated from one to another, and the particular cases of
former Courts have been so various and so many, that they require strong
memories to retain them. 2. Lawmakers are not able to comprehend all
particular cases that may happen, nor do they use to declare the meaning of the
Law, unless occasionally in some doubtful cases; for it is supposed, that the
Law when delivered, is clear and manifest, at least in the substantials of it.
3. Judges do not always look so far as to the Lawmakers, but to the practice
of former Courts grounded upon right reason, which is indeed the foundation of
all just and good Laws. 2. You answer with respect to the Church. The Church
besides the Letter of Scripture (which she reads assiduously with watching,
fasting and prayer for a right and happy understanding thereof) and her own
reasoning, has the help of a better and sure tradition, and the assistance of
the Holy Ghost.

Reply 1. What you mean by the Church here, is hard to guess. I fear your
commendations will not well agree to Popes, and the rest of your
Ecclesiastical Grandees: their other employments are so great and their
affection to Scripture in comparison of humane Traditions so little, and their
devotedness to the Expositions of others so absolute, that I cannot believe
that they read Scripture assiduously, with watching, fasting, Prayer: and for
your common people, they must not take that pains about Scripture if they
would: so that you must either give us another definition of Church, then you
do, page 73. or acknowledge that the Church does not read the Letter of
Scripture assiduously with watching, etc.

2. What ever you speak of the Church, may be as truly spoken of particular
Christians, they are capable of reading the Scriptures, with the use of
fasting, watching, Prayer; they have reason whereby they can discern truth from
error, they are also capable of using that which you call a better and surer
Tradition, and the assistance of the Spirit is as truly with them, as with
those you call Church: And therefore I shall conclude with you, leaving what I
have said to the impartial Reader, desiring him to judge by it, whether
private Christians, being rational men; yea, men endued with Gods Spirit, and
thereby capable of understanding the Will of God in the Scriptures, may not
according to the ability given them, and in their places seek for, and deliver
the sense of Scripture, and whether this be any undervaluing of Gods Wisdom
and Providence, or do directly tend to absurd and extravagant impieties.

CHAP. XI. Of the Roman Church.
BY the word ROMAN (say you) are not only comprised the inhabitants of that
particular territory of Rome, but likewise all Christians in the World that
acknowledge the Bishop of Rome for their chief Pastor appointed by Christ to
govern his flock. Answ. 1. It may well be doubted what acknowledgment you mean,
whether an acknowledgment de facto, or de jure only. If you mean by Roman
Church are only comprised those who do actually acknowledge the Bishop of Rome
for their chief Pastor, you overthrow its universality, It is not then
Catholic, for only a part of the West makes this acknowledgment. The Eastern
Church wholly and a great part of the Western do disclaim his supremacy, and
worship not the image of the beast, nor receive his name in their foreheads.
Yea if you consult antiquity you shall find that there never was an actual
acknowledgment of the Pope as chief Pastor, by all Christian Churches. There
were other Patriarchs besides him who had their several distinct limits, Azor.
inst. mor. p. 2. l. 3. c. 35. q. 5.
viz. the Patriarchs of Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem.
Some of whose limits were no less then the Roman Patriarchs, and whose power
did extend to the constituting, ordaining and confirming Bishops, Archbishops
and other Ecclesiastical officers (as your Azorius testifies) yea so
independent was the power of each of them upon other, that none of them was to
meddle in another Patriarchat as its proved out of the Council of
Constantinople (Can 2.) by the learned Scultetus who also clearly explains the
sixth Canon of the Council of Nice to this purpose, Scult. Synlag. medul.
Theol. Patr. p. 418.
and answers the objections that Papists make against it. All that Azorius
gives to the Pope is this, Inter Patriarchas, etc. Amongst the Patriarchs the
Pope of Rome was chief, to whom as Patriarch, the Western Provinces and many
Islands in the mediterranian sea toward the West, were subject. Here is
priority of Order, but no supreamacy of power over the other Patriarchs, the
Bishop of Rome had power over all the Cities and places about Rome (as the
Nicen Creed has it) but not over his fellow Patriarchs or their Cities, etc.
His power was provincial, not oecumenicall. 2. If you mean that by Roman are
comprised those who ought to acknowledge the Pope for their chief Pastor, it
will remain to be resolved who those are, whether some particular part of the
Christian World or the whole. The former you cannot grant but overthrow
universality, and set Roman against Catholic, which you are use to conjoyn in
their predication of the Church: The later we cannot admit till you can effect
an impossibility in proving that in the language of the Ancients, the
Catholic Church was couched under the word Roman It is evident that a
particular Church is sometimes by the Ancients dignified with a general and
common attribute, and are called Catholic Churches; but I never read that the
universal Church is couched under a particular appellation as a proper
predicate thereof, I say, A proper predicate. For I acknowledge that the Church
in Scripture is called Sion, and Jerusalem; but these are only figurative
expressions of it: it is never called the Church of Sion, or the Church of
Jerusalem, though it might rather be called so then the Church of Rome, or the
Roman Church: the Scripture never takes notice of Rome when it speaks of the
Catholic Church except as an enemy. 2. Notwithstanding, I shall suppose that
you mean of them that actually submit to the Pope, and thus you distinguish the
Roman Church from all schismatical companies of Christians whether Protestants
or others. This company (say you) together with the said Bishop compose and
make up the true Catholic Church. Answer, 1. The truth of this will appear by
your arguments which you bring for the proof of it: The arguments are these
which I shall consider of in the order I find them propounded.

1. Argument, That company of Christians, compose and make up the true
Catholic Church, to which the definition of the true Catholic Church does
agree; but the definition of the true Catholic Church does agree to the above
mentioned company, therefore they compose and make up the true Catholic
Church, p. 72. 73. Answ. If you speak of an exact and perfect definition,
wherein the definition is adequate to the thing defined, agreeing fully to it,
and not to any thing else: I subscribe to your major proposition, but deny the
minor. For proof whereof you give us a definition, and then apply it to your
Church: that is, first you suit your definition to the Roman Church, and then
you bring your Roman Church to the definition. The definition is, The true
Catholic Church is a society of men linked together in the profession of one
Faith, in the use o^ the same Sacrament, and under the government of Bishops
and Pastors lawfully sent, that are able to show their personal and doctrinall
succession from Christ and his Apostles, without the least interruption.

Answ. 1. It might rationally be expected from you, that when you bring a
definition upon the truth, whereof the validity of your argument depends, you
should have fetched it from some Fathers or other approved Authors and not out
of your own brain. Its not suitable for the seller to make himself a measure,
and then confine the buyer thereunto, or for a subject to frame a definition of
Law, and according to that proceed against his neighbor as a breaker of the
Law. If it could be thus, what man could not lay a foundation for suits, yea
and carry away another right by his new definition. I challenge you or any
other to show me this definition of the Catholic Church in any of the Ancients
or later Fathers, either Greek or Latin, till which time I might justly defer
an answe^. The former part I confess is warrantable, but, desinit in piscem
mulier formosa Superne. But you seem to say you prove it in every part of it by
Scripture. I shall therefore first examine whether it be in Scripture, and then
whether it (such as it is) be a pliable to the Roman Church. 1. Say you A
society of men; and he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, others Pastors and Doctors. A most necessary part of the
definition, you did well not to commit the poof of the Churches manhood,
because none denies it. 2. Linked together under the government of Bishops and
Pastors lawfully sent, Ephesians. 4. Heb. 5. Romans 10.4. this we grant. 3. That are
able to show, etc. The mountain of the house of the Lord shall be established
in the top of mountains, and all Nations shall flow unto it. Is. 2. He has
placed his Tabernacle in the Sun, Psalm. 118. Sir, you are now gotten to Rome,
and the Scripture leaves you: what sober man that reads these Texts, would
infer that the Bishops and Pastors of the Church are able to show, etc. but it
sticks in your teeth, and therefore you stop at show. And truly I may well
apply to you the words of the Psalmist, ( Ps. 39.6.) with a little variation,
surely you walk in a vain show, surely you are disquieted in vain, you heap up
Scriptures, and know not how to apply them. The Scriptures you urge are not
applicable to any thing you say, Isa. 2. Prove the amplitude of the Church
under the Gospel by the access of the Gentiles, by reason of whom also it
shall be more glorious then formerly: But what is this to the showing of
personal or doctrinall succession of the Churches Bishops? Sure you do not
understand by the Mountain of the House of the Lord, only the Bishops of the
Church, and by its being confirmed in the top of the mountains, that all the
Bishops of the Church shall be personally visible. Herein you would surpass the
very worst of doting Rabbis. 2. In quoting Psalm, 118. you commit two errors,
one personal, quoting Psalm. 118. for 19. The other vulgar reading after the
Latin, He has placed his tabernacle in the Sun, which is a most false
reading, as ingenious Papists confess. Vatablus reads it thus, Soli posuit
tabernaculum in ipsis, He has placed a tabernacle in them, (i. e. the Heavens)
for the Sun: that is as he notes, Domicilium circumscripsit in coelis, etc. He
has made an house for it in the Heavens, that there as in an high Theater is
might be better seen. Lyranus tells us, In Hebraeo, etc. In the Hebrew, and in
Hieroms translation according to the Hebrew it is thus: He has placed for them
a tabernacle for the Sun. Now do you think that either Vatablus, Lyr^, Hierom
or the Hebrews would infer that, because the Sun is in the Heavens, etc. its
able to show its own, or Bishops personal succession? I wonder you are not
ashamed to reject the Hebrew, and Hierom and produce a false translation to so
little purpose as you do: for suppose in both these Texts it were proved that
the Church had a show or were manifest, yet it makes not for a successive
visibilitie of an Hierarchicall Church. Yea they clearly prove that the Church
may be sometimes hid, for the clouds may both make the mountains invisible, and
obscure the luster of the Sun as common experience testifies. 3. Their
Personal and Doctrinall succession; He gave some Doctors and Pastors, etc.
until we all meet in the unity of Faith, Ephesians. 4 Indeed here is proved that
there shall be Pastors in the Church till the end of the world: God will still
raise up some to preach his truth, though there may be interruptions in
particular Churches, nor does Matthew. 28. prove a non interruption of succession
of Bishops, but only a non interruption of Christ's presence. But suppose, Isa.
2. and Psalm. 19. Prove a visibilitie; and Ephesians. 4. Prove a succession; and
Matthew. 28. Prove a non interruption: Yet to say therefore, the Church must be
able to show a succession without interruption, is fallacia compositionis. And
now let any man judge whether your definition be spiritual or no.

2. This definition is not a right definition according to the rules of Logic
its not adaequata definito, not fitted to the Catholic Church: For, first, it
may agree to a particular Church as well as to the Catholic, as is evident to
any that examines it: And secondly, it does not agree to the Catholic, i. e.
The universal Church. For first, Bishops and Pastors do not show succession as
Governors of the Catholic Church, but as Bishops and Pastors in particular
Churches. The Popes show their succession as Bishops of Rome. The Patriarch of
Constantinople, shows his succession as Patriarch of that place: thus the
Bishops of England show their succession in the Church of England. He that
shows a personal succession of government over the Catholic Church must
produce not a Pstoral, or Episcopal, but Apostolical succession, which Papists
themselves lay no claim to. 2. There are no such Bishops and Pastors, as can
show a personal and doctrinal succession without the least interruption. 3.
This difinition comprehends not Popes and Bishops, who are parts of it: The
Catholic Church as visible and distinct from particular Congregations is more
truly defined by Lorichius, in these words, Sensus unitatis ecclesiae est, etc.
The sense of the article of one Church, is to believe that all the
Congregations of the faithful are one Church, and that is the Spouse of Christ
and Mother of all Christians. And he fully and expressly meets with your self,
and such like flatteries of the Roman Church, who monopolize the word Catholic
to be: -- Non tamen ejus sedis, etc. Yet let not the governors of the Roman
Church extol themselves, as if that Church only and (as they speak)
exclusively were the Catholic Church, and that it behoved us presently without
trial of it to approve of whatsoever comes from that See: and that for all
Doctrines and pontifical constitutions nothing should be brought but an ipse
dixit. If we attribute this to that See, we shall expose the Catholic Church
to all errors. And the Church of Rome cannot have any more pestilent enemies,
than those flatterers, who do make her not only the chief, but the only
Church, and extolling her above the Word and Catholic sense of Scripture,
above all the Catholic Fathers, yea above the Church triumphant, and
consequently above the spirit of God, do make of her I know not what Idol.
This root of Parasites are overthrown by that of Hierom, The world is greater
then a city. So that it is evident the Roman being but particular cannot be
the Catholic Church. But supposing your definition good, I come to examine
whether it can rightly be applied to the Roman Church, in the several
particulars of it, as you say it may.

1. You say Its a society of men, this agrees to the said company, for in
that company is to be seen Jerusalem descended from above, Apoc. 4. A goodly
Hierarchy, or heavenly order and subordination of Subdeacon to Deacon, of
Deacon to Priest, of Priest to Bishop, of Bishop to chief Bishop or Pope, (who
is subordinate to none but (...) an exalter of himself above all that is called
God, 2. These. 2.) and of the Laity to all.

Answ. 1. I know not whether to pity or laugh at you, seeing you will needs be
so exact as to prove that Rome is a society of men, I wonder you do not go more
directly to work. Its not a direct proof to say in the Church of Rome there are
Subdeacons, Deacons, Priests, Bishops, chief Bishop, a goodly Hierarchy or
chief heavenly order; therefore the Church of Rome is a society of men; for you
would persuade us that the pattern of your Hierarchy was brought by Dyonisius
from heaven, and that amongst the Angels there is a goodly Hierarchy or
heavenly order, so that we cannot tell by your argument whether the Church of
Rome be a society of men or Angels. Why might you not as well argue thus, In
Rome there are common whores that bring in great revenues to his Holiness,
there are or have been devils incarnate conjurers, Magitians, Simoniacks,
Whore-masters: therefore the Church of Rome is a society of men: I am sure its
as good an argument as yours, to prove your Churches manhood. What assurance
have we that your heavenly orders are all men; for the Porrphyry chair is only
for the Pope, and I have not heard of any other chairs of humanity for inferior
orders. But you urge further these degrees are so masterlike set, that they do
not hinder and trouble, but as great and less strings musically tuned, make and
preserve the melodious harmony of peace and concord: Ergo the Church of Rome
is a society of men: Who that reads these arguments can forbear laughter. I am
sure they are neither musically tuned, nor do they make melodious harmony; by
this argument you might prove your fidle strings to be a society of men, but I
grant your assertion to be true without your reasons. 2. The second part is --
Linked together. This agrees to the said company, for in that company there is
no diversity of belief, but one as Monarch swayeth in Europe, Asia, Africa and
America; where one and the same belief is embraced for one and the same motive,
Gods revelation proposed by the Church.

Answ. 1. If to be linked together be the main thing applied to your Church in
this second part, it may agree to Heathens and Jews as well as Romans. If the
faith wherein they are linked together with the use of the same Sacraments
(which you seem to forget) this may also agree with the Greek and Eastern
Churches or to the Protestants, who (as is evident by their confessions of
their Faith) do as nearly agree as any Churches subjected to the Roman.

2. What you say of the same belief, that its received upon the Churches
account, I have before confuted it, and for further answer to it, refer you to
Lorichius in my last quotation of him. Lastly, your talk of your Monarchiall
sway, etc. is but a Popish brag, or if real, it is an usurpation, for which you
cannot plead Law nor ancient possession, as Aronius will inform you if you
consult him about the Popes dominions.

3. The third part is lawfully sent. This agrees to the said company, for in
that company no man clarifieth himself, but one receives power from another,
the Subdeacon, Deacon and Priest from the Bishop, the Bishop from the chief
Bishop or Pope.

Answ. 1. I hope you will not make the whole company of Popish Catholics
Preachers, though no man can infer any thing else from your words; for you
say, To be lawfully sent agrees to the said company, which company you define
to be under the government of Bishops and Pastors, p. 73. 2. Supposing you
meant it of Bishops, etc. yet there receiving of power one for another, the
Subdeacon Deacon and Priests from the Bishops the Bishops from the Pope does
not prove that the Bishops and Pastors are lawfully sent, unless it were made
manifest both that the power of sending were in the Bishops and Pope, and that
they used it lawfully; the latter of which especially will be difficult for you
to prove, considering that your Priests, etc. are ordained not to an
Evangelicall employment, as preaching the Gospel, and administering the seals
of the Covenant of grace, but rather to offer sacrifice and such as the Gospel
knows not.

4. The fourth part is able to show, etc. This agrees to the said company; for
in that company an exact succession of power and doctrine is faithfully and
with clearness deduced, Writers of several ages and nations having put forth
and published to the view of the w^rld authentic Schemes and Catalogues of
Popes, Bishops and Pastors, succeeding each other from Christ and the Apostles,
and from time to time laid open their doctrine.

Answ. 1. Personal succession (as I have showed) is no mark of a true Church,
its agreeable to other Churches: and this is the succession which your Authors
do principally, if not only demonstrate. 2. Its observable that there is no
personal succession of Bishops and Pastors (to whom you join Subdeacons, and
Deacons) distinct from the Pope mentioned in any of your authors that I have
met with, though particular Churches, as Spain, France, etc. have had
Apostolical institution as well as Rome, and its your task to prove not only
that the Pope, but Bishops and Pastors of the Church have a personal
succession from the Apostles. But 2. Rome is not now able to show a personal
and doctrinall succession from Christ and his Apostles, though I grant that in
the time of the first Fathers of the Church she was able, as were also the
Churches of Smyrna, Ephesus of Asia, the Churches in Germany, in Spain, in
France; Iren. adv. haeres. l. 1. c. 3.
in the East Countries in Egypt, in Lybia, in the middle of the world as
Irenaeus reckons them; but she is now unable unable to show either succession
of persons or doctrine: as I shall demonstrate by these following particulars:

1. As to personal succession, though she have a bed-role of names of Popes,
yet 1. She cannot affirm that none of her Popes came in by Simony. Nay the
contrary is evident by the testimony of Platina,, the Popes Library keeper:
Platin. in Bened. 4. et ser. 30.
Now I find her constitutions, the one made by Julius, the second made Anno
1505. which nullifies such Popes Election, declaring him to be no Pope, and
that no one ought to account him Pope, and further that without any further
declararation, he be divested of all his dignities, and that it be lawful for
any one to refuse obedience to his commands: and the other constitution
declares him excommunicate as Antichrist and an invader and destroyer of
Christianity. See both of these in Azorius's Morals: Azo. instuor p. 2. l. 4.
c. 5.
The like decree was made by Nicholas. 2. In the Lateran Council mentioned by
Caranza, wherein such a one is declared to be a thief, and one that may be
thrust out of the Chair by any one that has power. 2. She cannot affirm that
none of her Popes have come in by force and fraud: Nay its evident that many of
her Popes came in this way. I shall only give you the testimony of Caranza, for
many of them: he tells us that Christopher, 1. And Boniface, 7. got the
Popedom (malis artibus) by fraud and cousinage, others of them have come in by
force. Damasus the third got the Popedom by force with out the Clergy or
peoples consent. Sylvester the third (says he) was no true Pope but thrust in
by popular tumult, Clement, 2. was created Pope by the compulsion of Henery the
Third, John 13. took himself the Popedom through the assistance of his Father:
Leo, the 8. was ordained by the Clergy; but Otho, the Emperor forced them to
it after he had ejected Boniface, Saint John 18. did usurp the Chair, whilst
Gregory the fifth lived; So common was this way of coming to the Popedom that
the Author tells us, that course became so common, that any ambitious person
would usurp the Chair: Baronius acknowledges that men were thrust into Peter's
Seat by their potent Harlots, false Popes, etc. Now that Decree of Pope
Nicholas the second, [ An. 912.] meets with such as these for able entry,
nullifies the Popes right according to the former constitutions, and makes him
Antichrist. 3. She is not able to affirm that all her Popes have been free from
heresy. I have showed the contrary; yet the constitution of Julius, takes hold
of Heretics as of simoniacal Popes. 4. She cannot show that all her Popes
have been Males before the Porphyry Chair, there was no trial of the Popes
humanity: and that was occasioned by an Harlot, gotten into the Popeal Seat:
Yet its asserted and that truly, that a woman is not capable of pontifical
power and dignity. 5. She cannot show the order of her Popes: Its not known
where to place Clemens, and for Boniface 6. Caranza, says its a great
controversy amongst writers, at what time he sat in Peter's Chair. Now this is
inconsistent with the evident demonstration of Popeish succession. 6. She
cannot say but there have been great Chasma's wherein there have been no Popes.
There have been Vacancies not only for Months but years, through the
contentions of Cardinals or some other cause. 7. She cannot deny but there have
been many Popes at the same time, and each had their parties joining with them.
Caranza confesses that about the time of Alexander the Third there was a
Schism in the Church for almost twenty years: There was three others at the
same time with him, viz. John 24. Benedict, 4. Greg. 12 all three deposed by
the Council of Constance. This may suffice to allay the Popeish brag of
personal succession, and therefore I come to the next particular, viz.
Doctrinal succession.

2. Then as to Doctrinal succession. Rome, is not able to show Doctrinal
succession from Christ and his Apostles. There are two things concern her to
prove as to this. 1. That her present Doctrine is the same that the Apostles
taught. 2. That she has held this in every age since the Apostles until now:
both which are too difficult for Popish heads. Let any man read but the
Articles of Faith, in that Epistle of Paul to the Romans, and there will appear
a vast difference betwixt the Apostle and them: he taught justification by
faith without the deeds of the Law, Romans 3.20.28. impossibility of perfect
personal obedience, c. 8. 3. 3. 9. and 7. 14. 15. That concupiscence is a sin
in the regenerate, c. 7. 7. 8. that sufferings of Saints are not meritorious,
c. 8. 18. That Prayer is only to be made to the object of Faith which is God,
c. 10. 4. That the Roman Church may err and be broken off, as the Jews are, c.
11. 10. 21. 22. That every Roman ought to be subject to the civil Magistrate,
rendering honor, tribute, etc. c. 13. 1. That the Scriptures are written for
our learning, c. 15. 4. Lastly, that Religion consists not in difference of
meats and drink, c. 14. 17. nor of days' Verse 5. 6. Again; let Papists show us
so much as one Father, that believed, and propounded the late Articles of
Pius's Creed as necessary to be believed in every age, and then we shall
believe succession of Doctrine: till then we shall suspend our faith or belief
of it,

5. Your last part is without the least interruption, etc. this is manifestly
overthrown by what I have already said, and therefore I shall refer it to the
judgment of Christians as sufficient to overthrow this first Argument.

2. Argument. That company composeth, and makes up the truh Catholic Church,
which does acknowledge and embrace a power generally claimed, and a Doctrine
generally professed by the Apostles and Christians ever since; when any
opposition was first made; but the said Company acknowledges and embraces a
power generally claimed, and a Doctrine generally professed by the Apostles and
Christians ever since, when any opposition was first made; therefore that
Company composeth and makes up the true Cath^lique Church. Answ. 1. To your
Major, 1. Its obscure and doubtful, what you mean by Power as distinct from the
profession of Doctrine. In your next words you call it Apostolical power, which
may extend to jurisdiction as well as to Order, to Government as well as
Doctrine; but in the confirmation of your assumption, you only (though
frequently) express it by a power to preach and inculcate the truth, which is
no more then profession of true Doctrine against errors: and thus it must be
understood if the Argument be good. 2. Your felf overthrow the truth of this
proposition. 1. In saying, Apostolical power and doctrine [where Communion is
not wanting] are sure evidences of the true Catholic Church, whereby you
declare then your enumeration, of particulars in the proposition is
unsufficient, and may be where the true Church is not, viz. where communion is
wanting, and this is more necessary with you than any thing you express. 2.
Whereas in the former Chapter we asserted the profession of true doctrine to be
a mark of the true Church, you vehemently opposed it as an error; how comes it
then to be a truth in this Chapter? Is it a truth or no truth, a Popish truth
and a Protestant error. 3. These marks (or rather this mark) may agree to
particular Churches, and have rather agreed to any particular Church than the
now Roman. Yea, they may agree to particular Christians of other Churches; as
to Chrysostom Bishop of Constantinople, Athanasus Bishop of Alexandria; Cyril
Bishop of Jerusalem, whom you mention and were distinct Patriarchs from the
Bishop or Patriarch of Rome: yea every private Christian has a power from
Christ to embrace true Doctrine, and to make profession of it, and to contend
earnestly for it against all false doctrine.

Answ. 2. To your minor I deny it to be true, your proof of I shall mainly
examine. The second Proposition (say you) I clear by instances in and from the
Apostles down to Luther, Zuinglius and Calvin; and those of such points as
Catholics and Protestants mainly differ in. Parturiunt montes, etc. Who would
not here expect some great matter from this Doctor? yet who ever examines his
instances shall find nothing but a heap of lies and fopperies. For my
discovery hereof, I shall show particularly what this man undertakes, and how
he swerves from his undertaking. 1. He undertakes things. 1. To produce a
Catalogue of such points wherein Catholics and Protestants mainly differ. So
that to bring instances of such doctrines as Protestants disclaim as well as
Papists is to lie grossly, and to befool the Reader. 2. To produce the
generallity or universal company of Christians, as appears by those words
[Christians generally maintained] so often repeated in the following instances.
3. To produce this company professing, etc. when any opposition was first made;
whereby is implied that when the Protestant supposed errors did arise in
several ages, these Authors and Councels did then arise and oppose them. 4. To
bring in the testimony of Roman Catholics: for he proves that the Roman Church
is Catholic, because of their constant opposition of Heresies in all ages
since Christ.

2. The frothiness of his undertaking appears in his swerving from it which
comes not to be delivered. 1. As for his instance of such points, etc. who that
read his Profession but would expect a Catologue of Protestant errors from the
Apostles down to Calvin? but behold, a Catalogue of such Doctrines as
Protestants and Papists comply in the opposition of: Here are fifteen
instances, of which the six first, together with the eighth, tenth, eleaventh
and twelfth (as he delivers it) fourteen and part of the fifteenth we utterly
disclaim as none of the doctrine of the Protestant Churches, but a dead bastard
which the whore of Rome has laid at our side, instead of our own living child,
which this author has carefully hid from the eyes of his followers, making
show only of h^s own deformed bastard. But lest I should seem to affirm rather
then prove: Our disowning of them, I shall take a little liberty to demonstrate
what is the judgment of the Protestant Churches in those points that this
Author mentions as errors: only first I will advertise the reader of a juggling
feat of this Romish artist, it is this, when he brings in Fathers or Councels in
opposition to some errors, he turns them from opposing those erors to assert
some doctrines, not directly contrary to those errors, but rather to the true
doctrine of Protestants: as S. 2. in opposition to S. Magus opening Heaven to
Faith unaccompanied with good works; he brings in the Apostles and Austin,
asserting that good works are Absolutely necessary to salvation: Sect. 3. in
opposition to Eunomius, attributing Justification to a simple act of faith, he
brings in Irenaeus and Austin, affirming that Faith alone does not justify:
Sect. 4. Whereas Florinus blasphemed God to be the Author of sin, he brings in
Tertullian, Origin, and the Trent Council, asserting that God does no more but
permit, as if God could do no more about sin but he must be the Author of it:
Having premised this I come to his instances.

1. Instance, Simon Magus took upon him to open Heaven, to Faith unaccompanied
with good works. Ans. Is this the doctrine of Protestants, or do they open
Heaven, to Faith accompanied with good works? Do not all Protestants require
that the Faith which justifies be an active or operative Faith, and proclaim
other Faith dead: read concerning the necessity of works, the English
Confession: Non tamen dicimus, etc. Yet we say not that men may live
dissolutely, as if it were sufficient for a Christian only to be dipped and to
believe, and nothing else expected from him; true Faith is living and cannot be
idle: Read the Articles of the Church of England especially, Act. 12. Albeit
that good works which are the fruits of Faith and follow after Justification
cannot put away our sins, and endure the severitie of Gods judgment, yet are
they pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ, and do spring out necessarily of
a true and lively Faith, etc. Again Act. 17. They which are predestined --
they walk religiously in good works, etc. To all this, the reverend Assembly of
Divines consent, saying, Good works are the fruit and evidences of a true and
lively Faith -- that believers are created thereto, that having their fruit in
holiness they may have the end, Confess. of Faith, c. 16. Sect. 2.
eternal life. If you say Protestants hold they are not absolutely necessary.
I answer, this was not the error of Simon Magus, nor is the contrary opinion
the professed Doctrine of the Church of Rome, as appears to any that reads the
Council of Trent, Session 6. or of her children: see the Rhemists on Lu. 23.43

2. Inst. Eunomius attributed to a simple act of faith, virtue and efficacy to
cleanse and wash aaway whatsoever ordure and spots of sins. Tolet. in c. 3. ad
Romans
This is no Protestant doctrine, We fully consent to the speech of the Jesuit
Tolet. Advertendum est, etc. Note that faith has not of it self any efficacy
as it is an act of ours for remission and reconciliation, but all its virtue
does proceed from its object Christ, whose virtue and merit God has ordained
to apply to the sinner for his Justification through faith in him. Suitable to
this expression of the reverend assembly in their larger Catechism: Faith (say
they) justifies a sinner in the sight of God, not because of these other graces
which do always accompany it, or of good works that are the fruit of it; nor
as if the grace of Faith or [any Act thereof] were imputed to him for his
Justification, but only as it is an instrument by which he applies and
receives Christ and his righteousness. But Eunomius's error was rather that
attributed to Simon Magus than this (as appears by Augustine) and as such
also opposed by us. [ Aug. de haeres. c. 55.

3. Inst. Florinus blasphemed God to be the Author of sin. Answ. Protestant
Churches abhor this doctrine as much as Papists. In the Harmony of Confessions:
the Confession of Saxony, the Augustine Confession do disown it, and the latter
Confession of the Switeers expressly condemns Florinus and Blastus, and all that
make God the Author of sin: to which I will add our late Confession of Faith --
The Providence of God extends it self, even to the first fall, and all other
sins -- yet so as the sinfulness thereof proceeds only from the creature,
and not from God, who being most holy and righteous, neither is nor can be the
Author or approver of sin.

4. Inst. Origin robbed and spoiled Adam in his fall, and in him all his
posterity of that precious Gem the natural Image of God, Freewill.

Answ. No Protestants ( I met with) deny natural freedom of will to fallen
man, i. e. a liberty to natural, civil and moral actions. Yea, as to evil
man is most free, though as to supernatural good he is unable his condition is
such after the fall of Adam that he cannot turn and prepare himself by his own
natural strength and good works to faith and calling upon God. Harmon.
confess. Sect. 4. Mr. Baxt. Everlast. rest. part. 3. c. 2. Sect. 14. Marg.
See the Doctrine of Free Will in fallen man, excellently set forth in the
Later Helvetick Confession, and others; M. Baxter observes that Austin himself
and all the Fathers and all Divines acknowledge, Liberum arbitrium, Free Will
or choice who yet plead most for a necessity of grace.

5. Inst. Proclus left the regenerate all foul and conspurcate with sin. Answ.
Protestants in acknowledging regeneration and sanctification, do withal
confess, that those who are regenerate are not as they were before
regeneration, as to sin and its defilements, according to that of the Apostle
such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are Sanctified; but ye are
justified. Protestants receive Baptism as a Sign and Seal of their spiritual
cleansing by the Holy Ghost: we bless God for our Renovation. And does not all
this free us from this error. It Is true our confessions of Faith assert that
our Sanctification is but imperfect, that there are Relics of corruptions in
us as there was in Saint Paul (Romans 7.) yet we never say that the Regenerat are
all foul and conspurcate with sin, there is that in them which is truly good,
and which God accepts of, and freely rewards, See Harmony of Confessions, Sect.
9.

6. Inst. Novatus constituted a Church of mere just. Answ. Protestants if
guilty of the error of Proclus, then are free from this of Novatus; or if they
be guilty of this of Novatus, then are they free from that of Proclus. There
errors cannot agree to the same persons: 2. How contrary this error is to our
judgment is visible, both by the actual composure of our Churches, wherein are
good and bad tares and Wheat. And also by our doctrine: the English Divines in
their confession of faith acknowledge, that the purest Churches under Heaven,
Confess. chapter 25. ss. 4.
are subject both to mixture, and error, Mat. 13.24.47.
which they prove by the Parable of the Wheat and Tears, in one Field, and of
the good Fish and bad in one Net.

7. Inst. Jovinianus levelled sins by making them all equally grievous. Answ.
1. Protestants do not equallize sins. The Assembly of Divines in their larger
Catechism affirm that All Transgressions of the Law of God are not equally
heinous; but some sins in themselves, and by reason of several aggravatiens are
more heinous in the sight of God then others. The latter confession of Aelvetia
does expressly deliver this doctrine, and condemns by name Pelagius Jovinianus,
and the Stoics, for making all sins equally grievous.

8. Inst. Pelagius did endeavor to stop the course of Original sin in Infants.
and thereupon bereaved Baptism of its due necessity. Answ. The Protestants are
so full in acknowledgment of Original sin in their confessions, Catechismes,
Systems of Divinity, and Comentaries on Scripture, and so harmonious in their
administration of Baptism to Infants (which is a clear evidence of their belief
of Original sin) that I wonder with what face this man could bring in
Pelagianism in this point, as a Doctrine wherein Papists, and we mainly differ.

9, Inst. Berengarius grew to that height of, wickedness as to out Christ of
the Sacrament. Answ. This (as you express it) Protestants detest who
unanimously hold (and always did so) that Christ is really present in the
Sacrament. The truth is Berengarius was no Heretic in this point; he lived in
that age when the irrational and Antiscriptural doctrine of Transubstantiation
began to be broached. This new error he opposed, affirming that Christ was not
bodily present, as the Transubstantiators taught; but in a spiritual manner, as
Protestants now teach, and will maintain it against you.

10. Inst. Zenaius despised Images as worthless. Answ. Protestants acknowledge
that Images have their use, and consequently a worth in them: They may be used
privately for Ornament; yea and publicly too as Historical remembrances of
persons (provided that the Images of the Trinity be not made) and this was all
the use they had amongst primitive Christians, as Cassander fully shows saying,
Certum est initio, etc. Its most certain that in the beginning of the Gospel
times, for a good while Leven in the time of Agustin, a little after) there was
no use of Images amongst Christians, especially in Churches as appears by
Clemens and Arnobius; but afterward they were admitted into the Church as
Historical expressions of things done; or as lively Images of Holymen. And thus
far I know no Protestant Church; or rational Christian that can disalow them:
It Is true, we abhor the worship of them, and complain of Papists, as Irenaeus
of old did of the Gnostics for their worship of them; But this will not prove
that we despise Images as worthless.

11. Inst. Calvin drew compulsion upon humane actions. Answ. 1. If this were
true, yet its false that this is a point wherein Catholics and Protestants
mainly differ; for it would but be the judgment of one particular man. but, 2.
Calvin is wronged by you; for he fully frees the will from all Coaction. See
Instit. Lib. 2 cap. 2. S. 7.

Thus I have showed his first defect, his non-production of such points wherein
Catholic and Protestants mainly differ. And truly I should think the man
either a mere stranger to us, or void of reason in attributing such points as
these to us. But he does but tread in the steps of his forefathers. The
Catholic Apologist objects against us these Heresies, but is most satisfyingly
answered by Doctor Morton in his Catholic appeal. They are also objected by
Spalatensis in that simple Book called his second Manifesto, Sect. 8. with whom
others are not ashamed to join. But these Cretians are always liars, evil
beasts, slow bellies, such whole consciences are seared with an hot iron, [
Tit. 1.12. 1. Tim 4.2,] and speaks lies in hypocrisy. But let us try him yet
further.

2. His second failing is, that he does not produce the generality of
Christians as opposers of his errors. In some of his instances there is one
only Author mentioned, as Sect. 9. In others only two, as Sect. 3. or to make
up a number, he adds the late packt conventicle of Trent, as Sect. 4. where you
have Tertullian, who goes for a Monothelite with Eusebius, Origin, who is in
this Authors Catalogue of Heretics, spoiling mankind of free will, and the
Trent Council, who in the judgment of the French Papists was no lawful
oecumenicall Council. Do you think its a good Argument to say, Augustine or
Tertullian, Origin and the Council of Trent opposed such a doctrine; therefore
Christians generally opposed it. Origin (you say) spoiled man of Free Will. The
Council of Trent robbed general Counsels of their dignity and supremacy above
Popes: did therefore all Christians, or Christians generally spoil man of
free will, or oppose the supremacy of general Counsels; seeing you are at
Paris, you may ask the French Papists, whether they consented to the Council
of Trent, and I hope you will not deny them to be Christians, their King being
Rex Christianissimus, the most Christian King in your Calender. Yea, secondly,
he does produce the names of Christians, but he brings them not asserting his
Doctrines, or opposing the contrary: in his Catalogues he offends two ways.
First, by false, secondly, by general quotations. 1. His quotations are many
of them most false; as for instance, it is false that S. Paul, 1 Cor. 6.13. James
2. John 1. ep. 3. or S. Austine de Great. and lib. Arbitr. c. 7. do assert an
absolute necessity of good works, as he says, Sect. 2. If they assert an
absolute necessity, how dare your Rhemists say that in some Cases they are not
necessary, or why do they use this limitation when they speaks of good works?
Supra, Rhem. on Rev. 20.12. Margt.
such as do no good works, if they have age and time to do them are not found
in the Book of Life. Sure this is inconsistent with absolute necessity: again,
whereas you bring Irenaeus and Augustine asserting that faith did dispose and
help, but alone that she was too feeble and weak to justify a sinner, Its most
false that either Irenaeus and Augustine in the places cited, say any such
thing: the like falsity is in other Sections as S. 8. Hierom. in chap. 7.
Matthew. Sect. 10. August. lib. 9. Confess. c. 7. Council. Laodic. Can. 35. Sect.
13. Synod, Francoford. Sect. 14. Irenaeus lib. 4. adv. haeres. c. 34. S. Aug.
l. 17. de Civit. Dei, c. 17. lib. 20. Confess. lib. 10. cap. 3. Sect. 16. Aug.
lib. 9. Confess. c. 13. these may suffice to show his forgerie. 2. His
quotations are many of them very general, and to be sought like a needle in a
bottle of hay: as for instance, Sect. 7. he cites S. Gregory in his Epistles:
(now S. Gregory has 12. books of Epistles, and each book has many Epistles.)
S. Bid Comment in Cantic. Sect. 10. S. Cyprian, lib. 4. (but of what Quaerat
lector) Sect. 13. Council. Roman. Sect. 14. Lugdun. Council. where also he cites
Cypprians 19. ep. lib. 1. whereas he has but 12 Epistles in that book (this I
forgot to mention amongst his false quotations) Gaudent in Exodus All this shows
that this Author did rather study names of Christians, then to produce their
doctrine for the opposing his errors, which should have been his main work.

3 His third failing is, He does not produce Christians professing truth, when
first any opposition was made, as he promised, thereby implying that as these
errors were broached in every age, so in those ages Christians then living did
oppose them in their rise, and these Christians he should produce; but I find
no such methodicall proceedings in him: the error with its Author is mentioned,
and its opposers lived sometimes many years after it, as Augustine is opposing
Simon Magus, yet lived almost 400 years after him. The Council of Trent oppose
Florinus, yet were near 1300 years after him. Sometimes the error was broached
many years after its opposers lived. As against Luther he introduces Cyprian,
Irenaeus, Justin Martyr, Augustine, Hierom, Gregory Nyssen, Cyril of Alex.
Cyril of Hierus. Council. Nicen. and Omnia Concilia vetera, i. e. all the
Councels that were a thousand years before Luther. So against Calvin he brings
Ignatius, Dionysius, who lived 1400 and odd years before him. Thus preposterous
is he, though to speak truth, it is not much material when they are mentioned,
unless the citation of them were to better purpose then that for which this
Author brings them.

4. His fourth failing is, His Catalogue is not altogether of Roman Catholics,
such as were under the Government of Roman Bishops and Pastors. Eusebius tells
us, Eusebius. Chronogr. An. 195. p. 573.
that At Ephesus many of the Bishops of Asia met, touching the deliberation of
the Feast of Easter: where Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus was chief-In the
foresaid six Synods, (v^ of Rome, Cesaria, Pontus, France, Ostroena, and
Ephesus) held, An. 195. the Bishop of Rome had no more authority then the other
Bishops: He, in his City, and they in theirs were cheief. Now diverse of these
he mentions were Bishops of Asia; and therefore cannot be brought in as Roman
Catholics were they now living; they would clearly disclaim the Popes
usurpation, yea, and reprehend him sharply, as Irenaeus did, for challenging
authority over the Eastern Churches.

This shall suffice for his answer to his objected errors, desiring the Reader
to peruse that Elaborate Work of Doctor Morton, called The Catholic Appeal,
especially in that part which is against objected heresies, where this Authors
quotations are many of them answered. My answer being already too large for
these short winded times, and I having much more to say to him before I have
done, I wholly wave the discussion of them: Only I will take notice of his last
words, which are indeed the very last words of a dying Argument. This proo^
(says he) will gather strength by observing that the above named Luther,
Zuinglius, Calvin, etc. But few days or months before their opposition, held as
the rest of Christians did, in al^ points with the said Company; and that
neither they, nor any of them have left to posterity the least mention of any
number of men in being before their opposition, with whom to join and side to
make good the same, etc.

Ans. 1. How this strengthens your proof, I see not: Should the Jews have
objected against our Saviors, and the Apostles Converts, that their Jewish
Doctrine was generally received, and preached; yea, and that these Converts,
(as Paul, etc.) but a few days or months before their opposition held as other
Jews did, Would this think you make for them that they were the true Church?
The Gentiles the greatest part of the World professed against Christ, and his
truth, and those who were called out of them to receive the truth, did but a
little before comply with the Gentiles against Christ: Must this therefore
strengthen the Gentiles cause against the truth? It may be, your self, and
others who have apostalized from the true religion, but a few months before
your opposition, held as the rest of true Orthodox Christians did, yet this
will not (even in your conceit) advance your cause.

2. Its questionable whether Luther, Zuinglius, and Calvin, did hold with you
in all points, and that but a few days or months before their public
opposition of you. The Speech of Alphonsus a Castro seems to import the
contrary, when he tells us, that a great company seemed to wait for Luther, and
joined with him as soon as he appeared; I cannot think but that Luther was
against the sale of indulgencies, longer then a few weeks or months before his
opposition.

3. Its a gross lie, that there is not left the least mention of any number of
men in being, before their opposition, with whom to join and side. I have fully
showed the contrary to this, and therefore (remitting the Reader to what I have
formerly said) I come to his next Argument.

Arg. 3. That Company composeth and makes up the Catholic Church, which is
acknowledged even by their adversaries, to be Apostolical; but the above
mentioned Company is acknowledged even by their adversaries, to be Apostolical:
therefore that Company composeth and makes up the Catholic Church. The first
Proposition (say you) is evident, forasmuch as Apostolical in a right and
genuine sense, signifies to believe, as the Apostles believed, which is to be
Catholic.

Arg. 1. It seems now that profession of Apostolical Doctrine is a convincing
argument to prove a Company to be the Catholic Church. But Sir, why did you
not approve of this argument when we brought it for the Protestant Church? Or
how could you without blushing tell us, That true Doctrine (which is none other
then Apostolical doctrine, they being reciprocal) is no mark of a true Church,
it being often found among Schismatics, who for want of Communion cannot make
a true Church, page 60. If Protestants can prove they believe those doctrines
the Apostles believed, will you acknowledge them the true Apostolical and
Catholic Church? We desire no more, but that leaving humane constitutions and
traditions, you would examine our Doctrines by Scripture, the true Epitome of
Apostolical Doctrines, and if we consent not hereunto proclaim us Heretics.

2. Your Explication of the word Apostolical is good, and it evidently shows
that Personal Succession is inferior to Doctrinal in denominating a Church
Apostolical and Catholic, and that the Protestants supposed want of Personal
uninterrupted Succession is no hinderance to their being the Catholic Church.
All which does extremely weaken your former doctrines.

3. I deny your Minor Proposition, and come to examine your proof of it. You
say, It appears no less clear in several Protestant Writers, who expressly
account that the Apostles first planted the Christian Faith in England; that
the same was retained by Bishops and Pastors, from the first Plantati n to S.
Austine; that in substance it differed not from that which S. Austine brought
in; that S. Austine was sent by Gregory the Great, Bishop of Rome to convert
the Saxons in England to the Roman Faith; that the Roman Church in Gregory the
Greats time, was the same it is at this present, etc. All which you reduce to
this Syllogism; S. Austins Church and Doctrine were Apostolical; S. Austins
Church and Doctrine were the same with the now Roman: therefore the Roman
Church and Doctrine are Apostolical.

I answer, 1. By S. Austins Church, I suppose you mean the Roman Church in S.
Austins time, as when you say, The Roman Church in Gregory the Great's ^ime,
was the same it is at this present. Hereupon I particularly answer: Gregory 1.
To your Major, [That the Doctrine of the Church of Rome in the time of Austin
and Gregory, was the same with the Doctrine of the Apostles.] 1. The Apostle
tells us, That even in his time the mystery of iniquity did begin to work; and
succeeding Ages discover its progress. Most Ages did contribute some materials
toward Rome's Temple, though the nearer to the Apostles were more opposite,
and so more sparing in their contributions to it. Hence it was that in the
first five hundred years there is little to be found tending to Popery; and
that which is, is rather in notions and terms, then propositions; as in most
ancient Fathers we read the words, Altar, Sacrifice, Merit, etc. yet it will
never be proved that they used them for that which Papists now will have the^
to signify: In the next age there was a greater decay of purity than before,
ignorance did much aboudd, and superstition attendant on it, In this age did
Gregory and Austin live; the former being surnamed, Rainold. praelect. de lib.
Ap c. tom. 1. prael. 39. p. 365 Sixth. Senen. bill. Stae. l. 5. Au. 137 F. Hier.
Porter in the life of S. Gregory, p. 266. Chronic. Carrion. lib. 4. p. 552
The Great, and indeed he was great, as learned Rainolds observe^, in
comparison of those who succeeded him, and some of them who were before him:
yet was he short of apostolical purity, being guilty of superstition and error
in diverse points, as the adjudging of children unbaptized to the torments of
Hell: extending Gods promise of Salvation even to Reprobates, making Gods
decree mutable, and praying for such as are already damned; as in the Case of
Trojan. Carrion in his Chronicles attributes to him diverse errors, as
Invocation of Saints, and dedication of Temples to them; a wrong persuasion of
Monkish profession, Works of Supererrogation, Satisfactions, Vows, Virginity;
an opinion of sacrificing Christ's body and blood for the dead, whereunto he was
moved by the report of Apparitions: And besides all these, he is noted as
superstitious in imposition of Ceremonies, and those some of them Jewish, which
are not fit to be imposed on the Church of Christ: And as Gregory was guilty,
so its probable his Monk Austin was not free, In the life of Austin, p. 511, 512
and therefore when he came amongst the Britains, who had the Gospel, and many
Bishops and learned men amongst them, he was rejected by them: for which Hierom
Porter calls them Schismatics, maintaining errors, yea that held many things
repugnant to the unity of the Catholic Church: Therefore we may at least
probably suppose them Orthodox, being opposite to those innovations the Bishop
of R^^^e by his Apostles would have brought upon them.

2 To your minor, Saint Austines Church and doctrine were the same with the now
Roman or the Roman Church in Gregory the Great's time, was the same it is at
thi^ present.

I answer, could you prove this, it would make much for you: but hic labor h^c
opus est, this is too difficult a work for you, and therefore you pass it off
with a reference of us to a company of quotations to no purpose. There is no
Protestant Writer that I meet with, that affirms Austins Church and Doctrine
were the same with the now Roman. Perkins in his Exposition of the Creed, as I
can understand him) does not, but rather says the contrary* for speaking of
the present Church of Rome, he says, They hold justification by works of
grace; they maintain a daily sacrifice of the b die of Christ in the Mass, for
the sins of quick and dead; they worship images, etc. Thus then it appears that
the old Church of Rome is changed, and is now at this day of a Sp^use of Christ
become an Harlot, and therefore no more a Church of Christ indeed, than the
carcass of a dead man that wears a living man's garment, is a living man, though
he look never so like him. This same is the very judgment of all Protestants I
meet with, and is most fully and clearly demonstrated by the learned Doctor
Morton, in his above mentioned appeal, where he largely shows what was the
judgment of Saint Gregory in those main points of controversy betwixt
Protestants and Papists, and how far Rome at present is from that faith which
Saint Gregory taught, and all this he does by the testimonies of the most
learned Papists. Your mention of all the English Cronicles, is but a Popish
vaunt; be pleased in your next to mention the places where they affirm your
doctrine to be the same with Saint Gregory's and their words: till then I
suspend all further answer to this Argument which as it is the last, it is the
weakest and most, evidently false in its propositions, as I doubt not it will
appear to the judicious Reader.

CHAP. XII. Of certain Objections made against the Roman Church answered.
YOu begin your Chapter with a sad complaint of enemies of the Roman Church in
these words, The enemies of the Roman Church have not shown more pride in
contemning her power, then malice in raising false and slanderous reports
against her good name -- therefore I will endeavor in this Chapter to clear
her fame mainly clouded and shot at by the ensuing objections. Answ. When you
charge the Objectors with slander you seem to be ignorant of the nature and
definition of slander. There cannot be slander where there is no lying
accusation, or a charging of such things upon others, whereof they are not
guilty: And this your Aquinas will tell you is true. Now can you say that the
Objectours charge you with that whereof you are not guilty. If their accusation
be false, why do you not disown the things they charge you with but rather
defend them? You affirm that Christ's Body may be in diverse places at once, that
the Mass with Altars, images and relics are to be adored, that Saints and
Angels are Mediators, etc. If it be true, why do you charge the Objectors with
slander in the reporting of them. But let us examine the Answers to the
Objections.

1 Objection.
THe first objection is, The Church of Rome teaches Christ's body to be present
in many places at once, which implies contradiction.

Answ. 1. The measure of Gods power is his will, and his will is above the
reach of our capacity: therefore no wonder if God oftentimes does that we
cannot dive into the understanding of.

I reply, 1. If you speak of Gods absolute Power, its not measured by his Will.
God is able to do more then he has done or will do. Of this absolute power
John the Baptist speaks, Math. 3.9. God is able of these stones to raise up
children unto Abraham. Thus we grant he is able to make more works, and of a
piece of bread to raise up an humane body, he can turn one thing into another
of a different kind. This Power as its not measured by Gods Will, so its not
the foundation or reason of our faith, whereby we believe the existence of any
thing: But 2 If you speak of Gods executive power which is the power measured
by his Will, whereof you speak, then we affirm this presence is impossible to
God, because contrary to his will, as I shall show even now. 3 Whereas you say
Gods Will is above our capacity, etc. [Rom. 11.34. Deutr. 29.29.] I answer,
Gods Will comes under a twofold Consideration, its either secret or revealed:
that part of his will which is secret as it concerns not our knowledge, so
neither does it call for our faith or obedience, but his revealed will is for
us to know and obey. If then you speak of Gods secret will, you show your self
presumptuous, intruding into such things as you ought not: but if only of his
revealed, then you imply that this Politopie is expressed and revealed unto us.
Now this I utterly deny, for evidence whereof I shall premise that there are
two volumes of Gods will whereby its fully expressed unto us, viz. Reason and
Scripture, by the former its expressed more imperfectly and darkly, by the
latter most fully and clearly: The former is subordinate to the latter, and the
latter is perfective of the former: Whatsoever else testifies of Gods Will, its
in subordination to these, and is to be tried by them: Nor are we to account
any man's dictate to be Gods will, that does not agree with one or both of
these: I shall therefore show the dissonancy of your Doctrine, 1. to Reason,
then 2. to Scripture.

1. Its contrary to Reason, Aquin. Suppl. 3. part. q. 83 Art. 3. ad 4m.
that one body should be present in many places at once, without the
destruction of that body: Aquinas says, Vnum corpus, etc. One body cannot be
at once locally in two places, no not by a miracle; and he gives this reason,
because to be in many places at once is repugnant to the very nature of an
Individuum, which is to be divided in it self: for it would follow, that it
should be in a distinct posture: whence it follows, that for the same body to
be locally at once in diverse places includes contradictiion, as for a man to
want reason, and to have reason. A body in many places is no longer one, but
many bodies.

To this you answer, (Sect. 1.) As for the implicancy, some labor to convi^ce
this mystery of, there is none at all; for though a body cannot be locally in
two places at once, by reason of local extension which confines it to one: yet
this extension being removed as is possible to the Omnipotent Power, it is as
easy for a body to be in several places at once, as for the Deity to be in
three Persons at once; or for the soul to be in the head, the middle, the feet
at once.

Reply 1. You suppose a body separable from Extension, which is as much as to
suppose a man without reason; Aquin. 3. part q. 76 Art. 4.
for its granted as a certain truth by Aquinas, and others, that a body cannot
be without quantity; and thereupon Aquinas codcludes, that the body of Christ
in the Eucharist has its whole dimensive Quantity; whence I infer that it must
needs have its extension: the reason is, because Extension is the formal reason
of Quantity, Ruvio Com. in Arist. Dial. c. 6. de quant. q. 1. Supra Aug. ep.
57. and contra, Faustum, l. 20. c. 11.
and this is not an Entitative, but a Quantitative Extension, as Ruvio proves
by many Arguments. Now if a thing cannot be conceived without its essence, but
by implicancy of contradiction, as Aquinas grants, then cannot Quantity be
conceived as wanting Extension, and consequently bodies that have Quantity,
cannot without implicancy of contradiction want Extension. Augustine does
clearly assert what I say in diverse places.

2. Your similitudes make not for you, not the first; for, 1. The Deity is not
in three Persons, as a body in three places: The divine Persons are every of
them, every where, immense and infinite, not in several places. 2. God is in
one place only, though this one be comprehensive of all places, Schribl.
Metaph. l. 2. c. 3. Tit. 12 Art. 2. p. 2.
as Schribler does wittily manifest it from Isai. 66.1. Those that are
dis-joyned and distant places with us, are with God contiguous, and make but
one place. 3. If by your Similitude you prove the Deity in many places, it will
not hence follow that a body may be so to.

2. Nor the second, the soul in the head, middle, and feet at once, is not in
many, Aquin. fum. part 1. q. 76. Art. 8. c. and q. 52. art. 2. Zabarel l.
departit. animae. c. 5
but one place Whether you consider it as having respect primarily to the whole
body, (as Aquinas conceives, and expresses it) and that as one place, or to
the heart, as Zabarel. In saying, that its in the head, middle, and feet, you
confess that its in one place; for here is no distance which should make many
places.

2 You answer, If it be true Philosophy teaches, that a consequence from
being to may be is valid and good, Experience demonstrates that God has power
to make Christ's body really present in se^erall places at once: forasmuch as at
the self same time he was so present with his Father in Heaven, he appeared and
discoursed with Saint Paul on earth, Acts 9.4.5.

Reply 1. That Phylosophicall thesis of yours is not true, unless in ordinary
events, or with reference to Gods absolute power. The will of God may put a Bar
to it. God did appear on Mount Sinai delivering a Church Model: Here is a
Being, yet considering Gods Will, its impossible that he should do so again.
Satan did tempt Christ, Christ was made under the Law, crucified, dead, buried,
yet who would infer that these things are now possible. Amongst the errors of
your master of the Sentences noted by the Parisians, this is one ( Quod Deus
semper potest quicquid aliquando potuit, Ad fin. Lombard. sent. Edit. Paris.
Ann. 1537. p. 594.
that God always can do that which sometimes he has done. Sure these
Gentlemen did not take that for truth which your Philosophy teaches you,
though truly I think your masters speeches may be justified, for he says that
the power of God is the same always, but that he cannot always do that which
sometimes he could do, which seems contrary to your Philosophical axiom.

2. Granting it true, yet your inference proves not true, and I half think
your self were convinced hereof; Fateamur ergo Deum semper posse quicquid,
semel potuit, i. e. habere omnem illam potentiam quam semel habuit, and illius
omnis rei potentiam cujus semel habuit, sed non semper posse facere omne illud
quod aliquando potuit facere etc. Lomb. l. 1. did. 44.
for your expressions are not so plain for Christ's presence on Ea^^h, as in
Heaven. You mention Christ's apparition and disccourse with the Apostle on
Earth, but neither one nor both of these prove his corporal presence here one
earth. He appeared to Stephen, yet remained in Heaven only, Act. 7.55. He
discoursed with Peter, Acts 10.13, 14. yet was not corporally with him on
Earth. And for the Text you mention, it proves not any thing for you, if you
will believe the interlineans he will tell you the contrary: I am Jesus; that
is says he, Gloss. interl. and Lyran. in Act. 9.
I am God speaking from Heaven, whom thou thoughtest to be dead; and he gives
this reason of Paul's astonishment, That he thought not Jesus to be in Heaven,
wherein Lyranus concurs with him. As the light shined from Heaven, its most
probable the voice did also come from thence, as Lyranus confesses the voice
did, which Peter in the next Chapter is said to hear.

3 Granting that Christ was corporally present with Paul, how do you prove that
he was also corporally present in Heaven, why might he not ex aliqua
dispensatione, leave Heaven for a time.

4 If we should grant he was both in heaven and earth at this time it would not
follow therefore Christ may be; much less, must be continually present in his
body on the earth: I have showed how inconsequentiall this is in the first part
of my answer.

Thirdly, you answer, Even in nature there is a resemblance and light of this
mystery, one and the same water is in the fountain river and lake at once: one
and the same voice in thousands of ears at once: one and the same face in
sundery looking glasses at once.

Reply, These instances resemble not this Popish mystery. 1 Not the first: For
1 if you make the Fountain, River and Lake, three distinct places, then its not
one and the same water; for you cannot say that the water of the Fountain is
the water of the Lake, etc. That water that is hic and nunc, is not other
where. 2 If you conceive them continuately the water running with a continued
stream from the fountain into the channel, and diffusing it self from the
channel to the Lake, then all the water in these three partial continents is
but one numericall body, and the three continents are but parts of the same
place. 2 Nor the second: for first, voice or sound is no body. Secondly it is a
question whether it be one and the same voice that comes to thousands of ears
at once or a multiplied voice or sound: Magyr. Physiol. l. 6. c. 8. Com. ad
finem.
see Magyrus where the contrary is asserted upon this very ground. Thirdly, the
place of sound or its proper subject is the Air, not men's ears. 3 Nor yet the
third, for there is not one body really in two places, no more than if one man
were pictured in several frames, neither of which bears any resemblance of
this Philosophy of real bodies.

Fourthly, you answer, Should we believe only that which we understand, there
would not be any belief in us of mysteries of faith; they being all above the
reach of humane capacity.

Reply 1. If knowledge or understanding were not necessary to faith, why has
faith the name of knowledge given it in Scripture, Isai. 53.11. and John 17.3.
If faith be an assent as Papists tell us, then faith does necessarily require
knowledge, for we must know what is truth if we believe that it is so. I
confess there are some things which in some respects are not fully conceivable,
but for those, we have an express Word of God informing us of them, which is
the ground of our faith, but this we have not for a carnal presence in many
places, and therefore cannot command our belief of it.

Fifthly, by way of answer you introduce an objection against the Polytopie of
Christ's body, but is directly against bodily presence in any place: It is taken
from the strange irreverencies and absurdities which would ensue thereof, as to
be subject to the eating and tearing in piecs of d^gs, cats, mice, and to the
abuse of wicked me and miscreants: to which you answer, He that is of power to
render a body really present in several places at once, wit^out doubt is able
to defend and keep the same from all outrages, as God is pleased to do in this
mystery by removing local extension, and by consequen^e possibility, by means
whereof dogs, cats and mice can only tear and destroy the accidents of bread
and wine.

Reply, first the foundation is already overthrown: Secondly I believe you are
not persuaded that Gods power is employed about Christ's body to keep it from
irreverences, if you were, why is it that you dare not give the Cup to the
people? is not God able to prevent drops of the blood from sticking to the
peoples beards, or falling to the ground? Why do you make an invisible body to
prevent the faithfull's loathing, and the profane's scorning of the Ordinance?
is not God able to keep the faithful from loathing flesh and blood visibly and
really appearing such, as well as intellectually represented to their
understandings? if Gods power must support one absurdity, why may it not
another? 3 Though you speak irrationally of tearing the species of bread and
wine yet others of your fraternity speak plainly of the body of Christ. Among
the penitential Canons in the end of the old editions of the Roman Decree,
(Can. 39.) are these words, Quando mu^ corrodit aut comedit Corpus Christi,
etc. i. e. When a mouse gnaweth or eats the body of Christ, etc. he says,
not the species of bread and wine, but the very body of Christ. And in the new
Mass book it is said, De defect. circa Missam occurrent. c. 3. Sect. 7.
Si Hostia Consecrata, etc. If the consecrated Host vanish away by some
accident, as if it be carried away with the wind or by some miracle, or eaten
up by some beast and cannot be found, then let another be consecrated. I
suppose your Host or Sacrifice is not the mere species of bread and wine, but
the body of Christ: Now this Host it seems may be blown away with the wind or
be eaten of beasts: sure you take calm weather, and tie up your beasts when you
go in Procession. [ Ib. c. 10. Sect. 14.] What should I speak of your
vomiting, and against licking up the vomited Host, or in case of loathing,
putting it up for a relic; such stuff is fit for such beasts as return to
their vomit, or lie wallowing in the mire.

2. You answer to the Objection, Wicked men and miscreants offer violence to
the same, but not hurt or anoy the Body of Christ, no more then he were of
force to wrong the Godhead that surprised with a raging fit, should strike at
the air with an intention to do him mischief.

Reply Every thing you say ads to the miracle: Christ has a body to be eaten,
that yet is not seen, nor tasted, nor passible; yea is like unto God, or a
Spirit, that cannot be hit or wounded; What could Eutiches have said more? Does
not this prove that Christ's body is no real body, but only imaginary and
fantastical; or if real, yet its not (according to your doctrine) really
present. Will it follow that because God, or another spiritual Substance is
impassible by humane force, therefore a true natural body is so to? It must be
Popish Logic that will make this a good Consequence.

3. You answer, Admit these pretended inconveniences should follow (that the
body of Christ should be eaten and torn in pieces of dogs, bats, mice, etc.) I
do not conceive there could be inferred any other then a continuation of that
ardent love of Christ which he showed to man, when he estranged himself from
his Eternal Father, to bear with patience, and mildness, hunger, cold,
whippings, spittings, thorns, and last of all the bitter and disgraceful death
of the Cross.

Reply 1. This ardent Love of Christ to man, cannot be from hence inferred, All
sufferings of Christ are not the effects of his ardent Love: What Love of
Christ is manifested in wicked men's crucifying to themselves afresh the Son of
God, Heb. 6.6. and 10.29.
and putting him to an open shame; or in their treading under foot the Son of
God, and accounting the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing, and doing
despite to the Spirit of grace: What Love of Christ is manifested when his
body is torn in pieces of dogs, cats, m^ce, or blown away with the wind, or
spued out of some drunken Priests mouth, and lickt up again. Its a most evident
truth that those sufferings of Christ only are the expressions of his love,
which do tend to man's redemption and salvation, and without which these could
not be attained. Of this kind were the sufferings of Christ by the Jews and
Romans in the time of his incarnation. Hence are those expressions, The Love of
God is shed abroad in our hearts, Romans 5.5, 6, 7, 8 Gal. 3.13, 14 Isai. 53.4.
etc.
-- for when we were yet without strengh in due time Christ dyed for the
ungodly -- God commends his love to us in that when we were yet sinners
Christ dyed for us -- Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being
made a curse for us that the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles.
Surely he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows -- He was wounded for
our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. All which refer to this
state of humiliation, from which we have long since passed. I would have L. B.
or any Papist to show me what benefit we have by these sufferings, or how they
tend to our redemption and salvation. When dogs, cats, mice eat and tare in
pieces Christ's body, or a weak stomackt Priest spues up the body of Christ
into some filthy place, are we advantaged hereby, or can we glory in these
sufferings in this Cross of Christ? 2. There may be other things inferred, as 1.
That the Priest that either through negligence suffers Christ's body to be torn
in pieces of dogs, cats, mice, or that willingly deliver it to wicked men and
miscreants, is a Judas, a betrayer of Christ: and you may know him by his sop
dipped in the wine, which none of the people partake of. 2. That the Jews and
heathenish Romans were more merciful to Christ, then the present Priests and
Pharisees of Rome Antichristian: Those delivered him into the hands of men,
these give him into the mouths of dogs, cats, mice; Those preserved him whole
not breaking a bone of him, these tare him in pieces by wild beasts: Those gave
him an honorable interment, (He made his grave with the rich) these buried him
in the bellyes of beasts, or cast him into the draught.

2. I come to show the contrariety of this Doctrine to Scripture, 1. Some
Scriptures affirm that Christ is in Heaven, and must be contained there till
the restitution of all things, Acts 3.21. That the Apostle, Heb. 9.24. gives
the reason of it. He is entered into Heaven it ^elf, now to appear in the
presence of God for us: which is the work of the High Priest within the veil:
and Primasius to this purpose says, Introire autem Iesum, etc. We say that
Jesus is entered into Heaven according to his Manhood; Primas. apud Lyr. in Heb.
9.12.
for as God he is every where. Again, Joh. 16.28. I come forth from the Father,
and am come into the world: again I leave the world, and go to the Father. If
you ask how he left the world; the Interlineary truly tells you he did it
Corporali discessione non gubernati^ne presentiae: By a removal of his body,
etc. He speaks of his local removing, not of his lying hid in the world. Indeed
ver. 16. he speaks of his invisibility, A little while, and ye shall not see
me; but the reason was not, because he would go up and down, hid under the
forms and species of bread and wine, but because he went to the Father as
Theophilact from the Text does truly) note. Yea, further we find the
Scripture expressly denying his presence on earth, and that by a weighty
reason, Heb. 8.4. If he were on earth, he should not be a Priest, is he could
not perform all the rites of his Priesthood. For some of them require his
presence in the Holy of Holies, and there he could not be, if he were on earth;
this is clearly the Apostles Argument: Christ could not be in the state of
humiliation and exaltation at one and the same time: if he be in that state, he
is not in that too. 2. We find the Scriptures expressly denying that Christ's
corporal presence is in diverse places at once, Matthew. 28.6. He is not here,
for he is risen, which were no reason if your Doctrine were good, for he might
be there and risen too. To conclude, there is not any part of Gods Word which
gives the least countenance or encouragement to this Popish absurdity.

You answer, The Word of God is plain and express for the presence of Christ's
body in the Sacrament, and consequently in many places at once.

Reply. You truly infer that if Christ's body be really present in the
Sacrament, it must needs be in many places at once: but this presence is not
plainly and expressly delivered in Scripture. The word, This is my body which
you mention do neither plainly nor expressly deliver it: There are two things
oppose your exposition of those words.

1 The judgment of Fathers, Tertul. lib. 4. contr. Marc. c. 40. and L. 3. c.
19. Theod. Dial. 1. 2. Aug. c. 12. contr. Adimant and Ep. 23. ad Bonif. Council.
Carth. 3. Can. 24. Bellarm. l. 3. de Eucharist. cap. 23. Vasq. in 3. part.
Thom. disp. 180. t. 5. Cajet. in 3. Thom. q. 75.
Schoolmen and others: Tertullian, Theodoret and Augustine, understand the
words figuratively. The third Council of Carthage says, that here is in the
Sacraments no more offered to God than bread and wine mingled with water, etc.
Scotus affirms Non exstare, etc. That there is not any place of Scripture so
express that without the Churches Declaration it can evidently compel us to
admit Transubstantiation: And this says Bellarmine, is not altogether
improbable: Yea, Vasques further tells us, that Scotus affirmed, That the truth
of these words of Consecration may be retained, although the substance of bread
and wine should remain in the Eucharist: and blames certain professors of
Divinity that side with him, and in special, Cardinal de Alliaio, for
affirming that this way is possible, and neither contrary to reason nor the
authority of Scriptures; yea its easier to be understood, and more rational
than any other, of this judgment is also Cajetan.

2. Reason, which teaches first that neither one desperate can predicate of
another, (i. e. as you express it when two distinct things of different kinds
are affirmed of each other, which you say cannot be true) nor one thing of it
self in the same consideration or respect, and whereas you say that the body of
Christ out of the Sacrament before the words began is affirmed to be in the
Sacrament after they are ended. This is not plainly or expressly delivered in
the words of Christ; for he must either have said, That which was my body
before the Sacrament, is now my body in the Sacrament, or this was my body
before the Sacrament. In saying, This and is, he informs us that he speaks of
the Subject in its present capacity, and therefore some by This understand
Bread, which is most agreeable to the context. Christ took bread and blessed
it, and brake it, and gave it to his Disciples, saying, Take eat, This is my
body. That which Christ took, blessed brake and gave to them was Bread, 1 Cor.
10.16. Now this is predicated improperly of Christ's body. Thus Christ is called
a Door John 10.7. a Rock, 1 Cor. 10.4. Circumcision is called the Covenant,
Genesis 17.10. The Sacramental Cup is called the New Testament in Christ's blood,
Luke 22.20. I pray satisfy me what may be the reason why bread should become
the body of Christ to us, and that the Pascall Lamb or Manna should be so to
the Jews: for Christ is called the Passover of Manna; yea in these Sacraments
Christ was truly and savingly received by them: they did eat the same
spiritual meat with us, and drank the same spiritual drink, for they drank of
the Rock that followed them: And that Rock was Christ. What can be more express
than these last words, yet Papists will not here allow of Transubstantiation.
2. That Bodies are the object of Sense, yea and that the Senses cannot be
deceived in judging of them, whilst the Organ is rightly disposed; the medium
is convenient, the distance equal, the Senses of more then one concur in
judgeing and that the fantasies be not hurt. But here if the words be taken
properly, is a body which is not the object of Sense, though the senses be
rightly disposed, the medium convenient, the distance equal, etc. If you say
it may be done by a miracle; I answer, first amongst the miracles of the
Primitive Church this was never numbered by them or any others that I have read,
though its a greater miracle, if a miracle, than any others that are mentioned.
2. In those miracles recorded in Scripture which were wrought by transmutation,
there was no deceiving of the Sense. When Moses rod was turned into a Serpent,
as it was a true Serpent, so the Senses did truly discern a Serpent. When the
waters were turned into blood, the blood had the last color, effect of blood
slaying the fish in it. When by our Savior the waters were turned into wine;
as it was true wine so it had sensible qualities, as the last smell, etc. of
wine. It was the practice of the Sorcerers of Egypt to cause an appearance when
there was no real existance: Its the practice of Papists to urge a bodily
existence without the least appearance, like their forefathers the
Valentinians, whom Irenaeus charge with saying of Christ, Aliud erat, aliud
videbatur; when some affirmed in the Sacrament, there was no true fraction, but
only in appearance Lorichius answers out of Ambrose, Nihil falsum putandum in
Sacramento veritatis etc. We must not think of any falsehood in this true
Sacrament, in the enchantments of Magitians the eyes are deceived that that
seems to be which is not, but its otherwise in the Sacrament of Truth. [
Gerrhard. Lorich. Instit. Cathol. de sacr. Eucharist. page 72. 2.]

To this I may add, that the material parts of Sacraments must be sensible
objects, such were the Sacraments of the Jews, and such without controversy
is Baptism, where the material part is water which the Senses see, feel, etc.
Therefore it must be so in the Eucharist; (for there can no reason of a
difference be given.) You cannot say that the material parts of it are bread
and wine, for you teach that in the Sacrament there is neither bread nor wine,
(though there was before Consecration) and the body of Christ cannot be it; for
its not a sensible object being neither seen nor felt, nor tasted; and
accidental forms are distinct from matter. Aquinas delivers this Conclusion,
Cum natural sit homini, etc. Whereas its natural for man to attain to the
knowledge of intelligible objects by those which are sensible; A Sacrament
which signifies spiritual and intelligible good ought to be a sensible thing:
which how you will find it in your Sacrament I know not. 3. That humane flesh
is not to be eaten: But if these words [This is my Body] be taken properly,
then Christ's flesh should be carnally eaten, which is doctrine for Cannibals,
not for Christians. Saint Augustine upon this very ground understands those
words, John 6.53. Except ye eat the flesh, etc. figuratively, and delivers this
general rule, Aug. de doctr. Christ. l. 5. c. 16
Si aut facinus vel flagitium, etc. If the Scripture seem to command that which
is heinous and wicked, its a figurative speech; and instances in those words in
S. John. Papists give this reason of the invisibility of Christ's body in this
Sacrament because man abhors to eat humane flesh, in the proper shape. But what
difference between one man seeing the shape of humane flesh, and another
hearing of such a thing to be humane flesh though he see it not. Its the thing
it self, not the form or shape of it that is abominable, a piece of humane
flesh might be brought into such a form as it could not by the eye be
distinguished from other flesh, yet tell a man its humane flesh and he shall
loath it upon that very report: Though your seduced followers do not see flesh
in thr Sacrament, yet you tell and persuade them that the Host is humane flesh
with its blood in it; so that I must needs say they have either weak faith or
strong stomachs. To conclude, Let me know to what end is this eating of Christ's
body, for its not turned into the substance of our body whereby it should
nourish the body, for then our bodies should consist of Christ which were a
blasphemous assertion; and for the soul its not nourisht by carnal meat as
flesh and blood: spirits do not eat or drink, nor are they capable of
nutrition; there is no Spiritual advantage comes by it: Besides, when our
Savior had been speaking so fully of eating his flesh and drinking his blood,
to prevent their carnal conceits of this spiritual Doctrine, he addi this
wholesome and seasonable doctrine; that for his body it was to ascend up into
Heaven where he was before, and therefore his words were to be understood not
carnally but Spiritually. The words that I speak are Spirit, John 6.63. You
answer, that these words do not run counter to your said truth, in as much as
these words were uttered to the Capernaits in answer to their question of
Christ's Power, and not of the signification of his words.

Reply 1. I desire to know your ground for this Exposition I cannot find that
it is the Churches, and I thought you an enemy to the private spirit. 2. Its
most evident that these words are uttered for explication of the words
precedent: for having told them that they must eat his flesh and drink his
blood if they had life by him; they question what he may mean by eating his
flesh and drinking his blood and they seem to answer their own question by a
carnal conceit, which was (as the Rhemists observe) They imagined that he
would kill himself, and cut and mangle his flesh into parts, and so give it
them raw or roast to be eaten among them, which could not be meant says
Augustine, for that had contained an heinous and barbarous fact, etc. He tells
them therefore they must understand his words spiritually of our abiding in him
and he in us according to Augustine. Tract. 27. in Joan. tom. 9. Lyra. in text.
Lyranus speaks very well to this purpose: Spiritus, etc. They are Spirit, as
if he should say the words I have spoken have a Spiritual sense, and so they
vivifie -- they have a Spiritual understanding -- the flesh of Christ is eaten
in this Sacrament in a spiritual manner.

Your pleas for this opinion are vain: 1. You say, The question was not, what
says he, that they knew would be trifling and ridiculous, Christ having
immediately before confirmed the signification of his first words, This is my
Body, By other latter, Unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his
blood, you shall have no life in you; and they both heard and understood the
language he spoke in.

Reply 1. Pray where are those first words, This is my Body? You shut your
eyes, and laid aside your honesty, when you brought them in as spoken by Christ
before his supposed answer. But suppose them there, tell us next how those
latter words do confirm the signification of them? 2. When you tell us, they
knew what he said, and both heard and understood the language he spoke in, you
will show your self a notorious trifler. Will it follow that because they knew
his words, and heard and understood his language, that therefore they understood
his meaning? I trow not. Those that read the hard of places of Paul's Epistles
did both hear and understand the language he spoke in, yet knew not his
meaning, and therefore wrested them to their own perdition. The Jews both heard
and understood the language Christ delivered his parables in, yet it was not
given them to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven. Nicodemus understood
Christ's language, but not his meaning about regeneration. You cannot deny but
the Laity may both hear and understand the language whereinto the Scriptures
are translated, yet their private Spirit must not think of understanding the
Scriptures meaning. Thus though these Capernaits might and did understand his
language, yet they did remain ignorant of their true meaning, as all prudent
Expositors confess, and your Rhemists expressly affirm saying, Their gross and
carnal conceiving of his words of his flesh, and the manner of eating the same
was unprofitable, which is plain by the sentence following, where he warns
t^em that his words be spiri and life, of high mystical meaning, and not
vulgarly and grossly to be taken, as they took them. 2. You add, Therefore
except you will say, that Christ answered not to the purpose, his scope and
aim must be to declare his power; to the and to convince the Capernaits that
he was full able to perform what he said.

Reply 1. If you will have it the aim of Christ to declare his power to perform
what he said, and that directly in answer to the Caper^aits question, you must
grant that Christ did declare his ability to give them his body cut and mangled
into pieces, for so they understand the eating of his flesh, and thereupon
grounded their question. How can this man give us his flesh cut and mangled
into pieces? for the effecting of this, they expected a proof of his power, if
you will have it so. Now this your self will grant impossible, being contrary
to the will of God, the measure of his power: therefore you must confess that
Christ spoke not to the purpose, (as you object against us.) Or grant, as the
truth is, that they understood not Christ's meaning, and therefore that he
answered concerning the manner of their eating, not his power of giving his
flesh, etc. 2. We do not find how Christ declares any power in these words. You
answer, He does it effectually and home, by saying my words are spirit, A
Spirit having strength and virtue to do more then all bodies put together can
either do or conceive.

Reply A goodly Argument, and fit for your children that are content with
stones in stead of bread. Christ is a Spirit, is he therefore able to give his
flesh to be eaten? then all Spirits have the same power. But Sir, why cannot a
man, a body give his flesh to be eaten carnally; I see no difficulty in it, nor
need of any spiritual power to effect it, if there be but Popish, or other
Cannibals that will eat it. 2. How can the words of Christ be called a Spirit
in your sense? for you take not spirit for breath, but properly. Are words
living and intelligent beings, as Spirits are? But I suppose this quaint
Exposition was hammered out of your own brain, and though it agrees neither
with Fathers, nor your elder brethren; yet because it opposes the wicked
Calvinists, you like it well. And indeed so do I, both because it shows you to
be a most ingenious, learned, acute, and reverend Expositor, and also discovers
the goodness of your cause that needs such Expositions.

Objection 2.
The second Objection (say you) The Roman Church commits idolatry in her
ad^ration at Mass, bowing to the Name of Jesus, Altars, Images, and Relics.
You answer 1. By the Commandment, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven
thing, nor adore it, Exodus 20. is neither forbid the Art of Engraving, Carving,
Printing, Painting, Casting, Sowing, Embroydering; nor yet all manner of
religious honor to be given to creatures.

Reply 1. The Art of Engraving, etc. is certainly lawful, yet the exercise of
it has its limitations; which I conceive may be reduced to these two heads.

1. That nothing be engraven, etc. but what ought to be engraven, etc. whereby
is forbidden the engraving, carving, painting any lascivious pictures tending
to excite lust, but especially as to our purpose painting, engraving, and
carving any images of the divine Persons; thus Moses tells the Jews, Ye heard
the voice of the words, but saw no similitude, only ye heard a voice, -- Take
ye therefore good heed unto your selves (for ye saw no manner of similitude on
the day that the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb out of the midst of the fire)
lest ye corrupt your selves, Deuteronomy. 4.14, 15, 16.
and make you a graven image, the similitude of any figure, the likenes^ of
male and female etc. For this reason Eusebius refused to send Constantia the
Image of Christ, Eusebius. Eccles. l. 7. c. 17.
and imputes the Erection of Christ's Image to an heathenish Custom, saying, It
is not any marvel at all that they which of the Gentiles were cured by our
Savior made and set up such things, -- for the men of old of an Heathenish
custom were wont to honor after this manner such as they counted Saviors:
Lorichius does excellently set forth this, Ger. Lorich. instit. Cathol. in
praecept. fol. 95.
Est praeterea abusus imaginum, etc. There is (says he) besides an abuse of
Images, in that we presume to express the sacred Trinity, which is truly a most
pestilent heresy; for what can be more contrary to the Holy Trinity, then to
paint the Father like a crooked old man, the Son in the form of a young man,
and the Holy Ghost like a flying foul? What can Idiots learn from such a book?
truly nothing but error and heresy: This is the first.

2. That nothing be engraven, carved, or painted for this end, that it may be
an object of adoration or worship. Thus Moses says, Ye shall make you no idol,
nor graven image -- to bow down unto it. Hence its observable, that though we
read that Images used many years ago, yet Cassander tells us they were used as
Historical remembrances, which use is not sinful, they were not objects for a
religious and devout eye to be fixed upon, nor did they challenge any religious
prostration or honor, yea the giving of Religious honor to them, whether under
(...) or (...) is expressly forbidden in the Scriptures, as Exodus 20.5.23.33.
but of this more even now. In the interim I come to examine your proofs.

1. You say, In the Old Testament where this Commandment is enjoined the use
of those several acts was held lawful and religious honor exhibited, etc.

Reply 1. The former part of your assertion is manifestly true, the later is
evidently false, and your proofs altogether unsatisfactory. 1. Say you,
Religious honor was exhibited to the fiery bush by Moses, Exodus 25. Reply, the
Text which you misquote (it being Exodus 3.) proves no religious honor to be
given to the bush, nor indeed any kind of honor. Those things that might carry
any show of such a thing to you (if you consulted the Text before you urged it
which I much question) are these ver. 2. He looked, v. 3. Moses said I will now
turn aside to see this great sight, v. 4. He said to God, Here am I, v. 5. He
is bid to put off his shoes, verse 6. He hid his face: excepting these I know
nothing in this Chapter can be urged for honor to the bush, and which of these
make for it, I cannot tell: but 2. If it was honored, it was neither Mass nor
Altar, nor Image, nor Relic. If it have resemblance to any of them it is to
Image. But this it has not as Lyranus observes in these words, Erat populus
Israel ad Idolatriam pronus, etc. [Lyran. in loc.] The Israelites were prone to
idolatry, and therefore God appeared in the flame which cannot be figured by
any image, and in the bush -- because in such things there could no image be
made, etc.

2. To the Oracle of the high Priests, 3 King. 27. Reply, This book has but
22. Chapters, where then shall we find your 27. but I remember not any words
of Scripture, either in that or any other book that seems to express the high
Priests religious honor to the Oracle and therefore shall stay for your
correction.

3. To the Ark of David, Exodus 3. Levit. 26. Psalm. 131. Reply, your two former
proofs are mistakes, neither of these books mentioning David at all. Your third
Text has these words, We will go into his Tabernacles, we will worship at his
footstool: some Papists read the latter words thus, Adoremus scabellum pedum
ejus, i.e. we will worship his footstool: whom I suppose you follow, and there
upon ground David's worship of the Ark. But I appeal from the private to the
public spirit, from the translation of L. B. to the vulgar Translation of the
Romish Church, which is Adorabimus in loco, ubi steterunt pedes ejus, we will
worship the place where Gods feet do stand, (which may be meant of the
Tabernacle, as Psalm 26.8. Lord, I have loved the habitation of thine house,
and the place where thine honor dwells) not said, we will worship the place:
for God is the object of worship, as Euthymius well shows; In these words says
he, is foretold how the Temple should again be erected, and how they should go
into it, and there worship God as before. [Euthym. apud Lyran.]

2. You say, God himself justified them therein, by striking Uzziah with
Leprosy, and Oza with death, for not forbearing to meddle with holy and sacred
things without authority, 2 Paralip. 26 2 King. 6.

Reply 1. What you say is most true but nothing to purpose: Vzziahs sin was
that He burnt incense upon the Altar of incense, and so usurped the Priests
Office, v. 16.18. not that he did not bow to the altar, which you should prove.
If Vzziah had crept to it upon his knees and kissed it, and acknowledged
Divin^^^ in it; this would not have mitigated his guilt, nor have prevented his
Leprosy. [ Joseph. lib. 7. An iq. cap. 4.] The sin of Oza or Vzzah is diversely
conceived of; Josephus conceives it was because being no Priest, he yet
presumed to meddle with the Ark, which is also Augustines opinion: others think
he was punished not so much for this as some former sin, because it often
happens that lesser faults do bring on punishments of former sins: now this
other sin of Vzziah is mentioned by Procopius in these words; Alterius delictum
huc poenas, etc. He is punished for another sin, for whereas God commanded that
the Priests should carry the Ark upon their shoulders, he illegally carried it
in a cart, and therefore David when he fetched it from the house of Obed-Edom,
carried it not in a cart as before, but on men's shoulders, in humeris v. 13. ne
percuerent sicut Oza, as the ordinary gloss. Now what maks all or any of this
for you? here is not a syllable for adoration of Mass, Altars, Images, Reliqus,
nor indeed for any religious adoration of any thing.

Thirdly, you say by way of conclusion, so that all this Commandment forbids,
is to make graven things to the end to honor them with divine honor, that is,
to make gods of them as the Pagans did.

Reply 1. Your premises have been already confuted; and therefore this
conclusion if it had direct dependence on them, as it has not would fall with
them. Your self in saying, the Commands forbids not all religious honor,
implies that some manner of religious honor is forbidden, and if so then not
only Divine; for you clearly distinguish betwixt religious honor and divine.
[ Page 103.] 2. I shall add (to what I have already said, and in opposition to
what you say) that Religious honor is forbid by this Commandment religious and
divine honor being the very same: see Azor. Instat. Moral. part. 1. l.c,
10.9.2. For the clearing of this, let us see what religion, and what religious
worship is, religion (says the Orator) is that which is contained in the pious
worship of the Gods: Augustine notably expresses it. Si cultus tantummodo
dicatur, etc. Aug. de Civit. Dei. L. 10. c. 1. Aquin. 22 ae. q. 81. Art. 1. c.
and ad 4. and Art. 4.
If it be only called worship, it agrees not to God only. But religion
signifies more distinctly not any, but only the worship of God. Thus Religion
is defined with your Schoolmen by its relation to God. Religion (says
Aquinas,) is a virtue whereby men give due worship and reverence to God: yea,
by it special honor is given to God. And those according to him are religious
persons, Who devote their whole lives to Gods worship: whence it is clear that
he makes no difference betwixt religious and Divine worship. Again, Grotius
defining religious worship, H. Grot. de relig. Chr. L. 4. p. 191. and page 195.
says, Cultus religiosus, etc. Religious worship is nothing else but an
attestation of that chief goodness which thou acknowledgest in him thou
worshippest. Now in God only there is Summa bonitas, he only being the Summum
bonum. Of this religious worship the same Author further speaks, telling us
what are its chief acts, viz. Prayers which (says he) cannot be used, unless
foolishly, but to intelligent natures: Now Images, Reliqus, Altars, the Name
Jesus are not intelligent natures. To this I will add, That there are two main
grounds of religious worship. 1 Infinite excellency apprehended under the
notion of the Prime Principle, Manifestum est quod dominium convenit Deo
secundum propriam and singulare^ quanda^ ratione^, quia scil. ipse omnia fecit:
and quia su^mu^ in omnibus rebus obtinet principatum. Et ideo specialis ratio
servitutis ei debetur, et talis servitus nomine Latriae designatur apud
Graecos: Et ideo ad religionem proprie pertinet. Et paulo post. Quia tamen
specialis honor, debetur Deo tanquam primo omnium principio: etiam specialis
ratio cultus ei debetur, quae Graeco nomine (...), vocatur Aquin. supr. August.
tract. 23. Joan.
or first Original. This is fully expressed by Aquinas, who affirms, that in
regard of Gods supreme dominion founded upon his being the first Original and
cause of all things, therefore a special kind of service is due to him; which
service properly belongs to Religion, and is sometimes called Latria, and
sometime Eusebia, which together will make up your phrase Religious worship. 2
Infinite excellency apprehended under the notion of the chief good, or the
fountain of happiness. Thus Augustine; Haec est religio Christiana, etc. This
is the Christian Religion, that nothing be worshipped but One God, because none
maks the soul happy but one God. Religious worship therefore is proper to God,
the prime principle and last good; and therefore the giving of it to any but
God is forbidden in this Commandment as Idolatry.

Reply 3. Its not certain that the Pagans did make gods of their graven things,
or if some did, many others did not. Dionysius Carthusiensis, says, Quidam
Gentilium, etc. [Dionys. Comment. in Romans 1.] Some of the Pagans did worship
the very Images, but others did only worship the things represented by the
Images. The Apostle professes that the Gentiles knew God, only they changed
his Glory into an Image made like unto corruptible man, etc. which you also do
whilst you change Gods unexpressible glory into the Image of an old man, and
the glory of the Holy Ghost into the image of a fowl, and Christ of a young man,
and thus worship them: or if they gave them divine honor; do not some of you
plead, Aquin. 3. q. 25. Art. 3. and 4. and Cassand. consult. de imag. p. 979.
Act. 17.23.
that the cross of Christ and his Image should have the same honor: I am sure
Cassander blames Aquinas for this opinion. But to return, the wiser sort of
Pagans acknowledged One only God, yea the generality of them acknowledged one
only Supreme, whom either they called Jove, as some think from Jehovah, or the
unknown God. Who was the same that the Apostle Paul preached at Athens; and
although they had others whom they worshipped, yet these were rather Daemones
than dii middle natures between the immortal Gods and mortal men, employed by
them for carrying mortals prayers to God, and Gods rewards to men, and their
acknowledgement of these was only that their perfections and excellencies were
participated and relative to the Supreme God or some other. Athanas. orat.
contra Gentes. Arnob. l. 6. advers. Gentes.
Read to this purpose that learned piece of Mr. Mede, called the Apostasy of
the later times. Yea further when the Christians did object against Pagans
their idol worship, they still pleaded their respect to the gods whom their
idols did represent.

But I come to examine your vindication of Rome from idolatry in those above
mentioned particulars, viz. Mass, etc.

1 Mass. You say, Her adoration at Mass being not meant nor directed to the
accidents of bread and wine, nor to the figures of Host and Chalice next to
sight (for in these she does not acknowledge to be the perfections of
Exellencies belonging to God) but to the Person of Christ, hid and covered
under the said accidents and figures.

Reply 1. You grant that the Worship you call divine is used at the Mass, only
you plead that its not directed to the accidents of bread and and wine, etc.
but to the Person of Christ, etc. Bellarm. l. 4. de Euchar. c. 29. You may with
this plea give Divine Worship to Images, Altars, Relics; yea the Pagans might
have this plea, yet were idolatrous.

2. You differ from your Schoolmen, yea, and Church too. Bellarmine says, That
Christ per se and proprie, is to be worshipped with the adoration of Latria,
and that this adoration belongs to the signs or symbols of bread and wine in
as much as they are apprehended as one with Christ, whom they contain.
Conformably hereunto the Council of Trent says, There remains no doubt but that
all Christ's faithful people give the Worship of Latria, which is due to the
true God, to the Sacrament in their adoration, because they believe God is
present in it. So that either your Church is idolatrous, or your self not
sufficiently religious: Besides, in your Sacramental language you speak of a
Transubstantiation of the bread not into Christ's Person, but his Body. So that
its the Body of Christ you worship, for this is under the accidents of figures.
Now the perfections and exellencies belonging to God, which might command from
us Latria, are no more in Christ's body, then in the accidents of bread and
wine, there being an infinite distance between the exellencies and perfections
of the Deity, and Christ's humanity. This is not Primum rerum principium, as
that is.

3. This Adoration is without any precept or example in Scripture, where the
Sacrament is fully expressed.

4. Papists use it without doubting, as whether the bread be rightly
consecrated, and so whether the Body of Christ be present or no in the
Sacrament. Hence that Lesson of Pope Arian 6. teaching to say, Adoro te si tu
es Christus. I adore thee if thou be Christ. That there ought to be a
condition, is the judgment of Gabriel, Biel, Thomas, Bonaventure, Alexander,
Azor. instit. moral. p. 1. l. 9. c. 9. q. 10
Albertus, Richardus, and seems to be the common opinion of all Divines, says
Azorius. Which condition makes Images, Relics, Altars, yea the heathenish
idols, the Subjects of Latria; there is not any thing in the world but may
partake of divine worship with it as well as the Mass. But its sin to adore
that which we know not whether it be adorable or no.

2. The Name of Jesus, Altars, Pictures, Relics. You say, She allows indeed
of religious honor to the Name of Jesus, to Altars, Pictures, Relics,
relating to God, Christ, and his Saints.

Reply 1. The Heathens, as I have showed, did give no more to their-images,
then that you call religious honor. 2. The Worship of Images when it was in
relation to Christ and Saints has been branded with heresy. The Carpocrations
are cal-called Heretics by S. Augustine for worshipping of Jesus and Paul.
Aug. de haeres. c. 7. Dan. in cap. 6. Aug. de haeres. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l.
c. 3 Cyril. Catech. Myttag. 1a. page 513. 1 Timothy 4.1. Eusebius. Eccles. Histor.
lib, 4. c. 15.
Danaeus observes it to have been one of the Gnostics heresies. Eusebius
observes out of Justin. Martyr. that Simon Magus and his followers put in ure
against the pestilent superstition of pictures, from which they seemed once to
be free: As Cyril of Jerusalem calls prayers candles, etc. made for the honor
of Images, (...), the worship of the Devil, which Saint Paul expresses by
(...), Doctrines of Demons. 3. All that the ancient Christians ascribed to
Saints, was love, not religious worship. When the Christians of the Church of
Smyrna were denied the body of Polycarpus upon his account, lest they should
leave Christ to worship him; they answer for themselves that their enemies were
ignorant: That we (say they) can never forsake Christ which dyed for the
Salvation of the whole world, and that we can worship none other: for we
worship Christ as the Son of God, the Martyrs we love at Disciples and
followers of the Lord, and that worthily for the invincible good will they bear
to their King and Master whose Companions and Disciples we desire to be. In the
same place they say, We gathered his bones more precious then pearls, and
better then tried gold, and buried them in the place that was fit for the
purpose. They were neither worshippers of Saints, much less of their images,
nor reservers of their relics: All they desired was that they might bury his
body, which being denied them, they buried what they could get, his bones.

You urge, To find fault with this were to blame Justice for giving to every
thing its due in acknowledging the truth: It being most true and undoubted,
that the Name of Jesus, Altars, Pictures, and Relics, bear relation to God,
Christ, and his Saints, as Persons in Dignities and Preheminencies to the same.

Ans. 1. The Question is not whether every thing ought to have its due, but
whether religious honor be due to these things, that we grant; But deny this:
their mere relation (besides which you mention nothing else) cannot prove it.
All things in the world have relation to God, Christ, and the Saints; yea, some
things have a special relation, which yet you do not worship. Emmanuel is as
venerable a name as Jesus, so is the name Christ: Temples have special relation
to God as well as Altars; Dead pictures have not so much relation to Christ, or
God, and their living Images, true Christians; Relics of Saints have no more
relation to them then their works, or virtues; yet Papists give not religious
worship to these. You must therefore give us some other characters whereby to
know what things are adorable, or what religion to God, Christ, or Saint, will
purchase from us this honor, that we may know how and when, and to whom to
give it. 2. Though it were true that Images and Relics did bear such relation
to Christ and Saints as might procure this worship for them, yet its doubtful
whether the images you give us be the true Images of Christ. You know the
Painter pictured Peter ruddy upon supposal that if Peter were now at Rome he
would blush to see his Successors, etc. May. not Christ be missed in the
painting as well as Peter? for I hope your Painters are not infallible. May not
the Image you affirm to be the Image of Christ, be the image of some thief, or
wicked person? yea of Judas; and so whilst we bow to Christ, we kiss Judas. I
read of a Case not altogether unlike this, mentioned by Cassander: it is this.

Saint Martin once going to a place in his Diocese famous for the Monument of a
Martyr, Cass. de vener. reliq. page 973. Haback. 2.18. Isai. 44.10.
he found it was the Monument of a wicked thief. The Prophets truly tell us,
that the graven image and the molten image is a teacher of lies, and is
profitable for nothing: The same may be said of Relics, its questionable
whether they be true: The most of them seem counterfeit, and such are
complained against by moderate and more ingenious Papists. Cassander does very
much complain of them in these words, There are many that make merchandise of
relics whether true or false: so that they are carried about by Juglers and
the vilest fellows, like the heathenish mysteries of Isis, and they are
commended to the vulgar with many lies, Cassand. ibid. Erasmus is more full,
What says he, would Hierom have said in these days to see every where set
forth in oftentation the Virgin Mary's milk, and so many pieces of the Cross of
Christ, which if they should be gathered together, would overload a ship: Here
they show S. Francis his Coal, there the Virgine's Petticoat; One where S.
Anne's Comb, in another place Joseph's Breeches; and (which is a thing
uncertain) the foreskin of Christ which they adore more religiously then Christ
himself, Erasm. in Mat. 33. p. 80. Supr. I will conclude this with the words of
Cassander, Whereas there are but very few true relics in these parts, and
many of thos^ that are showed may be suspected; and their frequenting and
worshipping does cond^ce little to p^ety, but much either to superstition, or
gain: It were a much wiser course that there were no Ost^ntation of relics,
but that the people might be provoked to worship the true relics of the
Saints, that is to imitate those examples of piety and virtue which are extant
in theirs or others writings of them.

In the last place you bring in two Objections against adoration at Mass, and
answer them.

1. To urge against the lawfulness of adoration at Mass from the interposition
of creatures would prove too much; viz. That Christ were not adorable in
Churches, in the fields, nay at all, by reason of an interposition of walls,
the Heavens or Christ's Body betwixt the adorers and his sacred Person:

Reply 1. Your last Interposition is a conceit fit for a Transubstantiator.

2. No Protestant does urge against the lawfulness of adoration, the mere
interposition of creatures, but the interposition of them as the object of
worship: This we conceive forbidden in the first Commandment, which says, Thou
shall have no other Gods before my face: There may be Images, Walls, Heavens,
Sun, Moon, or Stars, before us, when we worship God, yet this makes us not
idolaters, whilst our religious service is not directed to these, as you
direct yours to such like objects, which makes you idolaters.

Object. 2. It will be opposed Christ is not capable of adoration in the
Sacrament, he not appearing there like himself with Glory and Majesty.

You answer, Christ is adorable where and howsoever he is pleased to be; else
the three Kings and Mary Magdalen, and the Apostles were reprovable for doing
him homage, not in a^sumptuous Palace, and enthroned under a rich Cloth of
State, but in a poor stable, a dusty manger, having for a Canopy, a rack of
hay, not gloriously attired, and accompanied with Nobles, but in swaddling
clothes, betwixt an Ox and an Ass; not like a Prince, but a mechanic,
Gardener, a Carpenter, Rep. 1. Omitting your rash traditions of the three
Kings, and Christ lying betwixt an Ox and an Ass, as not worthy an answer. I
say, 1. No Protestant makes the Objection you impose upon them: We all grant
that he is graciously and gloriously present in the Eucharist, as he is in
Baptism, and the Word which is the Scepter of his Kingdom, yea and that in
these he is adorable, and to be worshipped in the Eucharist, though not as if
he were contained under the Species of bread and wine: or in that space that
the bread and wine were in before transubstantiation. 2. Its false he that
Christ is adorable by external set Worship where and howsoever he is pleased
to be, lib. 4. de Euch. cap. 30. Bellarmine says, Apostoli non poterant, etc.
The Apostles could not always worship Christ upon their knees, and especially
in the Supper when it was necessary for them to sit down with him. Now this is
that worship you plead for: Besides Christ as God being present in every place
and thing, it must follow by your doctrine that Christ is to be adored in every
thing, as the Sun, Moon, Stars, Beasts, Plants, Stones, Stocks, etc. which is
the ready way to Heathenish idolatry: The truth is, Christ is not corporally
present in the the Supper, and therefore his Body is not there adorable. 3.
When you say, The three Kings did him homage. 1. How do you prove that this was
religious, and not civil worship? If the Disciples when they had been long with
Christ did dream of a temporal Kingdom, why might not these strangers take him
for a temporal ^ing, and so give him civil Worship? That which makes this
probable is, that they enquire Where is he that is born King of the Jews? And
that He^od and that part of Jerusalem that favored him, (for so Lyra
undestands the words, All Jerusalem) were troubled when they heard of him;
Lyran.
the reason whereof was, because Herod was a stranger, and feared he should
lose his Kingdom; and certainly that honor he pretended himself would give,
would have been only a shadow of civil honor. Yea lastly, If I would stand
upon words as you do upon your Latria, and Doulia, I might tell you that the
words do not import religious any more, (...).
then civil worship. But 2. Granting it was religious, (which I find to be the
more common opinion,) this makes not for your adoration at Mass. For 1. It was
manifest in it self and to them, that Christ was personally and locally present
with them. 2. They did worship God in Christ. Aug. Ser. de Epiph.
Tres Magi, etc. The three wise men (says Augustine) in one journey come to
worship God, in one Christ, (who is the way) the undivided Trinity was by them
adorable: They worshipped him so acknowledging God, whom they understood to be
made man. Lyran.
And Lyranus testifies, that they would not have exhibited so much reverence to
him, unless they had known him to be more then man. Now you cannot say, That
that you worship in the Sacrament, viz. Christ's body into which the bread is
transubstantiated, is, Aliquid supra hominem, Something more then man. Its the
Body of Christ with the accidents of bread and wine that you worship, not his
Divinity which you know no Protestant does refuse to worship. 3. They did not
worship the dusty manger, as you do the Altar, (whereon you say Christ's body
is) nor the rack of hay, nor the swaddling clothes, nor the Ox or Ass, all
which you say were about him. 4. When you say, Mary Magdalen, and the Apostles
did homage to Christ in a poor stable, as a Mechanic, a Gardener, a Carpenter.
You are much mistaken, or have better tradition then I can meet with, I do not
find that either Mary Magdalen, or the Apostles saw Christ in the manger, or
did homage to him like a Mechanic, etc. Indeed Christ was once taken for a
Gardener by a mistake, but whilst that mistake lasted, no religious adoration
could be yielded him without idolatry. 5. Whereas you say, The poorness and
meanness of the manner Christ appears in -- renders him much more adorable; for
Exaltation is humilities reward, etc.

Reply. If this were true Christ should have been more adorable while on earth,
then now he is in Heaven, which is contrary to Scripture, even in that place
you by and by mention, Phil. 1. God first exalts him, and gives him a Name
above every name, and then comes in the worship of all creatures expressed by
bowing at the Name of Jesus, which is not meant of the Name Jesus, and a bowing
at the sound of it, but it is an honoring of Christ by an acknowledgement of
his Supreme Lordship and Dominion, as both the ordinary Gloss, Rhem. on Phil.
2.9. and Heb. 2.9.
and Lyranus expounds it. But to return, Papists affirm that Christ merited
glory and honor by his humiliation; Now this glory was that which is signified
by having the knee bowed to him. It must therefore needs be, that Christ had
not so much glory in his humiliation as afterward; then he was only meriting,
but afterward he was possessing what was formerly merited. Christ had not
those excellencies in his poor and mean estate that he had in his rich estate:
For this reason Saints are not so worshipful with you whilst they live as
after this life, they are not canonized, nor prayed unto till your exaltation.
If means render a person more adorable, I am sure S. Peter deserved much more
honor then the present Popes, he being poor and mean, and they Lords of the
world above Kings, Emperors, and all that is called God or worshipped. To
conclude, if it be means that specially renders a person adorable, how could
you square adoration according to perfections and excellencies, (page 101.
etc.) and not rather according to the want of these.

2. Objection.
THe third Objection is, The Roman-Church challenges power to forgive sins,
which belongs only to God.

Answer, All power is naturally and originally in God, as Lord paramount of all
creatures, but not incommunicable: for as he has bestowed the power of
governing Kingdoms and Commonwealths on Kings and Magistrates, Prove. 8.15.
Romans 13.1. So the power of remitting sins on the Apostles and their
successors: yet men having these powers by way of gift and participation may
not be said to govern or to forgive sins, but as Gods substitutes and
delegates, suitably to the condition of their inferiority and subjection.

Reply 1. Gods power as to some of its acts is incommunicable. His power of
Creation is naturally in him, and incommunicable to any creature, so is his
damning and saving power, whereby he makes one a vessel of wrath, another of
mercy; of this nature is his power of remitting sin. It is God that justifies,
and it was a serious question (though wrongly applied) of the Scribes, Who can
forgive sins but God only, [Mark 2.7.] others cannot do it, and therefore Bed
does hereby prove Christ's divinit^, says he Solus D^us remittit peccata, etc.
[Bed, apud Lyran ib] i.e. God only remits sins, and the Son of man has power
of remiting sin; therefore God and the Son of man are the same; thus the Son of
man by his divinity does remit sins but by his humanity he is enabled to die for
sinners. For the clearing of this, I observe that remission of sins may be
considered two ways, viz. 1. As it is a judicial act, and denotes formal
pardon. Thus it belongs to the supreme Lord against whom the cr^mes are
directly committed, and his absolution is only satisfactory to the offender,
as Soto on Romans 8.33. very well shows. 2. As it is a Declaration of that act
already passed by the supreme Lord. As in human Courts, the judicial act or
formal absolution belongs to the Judge, but the declaration of this is in the
crier. It Is thus in the Church, The Church is the crier, but God the Judge; his
act is an act of power and authority, whereby Pardon is formally obtained, but
so is not theirs. This is confessed by the most noted Schoolmen, Lombard is
clear for it. Ita operatur sacerdos Evangelicus, etc. [Lomb. lib. 4. did. 18.
F.] The Evangelicall Priest (says he) does so act and judge in the absolving
from sin as the legal Priest did on them that had the Leprosy. Now its
evident that the Priest did not make them clean, but only upon Gods cleansing
of them declared them to be clean, nor is this the judgment of him only, but
of many other Schoolmen, and Lombard proves it from Hierom and Ambrose. Now if
the Church of Rome not content with the act of declaring sin pardoned, do in a
Pharasaicall pride (as Lombard speaks) claim to it self a judicial power
(which Ambrose calls jus, potestatis) then its certainly true that the Roman
Church claims a power that belongs only to God: But its certainly true that
this Church claims a power; the Trent Council is clear and full for it, [
Council. Trid, sess. 14. cap. 6. and Can. 9. ap. Binnium.] So that she
Anathematizeth whosoever shall say, that is no judicial act, but only an
office of pronouncing and declaring that sins are pardoned to the penitent
sinner. This is that we charge upon your Church as an heretical opinion.

What you say in answer to our Objection, I know not whether it be in
vindication of your Church, or in mere opposition to us, you have so darkly
folded up your opinion that I know not what it is. You say, The successors of
the Apostles have power to forgive sins, as Gods substitutes and delegates,
suitably to the condition of their inferioritie and subjection. You should have
told us what this suitable power is: for the power your Church claims is not a
suitable power for her even in the judgment of your Schoolmen. And if you deny
her that, you confess with us that she claims a power that belongs only to
God. Your allusion is nothing unless you can prove that as God has bestowed
power of governing on Kings, so has he given the Apostles and their
successors the power of formal remission.

4. Objection.
THe fourth Objection is, The Roman Church derogateth from Christ's
Mediatorship, making it common to Saints and Angels.

Answ. 1. Things that are like have eftsoons the same denomination; so Kings
and Judges are called Gods for some resemblance betwixt Gods power and theirs.
Psalm. 81.1.6. The Roman Church then observing in the intercession of Saints and
Angels, a certain likeness to the mediation of Christ; they being both
expressions of charitable and good desires for others, may not unfitly call
them alike by the name of mediation.

Reply, 1. That things that are like have sometime the same denomination, none
will question but the ground of this is not always likness or resemblance, as
you seem to assert: different things altogether unlike, may have the same
denomination whilst those that have some likeness cannot, The children of God
who have his Image, and are partaker of the divine nature are not to be called
Gods, though Magistrates are, Psalm. 82. There are two reasons or grounds
whereupon the names of God or Christ may be given to creatures. 1. Relation the
persons stand in unto God and Christ, thus Judges are called Gods, and Moses is
said to be a God to Pharaoh, Exodus 7.1. because Judges and Moses stood in Gods
stead, were his Vice-royes, his Ambassadors. 2. Divine authority seconding
the relation, I have said ye are Gods, and all of you the children of the most
High, etc. Psalm. 82.6.105, 15. God says of his children Touch not my Christ's.
Now according as God gives these names to creatures, so may we, provided that
we give them 1. Only to those to whom he gives them. 2. That we give them not
to any as properly belonging to them, but only as metaphorical expressions.
3. Nor ordinarily but upon special and extraordinary occasions and with
allusions to Gods own words. Against these the men of Lystra offended when they
called Paul and Barnabas Gods. Act. 14.1. Its not lawful for us to give the
Title of God to Magistrates ordinarily in our speaking to them, nor to say to
others ye are Jehovah, or Christ, or the Evangelicall Priest or Mediator for
the reasons now implied. The Apostle expressly says, There is one God, and one
Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5.2. If likeness
ground a denomination yet it remains doubtful what likeness does it. There is
nothing in the world but has some kind of likeness to God, yet you may not
call every thing God: though it may be this was the manner of the Heathens
deifying of every creature till it came to herbs. 3. The likeness betwixt the
intercession of Saints and Angels (supposing these to interceed though you
prove it not) and mediation of Christ is so little, that it cannot be thought a
sufficient ground for this denomination. What ever you can say of the
intercession of Saints and Angels in Heaven, may be said of the Prayers of
every Christian that supplicates God for others, and what man would say that
every Christian is a Mediator? For the clearing of this I shall show what
Christ's mediation is. Est. com. in 1. Tim. 2.5.
Estius says, Mediator Dei, and hominum, etc. A Mediator between God and man
is he who comes to God immediately, and by his own merit reconciles God to man,
and procures for man all saving benefits. And though afterward opposing
Protestants, he attributes this to others yet its very sparingly; says he,
Catholics do not transfer the office of Mediator now explained and proper
only to Christ to any others, but only does acknowledge some others to be
mediators in an imperfect manner, that is, our intercessors to God, such as all
those are who commend our salvation to God by their prayers. [ibid.] Here is
nothing attributed to Saints and Angels, which is not as truly applicable to
any living Christian, to whom you use not to give the name of Mediator. Aquin.
3. q. 26. Ar. 1. 2 m.
Aquinas moreover proves out of Augustine, that Angels cannot rightly be called
Mediators betwixt God and men, because they partake not of the qualities of
both extremes: the same reason is of force against the Mediety of mere men. But
you say the likeness is in this, that Christ's mediation, and Saints
intercession, they are both expressions of charitable and good desires for
others. Whereby first you falsely imply that Christ does mediate or intercede
for us by Petitions or desires, Dyonis. Carthus. ad Romans c. 8. v. 33.
which is contrary to the judgment of diverse Catholics, who say, Christ does
not interceed with words but by commisseration and presentation of the nature
he assumed, and the cursed death he suffered in his Fathers presence. Secondly,
Though it be granted that Christ does also in Heaven require a performance of
Gods promise to his Elect, for whom he has offered up himself a Sacrifice, and
Saints also desire the same thing, yet it will not follow, that they may
therefore have the name of Mediators, because Mediator does imply not only a
charitable act, but an Office: and every charitable act does not entitle a
person to the name of an Officer, who by virtue of his. Office performs the
like act. A private man may give his friend council, and plead for him with
such as do oppose him: Yet you will not say this man is a Counselor or a
Lawyer. A private man, yea a woman may instruct another in the mysteries of
salvation, and pray for them; yea, (and if Papists speak truth) may in some
cases administer a Sacrament, yet you would be angry if we should call these
private persons amongst you Priests, or should bring them intra ordinem
praedicationum, within your Order of Preachers: How if it be thus with men's
Titles, how much more with Gods and Christ's?

2. You answer, But she is so far hereby from intending the least prejudice to
Christ's mediation, either in confounding or equalling the same with that of
Saints and Angels, that she puts as wide a difference betwixt them as can be
betwixt two things of different appellations: acknowledging in Christ's
Mediation a worth or right whereto the thing desired is of Justice due; in the
Mediation of Saints and Angels only a virtue of moving Gods goodness and mercy
to grant their desires.

Reply 1. If she put as wide a difference betwixt them as can be betwixt two
things of different appellations, How could you plead their likeness, and upon
it ground the identity of appellations? to be like, and yet altogether unlike
are opposits, and one of them false. 2. He does not put so wide a difference
betwixt them as you speak of: you state it thus, She acknowledges in Christ's
Mediation a worth or right whereunto the thing desired is of justice due, in
the Mediatio^ of Saint and Ang^ls, only avertue of moving Gods goodness and
mercy to grant their desires.

Reply 1. What virtue this is, may be questioned, Its probable its a meriting
virtue, and this has respect to Gods justice, and indeed differs not from that
worth you ascribe to Christ. Its ordinary with you to fly to the merits of
Saints as well as to their prayers. Your Biel says, You invocate Saints as
Mediators for whose merits God bestows those benefits on us which we are not
worthy our selves to receive. And further he says, In Can. missae. Lect. 30.
We ought to fly to them, and reverently to entreat them, that we may be saved
by their merits and prayers. Bellarmine is not behind him, for he affirms, That
as to the words, its lawful for us to pray. Saint Peter give me this, or
the other, whilst we understand it, give it us by thy prayers and merits. Cass.
Consultd. d. merit. and interc. p. 970. Council. Trid. Sess. 6. cap. 32. cap. 6.
ap. Bin.
Cassander complains of some who choose the Saints to be their Guardians, and
trust more to their merits and intercession, then to the merits of Christ. All
which is noway contrary to the Trent Council which establishes merits of
Saints, nor to your self, who in the end of this Section derive this virtue of
moving God from the Saints purity and sanctity. To which others add their
sufferings, as when in your old Portess Christ is entreated by the wounds of
Thomas to loose your sins. But you say, The Saints move Gods goodness, but
Christ looks to Gods justice. I answer, Merits, whether of Christ or any other,
refer to Gods justice, according to that of the Apostle, Romans 4.4. Now to the
Mercenary man is the reward not reckoned of grace, but debt. 2. Whatever this
virtue be, yet you place them equally near unto God, as Christ is: they are not
Mediatores ad Mediatorem, but ad Deum: they move Gods goodness, and indeed so
does Christ. How long will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, etc. says Christ
to his Father, Zech. 1.12. So that however you pretend a vast difference, its
evident you make little, if any at all.

3. You answer -- Which since it is not held injurious to Christ's Mediation to
allow of as good in the prayers of sinners, hated and abominated by God for
their crimes and iniquities, much less ought it to be esteemed a wrong to
attribute it to the intercession and prayers of Saints and Angels, whose purity
and sanctity renders them gracious and pleasing in the sight of God.

Reply 1. Your answer contains a piece of bad Divinity. For, 1. If by sinners
[hated and abominated by God for their crimes and iniquities] you mean the
regenerate, then are you a step further in heresy then Proclus, for he as you
told us, left the regenerate all foul and conspurcate with sin, and you make
the objects of Gods hatred and abomination. Or 2. If you mean the unregenerate,
then its most false that they have a virtue of moving Gods goodness and mercy,
etc. God hears not sinners; but if any man be a worshi^per of God, and does
his will him hears he, John 9.31. The sacrifices of the wick^d are an
abomination to the Lord; but the prayer of the upright is his delight, Prove.
15.8. Jam. 5.16. The Scripture asserts the only prevalency of the righteous
men's prayers. 2. Its a wrong to Christ to attribute this virtue to such men;
for if they can do it, Christ's intercession becomes needless, or sinfulness
being that which brings in the necessity of a Mediator.

4. You propound and answer three Objections, which you suppose may be made
against you.

Obj. 1. It will be opposed (say you) in the vast distance that is betwixt
Heaven and Earth, Saints and Angels, cannot hear.

Reply. Blessed souls in their state of Separation have, as Angels (Luke 15.)
an hearing quite other from that of souls immersed and plunged in flesh and
blood: These hear by means of corporal Organs, which limited within a certain
distance, cannot receive impression out of the same: Those hear with their
understandings, which are by so much the more open and quick of apprehension,
by how much the less their dependence is on matter: The Saints then being freed
of all corporal clogs may hear at any distanc.

Ans. 1. The Knowledge of blessed Souls in their state of Separation (though
different from that of souls housed in bodies of clay, yet) is inferior to
that of Angels, (as Aquinas shows) because the nature of the soul is inferior
to the Angelical nature. Souls have a common and confused knowledge, Aquin.
part 1. q. 8, 9. Art. 3.
as he calls it, but Angels have an exact and more perfect knowledge. 2. The
freedom that blessed souls have from corporal clogs does not invest them with
the particular knowledge of things done here upon earth. This is also asserted
by Aquinas, Ibid. Art. 8. c. who for confirmation of it, brings in Saint
Gregory and Augustine, the former of them seeming to prove it from the distance
of habitation of spirits from that of bodies; the latter by Scripture, viz.
Isai. 63. And the gloss upon it, and by his mothers not visiting him, and by
the promise made to good Josiah, 2 King. 22.3. The Motion of Angels from place
to place, makes it at least probable that their knowledge is not alike when
they are absent, as when they are present with us. I confess that Aquinas
says, their motion from place to place is in order to operation, not
knowledge, Ibid. q. 55. Art. 2. ad 3m. But however they are here as
Executioners of Gods pleasure in works of judgment or mercy, yet it may seem
that they also go about to see the carriages, works, and dealings of men,
whereof they are said to make report, Zech. 1.10, 11. Nor is this for
information of God, as if he knew not what men did, but rather that the Angels
beholding by themselves men's actions, may justify God in his punishments of
the wicked, and rewarding of his people; or may acquaint the Saints therewith,
who being not messengers, as Angels, have their constant abode in the presence
of God. This seems to be Augustines conceit (if the book be his) for he lays
down two means whereby the Saints may know what has been done on earth, Lib.
de Cura pro Morl. apud Lyarn. in Is. 63.16.
viz. the relation of those who die and so come to them, or else the relation
of Angels who are present with us in our actions. Now if Angels know not
humane, affairs alike when absent, as when they are present; what ground have
we to think that blessed souls have this privilege. 4. Its false that souls in
their state of separation have an hearing or understanding quite other from
that of souls immerced and plunged in flesh and blood. For (excepting the want
of the Ministry of senses) the soul has the same manner of understanding in
its separate estate that it has whilst in the body, though more accurate and
less laborious; and the reason is clear, because understanding follows the
nature or essence of the soul, which in both estates is one and the same; did
the soul understand by species whilst in the body? p. 1. q. 83. Art. 6.
so it does still as Aquinas holds. Did the soul understand by discourse? So it
does still, not only understanding one thing after another, but one thing by
another.

2. Object. You say it will be opposed; Be it Saints can hear at what distance
soever; yet this not possible, unless Objects be proposed: and what capacity in
Prayers sent so far off as to reach to Heaven.

Reply, Catholics boast not of any such virtue in their prayers, but they
believe (as is confessed by all) that God is every where -- and that he is the
chief and principal Cause of all effects, and so of man's prayers. Now it being
the property of every cause to relate to its effects, and so to represent the
same, as looking glasses do faces and other opposed objects: The Saints (whose
happiness consists in a clear vision of God) must needs see and behold (amongst
other effects of his goodness and mercy) the Petitions of those who become
humble suitors to them.

Answ. 1. They that grant that Saints can hear at any distance are not very
wise to object the distance betwixt earth and heaven, and I am persuaded none
does so: but you traveled to set forth your late invented and unconceivable
Looking-glass which like Randolphs Peddler you will not fall to vent amongst
other Popish trumperies: and indeed you show your self a pedling Scholar in
bringing it in, implicitly denying what you had expressly asserted a little
before, for you told us that Saints could hear at any distance; but now as if
your conscience had checked you for that, you tell us that its God in whose
presence they are that reveals it to them. But secondly, how do you prove that
God is the Author or Cause of prayers to Saints? He did never so much as
command them, nor the Prophets or Apostles in Scripture give us one example of
them: Till you prove it a Christian duty, you cannot entitle God to it as the
Cause of it, any more than to sin which you say he does only suffer and
permit, p. 79. God does not allow any to give his glory to another, much less
does he concur in assisting him therein. Thirdly, its false, that its the
property of every Cause to relate to its effects, and so to represent the same,
as Looking-glasses do faces and other opposed objects. If this were true, then
when you see a workman you should in him see all his works, and so one man
should be a Looking-glass to another, which would make good store of
Looking-glasses and strange ones too. It Is true, some causes do represent their
effects, so there are effects that represent their Causes, and that more like
glasses representation of the face or other objects. So that you might as well
prove that every effect does represent its Cause and every thing in it, and
consequently that the creature does fully represent the divine Essence: and yet
the Scripture tells us that none can see God and live. 2. Its untrue that in
seeing the divine Essence, you see all its effects. Aquin. 1. part. 7.12. Art.
8. per tot, and cajet. ibid.
Aquinas demonstrates the contrary by the example of the Angels, who see the
divine Essence, yet are ignorant of future contingencies and the thoughts of
the hearts: and he further shows that its not necessary that he that sees a
glass, should see all things in the glass, unless he perfectly comprehend the
glass in his sight. Now there is no creature that does perfectly comprehend
God. Cyril excellently sets this forth of the Angels speaking of God, Cyril.
Hieros. Catech. 7. p. 169.
(...) etc. Whose face the Angels do perpetually see in heaven; but they see
every one according to the measure of his own degree, but the sublime splendour
of the fatherly vision, its lawful only for the Son and the Holy Ghost to
behold. Do you think that the Saints see in God the thoughts of men's hearts
(yet many prayers are no more but the inward groans of the heart) if you say
they do, then according to Aquinas they arrogate that which is proper to God,
if not, then they see not all the efects in God, and you have not given us any
distinction of effects visible or not visible.

3. Object. You say it will be opposed, If Saints and Angels have not men's
prayers before God proposes them he knows them beforehand: whence may be
inferd that their intercession is needless.

Answ. 1. Gods foresight of men's prayers maks not the intercession of Saints
and Angels any way unprofitable and fruitless; inasmuch as the effect intended
thereby is not to better Gods understanding, but to obtain from his blessed
Will, mercy and compassion, etc.

Reply, 1. The Objection does not refer to Gods foresight merely which may be
from all eternity; (He foreseeing all things before they were) but to Gods
actual receiving of them from us, and so proposing them to the Saints. Now I
assert that this does make the intercession of Saints and Angels unprofitable,
yea no intercession: For first, according to Papists, the reason why we look
for an Intercessor is this, we dare not come to God immediately: hence is that
Court-like instance and frequently urged of a subject, who not daring to come
into the presence of the King, immediately presents his Petitions to some of
his Courtiers, and by him to the King. But here forgetting your instance, you
first present your Petitions to the King, making him your Letter carrier to his
Courtiers; and this say you for this end that his Courtiers may move his
goodness, which how rational it is, let the simplest of your Synagogue judge.
2. According to your Rhemists the property of a Mediator or Intercessor, is to
offer up our Prayers to God. Now he that offers up any thing to another, does
not immediately receive his offering from him to whom he offers, but from him
for whom he offers: To say Saints receive Prayers from God that they may offer
them to God, is very harsh and unscripturall language.

Reply 2. If our Prayers go immediately to God, and then to Saints, and they
immediately obtain from Gods blessed Will mercy and compassion from us. What
room has Christ for his intercession, or how are Saints Mediatores ad
Mediatorem? Its difficult to set up Saints as Intercessors, and not to nullify
the intercession of Christ Jesus. But you urge, Princes have often notice of
subjects imprisonment and condemnation, yet seldom give reprives of
inlargements, but at the entreaty of some friend or favorite.

Reply 1 Princes do not usually receive and deliver Petitions directed to their
Favorites, that thereby their favorites may move them to compassion. 2.
Princes often give reprieves or inlargements at the entreaty of the imprisoned
or condemned. 3. The Apostle tells us clearly who is that favorite, that
receiving our Petitions does procure reprieves or enlargements for guilty
sinners, viz. Jesus Christ the righteous. 1 John 2.1.

2. You answer, Men are wished, yea warranted to pray for one another, (1 Timothy
2.) notwithstanding, God has the foresight of their wants and necessities.

Reply 1. For shame do not thus fight with your own shadow, what Protestant
doubts of Gods foresight of Prayers? or who asserts that Prayers are for the
bettering of Gods understanding? 2. When men pray one for another they have not
the sight of your supercelestiall Vtopian looking-glass, but being by their
friends acquainted with their wants, they are entreated to join with them in
seeking Gods mercy through Jesus Christ. 3. You answer, David's adultery and
guilt of blood were in the sight of God unpardoned, till after a low
humiliation, and an hearty acknowledgement of his fault 1 King. 12. Reply. This
being nothing to purpose shall pass unanswered, till you can make it appear
more material.

5. Objection.
THe fifth Objection is, The Roman Church entertaineth divisions and
contrariety in Religion: The Dominicans maintaining a Physical
predetermination, the Jesuits a Moral: those that the Virgin Mary was
conceived in Original sin; these that she was prevented by Grace and conceived
in the same. And if this be not enough to infer contrariety in Religion,
several Counsels have contradicted each other.

Answ. 1. Not every difference, but a difference in point of Faith makes
division and contrariety in Religion: The Dominicans and Jesuits only quarrel
about Opinions; it being not matter of belief that Gods Predestination is
Physical or Moral, or that the blessed Virgin was conceived in Original sin
or grace: These are mere School nicities, and not at all destructive to that
Unity which Catholics so much reverence in Religion.

Reply 1. You deal deceitfully with your followers and us, in making your many
divisions to seem few, and your great ones small. Are the differences in the
Roman Church only two, viz. about Predetermination, and the Virgin Mary.
Whosoever reads Azorius's Moralls, but especially Bellarmines Controversies,
shall find scarce one point of divinity wherein there is not difference amongst
Papists. Some have numbered 300. different Opinions of Papists out of
Bellarmines Controversies, and those about Points controverted between them and
us. Now if the differences between them and us be about Points of Faith as it
seems they are, else we could not be accounted Heretical) and not mere
Opinions: their is no question but theirs are of the same nature, there being
no Opinion of the Church but has some one or more Papists joining with us in
opposing it. 2. You might have done well to have informed us what are Points of
Faith, and what Opinions, for these Points you mention seem to be points of
Faith. For first, those things that constitute a point of Faith with you agree
to them? As first its authority from the Word of God which you branch into
Scriptrre and Tradition. Hence it was that some Jesuits of Ratisbone asserted
it to be an Article of Faith; That Toby's dog wagged his tail: and your self
say, page 65. All points of Faith being equally founded on Gods Revelation are
fundamental and substantial; which Revelation is by the Word or Tradition.
Now I conceive you will at least urge Tradition for Gods Predetermination and
the Virgins impeccable or sinless Conception. 2. The determination of your
Church in some Council or by some Pope. Extrao. Commun l. 3. tit. 12. c. 2.
apud Azor. part 2. lib. 1. c. 21. and Bin Tom. 4. p. 743.
Now its most evident that Sixtus the Fourth, did decree them Heretics, who
affirmed the Virgin Mary to be conceived in sin, Council. Trin. sess. 5. Council.
Basil. sess. 36. apud Bin.
though I deny not but he also disallowed the preaching of her purity: because
of the too great zeal in the Preachers of it. Upon this decree of Sixtus The
Council of Trent (having declared the universality of Original sin in regard
of persons) does make a formal exception of the Virgin Mary: But before either
that Pope or Council, The Council of Basil is most clear for it, decreeing it
to be A pious Doctrine and agreeable to Ecclesiastical worship, the Catholic
Faith, right reason, and the Holy Scriptures, and that it shall not be lawful
for any one to preach or teach any thing contrary to it, nor is the other point
of lesser concernment than this. 2. Those that hold the opinions of the
Dominicans are by you counted Heretics: for the former opinion they are judged
to make God the Author of sin with Florinus, or being a force upon the will
with Origin; for these are the inferences you raise from our Doctrine of
Predetermination: nor are you more charitable to us in regard of the other
opinion of the Virgins Conception. See the above mentioned Constitutions of
Sixtus the Fourth, where he brands the Dominicans with Heresy: now Heresy is
a rejection not of a mere opinion, but of a point of Faith. 3. If they be only
School nicities, why do your Priests so much instill at least the latter of
them into simple peoples ears as a matter of Faith? why do they enjoin the
observation of an holy day for her immaculate Conception? Why do they endanger
Christ's honor by making his mother equal with him in impeccability, and that
by a School nicitie, which if such, might be well rejected?

Secondly, you Answer, [It is as untrue, that general and approved Counsels
have contradicted one another in matters of Faith, or oecumenicall Decrees:
they have indeed talked and discoursed contrary, yea later Counsels have
altered and changed Laws and Constitutions of Government made and established
by former, but this only proves that Counsels admit a liberty and freedom to
debate matters of Religion, and that what was once good and convenient may
prove afterward (circumstances varying) bad and inconvenient, which no way
prejudiceth belief.]

Reply 1. You speak something fearfully as if you were afraid to lie, yet would
not prejudice your Church by acknowledging the truth. You say, They have talked
and discoursed contrary, and that because They have freedom to debate matters
of Religion, yet they do not contradict one another in matters of Faith. Here
is strange stuff, yet may well serve a credulous Papist. But tell me if the
determinations of former Counsels be unalterable as to Religion, as it must be
if they be infallible: How come later Counsels to have a liberty to debate
those matters which have formerly been determined or to discourse and talk
contrary to them? Is it because former Decrees are obscure, or later Councels
ignorant? or that these later Councels meet one^y to see who is the best
disputant amongst them. Nay rather according to truth, is it not in order to
the disquisition of truth, and to a Decree contrary to former Decrees, if they
be found faulty, this seems granted by a Council, which says, That the Church
does propound diverse, Council. Senen. apud Bin. To. 4. part 2. page 150.
and sometimes contrary decrees. It cannot be only in order to ratification of
the former decree, for the former Councels infallibility is sufficient for
that. Or if the succeeding Councels ratification were useful, it ought to be
given without talking, and discoursing contrary, merely upon the former debate
and establishment. So then their talk is either vain jangling to no purpose, or
it tends to alteration, and amendment of that which has been formerly decreed:
according to Augustines speech (mentioned by you) That often the precedent
general Councels are mended by the following. But you say, They have altered
and changed Laws and constitutions of Governments made and established by
former: and a little after, Councels admit a liberty to debate matters of
religion, and that what was once go^d and convenient may prove afterward
circumstances varying, bad and inconvenient.

Reply 1. If by Constitutions of Government you understand Government it self,
this will not agree with what you said against Calvin, That Christians
generally maintained and professed that the Government of the Church was
unalterable by any mortal. But if you mean only such rules as concern the
Execution of Government, I say the alterations made by Councels, have not been
only of these, nor does Augustine intend such things, as will appear to any that
considers the place you cite for it, a Book of his against the Donatists, in
which his main drift is to prove against them that Baptism was but to be
administered once. Now whereas the Donatists objected that Cyprian and the
Bishops of Africa, in a Council did determine the lawfulness of
re-baptization. Augustine answers, That the Scriptures cannot be doubted of,
but the writings of Bishops may be reprehended by others more prudent, yea
Provincial Councels must give way to General, and the former general Councels
themselves may be amended by the latter. 2. Its most evident that the
Alterations of succeeding Councels have been about matters of faith. I suppose
these are matters of faith. 1. The Popes Supremacy, his universal Headship and
Lordship over other Patriarcks and Councels. Bellarmine calls this one main
pillar of Catholic Religion, and one of the chief Heads of your faith, for
this you urge Councels: yet there are many Councels contradict this, as Council.
Carthag. 3. Can. 26. Council. Nic. 1. Can. 6. Council. Constantin. 3. Can. 36.
and Council. Basil. Sess. 2. Where it is decreed that the Pope ought to be
obedient to the Council, which decree has been freely embraced and maintained
by the French Papists against the Trentists. 2. Communion under one kind is
decreed by your latest Councels: yet Cassander tells us that Communion in both
kinds was by our Lords institution Apostolical tradition, public and perpetual
custom of all times, and further was confirmed by the Decrees of Popes and
Councels. 3. Worship of Images is established by later Councels, yet the
Council of Eliberis, Can. 36 and the seventh General Council of Constantinople
did fully decree against them. Three points of religion are always good and
convenient, and cannot become bad and inconvenient by any circumstances, as you
suggest. To say fundamentals cannot become bad, but accidentals may, were to
set up that which you have been endeavoring to throw down, page 64. viz. the
distinction of Fundamentals and Accidentals: all points being with you equally
fundamental, and substantial. But granting that matters of religion may be
altered so as the contrary to that was formerly taught and believed, may now,
nay must be approved, this must necessarily make contrariety and division, and
this will take of the objected slander.

6. Objection.
THe sixth Objection is, The Roman Church is injurious to Christ's merits
approving of humane merits.

Ans. Reason and experience show a diversity of Agents; that as some are
necessitated, as beasts, other-some are free, as men, and therefore capable of
merit and demerit, whereby they are differenced from beasts, which are
incapable of either; the assertion of humane merits is no other wrong to
Christ, then the affirming of a plain and clear truth can be wrong to him.

Reply 1. The Objection does not speak of merits in general, or in order to
temporal rewards from men, and therefore your answer thus far, (and the body of
it reaches little or no further) is to no purpose. But 2. Its questionable
whether a creatures capacity of merit or demerit do absolutely depend upon
freedom of will. Seneca says that the service of cruel Elephants is merited by
their meat. Certainly according to the use of the words with ancient writers it
may agree to beasts, and from them you fetch your prooffs for it. Aquinas
(though he denies them to have freedom of will) affirms that they act quodam
judicio, by a kind of judgment. By this judgment they know what we would have
them do, and do it; and thereby may, for any thing appears to the contrary,
deserve some thing proportionable to their work. And although, as you say, they
are necessitated, yet this necessity is not without a kind of judgment,
whereby a beast does act sometimes rather willingly then by coaction. 3. Though
you sometimes ascribe the power of meriting to Grace, yet it appears that the
main ground is Free Will, which is here laid at lest as a foundation of your
answer, so that the grace of God does but come in the second place, and herein
you are not alone, but have other Papists joining with you. But I come to
examine your answers to the Objections you make for us.

Obj. 1. It will (say you) be opposed, men are capable of merit and them rit in
order to temporal, but not to Eternal rewards.

Reply. As God has enabled men to deserve temporal, so eternal rewards.

Ans. 1. If you speak of rewards as proceeding from God, man can never truly
deserve eternal, nor so much as temporal rewards, though one man may deserve
these at the hands of another. 2. It will not follow that Because men can merit
temporal rewards at the hands of men, therefore they may merit eternal rewards
from God. For 1. Humane rewards are finite, and may be proportioned by our
work; and where there is proportion there may be merit. But because there is no
proportion between our works and an eternal reward; there can be no merit.
Therefore the Apostle does very well express the immeritoriousness of that
which is the top of Christian works, viz. Martyrdom Romans 8.18. Dionys.
Carthus. in Romans 8.18. and Gloss. Ordin.
The sufferings of this present life are not worthy, or meritorious, etc. Non
sunt digni ad vitam Eternam promerendam. The reason whereof is rendered by
Theodoret. Theod. and Haymo, apud Lyran.
Superant certamina coronae, The Crowns surpass the conflicts, the rewards are
not proportioned to the labors; for the labor is little, but the gain hoped
for is great; and therefore the Apostle does not call those things we expect
Wages, but Glory. So Haymo, Si quilibet hominum, etc. If any man could fulfill
all the Commandments of the old and new Testament, and could undergo all kinds
of torments -- he should by no means be worthy of the future glory of the
Elect. Why? because those are temporal, this is eternal, Job 35.7. 1 Cor. 4.7.
2. Man may be profited by us, and may have that from us which is none of his,
but this cannot be said of God: He is not profited by our righteousness, nor
can he receive any thing from us but what is his own. But how ^ay it be proved
that God has enabled men to deserve eternal rewards? You answer -- It is
apparent in Scripture learning, Heaven a Crown of Justice, a Reward, a Goal, 2 Timothy 4. Matthew. 5 1 Cor. 9. which necessarily impose merits, as their
Correlatives, bare actions void of desert, being looked on only as by way of
gifts.

Reply 1. Your Argument is diverse ways peccant. For 1. Your consequence is not
good, Heaven is called a Crown of Justice, a Reward, a Goal, therefore God has
enabled men to merit Eternal rewards Heaven may be so called with relation to
Christ's merits, not ours. Primasius calls it a Crown of Righteousness, with
relation to the righteousness of justification which is in Christ: yea further,
it may be so called without any necessary supposal of merit A Crown of justice
is no more but a crown coming to us in a righteous and just manner, and thus it
may come without our merits: As mercy makes us Kings, so it gives us Crowns:
And what rational man can doubt but that rewards may be free? Lyranus brings in
Chrysostom thus commenting upon the Text in Timothy, Si fides gratia est, etc.
If Faith be Grace, and Eternal life the reward of Faith, it may seem that God
gives Eternal life to the believer as a due debtowing to him; not because he
has merited it by faith, but because faith is grace, and life eternal is
grace, he gives it there of grace. Heaven as it refers to Christ's actions and
passions is a truly merited reward, an effect flowing from its proper cause;
but as it refers to ours, its only as an end relating to its means wherein its
attained, or as an improper effect of that which has only a negative
causality, or is Causa sine qua non. And this is no more then what Cassander
observes. Cassand. Hymn. Eccles. p. 262, 263
The more searching and religious Schoolmen, to say, conformably to that of
Bernard. Bernard. and Durand. ap. Cass. ep. 19. p. 110.
That those things which we call merits are the way to the Kingdom, but not the
cause of Reigning. Yea further he expressly says, That men's merits are not such
as that life eternal is of justice due unto them, or that God should wrong men
if he gave it not. And Durand affirms that God is not our debtor nor obliged of
justice to us, because of our good habits or acts which he has given us; and
that to thinks or say the contrary, is rashness and blasphemy. Yet this is the
faith and doctrine of the generality of Papists, and vehemently asserted by the
Rhemists in these words: It is most clear to all not blinded with pride and
contention that good works be meritorious, and the very cause of Salvation, so
far that God should be unjust if he rendered not Heaven for the same, Rhem. on
Heb. 6.10. But they have their sentence from Durand, to which I leave them. 2.
The Confirmation of your Argument is most evidently false, viz. that bare
Actions void of desert be looked only as by way of gifts: For actions may be
looked on without any meritoriousness, yet be no free gifts, but due debts or
duties: such are the actions of Gods children; filial duties they owe to God
their Father, as you grant in the next Section. Now these they are bound to
perform, though there were no Heaven to reward them, or Hell to punish them.

2. You reply to the Objections, It were indeed no less then blasphemy to go
about to equal in worth other merits with Christ; but the Roman Church offers
not any such thing, whilst she believes Christ's merits to be of infinite
value, others only of finite: Christ's merits to have their desert and worth
from no other; others to hold dependence f^r b th of them.

Ans. 1. Supposing that inequality you speak of be truly asserted. Its
blaspemy still to make God a debtor to man, and to assert that God is bound to
give us Heaven, and were unjust if he did not. Its the taking upon you that
power which belongs solely to Christ in every degree of it that makes you
blasphemers, you acknowledge that Christ is the only Mediator of reconciliation.
Now I durst appeal to rational men whether it would not be blasphemy for a man
to say he were a Mediator of reconciliation, and a Redeemer of himself from
the Curse, though withal he should say, he did not equal in worth his own
price with Christ's, but did believe that Christ's price was of infinite value,
his but of finite, Christ had its desert from no other, but his had dependence
on Christ. It is the undertaking to be a purchaser with money and price, when
God calls us to buy without money and without price, Isai. 55.1. If Simon Magus
will think to buy the gift of God with money, the Apostle may presage the ruin
of him, and may conclude that he is in the gall of bitterness, and bond of
iniquity, Acts 8.19, 20. The new Covenant is a Covenant of grace, the benefits
of it depend not on man's merits, but Gods free grace, which according to the
Apostle is exclusive of merits. If by grace, then it is no more of works;
otherwise grace is no more grace, etc. Romans 8.4.11.6. Ferus Ferus in Cap. 20.
Mat. ver. 1.
therefore gives a good direction, Quod si aliquando, etc. If at any time thou
hear a promise of reward, how that it is no otherwise due but by divine
promise: God has freely promised, and he freely gives; if therefore thou
would preserve the grace and favor of God, make no mention of thy merits. To
deny the glory of our salvation to Gods grace, and to give it to our works, is
indeed to give that to our selves which is due to God, and is nothing less than
blaspheming against God.

2. Popish merits are very little lower than Christ's, nay in many particulars
they are made equal to them. see little more can be ascribed to Christ's
merits, than the Rhemists give to man's in their notes on 2 Timothy 4.8. This place
(say they) convinces for the Catholics, that all good works done by Gods
grace after the first justification be truly and properly meritorious, and
fully worthy of everlasting life: and that thereupon heaven is the due and just
stipend, crown or recompense, which God by his Justice owes to the persons so
working by his grace: for he renders and repayeth Heaven as a just Judge, and
not only as a merciful giver, and the Crown which he pays is not only of
mercy, or favor or grace, but also of Justice. What can be said more for the
value of Christ's merits than this, that they are truly and properly
meritorious, and fully worthy of everlasting life. What is it more to be of an
infinite value? And whereas you further say that man's merits have dependence on
another for their desert and worth. Its most evident that in the beginning of
your answer, you lay the groundwork of merit and demerit upon free will, as
does also Pererius and Aquinas, Perer. in Romans 6. Aquin. 22ae. q. 104 Art. 1.
ad 3m.
who says, A work is rendered virtuous, laudable and meritorious, especially,
because it proceeds from the will, and therefore although obedience be a debt,
yet proceeding from a ready will it is meritorious.

Thirdly, you reply, Rather the Roman Church by asserting other merits, and
withal acknowledging their desert and worth to flow from Christ's merits,
attributed more to Christ's merits than they do who deny other merits: for
hereby are yielded to Christ's actions a capacity of meriting themselves, and a
communicability of the same to to other actions, which are two perfections; and
to acknowledge two perfections in a thing is undoubtedly to give more to that
thing, than to acknowledge only one.

Answ. 1. Its falls that they attribute more to Christ who acknowledge man's
merits though they affirm them to flow from Christ's; its a greater glory
oftentimes to be a solitary then a joint agent. Gods glory was greater for that
he created the world by himself, than if Angels had joined with him in it,
though in their actings they must have had the Divine influence and
concurrence. Christ's glory was greater in being the only Redeemer than if men
and Angels had concurred to the work; therefore Christ glories in these words,
I have trodden the wine-pr^ss alone, and of the people there was none with me;
-- Mine own arms brought salvation! Isai. 63.5. Solus Samson, etc. Samson alone
having lost his hair, is exposed to the Philistims, neither Angel, nor
Archangel, nor any heavenly Spirit, nor any man, either Jew or Gentile, He
alone fights, he alone overcomes, Jerome. apud Lyr. Nor secondly, is it any
truer that these are two perfections in Christ: for those are not a subjects
perfections which cannot truly be attributed to that subject. Its not an
attributing of two perfections to God to say, that he and Angels through his
assistance made the world, or a giving of two perfections to Christ, to say
that he redeemed not only men, but Devils, though the Patrons of the Devils
redemption might have urged it as well as you do communicability of merits:
they may plead that the larger the redemption is, the greater is the glory of
the Redeemer, and that therefore they attribute more to Christ than others, who
say he only redeemed mankind. We must not build upon our own imaginations and
fancies. First prove that Christ has communicated meritoriousness to men's
actions, and that this is one of his real perfections, and then we shall
conclude, that to acknowledge two perfections to Christ is to give more than to
acknowledge one only. In the interim, this may dissuade us from believing you,
because Christ has fully merited whatsoever is obtainable by a Christian,
either here or hereafter. He has purchased eternal redemption for us; what
need then of our purchasing that which is already fully paid for? I will
conclude with the speech of learned Rivet; Meritum est personalis actio, etc.
i. e. Merit is the personal action of the Son of God incommunicable to any of
his members in regard of meriting, which consists in the infinite virtue of the
person meriting, answerable to the excellent weight of glory. Whereas therefore
no simple creature is capable of this infinite virtue: it will follow that
Christ alone, is the singular solitary and immediate cause of merit, who has
therefore fully satisfied and merited whatsoever is necessary to us for
salvation, [ Rivet. sum contra. tract. 4. 9. 17. Sect. 6.]

Object. 2. It will be opposed, all Actions besides Christ's are duties, and
duties are inconsistent with merit.

Reply, They are so without Covenant and acceptance; so is obedience in a
child, a servant, a subject due to his Father, his Master, his Prince:
Nevertheless, as a Father, a Master, a Prince, making a compact to gratify
some particular act of his Child, his Servant, his Subject innobles the same,
and intitles it to what was promised; even so by the means of Gods Covenant, (1 Timothy 4. Romans 26. Hebr. 6.) That he will reward certain actions of men (though
otherwise due) and accept the same as worthy, they become meritorious, and
their reward due upon this account.

Answ. 1. Its Good sport to see what tuging there is amongst Papists about the
ground of our actions meritoriousnes, or whence it proceeds, whether from
Free Will as Aquinas, Aquin. supr. Dionys. in Romans 8.18.
or from the Spirit the Fountain of good Actions, as Dionysius, Carthusiensis,
or from the habit of Charity, as Azorius and Cajetan, or from Divine Covenant,
as Scotus and some ancient Schoolmen, or from the work it self, as Soto: Or
lastly, from the work it self together with the Divine compact, as Bellarmine.
Bellarm. de Justif. c. 5. lib. 17.
This Author, though first he mentioned Free Will, yet he comes off to Covenant
or compact, Council. Senon. decret. 16. de fide apud Bennium.
and seems to lay all upon this, and hereby as Vasquez acknowledges overthrows
merit and condignitie, which he has been pleading for, and indeed upon this
account one of their Councels does deny Condignity in these words -- Facietque
tandem omnis misericordia, etc. At length mercy shall make way for every one
according to the merit of their works, not by absolute condignitie, (for the
sufferings of this life are not condign to future glory) but rather by the free
and liberal promise of God, etc. Now if the promise of God be the foundation
of our receiving Heaven, and this promise be free, then how can it be that
because of this promise our works should be meritorious, But leaving these
boasters of unity to their hot disputes.

I answer, secondly, Gods Covenant does not make our Actions cease to be
duties, for then it should nullify the Law of God which does enjoin acts of
obedience, as duties. But we must not set Gods Covenant and his Law at
variance, as if contrary one to the other. The truth is, Gods free Covenant
wherein for the sake of Jesus Christ he promises to believers salvation, is an
exciter of us unto obedience, causing us to yield more freely and willingly
than otherwise we should: this is the Tenor of the Gospel, Luke 1, 68. etc.
Tit. 2, 11. etc. Here is first the purchase of Redemption, salvation,
deliverance from the power of Satan; and hereby an Obligation to duty. A father
promises a child that he will make to him such lands freely, this promise
does excite the child to do for his father what he commands him, and to study
in all things to please him, whose love to him he is sensible of by the
promise. This the Apostle shows, when he says, We lov^ him because he loved us
first, Exodus 20. And indeed the moral Law runs thus, I am the Lord thy God
that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, therefore thou shall have none
other gods before me. Thus God said to Abraham, I am the Almighty God, walk
before me and be thou perfect.

But because it may be thought that obedience is meritorious because God
promises life upon it: I further answer, this will not follow. For first,
Obedience, such as the Law requires is not attainable by us since the fall: and
therefore the promise may refer to our obedience in the person of Christ, whose
obedience becomes ours whilst we apply our selves to him by Faith. Or
secondly, if it refer to our personal obedience, it does respect our obedience
only as a disposition wrought by him in the Subject, upon whom he will bestow
life, not as a proper cause of life. As if a father should say, If his child
please him, be hopeful and take good ways, he will give him the inheritance:
this promise does not suppose that the child's pleasing of his father, or being
hopeful, and taking good ways is the proper cause of his receiving the
inheritance, but its his fathers good will that gives it him thus disposed and
qualified: thus it was with the Israelites; God promises them Canaan, only
requires that they should perform their duty to him as their God and Father.
Now should any one say, that this promise made their obedience meritorious of
Canaan, the Scripture would contradict him, which expressly says, Not for thy
righteousness, or for the uprightness of thine heart do thou go to possess
their land: but for the wickedness of these Nations, the Lord thy God does
drive them out before thee, and that he may perform the word which the Lord
swear unto thy Fathers, etc. Deuteronomy. 9.5.

Thirdly, God does no where promise to accept of men's works as worthy of
heaven, or to give them a reward, because their works are worthy or condignly
meritorious; or as your Rhemists speak Fully worthi^ of everlasting life. For
if this were so, there would be no room for grace, for that which is fully
worthy of somewhat has an equality with the thing which is therefore due to
it, whether there be promise or no.

The Texts you urge prove, that God will give heaven to men in the way of
godliness, patient continuance in well doing, etc. But they cannot prove that
godlyness or well doing are the proper cause of our enjoying heaven, (the
reward being hundred fold more than what we do) your instances are short of
proof for it; for if that Act required of a servant or subject be a part of
that obedience which is owing to a Master or Prince, and for it the Master or
Prince is pleased to promise a great reward with which the work bears no
proportion; this act cannot be said to be condignly meritorious of that reward,
no not by the promise; but the Master or Prince is willing to bestow something
on him, and takes this occasion for it, or gives it him in this way.

You conclude with saying, Saint Paul deemed it no presumption, to challenge at
the hands of God a Crown of Justice for his good fighting, well running, and
constant keeping of the Faith, 2. Tim. 4.

Answ. 1. Supposing this true, sure you will not make it a pattern for
Catholics, to whom you deny S. Paul's knowledge of their estates and good works.

2. Its false that S. Paul does challenge at Gods hands a Crown of Justice For
his good fighting, if your For be Propter, i, e. notes a proper efficient
cause. This excellent Preacher of Free Grace and salvation thereby unto others,
will not preach merits to himself, and that at the point of death, when the
soul lays hold upon that which is the surest stay; and this according to
Bellarmine is the alone mercy of God.

7. Objection.
THe seventh Objection is, The Roman Church gives the Communion under one
kind contrary to Christ's institution.

Answ. There is a great deal of difference betwixt Christ's Institutions and his
Commandments; ^hese requiring both belief and observance, those only belief.

Reply 1. What may be the foundation of your distinction betwixt Institutions
and Commandments I understand not. Institutions so far as I am acquainted
either with the signification of the word, or its use, are precepts whereby men
are instructed and taught what is their duty, and thus they require both
belief and observance. When Justinian wrote books of Institutions, I suppose he
did not intend points for faith only or principally, but rules of practice,
yet he titles his Book Institutiones Juris, being ignorant sure of your
invented distinction. When the Council of Constance tells us of Christ's
Institution and Administration of the Sacrament under both kinds; Pray Sir,
what do they mean by Institution as distinct from Administration? If it be no
more than Example as you express even now, then those worthy Synodists
tautologize in mentioning Administration and Institution both: Christ's
Administration being the example or pattern of our Administration.

2. Supposing Institution to be no more but example, yet it will thus require
more than belief, even observance; as Cyprian shows when he says, Si qu^s de
Antecessoribus nostris, etc. If any of our Predecessors, either ignorantly or
simply, has not observed and held this which the Lord by his example and
authority has taught us to do, his simplicity might be pardoned, etc. Christ
by his example does teach us to believe His Action is our Instruction;
Augustine therefore observes that examples in Scripture (not sinful, or of
extraordinary and personal actions) serve for exposition of precepts, yea and
contain precepts vertually in them; nor is this any more then what rational men
on both sides acknowledge, that, that which has been inviolably observed from
the beginning of the Church, must be supposed to be a divine precept. Now the
Council of Constance acknowledges our Saviors Administration of the Sacrament
in both kinds, and the primitive Christians receiving it according to his
Administration, what reason then have we to doubt of divine precept?

2. You further say, Although Christ's actions be good examples for us to
imitate, yet as such, they impose not obligation upon imitation. Christ fasted
forty days and as many nights, went into the desert to be tempted, forbear
marriage, etc. are all bound to do the like? none will say it.

Reply 1. If Christ's actions be examples for us to imitate, yea good examples,
then are we obliged to imitate them: the reason is clear, because the goodness
of them as to our imitation, does arise from their conformity to the divine and
Royal Law whereunto we are absolutely bound: Nay further, we are obliged by
them as such to imitation. The Holiness, Mercy, and Love of Christ are often
urged as obliging us to those acts of holiness, mercy, and love, Luke 3.36.
John 13.15. 1 Pet. 1.15. Gods holiness as therein he is an example to us does
oblige us to be holy; yea the very examples of the Saints command our
imitation, there is a general precept pressing this. Finally Brethren,
whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are
just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report, i^ there be any ver^ue, and if there be any raise,
think on these things. And it follows, Those things which ye have both learned,
and received, and heard, and seen in me do, etc. Philip. 3.11.4.8, 9.

2. The Actions of Christ which you mention concern not this place; for you
spoke of such Actions of Christ as you said were good examples for us to
imitate, but these actions are not of that nature. None ever said that all
Christ's actions are examples, or command imitation: Some Actions of his belong
to him as Mediator, and are so Christ's, that they are incommunicable to
others, of this nature is his paying a price to justice, reconciling the world,
subservient whereunto was his fasting forty days, and his temptation in the
desert; his forbearing of marriage may thus far oblige, that if God bestow on
us the gift of forbearance, we do forbear, that thereby we may more
undistractedly go about the service of God we are employed about. But now for
this Action of administering the Sacrament, it was not his personal action, he
did it as a Minister, and the Apostles his Ministers according to his example
did so administer it, as he had done before them.

3. A Doctor, now yours, Dr. Bane, lost sheep, c. 22.
having apostatized from the truth once received and professed by him, gives us
two requisits to make an institution obligatory, both of them fetched from
Jesuit Fishers Answer to King James his questions. 1. That the end of the
institution be necessary, and that it be necessary for every particular person
to endeavor the attaining thereof. 2. That if every particular person be bound
to endeavor to attain the end of an institution, that also the w^ole thing
instituted be necessary for the attaining of that end. According to these
rules, (supposing them true) the institution of the Supper under both kinds is
obligatory. For 1. The end of its institution is that they that partake, of it
may remember, and show forth the death of Christ, as is evident both by the
Evangelists, and Apostles. Now this and is necessary, being both expressly
commanded. and also being a special means for strengthening our faith. Yea
further, Its necessary for every particular Christian to endeavor the attaining
hereof. The Apostle Paul writes to the Saints and private Christians in
Corinth, and in them to all Christians, and gives this precept, Let a man
examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread; and drink of that cup, 1
Cor. 11.28. And he further tells them, That as often as they did so, they did
show forth the Lords death: that is, they did according to their duty attain
to the end of the Sacrament. 2. The whole or both kinds are necessary for the
obtaining of that end; because, 1. Otherwise the passion of Christ is
represented. Aquinas Aquin. 3. q. 76. Art. 2. ad 1 m.
says of the whole, Valet ad representandam, etc. It avails for the
representation of the passion of Christ in which the blood was separated, and
apart from the body; therefore in the form of consecration of the blood, there
is mention of its effusion. Its a great mistake of Papists that they look at
Christ in the Sacrament, not as suffering and shedding his blood, but under
another consideration, whereas the end of the Sacrament is to show forth the
Lords death. 2. Because otherwise whole Christ should not be received, but his
body only without his blood, and consequently should have imperfect instead of
perfect nourishment. Its granted by Popish Schoolmen, that although whole
Christ be under the form of bread, and whole Christ under the form of wine;
Aquin. Supr.
yet Ex vi Sacramenti, etc. i. e. by the power of the Sacrament the body of
Christ only is under the species of bread, and his blood only under the species
of wine. Petrus de Palude is full in this, says he, There ought to be a
twofold matter of this Sacrament, viz. the matter of meat and drink, because
the effect of the Sacrament ought to be representd perfectly and in a manner
agreeable to nature; because Sacraments work that which they figure: but the
effect of this Sacrament is the perfect nourishment of the soul, therefore the
matter representing ought to be by perfect refection of the body, which is not
but by meat and drink. See more to this purpose in Cassand. de Sacr. Com.
sulutraque specie, p. 1034. etc. 4. The primitive Christians, yea and all
succeeding Christians for above a thousand years after Christ, did practice
according to Christ's institution and example. The first that rejected the Cup
were the Manichees against whom Pope Gelasius made a Decree that they should
either communicate in both kinds, or in neither: yea Christ's institution was
the ground of the first Christians practice, as Cassander shows, and with him
Bonaventure, Cass. de Sacr. Com. etc. p. 1019, 1020, 1021. Bon. apud Cass. ibid.
who says the reason of both kinds is dispositively from nature, but
completively from divine institution, which has ordained these two signs to
signify one perfect refection. The Eastern Churches have both kinds to this
day, and that upon this ground. Sure then these Christians did more reverence
Christ's institution, then the Popes followers do, and looked upon it not as a
bare example that may be rejected, but as a divine precept whereby thy
conceived themselves obliged to duty.

3. You say, Wher^fore the Roman Church believing Christ's institution of the
Sacram^nt to have been under both kinds, gives to it its full due.

Reply 1. I wonder that you who are sometimes so generous as that you will
give, God more then you owe him, or otherwhile so strict with him that he shall
not have a mite more then his due. But 2. How can you say you give the
Sacrament its full due when you take away one of those signs which Christ has
ordained to be used in it? I believe, if you took away the bread, and gave the
people only the cup (which crochet may come into the head of some Pope for any
thing I know) you would say you gave Christ's institution its full due; but if
you give it its full due when you leave only one kind, what do you think they
did who used both, did they supererogate, or were they superstitious? Surely
either you give too little, or they too much to Christ's institution. 3. How
silly is it to say, You believe Christ did institute it under both kinds? the
Devils believe it, so many Turks, Pagans, Jews, yet give not Christ's
institution its full due. They look upon Christ's actions, as of a private man
eating and drinking with his Disciples, but no way obligatory to them or
others, and you give it no more. Lastly I appeal to any rational man, whether
Christ's institution of the Sacrament under both kinds, may not probably require
from us a conformity of practice, withal considering the practice of the
Church of God in her purest times, and the good, or no apparent prejudice that
can come to us by it. Its evident that an Antichristian Spirit in Rome puts her
on to thwart Christ's institutions; that so she may set up her own inventions.
Christ instituted Baptism in one only Element of water, and as if that were
defective, the Roman Church has added salt, spi^^le, etc. He institutes his
Supper in two Elements of bread and wine: and as if these were too many, she
restraines the people to the use of one only. So that probably had Christ
instituted bread only, you would have added the cup, that the institution
might have something of your Lord God's the Pope.

4. You say, For the Communion under one kind, there being no Commandment
forbidding the same, it is rashness in an high degree, and want of charity to
condemn her as sacriledgious for so doing.

Reply 1. Whether it be rashness in us to condemn Rome of Sacriledg, or in Rome
to deprive Christian people of the Cup, let any judge who does but consider the
fathers of this sacrilege, the Manichees, and the rise of it, Non ex
constitutione aliqua, Cassand. supr. p. 1035.
etc. Not by any constitution in any approved Primitive Council, but only by
custom, which is often times the patron, of much wickedness. 2. If it be rashness
to condemn Rome as sacrilegious etc. one of your Popes was guilty of this high
degree of rashness with us, who expressly decrees that this division of one and
the same mystery could not he made Sine grandi Sacrilegio, without heinous
Sacrilege. 3. It is no rashness to condemn her of sacrilege; for the Cup is
an holy thing having divine Institution, Apostolical and primitive
Administration. It must therefore needs follow that the taking away of this can
be no less then Sacrilege, Aquin. 22 ae. q. 99. Art. 3.
nay according to Aquinas its the highest kind of Sacriledg. But its strange to
see what little ^^gard divine Institution, or Apostolical practice has with
Papals ^ though sometimes they accuse us of novelty, and cry up themselves as
the only followers of divine Institutions, Apostolical traditions, and
primitive practice, we must be branded with heresy for disceding from them;
yet here they are in another strain, and because we use the Cup according to
Christ's Institution, and primitive practice, we are still heretics, and cursed
to hell by the Tridentine Conventicle. To say there is no express command for
the Cup, therefore it cannot be sacrilege to take it away, is false; for it may
be sacrilege to take away an holy thing, though there be no express command
for the thing. You say there is no command for the people to use the Cup. Now
if this be so, I am confident you cannot show me an express command for the
peoples eating the bread, which you seem to grant, in saying, that in the
primitive times, the people sometimes received the cup, not the bread, which
they durst not have done, if there had been an express command for receiving
the bread. Now I pray resolve us whether it would be sacriledg to take away
from the people both bread and wine. If it be not sacrilegious, then it is
evident your people stand at the Popes mercy for their partaking at all of the
Sacrament, and for any thing I see he may take it quite from them. If it be
sacrilegious, then its as evident, that sacrilege depends not absolutely on a
particular command, and that its truly sacrilegious to take away the cup from
them. 4. There is a Command for both, Let a man examine himselfelf, and so let
him eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, 1 Cor. 11.28. v. 25. from whence
Dionysius Carthusiensis infers, that in the Primitive Church the Sacrament was
administered under both kinds. This do ye as often as ye drink it in remembrance
of me: i. e. as Dionysius expounds it, take this cup and drink of it: So it is
said, He took the Cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye
all of it -- And they all drank of it. Mat. 26.27.

You answer, These words indeed, Do th^s in commemoration of me, Drink ye all
of this, imply a Commandment, but concerning only Priests, to whom as the
power of making, so the Obligation of taking under both kinds is peculiar and
proper -- The Reason is, because hereby (as the words clearly bear) he chiefly
a^mes at a remembrance of his death and passion, which including a separation
of his soul from his body, and of his blood from his flesh, cannot be so lively
and so fully represented under one kind.

Reply 1. Do the words only imply a command? are they not as express and full
a command as can be? 2. How may it appear that it concerns only Priests, that
the Obligation of taking under both kinds is peculiar and proper to them? there
are diverse reasons to the contrary.

1. If it concerned only Priests, then the people could not be able to produce
any precept of Christ for their receiving at all, because with this is joined
the command of eating the bread, and to these all precepts of this nature are
reducible.

2. Christ (you say) in the words does chiefly aim at a remembrance of his
death and passion, which cannot be so lively and so fully represented under one
kind. But the people are able to remember Christ's death and passion as well as
the Priests, yea and are as much obliged thereto in regard of their particular
interest in the benefits of Christ represented in the Sacrament, and
particularly by the Cup. Which benefits are the ground of our receiving of this
Element, as appears by the Evangelist, Drink ye all of this: for this is my
blood of the new Testament which is shed for many for the remission of sin.
[Supr.] It cannot be denied but the reason of this Precept does as much concern
the people as the Priests; the precept therefore must also concern them.

3. There were no Priests present with Christ at his Institution; for according
to Papals none were present but the twelve Apostles. Now they were not Massing
Priests; for first its the common opinion amongst you, that the order of
Priesthood was not actually conferd till after Christ's resurrection when he
sent them, and breathed on them. Joh. 20. He could not therefore give a command
to Priests, when there were no Priests with him. 2. The twelve Apostles
according to the Popish Schoolmen and others, did represent Bishops, not
ordinary Priests, who (as Aquinas several times affirms) were the successors
of the seventie Disciples. 4. If none were with Christ but the twelve (which is
questionable) it is most evident that they did represent believers, and that
the command concerned them. Cassander shows this out of diverse ancient Authors,
viz. Paschasius, Rathertus, Chrysostom, Theophylactus, Cyprian, Origin and
Augustine, [Cass. de sacr. Com. sub utraque spec. p. 1019.] And certainly, if
it were not thus, the Apostle did in vain urge the Institution and Precept of
Christ to the Saints or private Christians in Corinth, and that in order to
their practice, they might have told him that it concerned himself and such as
he, but not them. You bolster up your selves much by your word Make, [to whom
as the power of making, etc.] hereby endeavoring to persuade us that Christ
speaks to sacrificers about sacrificing, and hereby shut out the people from
the cup. But without any reason, for if it could prove any thing, it should
seem rather to appropriate the use of the bread to the Priests, then the Cup,
seeing they have Christened it an incruent sacrifice; the wine after
consecration being real and true blood. But I wonder, seeing our critical
adversaries are so full of this word, that the hot headed Rhemists did not
translate it -- Make this, if it were for nothing but to oppose the Heretical
Calvinisti, that render the Greek Do this. Sure they were convinced, that this
conceit was but worthy of private observation, and therefore creeps in with the
note only: but further its observable that S. Matthew and S. Mark say only,
Take, eat, This is my body, drink you all of it -- He gave it to them, and they
all drank of it. S. Luke says, Do this, not mentioning taking, or eating or
drinking of it. S. Paul unites them in one saying, Take, Eat, -- This do in
remembrance of me. So that to do this is to take and eat the bread, and drink
the wine according to Christ's Institution, which does principally concern the
people. And this Dyonisius, Carthusiensis does propound as probable. And its
further observable, that whereas S. Luke only of all the Evangelists does use
the words, Do this; he only uses it with reference to the bread (which
belongs (say you) to the people) not to the Cup which is the sacrificers
portion.

The precept which you mention out of S. John [Vnless ye eat the flesh of the
Son of man, and drink his blood, etc.] which you say extends to the Laity, I
shall not much build upon, because I conceive its not spoken of the
Sacramental eating and drinking. This only I shall gather from it, that
Christ is perfect nourishment, and that as his flesh is meat, so his blood is
drink both necessary for our nourishment; and that therefore as we have the
Bread in the Sacrament to assure us of nourishment by his Body; so we ought to
have the Cup to assure us of an interest in his blood: bread it self being
neither naturally, nor Ex Instituto any representation of blood: [Cass. supr.]
And certainly from hence diverse of the Fathers did conclude, the use of the Cup
necessary for the people. See Origin and Augustine, cited by Cassander to this
purpose.

Lastly, you say, For Confirmation look up into the Primitive times, even of
the Apostles and Christ, Act. 2.42.46. and you will find by their promiscuous
Communion, sometimes under one kind, sometimes under another, and sometimes
under both, that they never understood of any Commandment of Communicating
under both kinds.

Reply 1. The Council of Constance acknowledges, that as Christ did Institute
and Administer it under both kinds, so the Primitive Christians did use it. 2.
What reason can be given why in other Sacraments Jewish and Christians the
material part should be determined and appointed, and that in this it should
be left to the discretion of a Pope. 3. If it was such a matter of indifferency
in the Primitive times whether Christians did communicate in either or both
kinds, How comes it now to be a matter of necessity, so as Christians may not
Communicate under both kinds. But 4. I challenge you to name one ancient and
approved Author, who asserts that the Primitive Christians did communicate in
wine only, or in bread only, which will be as hard for you to do as for the
Artotyritae, to prove that they communicated in bread and cheese. 5. The Text
you urge proves not your assertion. For first, there is no mention of their
communicating in wine only, which is one part of your assertion.

2. Breaking of Bread does not infer their Sacramental receiving of Bread
only. Its a noted Hebrew phrase, and is as much as giving or eating of meat of
what kind soever, as Lament. 4.4. Isai 58.7. Sanctius upon the Text, you
mention says, Omnis cibus, etc. All kind of meat in Scripture languge is
called Bread. But beside, how will it be proved to be meant of the Lords
Supper. Lyranus understands it of ordinary eating, so do Chrysostom and
Oecumenius: and why may it not be understood of their Love Feasts, which were
means of preserving Charity amongst Christians; or of the distribution of meat
out of the common stock for the relief of poor Christians according to the
custom of those times related by Sanctius. And thus it very well answers the
Hebrew phrase, Isa. 58. where you read of breaking bread to the hungry.

Lastly, supposing it to be understood of the Lords Supper, it must give way to
a Sonecdoche, the Bread being put for both Elements: else the Apostles did
either not communicate with them, which is against the Text, or if they did,
they were sacrilegious in Communicating in one kind only; there being as you
say a Command for them to Communicate in both. 2. Else it was no Sacrament
Commemorative of Christ's death, because this cannot be lively and fully set
forth under one kind, as your self have acknowledge. It must therefore either
not be meant of the Sacrament, or if it be, Bread must be taken for both
Elements, and either of these does destroy the inferences you raise from the
Text. To conclude, Look you into the Primitive times of the Apostles and
Christ, and see if you find Communion under one kind an Article of Faith as now
it is, and if you find it not, as I am sure you cannot, ceas that loud cry of
the antiquity of your Faith, wherewith you fill the ears and puzzle the heads of
illiterate and credulous persons.

The Epilogue.
I have done with the book: The Epilogue only remains shuft up with fained and
flattering words to deceive the simple Reader, containing more Rhetoric than
Logic, more of words than reason, and therefore not worthy any particular
inquisition and confutation: yet in imitation of it I shall address my self to
the Reader by way of advice against the delusiv charms of this Siren: Desiring
thee to consider his assertions and my answers to them, and weigh them by
Scripture and reason, and what thou find according to these receive and
intertain. I would not with this Author persuade thee to a groundless
credulity, that thou should receive a way without trying it, whilst he
cries out -- It behooves you to effect it with speed; and not stand reasoning
h^w this? why the other, replies beget delays, and delays are seldom out of
the ill company of danger. Epil. page 124.
Himself delivers better Doctrine, and safer for thee when he tells thee, That
Christianity is not against reason, and he is to be reputed silly and light
that hastneth upon a truth, Ecclus 19. however propo^ed without examination of
its credibilitie and consistence with nature which must be the work of reason,
nay more, Page 25.
that belief is beholding to reason, even for discerning and finding out her
guide the true Church: which sentences I leave this Doctor to reconcile.

Be not of those silly and light ones. The Apostle bids us prove all things,
and hold fast that which is good. That which is suddenly believed, is as easily
rejected, as before received. Deliberations are means of setledness. Art thou
out of the way of truth, return and live? Angels will rejoice over thee, though
not in expectation of the reparation of their ruins, (as this Author speaks)
they being happy, and from the beginning above the verge of a ruinous estate.
Seek the way to Sion, peace is within her walls, and prosperity within her
palaces. Have thou received the truth, hold it fast, contend earnestly for it,
sell it not. Let not the Images of Babylon, the images of men pourtrayed upon
the walls, pourtrayed with vermilion, girded with girdles upon their loins,
exceeding in dyed attire upon their heads, etc. allure thee that thou should
commit Adultery with them, and that the Babylonians should come into thy bed of
love, and defile thee with their whoredoms, and thy mind be alienated from the
true Church where the word of God is purely preached, and the Sacraments
rightly administered, where is purity without pomp, divine verities without
humane traditions, religious worship without superstition. Finally where Christ
Jesus is exalted in his Person, Natures, Offices, and the Elect called,
edified, comforted, and out of which ordinarily there is no Salvation. These
are the Badges of the Reformed Churches in which thou may ride safely, till
at last thou be set on shore in that Country where thou shall find an eternal
and exceeding weight of glory, (the free reward of thy constancy) prepared for
thee, and shall for ever sing praises to God, and to the Lamb that sits upon
the Throne, whom thou have served.

FINIS.
Reader, thou art desired to mend these Errata's with thy Pen; there are some
other litteral faults escaped, which thou may discern in reading, and so
receive no prejudice.
PAge 6. l. 21. r. Christianis, p. 10. l. 12. r. Cuivis, p. 12. l. 1. r.
Gospels, p. 14. l. 22. r. you, p. 16. l. 21. fo. 1. r. 5. p. 19. l. 28. r.
praelati, p. 31. l. 5. for Church r. Pope. p. 33. l. 26. r. not. p. 52. l. 23.
for men r. Pen, p. 59. l. 27. r. Successors, p. 65. l. 4. r. by, p. 70. l. 19.
r. Dowaists, p. 76. l. 22. r. as if, p. 81. l. 22. r. mendata, and 24. r. us,
p. 92. l. 1. for hope, r. Pope, p. 103. l. 1. r. are, p. 105. l. 30. r. be, p.
122. l. 24. r. its l testimony, p. 130. l. 2. r. i. e. p. 133. l. 7. r. 1 trow,
p. 153..27. r. mediation, p. 136. l. 28. r. mediation, 137. l. 18. r. valid, p.
144. l. 12. r. leaning, p. 170. l. 12. r. exorcise, p. 178. l. 10. r. naming,
185. l. 18. r. way, p. 189. l. 2. r. gross carnal presence, p. 215. l. 8. r.
private, 217. l. 25. r. Romans 8.8. by Syricius, p. 221. l. 1. are, p. 222. l.
19. r. Azorius, l. 30. r. Azorius, p. 236. l. 1. r. omit, p. 237. l. 16. r. in
them, p. 239. l. 24. r. to your selves, p. 253. l. 22. r. unaccompanied, p.
259. l. 24. r. seven, p. 275. l. 20. r. individed, p. 286. l. 9. r. he has, p.
291. l. 1. r. should not, p. 292. l. 1. and 5. r. taste, p. 310. l. 23. r. not
without, p. 312. l. 1. r. again, p. 317. l. 15. dele, he, p. 321. l. 2. and 7.
r. meanness, p. 329. l. 11. r. she, p. 343. l. 10. r. bring, p. 347. l. 12. for
three, r. thirdly, p. 351. l. 2. r. tearming, l. 4. r. suppose.


