St. Paul's Thanksgiving: Set forth in a SERMON Preached before the Right
Honorable House of PEERS in the Abby-Church Westminster, on Thursday May 10.
being the day of solemn Thanksgiving to Almighty God for His late Blessings
upon this KINGDOM.

By James Buck, B. D. Vicar of Stradbrook in Suff. and Domestic Chaplain to
the Right Honorable Theophilus Earl of Lincoln.

(...) --

There is nothing so takes God, as to be thankeful not only when things go
well, but in their contrary carriage. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 116.8. Psalm. 42.5.

The King shall rejoice in God, every one that swears by him shall glory, but
the mouth of them that speak lies shall be stopped, Psalm. 63.11.

LONDON, Printed by J.G. for John Playford at his Shop in the Temple, near the
Church door, 1660.

Die Veneris, 11. Maii 1660.
ORdered by the LORDS in Parliament assembled, That Mr. Buck is hereby desired
to print and publish the Sermon that he preached the 10. day of this instant
May, in the Abby-Church before the Lords of Parliament, for which he has their
Lordships thanks, and that no person shall reprint the same without his
approbation.

Jo. Brown, Cleric. Parliamentor.

I do appoint John Playford to print this Sermon,

James Buck.

To the Right Honorable the LORDS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
My Lords,
YOur Lordships pleasure is the sole producent of the publication of this
Sermon, which therefore makes lowly address to your most honorable House, that
seeing your will has given it a public existence, it may not lie idle and
fruitless in open view, but remain a lively and lasting monument of true
thankefulness, by your Lordships good example and precedence.

My Lords, though in this juncture of the greatest benefits, the whole Kingdom
is bound, more than any Nation, to be thankeful, yet in the common blessings
the Peers are especially obliged to gratitude, by reason that others suffered
with you, only in their estates, your Lordships alone suffered in your Honors.
The forces, that so far as in them was, abolisht Kingship, put Peerage down as
useless, and left you bare titles of honor without influences of activity in
your sphere of government: and no wonder, when the fountain of honor was
obstructed, that the riverets should be dried up, when the Crown did not
flourish, how could the Coronet? The Moon would go for an obscure body, if by
monthly returns she were not replenisht with new light from the Sun: During
the Kings eclipse your Honors were under a cloud, but by a renewed conjunction
with his Majesty, your titles of honor be significant, your luster is repaired,
your beams cheer your country, and you act the prime part in the grand Council
and affairs of State. Sad experience may serve for a remembrance that the
concernment of the Nobility is to keep up Majesty, for the King cannot be
lessened in his legal rights and prerogative, but the Nobles will be diminished
in their native privileges and dignities. My Lords, considering how easy it
was with God to lay the highest honors low, even by and under contemptible
creatures, now that his favor shines again upon you, let ingenuity persuade
your Lordships to walk officiously with our dear Lord, and sacrifice
thankofferings beseeming Christian grace and English grandeur; in which kind
Almighty God throughout his Law calls for regard of the poor, respect to the
Levite: On behalf of the poor, I beseech you give me leave to remind your
Lordships what floud-gates of sin it will stop, and what a door it will open
for amending the manners of the most necessitous, and the trayning up their
infantry to industry and virtue, to anticipate all begging by fit relief, and
setting all able hands to some task toward their living. There be indeed
excellent laws already to this purpose, but nevertheless I am an humble
suppliant to your Lordships, that a course may speedily be took for a
possibility to effectuate those laws, by workhouses and sufficient stocks in
these populous and wealthy cities, from which the pattern will soon issue forth
into all the land. As for due countenance to the Levite, I held it neither
opportune nor needful to solicit your Lordships in my Preaching, because the
propensity and inclination of your noble Souls is transparent, that His Majesty
shall no sooner be repofed in his regalities, and the Kingdom resetled in its
laws and liberties, but your Honors will show your selves munificent Patrons
and providers for the Church, and the reverend Fathers and very learned
Ministers thereof, that be supervivors, to the manifold sufferings and
injuries, which have been illegally inflicted on them these twenty years
bypast: Undoubtedly the estimate of a Clergy cannot be upheld without
endowments, benefits and salaries, whereby some eminent Divines may proceed
equal to the most famous of other liberal Sciences, in their rewards and
perquisites; otherwise the finest wits and brave spirits will betake themselves
to other professions, if Physicians for the body advance higher than any
Physicians for the soul, and if the Gospel cannot prefer as much as the Law:
How can your Lordships wish a learned, pious and painful Ministry in every
corner of the Realm, unless a competency be fore-prepared for their maintenance
and encouragement? Wherefore when once your Lordships shall have re-established
the fundamentals of the State, you will credit your memories in all posterity,
to accommodate the Church with necessaries for decency of degree in Churchmen,
and contrive a bountiful convenience for the Pastor of every parish, by uniting
small adjacent Livings and like expedients, which so wise a Council will not
fail quickly to find out, when they intend it as a serious piece of their
business. For which provisions for the poor in honest labor, and for
Ecclesiastics in godly work, your Honors shall inherit the benediction of the
Church, and the blessings of the poor, (two notable promises in holy Scripture)
together with the prayers and praises of all Gods people, and the faithful
services and devotions of,

My Lords, Your Lordships most humble, and most devoted, and most obedient
Servant, JAMES BUCK.

SAINT PAUL'S THANKFULNESS.
ROMANS 7.25. I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord.


SAint Paul being encumbered with the relics of sin, and thereupon crying out
in the Verse immediately before, O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me
from the body of this death? very abruptly bursts forth in this clause, I thank
God through Jesus Christ our Lord: But this inference is not without a mystery,
and insinuates three things.

Why St. Paul abruptly breaks into thanksgiving.
1. How Prayer discharges the heart of troublesome cares and anxieties, and
reposes it in the safe custody of divine peace: Phil 4.6, 7. Be careful for
nothing, but in every thing by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, let
your requests be made known unto God; and the peace of God, which passes all
understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus. Thus we
find David in many Psalms beginning with mournful ditties, unexpectedly to
break into joyful Hymns and gratulations, Felinus in Psalm. 17.
as if some Angel had in the midst of Prayer all on the sudden brought him
better news from heaven.

2. That our Apostle practiced such a duty as Lansperg bravely frequented.
Toties te edoro and Laudo, toties pro illis lauds tibi suavissimas cano, and
praecipue eas quas spiritus ille reprobus, qui mihi talia nunc suggerit, modo
caneret, si in bono perstitisset, ut vel hoc modo in tui laud illius expleam
vices In Pharetra Divini amoris, p. 23.
So often as wicked suggestions are forced upon me unwilling, so often I adore and
extol thee, so often because of them I sing thy most sweet praises to thee, and
chiefly those which that reprobate spirit, who now suggests such things to me,
would have sung if he had persisted in good, that even by this means I may
supply his course in praising thee. Did Christians constantly deal thus with
the Devil, they would make him weary of his part in tempting.

3. Blessed Paul has no sooner uttered his distressed mind in petition, Who
shall deliver me? but he is instantly enlarged with matter of thanksgiving, and
therefore praises God, as feeling some ease. In agonies with concupiscence the
Lord can in a moment transport the soul from the bottom of anguish to the top
of delight: Esa. 65.24. Psalm. 10.17. The Lord hears the desire of the poor,
D^siderium pauneris exaudit Dominus.
Scilicet dum adhuc aliquid est in desiderio, to wit, while a thing is yet in
the desire. God prevents the words of his Orators, attends their desires, minds
their prayer in the fieri, whiles it is forging in the seed of desire he
prepares relief. And a blessing has so much the more of contentation, by how
much the less it was in expectation. Hence the signal mercy of restoring the
right Heir to the three Crowns, deserves the greater honor, by how much the
more it is equal to our wishes, and far superior to our late hope and
expectances: Who had the heart a few months since to promise himself to see
such a day as this? That the Honorable Houses of Peers and Commons should
quietly meet and consult the Interests of Church and State, without the least
control, and recognize and proclaim the rightful King, with wonderful
triumph and acclamations of all the people, and solemnize this day of
Thanksgiving for the same, with the greatest and most unanimous satisfaction
that ever was perceived in England? This is the day that the Lord has made, we
will rejoice and be glad in it. This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous
in our eyes, and fills every true Englishmans mouth with Saint Paul's words, I
thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Which contain these five Propositions:

That all thanks and praises are due to God.

That due praising and thanks to God cannot be performed and given without
Christ.

That it is peculiar to the Regenerate, whom S. Paul represents, to pay through
Christ their debt of thanks and praises unto God.

That victory over temptations, and spiritual blessings, are the main objects
for which the Regenerate thank God in Christ.

That such Thank-offerings are the highest sacrifice of the Church, Militant or
Triumphant.

These I shall handle briefly in their order.

That all thanks and praises are due to God.
1. That all thanks and praises are due to God. And our Doctors thanking of God
is nothing else but his referring unto God all the good that he had, or could
conceive or wish, as a small moiety of his immense perfections.

It is true that the Philosopher writes, In the first of his Ethics, (...). --
(...).
Praise is too low an expression for Gods acts; Honor, and some more lofty
style must be used in speaking of his Divine Majesty and excellencies. Neh.
9.5. His glorious name is exalted above all praise. Higher epithets belong to
him then those of Praise, and all our terms of glory, respect, worship.

But God is pleased that poor mortals speak of him the best that they can. That
is an observable locution, Psalm. 71.23. My lips shall greatly rejoice when I
sing unto thee. Which to understand, be pleased to take notice, That Joh. 7.38.
the heart is called the belly of the soul, as the receptacle of grace and
heavenly refreshments, and as it is enabled to communicate to other parts, and
send forth streams of love and duty. Now as in Nature, which is well discovered
by Bartholinus an eminent Anatomist, Ventriculus habet membranam -- nervosam,
in quam vasa term nantur esophagi, oris and labiorum tunicae continuam, ut
nihil ventriculo ingratum recipiatur, -- binc quando in ventriculo bilis,
communicatur linguae amaritudo and flavedo; e^cont^a ^tiom oris and linguae
vitia oesophago and ventriculo. Anato. l. 1. c 9.
the ventricle has a membrane or coat full of nerves, which is continued with
the tunicle or skin of the mouth and lips, whence they sympathize mutually, and
distempers in the mouth, lips, tongue, affect the stomach, and choler in the
stomach causes bitterness and yellowness in the tongue: So in Reason and Grace,
the matters that be in the belly of the soul affect the lips and tongue with
vehement tinctures; and when the belly is full of the sweetness of God, it
qualifies the lips and tongue with a divine gust and relish, and the name of
God and his Christ is melody in the ears, Melos in aurc, m^ in ore.
honey in the mouth. As Bonaventure, a devout Scholastic, relates of his
Master, that he was so enamored therewith, that in rehearsing of the Psalms,
when Gods name occurred in them, In vita Francisci c. 10. Prae suavitatis
dulcedine labia sua lingere videbatur.
out of the flavor of sweetness he seemed to lick his lips, and to be in a
rapture when our Savior was named. It is impossible to have any worthy
thoughts what an infinite amiable good the Almighty is, but that it will alter
the soul and body with affects of the sweetest savor. The Jews have all along
had a godly usage, upon any occasion of naming God in their writings, to insert
an abbreviature of praise, the holy one, the blessed. (...)
Mark the spirits of the principal Apostles St. Paul and St. Peter, S. Chrysostom.
de incomprehen sibili, sermon. 3.
they cannot let the mention of God pass occasionally from them in their
Epistles, without a Parenthesis of thanksgiving and praise, Romans 1.25. Who is
blessed for ever, Amen; 1 Pet. 4.11. alleging that God may be glorified
through Christ, he interposes, To whom be praise and dominion for ever and
ever, Amen: If any duration could be more than ever, he would have God honored
for evermore; as if he should say, in all eternity we cannot fully praise God;
if there could be more than one sempiternity, he would long to have them all
replenisht with the endless praising of God. And so you have a little taste
that all thanks and praises be due to God.

That due praise and thanks to God cannot be exhibited without Christ.
2. Our second task is to show, that due praise and thanks to God cannot be
exhibited without Christ, I thank God through Jesus Christ. Mat. 11.27. None
knows the Father but the Son; he only understanding the universal goodness
of God, is alone able condignly to praise him, with praises equal to his
supreme worthiness: The praises of all men and Angels fall short, and have no
proportion to the divine goodness, and therefore all Angels and men ought to
prefer their praises as well as their prayers in Christ.

Again, Thanksgiving is a part of divine Worship, and St. De Trinit. l. 1. Sine
Deo Christo, unum Deum confiteri irreligiositas sit.
Hilary teaches right, It is Paganism and irreligion to worship God out of
Christ, in whom alone he is well-pleased, and out of whom praises are natural,
not Christian, not spiritual, and therefore in no order to life eternal.

In Christ the thanksgiver renders praises to God cordially and reverently;
cordially, for Christ is truth, and nothing void of sincerity can rise to his
hand, to be thereby given unto God: none must imagine lip-labor shall serve,
because thanksgiving is expressed by fruit of our lips, Heb. 13.15. The Latins
do finely circumscribe thankfulness by Gratus animus, the hymn that praises
God must be sung with grace in the heart, Col. 3.16. which makes melody in the
heart, Ephesians. 5.19. when all the strings thereof, all the faculties therein,
are tuned by the holy Spirit to consent in Gods will and blessing him, as the
strings in an Instrument are fitted to consent in Music. Very divinely St.
Athanasius the Great, (...) -- ad Marcellum. p. 756.
Reason would that a man should not be in discords with himself: As the best
instrument gives an harsh sound if all the strings be not tunable and in mutual
harmony; so our actions and praises yield an unpleasant sound in Gods ears,
unless our whole spirit, soul and body, in all their parts and powers be in
conformity to his will, and united in his praise.

Reverently, as Paul performs it here, like a sacred duty of divine adoration,
and holy worship, with spiritual elevation in Christ: Psalm. 111.9. Holy and
reverend is his Name, and therefore not to be mentioned but with religious and
awful reverence: we must wash our mouths in Christ laver, before we presume to
take Gods praises into them, Tingebat calamum linguae font Sancti Spiritus, ut
mundas Deo lauds diceret.
as Paschasius writes of the worthy Prince St. Adelhard, that was uncle to
Charles the Great, he dipped the tip of his tongue in the fountain of the Holy
Ghost, that he might utter pure praises to God.

This observation serves for warning, for learning, and for quickening. For
warning, that God is, Exodus 15.11. dreadful in praises; which reproves them
that take the name and praises of God in vain, that lightly and inconsiderately
use thanksgiving, and tremble not in recounting Gods holy and venerable
praises; bold people, that are not afraid to have the glorious praises of God
at their tongues end, and thank the Lord at every second word perfunctorily,
without advancing of their spirits and praises to him in Christ, or regard
agreeable to acts of divine worship, have their consciences charged with the
guilt of great irreverence. As for us, we are not worthy to take the high
praises of God into our mouths, and defect in offering them, if we shall dare
to present them by themselves without joining Christ's praising with them; or if
we shall presume any acceptance of our praises without Christ's merits, which
who so do must look to answer for ill setting forth and counterfeiting the
divine virtues.

For learning, whence the Saints come to have such sense and feeling of their
own poverty and insufficiency in praising God, Psalm. 72.20. the Psalmist having
poured forth his spirit to the utmost in praising the divine favors, and
finding himself extremely short of them, Defecerunt lauds David filii Jesse.
daintily subjoyns, The praises of David the son of Jesse are finite and ended;
which sentence is curiously contrived for the conclusion of the second book of
David's Psalms, (the whole Psaltery according to the Jews consisting of five
Books) and for insinuation that all hymns are of too narrow limits to
correspond in any degree unto the infinite glories and praises of God, And
hereupon inspired men, out of their longing that God might be duly praised, not
only sum up all their own parts and appurtenances, Psalm. 57.8. Awake my
glory, awake Lute and Harp, I my self will awake, but also invoke the aid and
concurrence of all creatures, to assist them by their several virtues,
excellent properties and abilities, Psalm. 148. -- the religious soul conceives
so highly of God, as to burn in desires, that all creatures in the whole
Universe would lay their forces together, and especially, that in the world of
pure praises the holy Angels and perfected spirits would busy themselves in
extolling him: But for us poor and ingrate souls, when we repeat the clauses
wherein all creatures are invited to associate with us in setting out the
praises of God, we may profitably remember that of Arnobius junior, We excite,
provoke and exhort all creatures to the praising of God, and unhappy we sleep
our selves; behold, all things that we call upon, come together, saying, Why do
you call upon us? we are come together that we might praise God, and we find
his holy name, blasphemed only by your fault, your seat and place is only
vacant in the Chorus.

For quickening in Christ's supply not to despair of our praising God: Tacitus
writes judiciously, Beneficia co usque laeta sunt, dum videntur exolvi posse,
si multum antev^nere, pro gratia^adium redditur. Anal. 5.
Favors are so far satisfactory as they seem returnable; if they much exceed
that, hatred is rendered for good will; good deeds are burdens when they be
above men's possibility of requital. For this cause being our own thanksgivings
are defective, and the praises of all creatures in earth and in heaven it self
incompetent, sufficiently to glorify God, that our aspiring worthily to honor
God may be satisfied, we must be sure to get Christ's praises conjoined with
ours, and offer ours in union and merit of them; That whether we eat or drink,
or whatsoever we do, we may do all to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.30. Mingle
Christ's odors with our works of grace and nature, of Christian vocation and
common calling, and so present them to God as a perfume compounded of sundry
fragrant scents, Cant. 1.13. -- make a posie of Mirrh and the other odoriferous
ingredients of our Lords ointment, and by their mixture put value upon our
praises. It were envy not to commend this passage of Androtius, We cannot
present our selves in sacrifice to God without Christ's assistance, and though a
man should offer himself a thousand times, it were little; therefore that we
might have what to render to God for all his benefits, Christ himself, as by
dying on the Cross he offered himself to the Father, Traidd ti etiam se homini,
ut ab homine possit cum meritis and amore suo infinito tanquam hostia pro
peccato, and tanquam oblatio pro beneficiis, Deo offerri, and sic homo potest
patri offerre infinitum precium meritorum Christi, and ipsum Christum.
Androtius de pass. and morte Christi, c. 5. v. c. 11.
tradidit etiam se homini -- has made over himself also to man, that by man he
might be offered to God with his deserts and infinite love, as a Sacrifice for
sin, and as an Oblation for benefits, and so man may offer to the Father the
infinite price of Christ's merits, and Christ himself, which is the proper work
of the regenerate.

Paul represents, (and in whose person he speaks as well as in his own) to pay
through Christ their debt of thanks and praises unto God. Psalm. 33.1. Only the
regenerate pay through Christ the debt of thanks and praises unto God.
Praise is comely for the upright, it beseems the godly and holy to praise the
God of holiness.

But it is unhandsom that the wicked should pollute Gods praises with their
impure lips, Psalm. 50.16. The brave Roman held that only for a praise, which
came, a viro laud dignus, from a man worthy of commendation; and should God
have his praises pronounced by men of unclean lips? Hence it was, that
Thankfulness, that precious virtue, has ever been so rare and such a stranger
in the world, that the learned Languages of Greek and Latin have no proper word
for it; the thing not appearing, their ingenuity left it nameles; but
unthankfulness, as every where frequent, got a name in all tongues, (...) is a
good Greek word, and ingratitudo a good Latin, so is not gratitudo, which
sprang up after the purity of Latin speech was exspired, about the time of
Tiberius, when they coined for complements words without experiments. Humility
and gratitude are virtues proper to Christianity, in Believers and Martyrs
above others, to act not in themselves but in their Mediator; and when they
have actually showed the greatest thankfulness and charity, and died for their
Lord, and are crowned for so doing, Apoc. 4.10. to prostrate their Crowns
before his throne, and acknowledge him the onely-worthy of all glory, and
honor, and that in his power and grace they conquered and triumphed. Because
this office is appropriate to the godly, the holy Scripture sets them to this
work by name, Offer to the Lord thanksgiving, Psalm. 50.14. thus we see David,
the man after Gods heart for sincerity, love, devotion, to be the sweet singer
of Israel, 2 Samuel 23.1. and the especial Trumpeter of Gods praises: And there
is nothing that David so varies in his Psaltery in sundry ways of repetition,
as his Hallelujah, Praise ye the Lord, beginning and ending diverse Psalms
therewith, ending every verse of some with invitation thereto, as the 150th.
the last verse excepted, which has it doubled in the close; and in the 136th.
Ut quicquid operam Dei percurritur, ideo intelligatur ^ffectum, ut honitatis
and misricordiae ejus intelligatur aeternita^. S. Prosper 1b.
paying six times at the end of every verse thankful acknowledgment of
everlasting mercy, which manageth all Gods proceedings with his people: This
moved the devotional King David, that prayed three times a day, Psalm. 55.17. to
give thanks seven times a day, Psalm. 119.164. as the principal work of the
sanctified: And because we have more reason to give thanks for free mercies
than to crave undeserved kindnesses, and God is more worthy to be praised than
any thing in heaven or earth to be desired, and our fruitions exceed our wants,
the vouchsafements which regenerates enjoy are above all they can desire, and
more than all they need, the imitation and entering into the state of true grace
harder than the progress, Vid. S. Chrysostom. (...). him. 3.
the new birth more difficult than the growth, the first conversion has more
of the creating hand than all proficiency and perfection.

That regenerates are the most obedient Subjects, and most thankful for Kings
and Princes.
As none are thankful for Supernaturals but only they that have Christ's grace,
so neither are any equally thankful for terrene and political blessings, as the
orthodox and truly pious; none so obodient to Princes, in as much as it is part
of their faith that humane laws bind Conscience, Romans 13.5. And they consider
the benefit of government and Kingship, what instruments and ministers they are
of public tranquillity and repose: Sects and schisms are the issues of pride
and contention in the Church, and so naturally prone to breed and foment
divisions and disturbances in the State; but Orthodoxality is a daughter of
obedience in the Church, and consequently frames the spirits of men to be quiet
and orderly in the State: Grace harbors not malignity toward equals or
inferiors, to misconster, be jealous, suspicious, and interpreting all things
to the worse; much less can it abide such humors against our Superiors, but
ever hopes the best of governors, and takes their doings in the fairest sense:
You have a most imitable temper for Subjects, 2 Samuel 3.36. Whatsoever the King
did, pleased all the people, and that induced Almighty God to give the King a
mind in all things to gratify the people, 1 Chronicles. 13.2. And David said to all
the congregation of Israel, If it seem good to you let us do so, and so, --
confidence of Subjects excites trust and compliance in Kings. Further,
conscientious people look upon it as a duty imposed on them from heaven, freely
to contribute to the royal support of their Kings, Romans 13.6, 7. render all
their dues, Tribute to whom tribute is due, which in St. Augustines judgment is
the way for a Nation to grow rich: M^j^res nostr ideo copiis omri^us
abundabant, qui Deo decimas dabant, and Caesari censum ^eddebant. hom. 48
Our Ancestors (the Christians of the primitive and best ages) therefore
abounded in all plenties, because they gave tithes to God, and subsidies to
Caesar; and well may your Honors confirm the tithes to God, who has quit you
of the danger of DECIMATION; and well may you leavie tributes for the King, who
makes you masters of your Contributions, and frees you from the bondage of
paying whatsoever Phanatiques would pretend that Providence did act them to
exact: The little finger of an Usurper is thicker than the loins of a lawful
possessor; nor can a voluntary people grudge to afford a third of that for the
maintenance of a right Owner, which was forcibly took from them to keep in an
Intruder. He that another day shall feel in himself a tentation of unreadiness
to pay taxes to his Prince, let him record this day, wherein after many years
slavery under the tyranny of servants, our Sovereign Master being owned, there
was as universal and as real a thanksgiving, as ever was known in England, and
he for one heartily cried out, I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord.

That spiritual blessings are the main objects for which the regenerate thank
God in Christ.
And so we are conducted to our fourth resting place, That spiritual blessings
are the main objects for which regenerate thank God in Christ. As our Apostle
here thanks God for the delivery from sin; and the Psalmist quickens all his
powers to unite their faculties in praising God for remission of sin, and for
sanctification, Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is
within me bless his holy Name, -- who forgiveth all thine iniquities, who
heals all thine infirmities. This Truth is considerable for distinction, for
discretion, for devotion: For distinction, this differenceth the Church and the
world, The love of the Father is not in the world, 1 John 2.15. the Nations
have some love of God as the prime good and being, but it is without any
consideration of Gods existing a Father to Christ, and us in him; therefore at
the best it is but Philosophical love, it is no Christian nor Theological
charity; Mat. 15.31. They glorified the God of Israel, not the God of heaven
and earth, as he was discerned in light of Nature to the world, but the God of
Israel, as he was discovered by light of sacred Scripture to the Church: In the
Old Testament the Lord is familiarly styled, the God of Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, not of Europe, Asia and Africa, nor the God of the four Elements, etc.
to intimate, that the saving knowledge is not by manifestation from the
creature, but by revelation to the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, etc. Ephesians.
5.20. true thanksgiving and accepted with God is in the name of Christ, to God
and the Father; to God, not barely considered as God, but to God as eternally
the Father of our Lord Jesus, and in good time our Father through Christ, Col.
3.7. as Christians apprehend him, and assume all the benefits for which they
praise him, qualified in the relation of a Father, and the mediation of a
Redeemer: Let me add this to your meditations, Psalm. 4.6, 7. the world many
times word and mouth some thanks to God for Corn, and Wine, and Oil, but
never is thankful about any oblations of praise to God for succors purely
Evangelical, victory in tentations, assistance against sin, which ravished Paul
into this doxology. Carnal men may for self-love really beg favors, and pray,
give and forgive, they cannot for Gods love cause their hearts to say, hallowed
be thy name, because thou leadest not into temptation, but deliverest from
evil, which is the effect of the Apostles thanksgiving. For discretion, to be
entirely thankful we must distinguish betwixt our tentations and our sins; Paul
was grievously buffeted by motions to sin, so as to wax weary of his life, but
all the while he resisted; it was his infelicity not, his fault; it was
concupiscence that sinned, not St. Paul, Romans 7.17. and therefore in abatement
of the agony he bursts out in thanksgiving. Vid. in ^^tis Sanctorum. Ap. 29.
Catherine of Senes, a spiritual woman in her Age, having been vexed with all
manner of blasphemous thoughts and horrid suggestions, after some release and
Christ's gracious return, inquires in a Soliloquie, Where wast thou, dear Lord,
when my poor heart was pierced with fiery darts, and harased in woeful wise? and
had for answer, Fui in medio cordis tui, I was in the center of thy heart,
rendering those injections abominable, withholding thy consent, and enabling
thee to stand out in resistance. For devotion, not to rest till we attain
Christian inspiration and expirtion, and be able with St. Paul to breath
Gospel-ayrs; Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be God who has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings, in which we are incomparably more happy than in any worldly
enjoyments, which then only are matters of true content and thankfulness, when
they are embraced as tokens of Gods good will, paternity, and gracious
reference in Christ.

That our temporals require many thanks of Englishmen, and our spirituals many
more.
The occasion of this solemnity calls upon me to insist a while upon this
subject, that our temporals require many thanks, our spirituals many more. Our
temporals require many thanks, Psalm. 12.1. When the Lord turned again the
captivity of Sion, we were as them that dream: It fares with us now as it did
with the Jews discharged from their captivity in Babylon by the gallant Emperor
Cyrus, the turn was so unlikely, that an helpless poor company of Bondmen
should get out of the hands of the mightiest Lords in the world, that when the
Proclamation of Cyrus set them all free, and encouraged his loyal subjects to
relieve them for their passage, and commanded his Officers to allow the
expenses for rebuilding the Temple out of his Imperial Exchequer, it was so
much beyond the hope of the distressed Jews, that it looked more like the dream
of one asleep, than the vision of one awake: Likewise we, in these our
excessive joys, can scarce believe our senses, and hardly think our selves well
awake, that our vouchsafements are in reality, and not the aerie imagination of
dreamers. Far be it from me to rip up, and publish in a Pulpit, the foul
proceedings, which the goodness of our most gracious King, the wisdom of the
Parliament, the charity of the Nation, would have buried in forgetfulness by an
Act of oblivion; give me leave only to propose the Parable of Jotham, Jud.
9.9. -- The Trees would needs be making themselves a King, and tender the
Kingship to the Olive Tree, the Figtree and the Vine severally, which are trees
of the best quality and fruit; but they all jointly refuse to take supreme
dominion; then they offer it to the Bramble, no tree but a sorry shrub, and the
Bramble at the first moving assumes domination; that which the most noble
Families trembled to hear of, a younger sprig of a stock in the Gentry boldly
ventures upon, and mounts into the throne and seat of highest Majesty and
State; what is the issue? verse 15. fire proceeds out of the Bramble, and
devours the Cedars: Mark the profundity of divine Scripture in Simile's;
Lyranus out of Isidore informs us, the Bramble is a petty bush, Rhamnus est
dumus parvus, qui vento agitatus ex se enittitignem.
which tossed up and down, to and fro by the wind, emits and springs fire out of
it self; in the hotter regions and countries, the Bramble at times, by the
agitation of the wind, conceives fire, and wastes it self and all the wood
about it; of which also our compatriot Edmund Bunnie avouches that himself had
seen some experience. In his Head Cornerstone, l. 1. c. 11. sect. 4. p. 235.
The Bramble that domineered over these Kingdoms, tempested with choler that
the great ones that chose and advanced him did not confide in his shadow and
Protectorship, in a rage of heart-burning fosters discontents, and contrives an
inhibition against the meetings of the grand Officers of the Army without
license from him, which kindled such a combustion among them, that the Bramble
was presently pulled out of the fence by his own allies and nearest affinity;
but the fire stayed not there, but seized on the Cedars and chiefest of the
Swordmen, and made them so hot one against another, that they were all soon
down, and the whole Malignant party quasht and laid in the dust; and because
they are in the dust, I shall not trample on them.

But your Lordships are assembled to give God the glory of this overture and
stupendous revolution, and that for great cause; considering, that as God was
blasphemed, his Truth questioned, his Religion disparaged, inasmuch as men of
most erroneous principles and most injurious practices triumphed and bare up by
mis-apprehension of a continued series of Providence, (which were only
testimonies of Gods displeasure at our sins, walking unworthy of a good
government and our profession, they were no hints of Gods approving their
whimsies, phansies and pretensions:) So now on the contrary, by this miraculous
dispensation, our Lord is glorified with us at home, and with others abroad,
declaimers are silenced, and beholders compelled to wonder at the mavelous
outgoings of God in the Land. In Homer, Laertes being sure that his son
Ulysses after twenty years absence was indeed returned, and had quelled the
abusers of his wife and family, the old man exclaims, (...), Odyss. ult.
High Jove, father of heaven, well then, yet you gods are still about the wide
world! How then shall not Englishmen, observing how our gracious Sovereign,
after many years expulsion and exile out of his Dominions, is in the turn of
Gods right hand, when we were in desperate consusions, without any foreign
help, or effusion of blood, suddenly admitted to his just and hereditary
rights, with the incredible satisfaction of the generality of his subjects,
lift up our voices and say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous, verily
there is a God that judges in the earth, Psalm. 57.12. And neighbour-Nations
must needs say, Psalm. 126.2. God has done great things for them: I, the Lord
has done great things for us, whereof we are glad, and do now keep a Festival,
and shall for ever rejoice. Honorable and beloved, no King upon the face of
the earth has such characters and demonstrations of heavenly favor to him, as
our Sovereign Lord King Charles, which give more than humane assurances that
God designs his most excellent Majesty a great blessing to these. Nations, and
as glorious an ornament to Christendom as was Charlemaigne. May we not then
justly take in the two readings of this my Text, gratia Deo and gratia Dei?
Lately we might have said, Wretched men that we were! who shall deliver us from
this slayery, baser than ever any gallant people suffered? and now by Gods
mercy we may say, gratia Deo, We thank God -- And again we may say, Wretched
men that we were! who or what has delivered us from the basest tyranny? and
must answer our selves, gratia Dei, the grace of God through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Ye have heard how great and many thanks our temporals require, now please to
listen in a word, that our spirituals require many more: Psalm. 144.15. When
David had held forth in most ample circumstances the felicity of a Kingdom in
peace and plenty, he closes with this Epiphomema, Happy are the people that
are in such a case, and immediately corrects himself, Yea, happy are the people
whose God is the Lord: So then, our greatest happiness in a gracious King, and
mighty Kingdoms abounding in wealth, and strength, and policy, and state, and
unanimity, is but an emblem of the welfare and riches of a soul that can
appropriate God to it self: Micah 4.9. Now why art thou contracted in sorrow,
or is thy counselor perished? and if thou have the invincible King for thy
defender, why do thou fear? and if the eternal Spirit be thy Advocate, and
his Law thy Counselor, how can thou miscarry? (...).
The Septuagint divinely turn that Psalm. 129.1. When the Lord turned the
captivity of Sion, we were as them that are comforted, for that greatest
contents, redemptions and bodily deliverances, are but a shadow to the freedom
of the soul from the dangers of sin; and the solaces of the most prosperous are
mere umbrages to the unutterable joys in the holy Ghost, and peace of
Conscience which passes all understanding; and the fore-tasts of the holiest
in this world, of heavenly contentments, are but quasi gaudia, as they speak in
the Civil Law, or, as they phrase it in the common Law, misprisions of joy, to
the consolations in the world to come, wherein they shall eternally sing
praises and thanksgivings unto God.

That thank-offerings to God through Christ, are the highest sac ifice of the
Church, militant or Triumphant.
And thus we are brought to the last Stage, That Thank-offerings to God through
Christ are the highest sacrifice of the Church, militant or triumphant: whereas
the praise of God is the sovereign end of all creatures being and continuance,
the praising of God, which is the nearest relation, and next acting to that
end, must of consequence be the most super-excelling work of heaven and earth,
the quintessence of all Divinity, the flower of all Theological duty and
Divine service, and clearly our best and highest office.

We shall improve the Use of this Doctrine for Information, Admiration, and
Exhortation.

1. For Information, That it is the most noble state and height of the renewed
soul, not only to be patient and contented, but delighted and thankful in all
conditions. When the regenerate recollecting how God causes all things to work
together for his glory, the good of the Universe, the salvation of
predestinates, do comply with him in absolute accommodation, and in
reverentiall respect of his gubernation, accept from his divine hands
prosperity, adversity, influences, desertions, good and evil, with indifferent
minds, and with equal thanks. Job 2.10. Shall we receive good at the hands of
God, De amico and amato, sect. 7.
and shall we not receive evil? As Blaquere alleges for proof of his loving
God, Quoniam inter laetitias and tribulationes, quas mihi donas, non facio
differentiam: That he put no difference between the joys and tribulations
which God confers. Psalm. 25.10. All the ways of God are mercy and truth: There
are no forth goings of his providence toward men, that have not for their
original, eternal mercy, and the fidelity of his gracious covenant in Christ,
for whose sake all things are intended, guided and collated for our good, if we
would so take them; that whether God give or take, whether he afflict or
enlarge, we may always say with patient Job, The Lord has given, the Lord
has taken, as it pleases the Lord so come things to pass, blessed be the name
of the Lord for ever and ever, Job 1.21.

2. For Admiration; the kingly Prophet saying, Let my soul live, and it shall
praise thee, Psalm. 119.175. declares not only that he desired life, for no
other cause in chief but that he might therein give thanks and glorify God,
but also that the praises of Gods children here have in some respects prelation
above the hymns of glorified spirits. Which Hezekiah also affirms, protesting
that Hell cannot praise God, but the living, the living he shall praise God,
Esa. 38.18. whereupon those religious Kings, notwithstanding the trust they had
to celebrate among the Fathers immortal thanks, petitioned that they might
abide here to praise God. In pirke avoth,
It was a wise apothegme of Rabbi Jacob, that one hour of repentance and good
works in this world is (...) better than all the life of the world to come, and
one hour of refreshment in the world to come is better than all the life of
this world. The complete praises of the other world are without comparison
diviner than our imperfect thanksgivings upon earth, in regard of the acts
themselves; but praises here have their privilege, in that they be exemplary
to sinners, and converting praises, not seldom attracting others from vanity to
be companions in the true worshipping of God; as godly Hezekiah hints in those
words, The father to the children shall make known thy truth. Moreover, divine
praises here be operative and efficiently antecedent to our glory there; After
death the blessed rest, Apoc. 14.13. and cannot promote in bliss; and the state
of glory in heaven is proportioned to the measure of virtue and praise upon
earth: whiles we are in the way every praise adds to the treasury of our
future glory, when we come home into our country we take up our standing, and
can proceed no further; here must we furnish our everlasting mansions, here
must we lay up in store for our selves a good foundation for the future, 1 Timothy
6.19. and procure that degree of honor wherein we would sempiternally praise
God.

3. For Exhortation, urging us above all studies to intend thanksgiving, and
frequent Gods praises; as in our Lords prayer we are taught to begin our
petitions with praying first and principally, Hallowed be thy name, enable us
and all thy creatures to glorify and praise thee; and in the close annexed in
many Greek copies to that prayer, Mat. 6.13. to ascribe Kingdom, Power and
Glory to God, as the father of lights, and donor of every good and perfect
gift, which is the summary of thanksgiving. The hellishness of hell, and most
horrible evil there, and that which most terrifies the godly in their
contemplations is, that the damned perpetually gnash their teeth, Psalm. 112.10.
and blaspheme and curse God that is blessed for ever; Apoc. 16.10, 11. They
gnawed their tongues in pain, and blasphemed the God of heaven because of their
pains, -- and repented not of their evils; if reprobates do so on earth, what
will they ^o in hell? And this is to the minds of them that fear God the heaven
of heaven, that there is no cessation nor end of praising God there; Apoc.
5.13. none is silent in the heavenly Chorus, Every creature which is in heaven,
and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, heard I
saying, Blessing, honor, glory and power be unto him that sittteth upon the
throne, and unto the Lamb for ever, Apoc. 7.9, 10.

Swasives to thanksgiving.
Will you be pleased to ponder the commendations heaped upon sacred
thanksgivings? Psalm. 147.1. It is good to sing praises unto God, it is
pleasant, and praise is comely. It is good, and by consequence has force to
draw and allure every rational will, as convenient for it; vox hominem sonat,
it is a speech for a man to men, who will show us any good? therefore God
commends this duty to us as men, it is good, it is right, Ephesians. 6.1. it has all
reason for it.

It is pleasant, not only pleasing to God (whose pleasure is more acceptable
to the pious than any life) but pleasant to the thanksgiver, a duty which
cannot possibly be performed without pleasure on his part. For that our good
Lord would have us rejoice evermore, 1 These. 5.16. Be always cheerful, he
passes an injunction, that we should in every thing be thankful, verse. 18.
Would any learn to go easily away with his burden? (...). In pareticis c. 35.
let him hearken to Saint Nile, In adversity give thanks, and the yoke of
afflictions will be easy and light; when and wherein soever we are discontent,
we detain praises in unthankfulness, and give not God the honor of governing
all things for the best. Thank God unfeignedly for thy portion, for thy
corrections, for all thy trials, and the Lords dealing ceases to be any longer
displeasant to thee.

It is comely, there is nothing so unseemly and odious as ingratitude, nothing
so amiable and decent in all eyes as thankfulness; how then does it become
Psalm. 51.12. the free, ingenuous and princely spirit wherewith we are sealed,
to officiate in this divine service, and sacrifice continual thank-offerings to
the God of our praise, who has made us his praise in preeminence of heavenly
collations. -- (...) P^ Martyr. Ju^^^^m.
O happy David for an heroic spirit in practicing Divinity! Psalm. 116.12. What
shall I render unto God? which is wisely expended by St. Basil, to be the voice
of one that was bravely in straits, and saw his penury on all sides, that he
had nothing fit for retribution; but to the utmost of his power he was willing
to lay out himself, and spend and be spent for God, and that he was glad of an
opportunity to serve his generation, and advance the interests of his maker.
Honorable Lords, there is no higher decorum than to study grateful returns, do
something worthy of God, and your Nobility, and this day of your triumph and
joy. And whereas your goods and goodness cannot reach to God, but may reach to
his substitutes, the receivers and takers of the King of heaven, let me beg
leave to speak a word for Christ's poverty in our Land, that in reception of so
transcendent blessings you would remember the poor, and signalize this happy
year with a provision, that there may be no complaining, no begging in our
streets, and workhouses may be erected in these rich and populous cities, that
all that are able to work, may be blessed in eating the labor of their own
hands, Psalm. 128.2 and all that are absolutely impotent, be otherwise
sufficiently relieved; a work that all mankind must necessarily acknowledge
excellent. Hodieque in captivitate nullos mendicos habemus qui stipem
postulent, sed onnes aut Synagogarum proventibus, aut divitum liberalitate
sustentantur, ita ut necessaria iis nunquam desint. Menasses Ben-Israel
conciliator, p. 223.
The Jews can provide for their poor throughout Christendom without begging,
may not Christians much better do the like? Some neighboring people in
foreign parts prevent all need for their poor to beg, what hinders this
magnificent Kingdom to do the same? Other Parliaments (as fame goes) have had
this religious design under consideration, but have left you the glory to
complete the work, and put it in execution. Your Honors have raised such
extraordinary hopes in these three Nations, that they promise themselves from
these two Houses the greatest benefits that can be procured by the best
Parliament, and therefore I had the boldness humbly to propose this motion to
you. And when I shall in three words have touched upon three motives that exalt
thanksgiving above all other service, I will dismiss this honorable audience
to the festivities of this joyful day.

1. It is very remarkable that ever and ever is adjoined to the close of the
Doxology, Mat. 6 13. because thanksgiving only is an eternal and everlasting
office; prayer is a duty of time, thanksgiving is a service of eternity; after
the day of Judgment petitions shall cease, when once all desires are
accomplished, but giving of thanks shall be sempiternal, Agobard ad c^mores
occ^esiae Lugd^^ens. V. 612.
that God has filled up all our faculties of desiring, and left us no more
space nor room for prayer.

2. Thanksgiving is an Angelical office, therefore to set an estimate upon
sacred hymns and praises, Esa. 6.2, 3. You have the Seraphims of the supreme
order veiling their faces and feet in token of reverence, and flying as they
sing in testimony of affection, and longing to draw near to God; and they
being, as it were, chief chantors and leading the song, all the Chorus of
Angels accompany them with harmonious and according voices, and with incredible
gladness and exaltation of spirit.

3. Thanksgiving as it is a Saint-like and Angelical performance, so it is the
proper service of heaven, as it is the place of everlasting repose: Hence Luke
2.14. they sing glory to God in the highest (heavens) as the seat of eternal
praises. Petition often tends to our own good, thanksgiving looks entirely at
Gods glory, which therefore is the grand duty and product of charity, and the
peculiar office of heaven, where having whatsoever they can wish, they have no
other employment but to bless the fountain of their blessedness: Prayer
pertains to viators, and praise to comprehensors, as satisfied in good, and
secured of eternity in bliss. Dionysius Carthusianus, Deum laudere est actus
praeclarior quam Deum orare; 1. qunniam actus ille est magis Angelicus; 2. quia
actus ille est simplicior ac purior, quia per illum m^gis pure in Deum
convert^mur, per orationem vero ad nos ipsos aliquo modo reflectimur. De S.
Catharina sen. 1.
a godly and learned Writer, shall conclude for me, To praise God is a more
eminent act than to pray unto God, both for that it is a more Angelical act,
and because it is a purer and more sublimated act, as in which we are purely
inclined and converted to God; whereas in prayer we reflect in some sort upon
our selves. This then of all other is a most celestial function, to sing
Hallelujahs, to coassist with the heavenly inhabitants in praising God; this is
to be in Paradise, to taste the first fruits, and in a manner to have the
exercises and fruitions of heaven upon earth.

Therefore with Angels and Archangels, and all the company of heaven, let us
thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord.

FINIS.

