A Confutation of the ANABAPTISTS, AND All others who affect not Civil
Government; Proving the lawfulness of it: and a full Answer to all their
Cavills, that are, or can be made against it.

WITH A Nut-cracker for an unnatural Nut, whose Shell is as hard as the Scales
of Leviathan, and the kernel of his heart as hard as a piece of the nether
Millstone, Job 41.15.24. yet the hammer of Gods Word that breaks in pieces
the Rocks, Ier. 23.29. will break this Nut, that all may see the devilish
kernel that is in it.

Also Arguments against the Anabaptists, proving that Infants borne of
Christian Parents ought to be Baptized: With a full Answer to all their Cavills
that are (or can be) made against it.

Imprimatur Ja. Cranford.

And thou Ezra, after the wisdom of thy God, that is in thine hand, set
Magistrates and Judges, which may Judge all the people that are beyond the
River, and whosoever will not do the Law of thy God, and the Law of the King,
let Judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether, it be unto death, or
unto banishment, or confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment,

Ezra 7.25, 26. Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and powers, to
obey Magistrates, to be ready to every good work,

Titus 3.1. They sent them Peter and John, who when they were come, prayed for
them that they might receive the holy Ghost, for as yet he was fallen upon none
of them only they were baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus,

Acts 8.15, 16. Then Peter said unto them repent and be baptized every one of
you, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost, for the promise is unto
you, and to your children,

Acts 2.38, 39. LONDON, Printed by M. O. for T. Banks, and are to be sold in
Black Friars (...)

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
THE maine cause that moved me to undertake this Work is this; many faithful
Christians, and loyal Subjects are blamed to be enemies to Civil government,
as also my self bearing a part of that reproach with them: now to clear both
my self and others in these divided and distracted times, J thought it not
amiss to discover them, and to make them known who they be that despise
dominion, and speak evil of dignities, Jude 8. that faithful Christians and
loyal subjects may not be blamed, who are subject to Principalities and
Powers, and willing to obey Magistrates, and ready to every good work, Titus
3.1, 2. Who every day that passes over their heads put up prayers and
supplications, intercessions and giving of thanks at the Throne of grace for
Kings, and all in authority, that we may live a quiet and peaceable life, in
all godliness and honesty 1 Timothy 2.12. And as for me, God forbid that I
should sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray for them, 1 Samuel 12.23. Tet
Gods people were always blamed to be enemies to civil authority. Ahab said
to Elijah, Art not thou he that troubles Israel? 1 Kings 18.17. And says
Haman that great Courtier, There is a certain people scattered and disperced
among thy people in all the Provinces of thy Kingdom, and their Laws are
diverse from all people, neither keep they the Kings Laws, Esther 3.8. Nay
further, this Court-flatterer so prevailed with the King to get Letters sealed
with the Kings seal, to destroy, to kill, and cause to perish all Jews, both
young and old, little children and women in one day, even upon the thirteenth
day of the twelfth Month (which is the Month Adar) and to take the spoil of
them for a prey, Verse 13. And it was told the King saying, Daniel, one of the
captivity of the children of Judah, regards not thee, O King, nor the decree
that thou have signed, and so was cast into the Den of Lions: but in the
morning the King comes to the mouth of the Done, and calls Daniel; to which
he answered, O King, live for ever, my God has sent his Angel, and has shut
the Lions mouths, that they have not hurt me, for as much as before him
Innocence was found in me; and against thee, O King, have I done no hurt,
Daniel 6.13.20.21.22. And Paul was accused to be a pestilent fellow, and a
mover of sedition: but when the trial came, neither against the Law of the
Jews, nor against the Temple, nor against Caesar had he offended any thing at
all, Acts 24.^.25.8. Nay further, they said of Christ himself to Pilate, If
thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's friend, for he speaks against
Caesar: John. 19.12. Yet Christ, although he was a true heir to the Crown and
Kingdom of the Jews, showed himself loyal to Civil Government, saying,
Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are
Gods, Matthew 22.21. And he paid tribute to avoid offense. Matthew 17.26, 27.
although an heir to the Crown, and free from Tribute; Thus in all ages, both
all the faithful, and Christ himself was blamed to be enemies to civil
government: And now I come to our own age, witness those three Worthies, and
faithful servants of Jesus Christ, who pleading for God and the King, and
declaring how those Traitorous Prelates did entrench upon the Kings prerogative
in many particulars; these men venturing lives and states, and all outward
comforts, through a tender affection they had to their Prince, as not being
able to endure to see the wrong done to him, and be silent; and yet for
speaking, and declaring those Traitors, they were punished altogether, although
they did express such Loyalty that I think their examples are not to be
paralleled; witness that renowned Doctor Bastwick, who labored to maintain
the honor, and dignity, and prerogative Royal of our Sovereign Lord the
King; saying, Let the King live for ever: Had I a thousand lives, I should
think them all too little to spen^ for his Majesty's Royal Prerogative: and
had I as much blood in my veins as would swell the Thames, I would shed it
every drop in this cause: And then wishing the people not to be discouraged,
nor daunted at the Prelates power, but bid them labor to preserve innocence,
and keep peace within, and go on in the strength of your God, and he will
never fail you in such a day as this: Then says he, as I said before, so I
say again, had I as many lives as I have haire^ upon my head, or drops of blood
in my veins I would give them up all for this Cause. Yet all this could not
free them from sufferings, although Mordecai had saved the Kings life from the
hands of Traitors, yet no honor is done to Mordecai: But the Lord has all
these things upon the File, and in his due time he will cause the King to read
the the Chronicles, to find out that which Mordecai has done, and requite it,
Esther 6.1. For behold thy servants are ready to do whatsoever my Lord the
King shall appoint, 2 Samuel 15.15. Not as men-pleasers, but as the servants of
Christ, doing the will of God from the heart, with good will doing service, as
to the Lord and not to men, Ephesians 6.6.7. For we must be subject, not only
for wrath, but for conscience sake, Romans 13.6. Yet not as bringing the
conscience under any humane power, but as in obedience to Gods command, who is
the only Lord of Conscience, he says, Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers, Verse 1. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the
Lords sake, whether it be to the King, as supreme, and to Governors sent by
him, 1 Peter 2.14.15. And we honor and reverence them as the Deputies of God:
for the powers that be are ordained of God, and their place is Gods Ordinance,
Verse 2. He says, By me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice; by me Princes
rule, and Nobles, and all the Judges of the earth, Proverb; 8.15, 16. All
Princes Judges, and Magistrates bear the name of God, as being clothed with
his authority: GOD stands in the Congregation of the mighty, and judges
among the Gods, I have said ye are Gods; Psalm. 82.16. Also we reverence them
from Gods command, which says, Fear God and honor the King, 1 Peter 2.17.
Yea we must fear God and the King, not with a slavish, but with a filial
fear, My son fear thou the Lord, and the King, Prove. 24.21. Thus we are
highly to esteem of civil government; for as the breath of our nostrills is
the Lords anointed. Lam. 3.20. And when David would go forth to war himself,
the people answered, Thou shall not go forth, for if we fly away, they w ll
not care for us, neither if half of us dye, will they care for us; but now
thou art worth ten thousand of us, 2 Samuel 18.2.3. So then our lives and
states, and all we have is not too dear to do him service. Now such a one is
a faithful Christian, and a loyal Subject: but because some are like the
unjust Judge, who neither feared God, nor regarded man, Luke 18.4. Yet they
would be thought to be faithful Christians and loyal subjects: therefore to
make them manifest, I shall first show negatively who they are not, and then I
will endeavor affirmatively to show unto you who they are.

First, they are not that profane blaspheming ^rout that cling about his
Majesty, who in their common talk dare Jehovah to his face to damn and sink
them to the pit of Hell: but can these that are enemies to GOD and to
themselves be either faithful Christians or loyal Subjects? it is
impossible. Such as these, says the Prophet, being in any straight, as when
they are hungry, they will curse their King and their God, and look upward,
Isaiah 8.21. And did not those many of them at the fight at Newburie breath out
their last breath, blaspheming GOD and cursing their King? but as they love
cursing so let it come unto them: as they cloth themselves with cursing like
as with a garment, so let it it come into their bowels like water, and like
oyl^ into their bones, Psalm. 109.17, 18. But although these men swear, yet
faithful Christians and loyal subjects fear an Oath, Ecclesiastes 9.2, They
know that because of swearing the Land mourns, Jeremiah 23.10. They tremble
at that flying rout that is sent into the house of the thief, and into the
house of the swearer to cut them off, Zechariah 5.3. Neither dare they curse
the King, no not in their thought; for a Bird of the air shall carry the
voice, and that which has wings shall tell the matter, Ecclesiast. 10.20. It
is written, that thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people, Acts
23.5. Then those that cannot keep their tongues from swearing and their hands
from stealing, declare plainly how they despise civil government, and those
Laws that should restrain those cursed practices, these licentious sons of
Belial, who seek to overthrow civil government by violence. But I shall be
more brief in the rest, because J am but in the Preface.

Secondly, the Romish Clergy or the Prelacy are enemies to civil government,
who exempt themselves from under their power, and not only so, but they seek
to take the power from the Magistrates to themselves, and so to make them their
vassalls: their cavills I have answered distinctly in this Book.

Thirdly, the Antinomians and Familists are enemies to civil government, who
seek to overthrow the eternal Law of God, on which the civil Law is built:
now if these men take away the foundation whereon all our Laws are built, what
do they else in this, but seek to overthrow all civil government, that they
may more freely satisfy their licentious affections?

Fourthly, the Brownists, who call themselves Independent; there be many Sects
of them, since Brown first breached that Schism: some follow Smith, some
Johnson, some Robinson, some Ainsworth, but they all dash one against another,
and all excommunicate themselves from the Church of Christ: and, suith Pager,
three or four hundred Brownists have brought forth more Apostate Anabaptists
and Arrians sometimes in one year than ten thousand members of the Reformed
Dutch Church in Amsterdam has done in ten years, though tempted by seducers as
much as any others: of this he was an eyewitness, being then and there a
member of the Classical Assemblies; see his Epistle to the Arrow against the
Brownists. They deny that Magistrates should have any hand in Religion, or the
work of Reformation: they affirm that Christian Princes and Magistrates have
no more to do in or about the Church than Heathen Princes: but here they
entrench upon civil government, denying Caesar his due: thus they would have
civil government lessened, or limited. The Popish Clergy, they would have
civil power removed from the Magistrate to themselves: profane people would
have it connived at, in respect of themselves; and Antinomians seek the
violation of it by accident, in seeking to make void the Moral Law of God. Yet
my purpose in writing this book was not to meddle with any of these; but as
they set upon me in the pursuit of those grand enemies of civil government,
which are that wicked generation of the Anabaptists; these are they to whom I
chiefly bend the whole drift of my disputation, as being absolute enemies to
the essential being of civil government. It is neither conniving, nor
limiting, nor removing that will serve their turns, unless they have an utter
extirpation of it: so then all the rest do some way or other dash against
civil government: but these are professed enemies to it. Hence I conclude that
none of these are the men whom I intend, when, J say, they are faithful
Christians, and loyal subjects.

Now J answer affirmatively, that those faithful Christians and loyal
subjects are those people that are faithful to Luthers Protestation, and to
Calvin's Jnstitution: the first of these was the original cause from whence the
name of Protestants did first arise: for when Luther did first renounce that
strumpet of Rome, he caused them all that were with him to enter into a
Protestation against all Popery, and popish Innovations; and all that took it
were ever afters wards called Protestants: and we in this Kingdom have taken
the very same Protestation against all Popery and popish Innovations; and I
doubt not but we have many amongst us who will hazard lives and states and all
they have, to maintain that Protestation, and through Gods mercy will prove
themselves good Protestants. Now for Calvin's Institution, I do not call it so,
as if he had made it of his own head, but as a faithful servant of Jesus
Christ, he has faithfully declared all the counsel of God, as Paul did, Acts
20.27. that all may see what a Church Christ has instituted in his word, and
the great blessing of God upon this man's labors, and upon all that walked in
the same steps.

Dear Christian and loyal subject, thou that endevourest to have a conscience
void of offense both toward God and toward men, Acts 24.16. Thou that
renderest to God his due, and to Caesar his due; thou that obeyest both the
first and second table of the Law, thou that fear God, and ho^ourest the
King, and submittest thy self to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, I
say to thee, Be faithful to the death, and thou shall have the Crown of life,
Rev. 2.10. Ye shall be hated of all men (says Christ) for my names sake, but
he that holds out to the end, the same shall be saved, Matthew. 10.22. And for
those that do in any case dash against Gods Law, or man's Law, I would entreat
them to read this Book with an impartial eye, and it may be they may see their
error; and if so, then I would entreat them to imitate the faithful Christian
and loyal Subject; and so as they grow in strength and wisdom, they shall
grow in favor with God and men, as our perfect pattern did, Jesus Christ, who
said, learn of me who am meek and lowly in heart, and you shall find rest for
your souls, Matthew. 11.29. And so I commend thee to God, and the word of his
grace, which is able to build thee up, and to give thee an inheritance among
all them that are sanctified, Acts 20.32. Now the God of pe^ce, that brought
again from the dead our Lord Jesus that great Shepherd of the sheep, through
the blood of the everlasting Covenant, make thee perfect in every good work, to
do his will, working in thee that which is well pleasing in his sight, through
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen Hebr. 13.20, 21.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, THOMAS BAKEWELL.

The Errata.
Some faults have escaped the Pressc, and because the number of pages is not
sot, I must direct thee to them by the letters on the lower and on the first,
b. l. 20. for God r. Gods. On the backeside, l. 5. for if. r. for. On the
second, b. l. 1. leaveout to on the bakside of the second, d. l. 35. put in
are. On the first, h. l. 25. put in called. On the backeside of the second, h.
l. 11. for of r. as, l. 40. for Prophet^r. paths. On the backeside of the
third, I. l. 35. put in not. On the second, k. l. 1. put in the means of. On
the blancke of k. l. 11. for Gervenus, r. Servetus. On the backeside, l. 13.
for Churches r. witnesses. On the first L. l. 8. put in the. On the backeside,
l. 36. for if r. that. l. 35. leave out no.

A confutation of the Anabaptists and all others who affect not Civil
Government, proving the lawfulness of it, and a full answer to all their
Cavils that are or can be made against it.
THere be two main arguments to prove the lawfulness of civil government
amongst Christians.

First, Civil government is very necessary, and that appears in many
perticulars, such as these; It is necessary to defend the outward worshipping
of God, and to defend the sound Doctrine of Godliness, and the state of the
Church; and to frame our life to the fellowship of men, and to fashion our
manners to civil righteousness, and to procure us into Friendship one with
another, and to nourish common peace and quietness. Now while we are here we
stand in need of such helps, so then the thought of putting down Civil
Government is outrageous cruelty, for we stand in as much need of it as of our
bread and water, the Sun and the air, yea the dignity of it is far more
excellent; for if there were no civil government, men could not live together
the outragiousnesse of man's nature would be so boundless: Again, if it were
not for civil government it were unpossible to uphold the true Religion, for
all manner of wickedness would so abound, as Idolatry and Sacrilege against
the name of God, and blasphemies against his Truth, and all manner of sin; For
the man Micah had his house of Gods; In those days there was no King in
Israel, but every man did that which was right in his o^^ne eyes, Judges
17.5.6. And he consecrated a Levite to Idolatry, and put ^^m in his house of
God and said, now I know that the Lord will do me good: In those days there
was no King in Israel, ver. 12.13. chap. 18.1. The Levites wife played the
whore and went from him and was afterward forced to death: In those days
there was no King in Israel, Chap. 19.1.2.25. The Children of Israel had sworn
saying, cursed be he that gives a wife to Benjamin, yet they dispensed with
their Oath and gave their daughters to them: In those days there was no King
in Israel, every man did that which was right in his own eyes, Chap. 21.18.25.
Now the civil government restraines all these outrageous abominations among
the people, that common peace be not disturbed, that every man may keep his own
in safety, that men may use their affairs together without hurt or danger,
that honesty and modesty may be kept, and that among Christians there may be a
profession of religion, and that among men may be a man like civility; So then
this Ordinance of policy is to defend the true religion which is contained in
the Law of God, that it be not openly and sacriledgiously broken and defiled.

The second maine ground to prove the lawfulness of civil Government, is
taken from the honorable Titles that God is pleased to put upon it when he
commends it unto us; Those whom it pleased God to put in the place of
Magistrates, they are called Gods, I have said ye are Gods, Psalm. 82.6. And
this is of no small Importance, for thereby is signified that they have
Commandment from God, and that they are furnished with the authority of God,
and do altogether bear the person of God, whose place they do after a certain
manner supply, see John 10.35. If the Scripture says he calls them Gods unto
whom the Word of God was given, which is his word of Command, being a word of
Authority; what is this else but to decla e that God has committed his
basinesse to them, that they should serve in his Office as Moses and
Iehoshaphat said to their Judges, whom they appointed in every City of Judah,
that they should sit in judgment not for man, but for God, Deuteronomy. 1.16. 1 Cron.
19.6. And so to the same purpose the wisdom of God affi^meth by the mouth of
Solomon, that it is his work that Kings reign, and Princes decree justice; By
me Princes rule, and Nobles, and all the Judges of the earth, Prove. 8 15.16.

This plainly declares that the government of all things in earth that is in
the hand of Kings and other Rulers, is only from the Providence and the holy
Ordinance of God to who^ it seemed good so to order the matters of men,
forasmuch as he is both present and President among them, in making of Laws,
and in executing uprightness in judgments: This also Paul affirms and reaches
when he reckons Governments among the gifts of God, which being diversely
distributed according to the diversity of grace, and ought to be employed of
the servants of Christ to their edification, Romans 12.8. And although he there
properly speaks of a Counsel of grave men which in the Primitive Church were
appointed that they should have the rule of ordering the public Discipline,
which Office the Apostle calls Government, 1 Cor. 12.28. Yet forasmuch as we
see that the end of civil power tends to the same end, therefore we need not
doubt but that he commends unto us all kinds of Governments, but see Romans
13.1. Where he purposely makes a full discourse of that matter, for there he
shows that Power is the Ordinance of God, and that there is no Powers but
they are ordained of God, and that Princes themselves are the Ministers of God,
for a praise of them that d e well, and for a terro^r to evil doers. Hence I
conclude, that civil Government is a calling not only holy and lawful before
God, but also the most holy and most honorable calling of all other in the
whole life of men; yet says Mr. Perkins on his Commentory on Jude page 110.
many Libertines sprung up in the Apostles days, such as Simon Magus, and his
Disciples, who taught that men might lawfully commit fornication: So also the
Disciples of Basilides Eunomius, and the Gnostics, Heretics who taught that
men might live as they list, seeing now such liberty was procured them, being
freed from being under the Law any longer, which sin died not with those cursed
heretics, but the Devil has in these last days revived it, especially in 4.
so^s of men.

First, the Libertines of this age, who hold with the former, that being under
grace, they are freed from the obedience of the Law. Secondly the Anabaptists,
who upon consideration of the liberty (...) that civil Jurisdiction and to
Magistracy is unlawful, as also to make war, and take an Oath before a
Magistrate, these (says he) are dangerous enemies wheresoever they be, both to
the grace of God, and to the good of men, for where the civil sword cease,
there can no society stand in safety. Thirdly, another kind of Libertines are
the Papists with their whole Religion, being open enemies to the grace of God,
turning it into wantonness and liberty of sinning against him diverse ways:
First, God having of his grace given unto the Church a power of the keys to
open and shut Heaven, but their religion has turned it into an instrument of
profaneness, in setting up a new Priesthood to absolve and forgive sins,
properly in offering a Sacrifice both for the quick and dead, and so abolishing
the Sacrifice of Christ. Secondly, of injustice, for by it they depose Kings
and Princes, and they free Subjects from their Allegiance, and they stir them
up and encourage them to conspiracies and rebellions, and they maintain
Factions, Civil Wars and Seditions, and all by virtue of their power. Thirdly,
of horrible Covetousness, by selling of pardons for thousands of years, by
which Craft they have gotten the third part of the Revenews of Europe into
their hands, which proves plainly that they turn the grace of God into a
liberty of sinning against him.

The fourth sort of Libertines, are carnal and formal Protestants, who turn
the counsel of Gods election into wantonness, saying, if I be elected to
salvation, I shall be saved, let me live how I will, but if I be not elected, I
shall not be saved, lot me do what I can.

Secondly they turn the mercy of God into wantonness, in saying God is
merciful, I will deser my repentance, for at what time soever a sinner
repents, God will put all his sins out of his remembrance: Therefore they will
not repent yet, saying, what young Saints and old Devils, thus they cast away
the timely acceptance of Gods mercy with a scornful reproach.

Thirdly, some under pretense of brotherly love spend all that they have in
wantonness, riot, excess, gameing, and company keeping to the begge^ing of
themselves and their Families.

Fourthly, others under a pretense that the Jewish Sabbath is abbrogated by
Christ, and now there is no distinction of times, hence they will keep no
Sabbath at all.

Fifthly, some others say where sin abounded, grace abounded much more, Romans
5.20. Therefore say they, let us continue in sin that grace may abound: But all
these turn the grace of our God into wantonness, and therefore by the just
judgment of God for committing such things are worthy of death, yet they not
only do the same, but take pleasure in them that do them, R^m. 1.32.

Now these Libertines for the better encouragement of their Disciples in evil,
they tell them they shall be illuminated and deified, such great matters they
promise them, and by this means make them the children of the Devil sevenfold
more then they were before: and for the Romish Clergy they have been very large
in their pr^mises unto their hearers. They tell them that they shall be able to
satisfy the justice of God for their sins, yea, and to merit everlasting life,
and not only so, but they shall be able to do works of Supererogation, that is,
they shall be able to do more then the law of God requires of them, yea, for a
little money they shall have a tolleration to break any of Gods Commandments,
and to reject them at their pleasure, much like to the old Pharisees, when Gods
law said: He that curses father or mother shall dye the death; but these men
will say, although he honor not his father or his mother he shall be free, Mat
15.46. These Achans have a long time troubled our Israel: They neither fear
God nor regara man, Luke 18.4. They despise all government both of God and man,
divine and humane.

Divine government is the absolute power of God, whereby he makes laws to bind
the conscience, and that under pain of life or death eternal; Now this is the
power of the whole Trinity, but the administration of it is committed to the
son, this divine law of God is despised by Libertines, or as now they are
more commonly called Antinomians, and by Anabaptists, Papists, and profane
Protestants, yet at this time I intend not to call them to an account for
despising of that government alone, as in it self, but there is another kind
of government despised of these men, which is a humane government, for the
Apostle says: Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake,
whether it be to the King as supreme or unto governors sent by them, 1 Pet.
2.13, 14. This is that government which is so much despised, especially by the
Anabaptists, to them I chiefly bend the drift of my disputation, yet not
conniving or sparing any other that shall dash against it, or any way seem to
undervalue it.

This humane or civil government is a state of superiority consisting in the
power of commanding, and in the power of the sword for the good of mankind,
that it is a state of superiority appears, Romans 13.1. Let every soul be
subject to the higher power. Again, it consists in a double power, 1. In
commanding, that is, of making laws and edicts, calling and conventing, the
second power is that of the sword, and it may be comprehended under thesce 4.
heads, 1. In arresting, 2. Imprisoning, 3. In putting to death, 4. In making
war in way of protection or otherwise.

The reason why this power of the sword is added, is this, to put a difference
between the authority of the magistracy, and the authority of the ministry:
Now this difference stands in 3. things. First, the magistracy has a power
in it self, whereby the civil Magistrate may command in his own name, but
the Ministry has power only to pronounce what God commands, and in his name
saying; Thus says the Lord, none durst ever say from himself, I say unto you,
but Christ alone, Math. 5.

Secondly, the authority of the civil Magistrate is in himself, but the
authority of the Minister is not in himself, but in Christ, so then the civil
Magistrate may command obedience to himself, but the Minister commands it to
God.

Thirdly, the civil Magistrate has power over the outward man, but the
Minister has power only to counsel, persuade and exhort. So much of the
difference between the Magistracy and the Ministry.

Secondly, this power of the sword is added to distinguish the power of the
magistracy from all private power, as in Schools and Families, which have a
power of commanding, but not of the sword.

Lastly, I add for the common good of mankind, Romans 13.4. He is the Minister
of God to thee for good, or for thy wealth, that is in procuring the welfare of
soul and body, which stands in two things, First, true Religion, Secondly,
civil justice, both which are by the magistracy maintained,

Now here it may be demanded, how far the power of civil government
reaches. I answer, over all causes, things, and words of men, whether Civil,
or Ecclesiastical, over Temporal things. I know none that will make question
of it, but the Anabaptists, who deny the very being of it, but it also reaches
to the causes of the Church, and this appears in that the Kings must have the
book of the Law before them when they sit upon the Throne of the Kingdom, and
it must be with them, and they must read therein all the days of their lives,
that they may learn to fear the Lord their God, and that they may keep all
the words of this law, and do them, that their heart be not lifted up above
their brethren, Deuteronomy. 17.18.19.20.

Secondly, this we may see in many examples of holy Kings in Scripture, Josiah
kept the Passover and commanded others to keep it, 2 Chronicles. 35.1.16. and K.
Asa commanded Judah to seek the Lord God of their fathers, and to do the Law
and the commandment, and he took away the Altars of the strange Gods, and the
high places, and brake down the images, and cut down the groves, 2 Chr. 14.3.4.
And Manasseh repaired the Altar of the Lord, and sacrificed thereon
Peace Offerings, and commanded Judah to serve the Lord, Chap. 33.16. And Josiah
took away all the abominations out of all the Countries that pertained to the
children of Israel, and he made all that was present to serve the Lord their
God, Cha. 34.33. Israel served the Lord all the days of Joshuah, and all the
days of the Elders that outlived Jo^huah, Josh. 24.31. And the Lord raised up
unto them David to be their King, to whom he gave testimony, and said, I have
found David the s^nne of Jes^e, a man after mine own heart, which shall
fulfill all my will, Acts 13.22. And so when he was King, he did not only
reform his own Family, that no liar should dwell in his house, nor deceitful
person should tarry in his right, and slanderers he would cut off, and proud
persons he would not suffer: the faithful should dwell with him, but yet this
is not all (mark says he) I will early destroy all the wicked of the land,
and cut off wicked doers from the City of the Lord, Psalm. 102.

Thirdly the command of God, goes down to the house of the King of Judah, and
speak unto him this word and say, hear the word of the Lord o King of Judah
that sit upon the Thro^e of David, execute judgment and righteousness, and
deliver the spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor, do no wrong nor violence
to the stranger, and fatherl^ss^^ and the widow, neither shed innocent blood in
this place, then if they do these things, abundance of blessings are promised,
but if they do not these things, fearful judgments are threatened, Jer.
22.3.4.5. and 21.11.12. And (says David) Be wise o Kings, serve the Lord,
kiss the Sun lest he be angry, Psalm. 2. Fourthly, the Lord has promised that
Kings under the Gospel shall be nursing Fathers, and Queens nursing Mothers
to his Church, Isa. 49.23. Yea Kings shall bring their honor and glory into
it, Revel. 21.24. That is, the honor and glory of their power and authority,
and riches also, shall be all improved for the good and welfare of the Church,
they shall cast their Crowns before the Throne saying, worthy art thou O Lord
to receive glory and hoxour and power, for thou have created all things, and
for thy pleasure they are and were created, Revelat. 4.10.11. And as they have
given their power to the Beast, so time will come, the Lord hasten it, that
they will give all unto Christ for the good of his Church, as David did. 1 Chronicles. 29.11.12.

But hear the Schism of Brownie, those independent people will set upon me,
who tell us that Christian Princes and Magistrates have no more to do in or
about the Church then heathen Princes; I answer, but every faithful Subject
under a Christian Prince will acknowledge his place is to defend the says, I
mean the Doctrine of faith, all those truths which are necessary to be believed
to salvation they are to defend, that no heresy as a canker may corrupt, as
also the written word of God, which is called the word of faith, because by it
faith is wrought in the Elect, Romans 10.17. this faith they must defend also:
But they object, that those Kings of Judah mentioned before, who meddled in the
Church with Reformation and Establishment of Religion, that they did it not as
Kings, but as Types of Christ, so that now Christ is come, he has put an end
to all such Types and Shadows; but this is a wicked error for us to exclude
any particular calling that is lawful, especially such an eminent calling as
that of the Magistracy, from (...) any hand in the work of Reformation, and
setting up of the true Gnvernment of Jesus Christ amongst us, as though that
Christ was not then the King of his Church ^swell as now.

I once demanded of some of the chief of them in that way what Christ was to
the Church of the Jews, if not their King while those Reformers were living,
but I was never answered yet: But what says the Lord, I have set my King upon
the hill of Sion, Psalm. 2.6. The Lord said unto my Lord (says King David)
Psalm. 110.1. Yea before the Law was given when Abraham sat in his Tent door,
he lift up his eyes and looked, and lo three men stood before him, but one of
them was Christ, for (said he) My Lord if now I have found favor in thy sight,
pass not away I pray thee from thy servant, Genesis 18.2.3. The other two were
angels which went to Sodom, Chap. 19.1. He appeared often, as to Jacob Genesis
32.24.28. and Exodus 23.20. Joshua 5.14.15. He is called the King of Jacob, and
the King of Israel, and wisdom which is Christ says, By me Kings reign, and
Princes decree justice; By me Princes rule and Nobles, yea all the Judges of
the earth, Pro. 8.12.15.16. So that then Kings were Gods Deputies on earth
as well as now: But will they debar that honorable calling of the Magistracy
from having any hand in the work of Reformation of Religion under the Gospel,
how will they answer such places as these, They shall bring thy sons in their
Arms and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders, and Kings shall
be thy nursing Fathers, and Queens shall be thy nursing Mothers, Isa. 49.22.23.
And says Paul, pray for Kings, and all that are in Authority, that we may lead
a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty, 2 Timothy 2.1.2. Then
must we pray that Kings and those in authority may be a means to help us to
lead a peaceable, quiet, honest and godly life, and then say presently that
they have no more to govern us in a godly life, than heathen Princes, but
Kings must read in the Law of God all the days of their life, that they may
learn to fear the Lord their God, and keep all the words of this Law, and do
them, Deuteronomy. 17.10 19. If this does not satisfy, see one place more, 2 Samuel
22.3, The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel speak to me he that rules
over men must be just, and not only so, but ruling in the fear of God. If this
suffices not, let them show whem or where any lawful calling was debard from
the work of Reformation, if they cannot, then why should this honorable
calling be excluded? We may read of many callings that put to their hand in
repairing the walls of Jerusalem, which was a Type of the Church, as the
Apothecaries, Goldsmiths, Merchants and others, and Rulers that put their hand
to the work, and commended but their Nobles, are branded for this, that they
put not their necks to the work of the Lord, see Nehem. 3.5.

I grant that Ministers are to inform the Church what is the will of God
concerning Reformation but the Church and People are to do it in obedience to
Gods Commandment, and the commandment of the Magistrate, see both these Ezra
6.14. these were heathen Kings, and were they also Types of Christ: Again,
shall heathen Princes have their hand in the work of Reformation, and shall
Christian Kings be barred from it, shall those without the Covenant and without
Grace do it, and shall not Christian Kings and Magistrates being in the
Covenant and in the state of grace do it? those that are not blind may see
their folly.

In the next place it will be demanded whether Magistrates have the same
authority in Ecclesias^icall things as in Civil: I answer, no, there be two
differences to be marked; First in civil causes it orders all, and executes
all, but in Ecclesiastical it has power to order al, but not to execute the^,
the Magistrate indeed orders and prescribes an all, but the Min ster is he
that executes in Ecclesiastical causes. Secondly, Civil Authority has power
over all the things of men, as their words and actions, body and goods, but not
over the things of God, as the Word and Sacraments, Faith and Conscience, and
all the graces of Gods spirit wrought in the heart, civil power has no rule
over these, for (says Christ) Give unto God the things of God and unto Caesar
the things of Caesar. Secondly, this authority exten^^eth to all sorts of
persons, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, but so as it reaches not beyond
the out ward man, it is to the body life, conversation and outward things, but
not to the soul and conscience of which God is the only Lord and governor: Now
if it be demanded how many kinds of Civil Government there be, I answer, it is
of three sorts, first in one person, which is a Monarchy. 2. In more then one,
when the government is in a few States and Peers, this may be called
Aristocrificall. or a Parliamentary way of government. 3. When it lies in the
body of the People, this is called a popular government by one of these three
is every Commonwealth governed.

Here I need not to dispute which of these is the best kind of government for a
Christian Commonwealth to be governed by. I suppose a populer government is
the way to sedition and to Civil wars, and mutinies in a Commonwealth, and
Monarchiall would be a very heavy burden for a free Nation to bear, when
Reheboam told them he would make their yoke heavy, and whip them with
Scorpions, he almost lost all his Subjects. 1 Kings 12.14. Then I conceive a
Parliamentary way of government to be most agreeable to Gods word, and most
comfortable and beneficial to all the people, when the three States are
assembled, the King entering a Covenant with the Lords and Commons, representing
the whole body of the land: Thus all the Elders of Israel came to Hebron, and
David made a Covenant with them in Hebron before the Lord, and they anointed
David King over all Israel, 1 Chro. 11.3. And when Joash was anointed King,
all the chief of the Fathers of Israel came to Jerusalem, and all the
Congregation made a Covenant with the King in the house of God, 2 Chronicles. 23.2,
3. Now this Covenant between the King and the representative body of the
Kingdom binds all in obedience, see Josh. 9.18, 19.20. What the Princes of
Israel then did, if Saul although a King, and many hundred of years after,
shall presume to break this Covenant, his house and Kingdom shall sinart for
it, see 2 Samuel 21. Nay, although the covenanting with those people was a sin,
and many of the people murmured at it, yet it being made, must not be broken,
which does at this time charge us all to be under this National Covenant,
considering the representative body of the Land have solemnly taken it,
although some refractory people refuse it and murmr at it, yet this will not
free any from observing of it, Deuteronomy. 29.14, 15.

The Oath of the Kings of England taken out of the Parliament Role, 1. H. 4. N.
17.
The form of the Oath wont and accustomed to be taken at the CORONATION.
YOu shall keep the Church of God, the Clergy and the people entirely in peace
and concord in God, according to your power. He shall answer, I will keep them.

You shall cause equal and right Justice in all your judgments, and
discretion in mercy and truth, according to your power. He shall answer, I
wild^^e it.

You shall grant just Laws and Customs to be kept, and you shall promise those
shall be protected by you, and to the honor of God, to be strengthened, which the
Common people shall choose according to your power. He shall answer, I grant and
promise it.

And the people bind themselves to the King in the Oath of Allegiance.

BUt now step out the Anabaptists, who despise government, saying, all swearing
is unlawful; for say they, Christ says, swear not at all, Mat. 5.34. I
answer, that is meant in our communication, which must be Yea, yea, and nay,
nay v 37. Again, God commands swearing as a part of his worship, saying, Thou
shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shale swear by his name,
Deuteron. 6.13. and 10.20. Now Christ came to do the will of his Father, John
5.30. And not to contradict it as our Anabaptists blasphemously affirm, while
they say, Christ here flatly forbids swearing, which was commanded by God as a
part of his worship: but see how these wicked people would make a breach of
Unity in the very Trinity between God the Father, and God the Son; then well
may these blasphemers make rents and divisions in Kingdoms and Common wealths.
Again, the Apostle is so far from denying the lawful use of swearing, that he
gives a sufficient reason to prove the lawfulness of it in some cases for
says he men verily swear by the greater, and an oath for confirmation is the
end of all strife, Heb. 6.16. Again, we have many examples of them that have
sworn upon some occasions, both out of the old Testament and out of the New,
Genesis 21.23.31.53. Romans 9.1.2 Cor. 1.23. 2 Kings 6.31. This may suffice to prove
that swearing in some cases is lawful.

Now to know what an oath is, we shall see by the parts of it, which are two,
Confession and Imprecation: Confession is threefold, though for the outward
form the words be few: First, a man confesses that which he swears to be
true in his conscience. 2. That God is a witness not of his outward action and
speech, but also of his particular conscience. 3. That God is an omnipotent
Judge of all, and of him that swears, and able to justify him if he swear
truly, or otherwise to condemn him eternally if he swear falsely, these things
are confessed by him that swears.

The second thing in an oath is Imprecation, which is a prayer to God for two
things. 1. That God would be witness with him that swears, to testify that
he swears truly, and according to his conscience, so Paul did, Romans 9.1. I
speak the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience bearing me witness in the
holy Ghost. 2. a man prays that God would become a Judge to curse him with
eternal wrath, if he swear falsely, thus did Paul, 2 Cor. 1.23. I call God to
record upon my soul; and the form of swearing in old time was the using of
this imprecation, God do so to me, and more also if I do not thus and thus, 2
Kings 6.31. Thus you see what an oath is: Now it may be demanded, when be the
times, and in what cases we may lawfully swear, seeing we may not swear in
our communication.

I answer, a man may lawfully swear, when the Magistrate ministers an oath
unto a man upon a just occasion, for the Magistrate has the power of God in
this case, and therefore when he justly requires it of a man, then he may
lawfully swear.

Secondly, when a man's own calling general or particular, necessarily requires
an oath, and that in four cases, 1. When the taking of an oath serves to
maintain, procure, or win unto God any part of his glory, or to preserve the
same from disgrace, in this regard Paul moved with a godly zeal, used an oath
for confirmation of his Doctrine, that the Churches to whom he writ, might be
established in the truth, and so glorify God the more.

Secondly, when his oath serves to maintain or further his own or others
salvation, or preservation in soul or body, in this case Paul calls God for a
record unto his soul, that he came not to Corinth to spare them, 2 Cor. 1.23.
And David to further himself in the way of salvation bound himself by an oath
that he would keep Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119.106.

Thirdly, when the oath serves to confirm and establish peace and society
between party and party, country and country, Kingdom and Kingdom: Thus did
Abraham and Abimilech swear each to other, Genesis 21.23. And Jacob and Laban,
Genesis 31.53. And by virtue hereof do Subjects bind themselves by oath in
Allegiance to their Princes, and soldiers to their Generals.

4ly, when a man by oath may free himself, and can no otherwise from temporal
losses, or procure to himself some temporal benefits which be of great weight
and moment, then do men take an oath for confirmation to put an end to all
strife, Heb. 6.16. For much strife and contention arises about worldly
affairs, and in this regard, a man by oath may purge himself lawfully from
infamy and slander: in these four cases a man may lawfully swear, not only
before the Magistrate, but also privately, so it be with due reverence and good
conscience, but in common talk or on light occasions, a man cannot lawfully
swear, either by great or small oaths, for that it is to take the name of God
in vain.

Secondly it may be demanded, how must a man take an oath, when he is by a just
occasion called to swear? I answer, there be three virtues or ingredients in an
oath, which must not be wanting, Ier. 4.2. Thou shall swear, the Lord lives
in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness.

First, truth, and that respects 2. things, 1. The matter whereto we swear,
for God may not be brought for a witness to a lie, 2. It must be in truth,
according to the mind of him that swears without fraud or deceit, and with
intent to perform that truly which he promises thereupon.

Secondly, we must swear in righteousness, which also respects two things,
first the thing sworn to, that must be just and lawful, and according to Gods
word: secondly, the conscience of the sweater, for a man must not swear for a
trifle, although the thing be true, but either by authority of the Magistrate,
or upon some necessary cause of his lawful calling, and against this virtue do
those sin that swear usually in their common talk, though the thing be
true, for trifles and light matters are not a just cause of an oath.

Thirdly, we ought to swear in judgment, that is, he that swears rightly,
ought to know the nature of an oath, and be able to judge of the matter before
whom, and to whom,, and of time and place, and other circumstances, and for his
own person, he that swears, ought to see in his own conscience that he is
fit to take an oath, and thereby to worship and glorify God; for he that
swears aright, ought to have his heart smitten with fear and awe toward God,
as in all other parts of his worship, Deuteronomy. 10.20. The fear of God and
swearing are joined together, and therefore a profane man that has no fear
of God in his heart, ought not to swear, this may suffice our Anabaptists
concerning the lawful use of swearing, especially that oath of Allegiance to
Princes, wherein they are bound in subjection to Civil government which they
despise, and so much for their first objection against the lawful use of
Civil government.

Their second objection, they say that subjection came in with sin, but (say
they) Christ has taken away sin, and therefore he has taken away subjection
also: Again, they say that man in innocence was to rule over the fish in the
sea, the fowels of heaven, and over the beasts on the earth, and all creeping
things, but not over man, Genesis 1.26. But after the fall Eve is put under
subjection to Adam, Genesis 3. To this I answer, that there be two kinds of
subjection, the first is servile, the second civil; the former is the
subjection of a slave or vassal, who is only to seek the proper good of his
Lord and Master, the latter is that whereby one man is subject to another for
the common good, the first of these came in by sin, but the second was before
sin, even in innocence, and so Eve was subject to Adam in innocence; and the
Apostle argues thus, Let the woman be subject to the man, for she was taken
out of man; for the man is not of the woman, but the woman of the man; neither
was the man created for the woman, but the woman for the man, 1 Cor. 11.8.9.
Let the woman learn in silence with all subjection; I suffer not a woman to
usurp authority over the man, for Adam was first formed then Eve, 1 Timothy
2.11.12, 13. Now this was in their innocence that the woman was taken out of
man, and that Adam had the priority in creation, and woman was made a help meet
for man, Ge. 218. Therefore she was subject in the time of innocence: Again, in
the time of innocence it was s^^d, increase and multiply, therefore by the light
of nature there is a plain distinction between the father and the son, the
one to rule, the other to obey, therefore obedience is due to Magistrates:
Again, they mis-alledg that place Gen 1.26, because it was spoken not of man
alone, but of all mankind, which comprehends as well women as men, for all
mankind without exception had dominion over the vest of unreasonable creatures;
and for the second place Genesis 3.15. He shall rule, and thou shall be subject;
this is not spoken as if ruling and subjection were not before the fall, but
because now subjection is joined with fear, grief and sorrow, this is that
curse that came in by sin, and was not in innocence, for then subjection was
delightful and full of pleasure; So then subjection it self is not a curse,
but as fear, and grief and sorrow are joined with it; then let us make our
subjection to Magistrates a pleasure, and so the curse is taken off, and we
shall enjoy the blessing promised Ephesians. 6.2.3.

Thirdly they object, that every believer is in the Kingdom of Heaven even in
this life; and further, they say in Heaven there is no King but God, therefore
believers are to be subject to none but God and Christ: I answer, there be two
kinds of Government upon earth, one is spiritual and inward, this is called
the Kingdom of Heaven that is within you, which stands in right usnesse,
peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14.17. In regard of this
government of Christ there is no difference, of bond and free, Master and
Servant, Father and Son, for all are one in Christ, Gal. 3.28. But the other
is actual Government, wherein orders and distinctions of men must be
maintained, as some must be Princes, some must be Subjects, some Fathers, some
children, some Masters, some servants: hence every man ought to sustain two
persons, and is to be considered first as a believer, and a member of the
Kingdom of Christ thus he is equal to any believer, and any believer is
equal to him. Secondly, he must be considered as a member of the Commonwealth
wherein he lives, thus he is either a Superior, or an Inferior, so then
their reason were to some purpose if every believer were only in the Kingdom
of Heaven but every one that lives here is also a member of some
Commonwealth, so that he must either be a Magistrate to rule others, or else
he must be subject, and obedient to others whom the Lord has appointed to
rule them.

Fourthly, they object that civil Government is full of cruelty, which having
the sword in their hand, they destroy the bodies and souls of offenders in not
giving them time of repentance, and therefore is intolerable among Christians:
I answer, Moses and the Levites by Gods commandment flew 3000. of the
Israelites for worshipping the golden Calfe, and never gave them space to
repent. Secondly, malefactors that are not moved to repentance under the
sentence of present death, there is little hope that ever they will repent
although they had longer time allowed to them. Thirdly, Gods wisdom and
commandment must take place of man's reason, but he commands that the
malefactor should dye, that thereby the evil may be taken away; then better it
is that one should be destroyed then unity; better that one be removed then a
multitude by the contagion of his example should be infected, therefore civil
government is necessary, and ought to be obeyed.

Fifthly, they object many places of Scripture, such as these, Gal. 5.1. Stand
fast in the liberty wherein Christ has set you free, from this they plead that
they are freed by Christ from all obedience to Magistrates: I answer, the
liberty which Christ has procured us, is liberty of conscience, and freedom
from the power of sin, Satan, death, hell and condemnation and therefore
spiritual, but not from temporal or civil subjection.

Sixthly, from Ram. 13.8. the Apostle says, owe nothing to any man but love,
therefore say they, no obedience or subjection: I answer, there be two kinds of
debts, 1. a civil debt occasioned by contract and bargaining between man and
man, the second is a debt to which we are all bound by Gods commandment, Law
or Covenant; but this place is to be understood of the first of these so far as
lies in our power, but we are bound still in subjection and obedience to the
latter, and besides in this word love is comprehended all manner of duty
whatsoever, therefore love is the fulfilling of the whole Law: For as love to
God includes obedience, so does love to man the same.

Seventhly, from Mat. 17.26. Where Christ had demanded before of whom the Kings
of the earth take tribute, whether of his own Children or of strangers, and
Peter answered, of strangers, to which Christ replied, then are the children
free; From hence they would gather, that there is no subjection due to
Magistrates, because Kings Sons are freed from paying Tribute: To this I
answer, that Christ here speaks of himself, who was by his birth the heir
of the Crown and Kingdom of the Jews, and therefore by right was to pay none,
neither did he but to avoid offense, but how does this free othermen from their
obecie^ce to Magistrates?

Eighthly, from these words of Paul, Ye are bought with a price, be ye not
the servants of man 1 Cor. 7.23. I answer the Apostle here does not free
servants from their subjection and obedience to them that are their Masters,
for (says he) Servants obey in all things your Masters according to the flesh,
Col. 3.22. But they must not make them absolute Lords over their souls and
Conciences, and the graces of Gods spirit in them, these are the things of God;
Now, if our conscience move us to obedience, it must be from Gods commandment
and not from man's for ye serve the Lord Christ therefore do it heartily; but
mark how, as to the Lord, and not to men, Col. 3.23 24.

Ninthly, they object from these words of Christ saving, The Kings of the
Gentiles exercise Lordship over them and they that exercise authority are
called benefactors but ye shall not be so, Luke 22.25. But what of this, here
was a strife among the Disciples which of them should be accounted the
greatest, and Christ to suppress their ambition, told them that their
ministry was not like to Kingdoms in which one man has pre-eminence above
the rest; but how does this place hinder Magistrates of that subjection which
is due unto them? It is clear from hence, that although the ministry should be
equal, that one should not exalt himself above another, yet it ought to be so
in Kingdoms, therefore civil Government is warrantable and lawful.

Tenthly, they object, that believers are governed by the spirit of God, and so
are able to govern themselves every way, and need not any government of man: I
answer, it is one thing what we do, and another thing what we ought to do, we
ought indeed so to live as not to need any governors, but we do not live so,
yea if believers could live so, yet were the reason naught, for the visible
Church contains as well bad as good, hypocrites as well as sincere Christians,
and therefore the best Churches stand in need of Magistracy for the punishment
of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well, yea the Church lying
open to the malice of Satan and wicked men, stands ever in need of
Magistracy to protect it by force, or war, or otherwise.

Eleventhly, they object that all Christians by the law of God are forbidden to
kill, and says the Lord, speaking of these times under the Gospel, that they
shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountains, Isa 11.9. I answer,
Magistrates in executing justice, do not do it of themselves, but as they are
Deputies to the Lord, they do but execute his will; Iehosaphat said to the
Judges, take heed what you do, for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19.6. Then they doing all things by Gods authority, they ought not to
bear the sword in vain, Romans 13.4. Therefore David rehearses this among the
virtues of a King: To cut off the wicked of the Land, and all the works of
iniquity from the City of the Lord, Psalm. 101. This made Moses to forget his
meekness, and David his gentleness, to do the justice of the Lord: The King
that sits on the throne of judgment, spreads his eyes over every evil
man. Again, a wise King scatters the wicked, and brings the wheel over them
Pro. 20.8.26. Take away the wicked from before the Throne, and the Throne shall
be established in righteousness: An evil man seeks only rebellion,
therefore a cruel messenger shall be sent against him, Pro. 16.12.17.11. Thus you
see that magistrates may cut off malefactors by death, and yet be free from
spilling blood, or the breach of that Commandment, which says, Thou shall not
kill: Nay, it is their righteousness to cut off the guilty malefactor, and by
so doing, they do keep their own hands pure from the blood that those murderers
have shed, and on the contrary if they do not, they are guilty of most horrible
wickedness, yet a Magistrate must take heed that he does neither with
rigorousnesse of mind wound them that he should heal, nor with a superstitious
affectation of clemency, fall into most cruel gentleness.

12. But they object, that under the Gospel Christians shall turn their
swords into Plough shares, and their spears into pruning hooks: Nation shall
not lift up sword against Nation, neither shall they learn war any more, Isa
2.4. To this I have given a large answer in that book entitled the Saints
Inheritance after the day of judgment, when the Saints shall inherit all
things: but till the day that Christ shall come to judgment? wars shall never
cease, they shall fall by the edge of the sword, but when shall this be? surely
very near the end when there be signs in the Sun, Moon, and Stars, then they
shall see the Son of Man in a cloud with power and great glory, but what of
this? I answer, when ye see these things come to pass, know ye that the
kingdom of God is nigh at hand, Lu 21.24.25.27.31. Now will you know when wars
shall cease? I answer, when the Son of Man shall come with power, and great
glory, then is that Kingdom of God at hand, in which there shall be no wars, but
then all that offend shall be gathered out of his Kingdom, and cast into the
furnace of fire, and the righteous shall shine as the sun in the Kingdom of
their Father, Math. 13.41, 42, 43. Then wars shall cease when there shall be none
in that Kingdom that offends, but these offenders must be in the Church, till
the very judgment day at the end of the world: The Angels which are the
Reapers, shall take out those tares that did offend, and cast them into hell
fire; then shall the second Adam restore to the Saints all the creatures in
their first perfection, after that they are purified by fire, at that day the
Saints shall inherit all things, and not before: For the first Adam by sin
brought vanity and corruption upon all the creatures, but at that day the
creatures shall be purified and purged from their vanity and corruption, and then
restored to the Saints alone, and so they shall remain for ever; for the Second
Adam will restore again to the Saints all that they lost, and not as they are
now corrupted and clothed with vanity: For the new heavens and the new earth
which I will make, shall remain before me, says the Lord, Isa 66.22. Of that
Kingdom there shall be no end, Luke 1.33. Now because the Church shall be pestered
with many enemies till the day of judgment, the sword of the Magistrate is
necessary to keep down the seditious stirs of unquiet men, which trouble all
Kingdoms with violent oppressions and heinous evil doings, then Magistrates
ought to defend them that are troubled, and to preserve the laws and
discipline with purity, which is the only means to regulate such wicked men to
better obedience; shall Thieves that rob a few be punished, and shall they
suffer whole Countries to be spoiled with robberies; so then the chief
Magistrate is not only to suppress private injuries with judicial
punishments, but also must defend with war the Dominions committed to his
charge against any foreign invasion whatsoever, and such wars by the testimony
of Scripture in many places are lawful.

Thirteenthly, they object that in the new Testament is neither witness nor
example which teaches that war is a thing lawful for Christians: I answer,
the same rule that was to the Jews remains still for Christians, and there
can be no cause to the contrary why Magistrates should not now defend
Christians as well as they did the Jews. Secondly, we should not look for a full
declaration of these things in the writings of the Apostles, for their purpose
was not to frame a Civil State, but to establish and to settle the spiritual
Kingdom of Christ. Thirdly, if Christ had intended that wars should end at his
coming, he would have said to those Soldiers which demanded of him saying,
what shall we do? Luke 3.14. I say his answer would have been this, cast away
your weapons, and utterly withdraw your selves from war, but he shows no
dislike of their being Soldiers, only he counsels theat to be content with
thear wages, and to do violence to no man; yet by the way, I approve not of
every light-occasion to be ground sufficient to go to wars, unless they be
driven to it by extreathe necessity: For as Cicero, a heathen man said, our
going to war should tend to peace, for war should be sought only, when no
other means will procure peace: Lastly they ought not to go to war upon any
private affection, but as they are sensible of some injury do^e to their
Kingdom, which they are charged to keep in peace, for if any private
affection should move them for wars, they abuse the power committed to them;
which was not given them for their own Commodity, but for their Kingdoms
benefit; thus they may use Garrisons and Fortifications to defend the borders
of their Countries, and if any trouble arise, they may join their Forces
together to suppress the common Enemy which would spoil their Kingdom, which
they are charged to keep in peace and safety.

The Apostle compares the fight of faith, that spiritual combat the child of
God (...) corruptions, to the bodily fight with open enemies to the Church of
Christ's which shows the lawfulness of wars undertaken by Christians for
defense of their Religion, now the good soldier must give himself wholly to
it, and strive lawfully, and he shall be crowned 2 Timothy 3 4 5. And we read of
rare Christians that were Soldiers, the Centurion had soldiers under him, and
yet he had such a says, the like was not found in Israel, Mat. 8.9.10. And
Cornelius was a devout man, and a Captain of the Italian Band, and he had
devout soldiers under him, Acts 10.1.2.7. And Paul was guarded by a Band of
soldiers, Acts 23.23.24. We read that Gog and Magog will compass the Camp of
the Saints, Revel. 20.8.9. But what, shall not this Camp of Saints resist them?
I saw the Beast and the Kings of the Earth, and their Armies gathered together
to make war against him that sat on the horse, (mark) and against his Army,
and the Beast was taken, Revel. 19.19.20. But what, was this done without any
fight? did this Army of Christians, and this Camp of Saints stand all for
ciphers? You shall see Jerusalem compassed about with Armies, Luke 22.20. And
there shall be wars, for all these things must come to pass, Mar. 24.6. It
is spoken indefinitely, that if one King go to war with another, they ought to
withstand him if they be able, Luke 14.31. As we would do against a thief,
and not suffer our house to be broken up, Mat. 24.43. (says Christ) I came to
send fire on the earth, and it is already kindled, Luke 12.49. I came not to
send peace, but a sword, Mat. 10.34. Then he that has no sword, let him sell
his garment and buy one, Luke 22.36. And resist unto blood, Heb. 12.4. Then
those that think their lives too dear for Christ and his Gospel, are
unworthy of either, Mark 8.35. and ill members both to Church and State.

Hence we may gather, that if this be so, then Tributes and Taxes are lawful
Revenues for Princes, which they may chiefly employ to sustain their common
charges of their Office, and likewise use to their private Royalty and honor
of their Princely state and dignity, as we may see by the examples of many
holy Kings in Scripture, which according to the State of their persons which
they did bear, were sumptuously maintained of the common charge, and we read
in Ezekiel. 48.21. That there was a very large portion of land assigned to the
King, etc. Yet again Princes should remember, that their treasure chambers are
not so much their own private coffers, as the Treasuries of the whole People;
therefore says Paul, For this cause pay we tribute, for they are Gods
Ministers, attending continually upon this very thing, to execute wrath upon
him that does evil, and he is the Minister of God to thee for good, render
therefore tribute to whom tribute is due, Romans 13. So then they may not
prodigally waste and spoil what they are betrusted with, for if they do, it
is manifest wrong to the people; nay it is no less then most cruelly and
unnaturally spilling the blood of the people, for their Impositions and
Subsidies, and other kind of tributes are but the supports of public
necessity: Then to weary the poor Communalty without cause, is tyrannical
extortion, these things considered, do not encourage Princes to wastefull
expense and riot, but rather it behooves them with pure conscience before God
to do all that they are bound to dee, lest by their wicked boldness they be
despised of God; and they must be raught by them to whom it belongs, how much
is lawful for them, neither is this Doctrine needless for private men, they
must not rashly and stubbornly give themselves leave to grudge at the expenses
of Princes, although they exceed common and civil measure, see Calvin Insti.
4.20.13.

Here it may be demanded by what rule Civil Government is to be regulated: I
answer, by the Civil and positive Laws of that Kingdom from which they
receive their authority and dignity of civil Magistrates, these Laws are as
strong sinews of Commonweals, or as Cicero calls them, the souls, without
which the Magistrate cannot stand, neither have they without the Magistrate any
force, for the Law may be called a dumb Judge, and the Magistrate a living Law.

Now the Jews had three sorts of Laws, the Ceremonial, which was to them a
dark Gospel, showing forth Christ to them in dark Types and shadows, but
blessed be God, the veil is taken away to us, and Christ is more clearly set
forth to us since the publication of the Gospel, and Christ is come, the
substance of all those dark Types and shadows. Secondly, they had the
Judicial Law, which was the civil or positive Law of their Commonwealth; so
answerable to this, we have our positive Laws of this Kingdom. Thirdly, they
had the eternal Moral Law of God, which commands simply without guile to
worship God with pure faith and godly life. Secondly, it commands to embrace
man with unfeigned love, it is the true and eternal rule of all righteous
walking both to God and men, and it is prescribed to men of all ages and times
who are willing to frame their lives to the will of God, for this is his
eternal and unchangeable will, that he himself should be worshipped of us
all, and that we should mutually love one another; So then although the
judicial or positive Laws of the Jews be taken away, yet the perpetual
duties of the Moral Law abide for ever.

Hence I gather, that every Nation has that liberty left them to make such
Laws as they shall foresee to be most profitable for them, but they must be
framed after the perpetual rule of charity, they must be grounded upon the
same foundation, although they may differ in the form-from other Nations: Now
the Law of God which we call moral, is nothing else but a testimony of the
natural Law that was written in the heart of man by creation, and some
relics of it are still remaining in man, this moral law must be the mark,
and end, and rule of all Laws; then whatsoever laws shall be framed according
to that rule, and directed to that mark, and limited to that end, there is no
cause why we should disallow them, although they differ from the Jewish Law, or
one Kingdom from another in the administration of it: as for example; the law
of God forbids stealing, now the petialty of theft is set down in the
civil laws of the Jews, to restore five oxen for an ox and four sheep for
a sheep, Exodus 22.1. Now other Nations punished theft with recompense of
double, the laws that followed afterward made difference between manifest
theft and that which was not manifest, and some proceeded to banishment, some
to whipping and some at last to the punishment of death: Again, for false
witnessing among the Jews was punished with recompense of equal pain Deuteronomy,
19.18. In some places only with great shame, in some places with hanging, in
othersome with the cross; and for manslaughter, all laws universally do
revenge with blood, yet with diverse kinds of death: and for adultery, in some
places were ordained great punishment, and in some lesser, yet we see for all
this diversity, all tend to the same end, for they all agree togehter to punish
those offenses which the eternal law of God conde ones, as manslaughter,
thefts, adulteries, false w^^^essing, etc. But in the manner of punishment they
agree not, neither is it needful that they should, for in some Countries they
must show vigor with horrible examples against man slayers or else they will
be immediately ruined with murders and robberies, and sometimes punishments
ought to be more severe then at other times, as in the time of was, all
humanity would be cast away unless they then use unwonted fear of punishments;
and some Countries are more addicted to some certain vice, which must be the
more sharply punished to stop the spreading of it. Hence we must not conceive
that the eternal law of God is abrogated, and new Laws made and put in the
place thereof, and prefe red above it, for they are not preferred above it
simply, but in respect of the times, places and Nations, neither was the Moral
Law given by Moses, but to Adam before he sinned, and manifested in writing to
Moses, not for the Jews only, but for all Nations, and to be the ground of all
their positive Laws.

Objections against our positive Law.
FIrst, being the 14th. in number, they object against our laws and
Magistrates, saying, that they are of no use for Christians, for we cannot
lawfully crave their aid in any suite at law, because they are forbidden to
revenge, or to have any controversy. I answer, Paul says that he is the
Minister of God for good, and he is so ordained of God, and for that very
purpose, attending continually upon this very thing, Romans 13.16. To defend us
from the malice and injuries of mischievous men, therefore we ought to pray for
those in authority, that we may live a quiet and a peaceable life, but unless
it be lawful to use such help and benefit, they were given to us in vain
from the Lord, and says Demetrius, if any man have a matter against another,
the law is open, and there are Deputies, let them implead one another; and if
you enquire any thing concerning other matters, it shall be determined in a
lawful assembly, Acts 19, 28, 39. And says Christ: Agree with thine adversary
quickly while thou art in the way with him, lest thine adversary deliver thee
to the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to the Sergeant, and thou be cast into
prison; verily I say unto thee, thou shall not come out till thou have paid the
uttermost farthing, Math. 5.25, 26. Upon these words says Mr. Perkins, Christ
here allows of the Magistrate and sear of judgment, 1. Of his proceeding
against the guilty, in delivering him to the officer, 2. Of the office of the
Sergeant, 3. Of casting guilty persons into prison, 4. Of suing at the Law,
when right cannot be had by other lawful means, but law must not be the first
course that we take in seeking our right, we must rather suffer some wrong, and
seek^ to end the matter by friends, and use law, as Physicians use poisons,
when gentle physic will not serve the turn, then in case of extremity, they
do minister stronger physic, yea some poison it self, so when we cannot
otherwise precure our peace and right, then we may lawfully take the benefit of
the law.

15. But they object, those which seek help at the Magistrates hands for
themselves and others, do prevent that help which they should have from God
their heavenly defender, I answer, not so, for the Magistrate is the minister
of God ordained for this very end, to deliver his afflicted people from the
cruel hands of wicked and malicious men; but they will reply in those words of
Christ, saying, resist not evil, but whosoever shall smite thee on the right
cheek, turn to him the other also, and if any man sue thee at the law, and
take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also. I answer, here Christ would
have them suffer double injury, rather then go to law, especially when they
seek to revenge themselves by law; all this I grant, and more also, for their
whole life should be a continual bearing the cross, when one is gone to fit
themselves for another; They must do good to them that do them wrong, and
wish well to those that curse them, and, which is the only victory, overcome
evil with good, being thus minded, they will not seek eye for eye, and tooth
for tooth, as the Pharisees taught their Disciples to desire revenge; yet all
this hinders not, but that a Christian may use the lawful help of the
Magistrate to preserve their goods, or through their love and zeal to the
Commonwealth, they may sue a malefactor at the Bar for his life.

16. They will object that contendings in law are altogether forbidden and
condemned by Paul, where he says: Brother goes to law with brother, and that
before unbeleevers; Now therefore there is utterly a fault among you, because
ye go to law one with another: Why do you not rather suffer wrong, why do you
not rather suffer your selves to be defrauded? 1 Cor. 6.6, 7. I answer, Paul
himself went to law with his adversaries, for said Paul, I stand at Cesars
judgment scate, where Tought to be judged, Acts 25.10. And he answered for
himself, saying; Neither against the law of the Jews, nor against the Temple,
nor against Caesar have I offended any thing at all; for if I be an offender, or
have committed any thing worthy of death, I refuse not to dye, verse. 8.11. Then
how can any wise man think that Paul went to condemn that which he himself
did? if this were true, we might retort those words back upon himself, saying;
Thou that judge another, condemn st thy self, for thou that judge, do
the same things, Romans 2.1. And as the Jews said to Christ, Physician, heal
thy self, slandering his holy and blameless life that never did amiss,
neither was guile found in his mouth; and so Paul living in all good conscience
both toward God and toward man, Acts 24.16. Yet these men would here fasten a
reproach upon him, to teach contrary to his practice; well the^ the true meaning
of Paul was this, that because the Corinthia^s were very much given to
contentions and strivings at law, and that before heathen Judges, which became
a great scandal to their profession, in not showing Christian meekness one
to another which they ought to do, yea they were so far from covering wrongs,
that they greedily coveted one another goods, and so provoked one another to
wrath: so that here Paul blames their abuse of this ordinance, when every
trifling matter was enough to make them run to the Court of Law, and the least
occasion that could be, was enough to kindle strife and contention, and to
reveoge themselves one of another; This Paul blames, but not the lawful use of
this ordinance appointed of God to preserve peace and unity, so that you see in
all this that civil government is both lawful and very necessary; then this
may discover the wickedness of that man of sin the Antichrist, who sits in the
Temple of God, and exalts himself above all that is called God, and showing
himself that he is God, 2 These. 2.4. Thus against God himself, and against
his Deputies who bear his name, he has for many hundred years usurped a
supremacy over civil government, being the highest rebellion that ever was in
the world; for says the Apostle: Every soul must be subject to the higher
powers, Romans 13.1. But let us hear what he has to say for himself.

First, he objecteth against this place, saying, that it is to be understood of
those that to be subject, but the Popes themselves are exempted; To this I
answer, if the Pope have a soul, he must be subject to civil government; this
is not to bring the soul it self into subjection to civil government, but
this is spoken of all men living, who have souls, those men, their words and
actions, body and goods, are to be subject to civil government; but in this
reply of his exempting himself from all subjection to civil power, he plainly
shows himself to be that Antichrist who exalts himself above all that is
called God, meaning all civil powers and Magistrates who are Gods Deputies,
and who alone bear him name, Psalm 82.1.2. When they are upon the Throne of
judgment, God judges among the Gods.

Secondly, but they object that Vzziah the King burnt Incense upon the altar of
Incense: Then Azariah the Priest went in after him, and fourscore Priests of
the Lord that were valiant men, and they withstood Uzziah the King, and Azariah
the chief Priest, and all the Priests looked upon him, and behold he was
leprous in his forehead and they thrust him out from thence, 2 Chronicles. 26.17,
18.20. Here say they, the Priest deposed the King, and thrust him out of the
Temple: I answer, Azariah resisted the King not by force or violence, but by
word only and admonition, whereby they caused him to depart out of the Temple;
for it is said, that he himself hasted to go out, verse. 20. Neither was he
deposed from his government, but being by God stricken suddenly with a
leprosy, he was by the law shut out from the company and society of men, and
so disabled to govern, although the right of it still belonged unto him.

Thirdly, they object that example of Iehojada the high Priest who deposed Qu:
Athaliah from her Kingdom, and set up young Ioash to be King, 2 Chronicles. 23.
Hence they conclude that the Pope has authority to depose Kings and Emperors:
I answer, Iehojadah the high Priest was next to the King in blood, 2 Chronicles.
22.11. And was one of the States of the Land, who deposed her not alone by
himself, but by the common consent of all the States and Peers of the Land,
see Chap. 23.1, 2. He indeed is chiefly named, because he was the chief of
them in blood; neither did he set up Ioash, but helped to maintain his right
which was usurped by Athaliah: in a word, he protected the right heir, but
could not himself depose nor make over the Kingdom unto him; hence I
conclude, that to exempt the Clergy from under the authority of the Civil
Magistrate is rebellion.

Fourthly, they object that Kings and Princes of their bounty have granted
these privileges unto them. I answer, the law of nature acknowledges a civil
subjection, and the law of God straightly commands it, saying: Let every soul
be subject to the higher powers, Romans 13. And put them in mind to be subject to
principalities and powers, to obey Magistrates, and to be ready to every good
work, Titus 2.1. Then I conclude hence, that no law of any man may offer
violence, or derogate from either of these.

Fifthly, they object from Ier. 1.10. where the Lord says, I have set thee over
Nations and Kingdoms, to plant and to pluck up: Hence they gather, that the
Prophets and their Successors are not to be subject unto civil Government: I
answer, the Prophet is set over Nations and Kingdoms, but not to govern by
the Civil sword, but by the sword of the spirit in his mouth, and he is to
plant and pluck up Kingdoms no otherwise then by declaring that God would
plant, or pluck them up.

Sixthly, they object from Isa. 60.10. That Kings shall come and serve the
Church under the new Testament, and therefore the Church is not to be subject
to Princes, but they unto the Church: I answer, in the Church are two things,
first, the persons of men, secondly, the things of God: Now it is true that
Kings are subject to the things of God in the Church, as the word and
Sacraments, to these Ordinances of God no calling is exempted, says Paul, our
selves are servants for Jesus sake; But to the first of these, which is, the
persons of believers, to these, Kings and Magistrates are not subject; but to
this very question, when some servants were converted, when they lived under
Infidel Masters, they thought themselves by this spiritual calling to be freed
from serving their Masters any longer, but (says Paul) Let every man abide in
the same calling wherein he was called; art thou called to the state of grace
being a servant? care not for it, yet if thou could be freed from serving an
Infidel, use it rather; but if thou can not, here is thy comfort, he that is
called, being a servant, is the Lords freeman, therefore brethren let every man
wherein he is called, therein abide with God, 1 Cor. 7.20.21.22.24. So a subject
being called, is not freed of his obedience to Civil Government, although he
were effectually called under Infidel Governors: it is in this case, as it is
with outward riches, the people of God only have a true right to them all by
Christ, so that all the riches in the world is theirs, all is yours, and ye are
Christ's, 1 Cor. 3.21. And what others have, they are but usurpers, yet
believers must not presently go and take these outward things from any man,
although he be never so wicked; So it is with places of Masters or Magistrates,
although never so wicked, yet while they are in it, we ought to yield obedience
to them, for (says Peter) Cervants be subject to your Masters with all fear,
(now mark) not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward, 1 Pet.
2.18.

Seventhly, they object that Kings and Magistrates are as sheep, and Ministers
are as Pastors and Shepherds, therefore say they, Kings are under Ministers, as
the flock is under the Shepherd: I answer, in the Prophets or Pastors consider
two things; first their persons, secondly their Ministry; now in regard of
their persons all of them are subject to their Princes, and that for conscience
sake, but in regard of their Ministry, Princes and Magistrates are to be
subject, both when the Word is taught and the Sacraments be administered, all
must submit themselves unto it; even as a mean man being a Sergeant, may arrest
a Baron, Earl or Duke, neither may they resist him, because he comes with
the Princes authority to which he must yield himself, though not unto the
person of the Sergeant; So must Magistrates submit unto Ministers, coming not
in their own name, but in the name of God and Christ; now this must be marked,
that Magistrates are not simply subject to the Ministry, but so far as they
teach the word truly, and rightly administer the Sacraments, the which if they
do not, they have power to reform or depose such ministers as shall fail in
their administration, and in this regard Magistrates are called Shepherds, The
Lord says, Cyrus is my shepherd, Isa. 44.28. Though otherwise he be a sheep,
so far as he is truly taught by the Minister, For they may say to the King and
to the Queeno, humble your selves, Jer. 14.18. And Herod feared John, and did
many things, and heard him gladly, Mark 6.20. Thus we see that all men are to
submit themselves to the Magistracy or Civil Government, and to the positive
Laws of the Land.

Now the Romish Clergy are not enemies to Civil Government, as it is
government, but as it is in the hand of Civil Magistrates, so that their drift
is not to put it down, but to remove it from the Magistrates to themselves,
that they might make all Magistrates their vassals. Secondly, profane people
do allow of civil government in their judgment, but they would have some
liberty to entrench upon it in their practice. Thirdly, Anunomians and
Ean^lifts are enemies to the eternal law of God, which is the ground and
foundation of the civil law, which, while they take a way the foundation, of
necessity the whole building must needs fall; So they, although they will not
openly say that they are enemies to civil government, yet by accident, they are
enemies to it, and in their way seek to overthrow it, 4, the independent people
or the Brownists, who will have Kings and Rulers and Magistrates to have no
hand in matters of religion, but all to be servants to the persons of
believers, and so they deny Caesar his due, which is to have power over the
outward man both of words and actions, body and goods, although he has no
power over the things of God, which are, their souls and consciences, faith
and all the graces of Gods spirit that are wrought in the heart, yet we must
obey them for conscience sake, Romans 13.5. Not as to bring these things of God
under their command, but obeying because God commands it, even from the heart
as to the Lord, Col. 3.23. Fifthly the Anabaptists, who are absolute enemies to
civil government, to them (...) chiefly intend, yet all the the rest do
something dash against civil government, and the most of them do expect a time
under the Gosoel, in which they hope to be freed from all civil power and
government, witness that heretical book entitled (The personal reign of
Christ upon earth) which affirms, that all civil power and government shall
be cast down before the end of the world a thousand years; this has great
approbation among them and they the mean time desiring and expecting when all
Thrones and powers shall be cast down, that they may live without rule or
government: But see my answer to it in that book, entitled (The Saints
inheritance after the day of judgment) and for the present let it suffice that
the Scripture mentions but three commings of Christ, one spirituaily, when
he changes the heart, and st^mpeth his own Image of grace upon it. Secondly,
when he came visibly in the flesh. In the fullness of time God sent his Son,
Gal. 4 4. This was done when the word was made flesh and dwelt among us. John
1.14. The third is yet expected, at which coming he shall judge both quick and
dead, and the heavens must receive him un^^ the restitution of all things, Acts
3.21. Thefore no other coming to be expected before the end; but here we may
see how they declare their affections to civil government, when as they expect
that Christ shall come and free them from all obedience to it, and that a
thousand years before the end of the world.

But here some may reply and say to me thus you affect neither Antinemians nor
Familists, Anabaptists nor Papists, Brownists nor profane Protestants, then
what is it you would have? I answer, I desire to be found faithful to Luther's
Protestation, and to Calvin's Institution; the first of these was the original
cause from whence the name of Protestants did first arise, for when Luther did
first renounce that strumpet of Rome, he caused them all that were with him to
enter into a Protestation against all Popery and popish Innovations, and those
that took that protestation were ever afterward called Protestants, and we in
this Kingdom have of late taken the very same Protestation against all Popery
and popish Innovations, therefore I doubt not but we have many amongst us, who
will hazard lives and States and all they have to maintain that protestation,
and so by the good blessing of the Lord will prove themselves good and
faithful Protestants: But for the second, although I call it Calvin's
Institutions, yet not as if he had made it of his own head, but as a faithful
servant of Jesus Christ, he has faithfully declared all the Counsel of God,
as Paul did, Acts 20.27. to all his fellow-brethren, that all may see what a
Church Christ has instituted in his word.

Also this does well agree with our late solemn National Covenant, in which
we have bound our selves, with our hands lifted up to the most high God,
swearing thus; That we shall sincerely, really and constantly through the grace
of God, endeavor in our several places and callings, the preservation of the
reformed Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government
against our common enemies. Now I hope all those that have thus engaged
themselves, are convinced, that their doctrine, worship, discipline and
government are agreeable to Gods Word, else why have we bound our selves to
preserve it there, and to acknowledge the enemies of it to be our common
enemies, yet I deny not, but as it is there, it may have some failings which
may admit of reformation: The Lord open our reformers eyes that they may
connive at nothing that may prejudice the honor of Christ, or the good of his
Church, but whatsoever is commanded by the God of heaven, let it be diligently
done, Ezra 7.23.

Again, we have sworn to endeavor the reformation of religion in England,
Scotland, and Ireland, in doctrine, worship, discipline and government
according to Gods Word, and the best reformed Churches, and for this I hope we
are convinced, that the Presbyteriall is the best reformation, else why do we
bind our selves to preserve it in Scotland? we are or should be resolved be
resolved before we vow, and not after vows to make enquiry, Prove. 20.25.

Again, we swear, that we will endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the
three Kingdoms to the nearest conjunction and uniformity in religion,
confession of faith, sorme of Church Government, directory for worship, and
Chattechising, but if Scotlands government and discipline must not be altered,
the case is clear, that we have bound our selves to uniformity with them in
the forementioned things: Let therefore as many as be perfect be thus minded,
and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto
you, Phil. 3.15. Thus you see the harmony between our protestation and Luthers
protestation, as also between our Covenant and Calvin's Institution, thus far
blessed be the Lord for our blessed union; therefore my motion I hope will not
seem strange, when I shall desire faithfulness to our late Protestation, and
to our solemn Covenant, not as though I did question the faithfulness of our
reformers, for blessed be God they have already done more, then some years
agone we thought we should ever have lived to see, or as though I questioned
the faithfulness of any that have taken that protestation or covenant only I
wish and pray for their perseverance; That as their hands have laid the head
stone thereof, their hands also may finish it, and when they bring forth the
foundation of this house with shouting we shall cry, grace grace unto it. Zech.
4.7.9.

But I must expect some foul-mouthed Prelate to stand up as in Doctor
Bastwick's case saying, that base fellow Calvin, for so that old Francis White
the Prelate of Ely called that ever to he honored Divine, saying that he arose
in an obscure come of the world, and violated and overthrew all order and
authority in the Church, and would also have demolished the authority of the
Magistrates; and then the pr^late of Canterbury avouched his Episcopal
authority, and preeminence over his brethren to be only from God, very much
blaming Calvin for his factious spirit, and said that they held the crowns of
Kings upon their heads, for no Bishop, no King; and those that would have no
Bishops, sought to overthrow all government, and so he concluded with
honorable expressions to that strumpet Synagogue of Rome, saying she was a
true Church, and that she did not sin in any fundamental points, and so the
rest blaspheming the holy Scriptures, calling them the refuge of heretics and
schismatics, and that they could not be known to be the word of God but by
the Fathers. These are they that blame Calvin for his factious spirit, and call
him base fellow, and that he should seek to overthrow all order and authority
n the Church, and to demolish the authority of the Magistrate.

Again, the Prelate Whitgift and Saravia dash one against another about ruling
Elders and P^esbiteries, Whitgift does acknowledge they ought to be under a
Tyrant, but not under a Christian Magistracy, the other will allow them to be
under a Christian Magistrate, but not under an Infidel. First, whereas
Whitgift says there were in the Primitive Church Seniors, but it was before
there was any Christian Prince or Magistrate. Secondly, and that God has given
the chief authority of government in the Church to to the Christian
Magistrate. Thirdly, that if there were a Seniory established, there could
remain no authority Ecclesiastical to the Civil Magistrate: I answer, if the
office of Seniors under a Tyrant had meddled with any part of the office of the
Magistrate, then so much as they exercised of the office of the Magistrate, so
much should have ceased; but the Elde^s are to assist the Pastor in matters
Ecclesiastical only, and not in Civil, therefore it ought to be in times of
peace, as well as in times of persecution, and if a Tyrant-Magistrate could
suffer them, it is evident that they did not offend against his office.

Secondly, there were Seniors among the Jews under godly Kings and in times of
peace, then why may it not be so among Christians?

Thirdly, the Ecclesiastical power is distinct from the Civil both in the
subject, object and end, so that the one does not h^nder the other; the
Magistrates power is to punish the outward man with outward punishment, which
the Presb^tery cannot hinder, and he may civilly bind whom the Presbitery
spiritually loses, and he may civilly loose, whom the Presbitery spiritually
binds; Lastly, the Magistrate seeks not the repentance and salvation of the
delinquent by his punishment, as the Presbitery does, be only seeks to maintain
the authority of his Laws, and the qui^^nes and preservation of the
Commonwealth, so that a delinquent by repentance cannot escape the Civil
Magistrate.

Fourthly, the Magistrate cannot determine questions of faith, nor know what
order and decency in circumstances is fittest for each Congregation, neither
can he excommunicate offenders, for when the Prelates exercised Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, and civil also, they did wrong both to the Prince; and also to
the Presbitery.

Fifthly, when Presbiters are established in their full power, there remains
much power to the Prince even in things Ecclesiastical, as to take diligent
heed to the whole State of the Church within his Dominions, to indict Synods,
and civilly to proceed in the same, to ratify the constitutions thereof, to
add unto them the strength of a civil power, to punish heretics, and all
that disobey the assemblies of the Church, to see that no matter
Ecclesiastical be carried factiously or rashly, but that such things be
determined in free assemblies, to provide for Scholars, Colleges and
Churches, that all corrupt ways of entering into the ministry, by Simony,
bribing or otherwise, be represted; and lastly, to compel all men to do their
duty according to the word of God, and the laws of the Church. So then the
civil Magistrate is to leave untouched that power which belongs to the
Ecclesiastical rulers, as the ministers of the Gospel, ruling Elders and
Deacons for Ecclesiastical, do not hinder the Civil in their administration.

Sixthly, is it so, that Prelates exclaim against Presbiteriall government? let
us retort their exclamation back upon their own-heads, as Elishah did in
another case, saying, it is thou and thy Fathers house that troubled Israel; So
I say, it is the Prelacy, not the Presbitery that is prejudicial to the power
of Princes, and has often encroached upon the same, as for example, the
Bishops assembled in the 8. council of Constantinople, ordained that Bishops
should not light from their horses when they chanced to meet Princes, nor
basely bow before them; and if any Prince should cause a Bishop to disparage
himself by doing otherwise, he should be excommunicated for two years, Canon
14. And in the same council, Canon 17. they also discharged Princes from being
present in any Synod, except the Occumenick: so much for answer to Whitgift.

Now for Saraviah who allows such Elders as the Jewish Church had to be
joined now with Pastors under a Christian Magistrate, but not under an Infidel
Magistrate, but this man takes the Jewish Elders to be their Magistrates, and
so he affirms that none but Christian Magistr^tes ought to sit with the
Ministers of the Word in Ecclesiastical Courts, as Princes and Nobles in
general or National Councels, and that Magistrates of Cities should sit in
particular Consistories, but this is as foul an error as that of Wh^gift, for
you see a plain distinction between the power Ecclesiastical and the Civil,
both in the subject, object, and end, as I showed before, and that the one is
not to touch or to meddle with the office of the other; Now if the Christian
Magistrate by virtue of his civil power should sit in Spiritual Courts, this
would make a mixture and confusion of civil and Ecclesiastical Functions; and
again, he contradicts himself, saying, that he admits grave and godly men
in the Judicatories of the Church, although they be not Magistrates, but
private men. Again, there have been Christian Churches under Infidel Princes;
but here I leave these two men as Ephraim against Manasseh, and Manasseh
against Ephraim, and both against Judah; so Whitgift against Saravia, and
Saravia against Whitgift, and both against the truth.

Now suppose the Cavaliers at Oxford should step forth and say that the
Presbiteriall government is worse then the high Commission or the Spanish
Inquisition; see Diurnal, Feb. 22. 1643. I answer, it is but the testimony of
profane Papists, and blaspheming perjured Traitors both to Church and State,
and therefore I leave them as not worthy to be answered.

But suppose they should seek to comply with our independent people, and tell
them that the King will grant them a free toleration if they wiladhere to him
to oppose Presbiteriall government. I answer, it has cast an ill savor upon
independent government, and makes it to relish basely with Gods people.

But what if the independent people themselves shall take upon them to examine
the Presbiteriall government, and present their examination to the King and
both Houses of Parliament, and tell them boldly, that all learned men have
granted that the Churches constituted by the Apostles were all independent
bodies but the man cannot produce any of these learned men, and therefore the
case is doubtful, and besides it were a hard case if neither Scotland, France,
Holland; and many other places where the Presbiteriall government is, or has
been, could not yield a learned man, this man I suppose to be either a Cobbler
or a Button-maker, or some such prime Scholar, and yet be takes upon him to
examine the learning of all the reformed Churches; but will you be pleased to
see his learned exposition of some texes of Scripture, such as these? The
Kingdom of God is at hand, that is says he, a particular Congregation is at
hand, Math. 3.2. And to be fellow Citizens with the Saints and of the household
of God, this says he, is meant of a paiticular Congregation, Ephesians. 2.19. And
for the Queen to stand on the right hand of Christ in gold of Ophir, this says
he also is a particular congregation, Psalm. 45.9. Thus you see how this man's
learning exceeds all thereformed Churches, who expound these places to be meant
of the universal or invisible Church.

But further he says in that examination, that the Pope is Antichrist because
he will have men to appeal from other Churches to him, and to stand to his
sentence and decree; but says he, do not Presbiter: all Assemblies and Synods
take upon them the same authority?

I answer, no, they differ thus: First, the Pope is one and receives
appellations Monarchically, but Synods consist of many, and receive
appellations aristecraticaly. 2. The Pope receives appellations from other
Nations beyond Sea, but Presbiteries and Synods do not so. 3. The Pope will
have his sentence received as infallible, but Presbiteties and Synods
acknowledge themselves subject to error. 4. The Pope acknowledges neither
Elders nor elderships of Congregations, but Presbiteries and Synods do 5. The
Pope acknowledges no power Ecclesiastical on earth, but what is subject to
him, and derived from him, but Presbiteries and Synods do. 6. The Pope
receives appellations in other causes besides Ecclesiastical, but
Presbiteries and Synods do not so. 7 The Pope has neither commission himself
from Churches, nor will admit the Commissioners of Churches to sit in judgment
with him, but Synods are made up of Commissioners of Churches. 8. The Pope
makes his power boundless, and exalts himself above the very Scripture,
but Synods when they receive appellations, are tied to certain rules of
proceeding and judging, especially by the Scriptures; thus wise men may see the
disterence between them to be as great as between light and darkness.

But now give me leave, being thus set upon by the independent men, to lay open
some of their errors, to see how they will stand in a well ordered Church.

First, independent Churches hold themselves to be all Rulers, and none to be
ruled: which is against all sense, reason, and Scripture also, Heb. 13.7.27.1
Tim. 5.17. But they are something ashamed that they have none to rule,
therefore they would make their ruling Elders themselves be their servants; and
yet to hold still the name of rulers, which is as bad an error as the former,
for although ruling Elders must not be as Lords to the Church, neither must the
Church be as Lords over them, and while they claim this authority for their
Church, they do but seek to remove the Prelates Lordship to their independent
Church.

2. They do not give those to the Lord from their childhood that are to be
their Ministers, that they may be trained up in the schools of the Prophets,
which is the ordinary way for to attain to the knowledge of the tongues; Now
that extraordinary is ceased which the Apostles had. Lu. 24.49. Acts 2.4. But
they not taking this course, are constrained either to take some broken
Tradesman for their Pastor to be employed in Gods work, whom the world has
cast off, or else they must take one that is employed in a calling already; But
for the first, will God accept of the worlds leavings? and for the second, what
warrant have they to take a man to this great calling, who is already entangled
with the affairs of this life? see 2 Timothy 2.4. The Ministry alone is a burden
more befitting an Angel then a frail man, says Paul, who is sufficient for
these things? 2 Cor. 2.16. The Apostles gave themselves wholly and continually
to prayer and to the Ministry of the Word, Acts 6.4 And yet they complain of
their weakness, as unable to undertake such a heavy burden, who were so
exceedingly furnished with gists, and gave themselves wholly to it, how then
shall our independent Pastors discharge it faithfully, who are employed
otherwise: If the world increase, the work of God must needs decrease.

Thirdly, when their Pastors gifts are to be proved, as Paul says, 1 Timothy
3.10. They will appoint none but mechanic men to do it, unless some Ministers
come in by chance unexpected, not as any duty they are boun^ to do, for they
are all independent, and who has to do with them? but how shall Mechanics
judge of questions and controversies of faith or how shall they determine the
same? they cannot find out and discover sub i^e Heretics, then how shall they
excommunicate them?

But I suppose in this they go contrary to their own judgment in other things,
when they will have all other things tried and proved by men of that calling
which have the most knowledge and skill in such a thing, that they may not be
deceived, and will they have less care of their souls then they have of
worldly things, it is but a bad sign of grace in such a heart.

Fourthly, mechanic fellows must entrench upon the ministry after they have
proved them to ordain them, but although the Cities of Creet might elect them
Elders, yet says Paul, I left thee in Creet to ordain Elders in every City
as I had appointed thee. Titus 1.5. And Paul and Barnabas retu^ned again to
Listra and to Iconium and to Antioch and they ordain^d them Elders in every
Church, and prayed with fasting and commended them to the Lord Acts 14.21.23.
And the Prophets and Teachers of Antioch ministered unto the Lord, and fasted,
and the holy Ghost said, sepa a^e me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto
I have called them, and when they had fasted and prayed and laid their hands on
them, they sent them away, Acts 13.1.2.3. The Apostles said unto the multitude,
choose you out men of honest report, and full of the holy Ghost and wisdom,
(but mark the next words) whom we may appoint over this business, and so they
nominated 7 and set them before the Apostles, and when they had prayed, they
laid their hands on them, Acts 6.7, 8. Neglect not the gift that was given
thee by prophecy (now mark) with the laying on of the hands of the
Presbitery, 1 Timothy 4.14. But I find no mechanics about the point of ordination.

Fifthly, these mechanic fellows which are unskilful in the Pastors office,
yet they must teach them their duty that never were Pastors themselves, and
these members may very well be ignorant of many points of faith, being
sometimes long without a Pastor, then much more they may be ignorant of his
office, yet they must pray for they know not what, and the greater must be
blessed of the lester, neither must these sick people have any help from
others, till they can help themselves; but I think they would not do so by
their bodies which would soon perish if none must help them in time of
sickness: but God has better provided for his Church then so.

Sixthly, they hold that not only the power of the keys, but the execution of
this power also belongs, and must be done by all the congregation, but the
punishment of excommunication, says the Apostle, was inflicted of many, 2 Cor.
2.6. But this were improper to say it was inflicted by many, if it was by all,
yet I grant it must be done by the consent of all, or of the greatest part, and
it may be said to be done by all, as the representative body of all, as what
the Parliament does, it may be said the whole Kindom does: but as the Kingdom
refers their business to the Pa^liament, so do the particular Churches to the
Presbitery: but they say every case ought to be heard and determined where the
fault was committed: By this argument we must remove our Parliament and all
other Courts to the place where any offense is committed to try them there. But
this their folly needs no confutation, and says Paul concerning Church
censures, I hear that there is fornication committed among you, (now mark)
For I verily as absent in body, but present in spirit, have judged and
determined already concerning him that has so done, and that was to deliver
such a one to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus: Yet it was not fully done without the
consent of the whole Congregation, although judged and determined in their
absence; Yet it was executed when they were gathered together, 1 Cor. 5.3, 4,
5. So the Presbitery ought to judge and determine of things, but they are not
to be accomplished privately, but openly with the consent of the whole
congregation.

But they say, if thy Brother trespass against thee, tell him his fault
between him and thee alone, and if he will not hear thee, take with thee one
or two more; but if he neglect to hear them, tell the Church, Mat.
18.15.16.17. This Church (say they) is a particular Congregation. but I deny
it, and will prove it to be a collective part representing the Church, to whom
binding and loosing was referred, for (says the Lord) if two of you shall
agree on earth touching any thing as binding and loosing it shall be done for
them of my Father in heaven, verse. 18.19. The reason is, because where 2. or
three a^e gathered together out of a Congregation in the name of Christ, about
such a bus^nesse (says Christ) I am in the midst of them, ver. 20. Now in a
small congregation having but two ruling Elders, and one Pastor, these coming
to gethe^ in the name of Christ, if but two of them agree, it shall be done,
ver. 19. But it were a si^ly conclusion to gather from hence, that if any two
of the whole parish, or of the whole cong^egation of Bro^nists agree together
about binding or loosing, it shall be done in heaven, So t^en I conclude, that
where there are but two Elders and a Pastor, if these come together, and but
two of them agree, says the Lord, it shall be done: Now if they should say, it
is a particular congregation, and yet but three persons in it, this I also
deny, for a particular congregation must have both Officers and people, or else
it is not a congregation; but suppose they say there was a Church in the houses
of Aquila and Nimphas Romans 16.5. Col 4.15. I answer, they had teaching and
discipline which did resemble a Church, but they neither taught nor governed as
Church Officers, but as parents and Masters: for they had no election nor
ordination, and therefore no calling; neither had they the sacraments, nor the
power of the keys for Excommunication. So then if they were Churches, it was
because Christians re^orted thither, and had the use of the Word and
Sacraments, see Acts 2.6.12.12.19.9.20.8.28.23. and because there were no
Churches built.

7. The independent government cuts off all remedy for injured persons, for
those perties must be their Judges while they deny Presbi^eties and Synods to
appeal to, which is against the very light of nature that parties should be
their Judges, who if ^ney get the greater number, the innocent party must needs
suffer although his cause be never so just, but this is flat against the
Scripture: There was variance in the Church at Antioch, and they appealed to
the Apostles and Elders then assembled at Jerusalem, Acts 15.2. It is in this
case as it is in civil injuries, see Acts 24.11. where Paul says, no man may
deliver me to them because they were parties, but I appeal to Caesar: these men
blame the Prelates for being parties in their own Courts, and yet here they
will tie their members to be tried by none but themselves, denying Presbyteries
and Synods, which is the only refuge of innocent persons, and the means of
justice to the guilty.

Eighthly, Independent people exclude women and children from having any voice
in their Churches, yet they deny a representative church gathered out of many
particular Churches: In this I demand what is their own, when men of years
must represent their whole Church, and where do they find such a Church in the
Scripture as this is; in this we may see plainly that their practice
contradicts their tenets, while they deny representative Churches, their own is
such a one, but they being silent to our demand, we shall give them better
satisfaction concerning Presbyteriall government; for when that controversy
was at Antioch, they determined that Paul and Barnabas and certain others of
them should go up to Jerusalem, unto the Apostles and Elders about this
question: now these certain that came with Paul and Barnabas are called the
Church, being brought on their way by the Church, Acts 15.3. But they did not
every man of the Church of Antioch come, for then how could they be sent? yet
these few that were sent are called the Church, and when they came to
Jerusalem, they were received of the Church, ver. 4. But did every christian in
Jerusalem come forth to meet them, or whether did some part of the church there
kindly entertain them in the name of the rest, and so are called the church,
and so that place before mentioned, Mat. 18. tell the Church, is no more, but
tell the officers of the church, and great fear came upon all the Church, Acts
5.11. Here is meant none but the Apostles, who in the next verse went all into
Solomon's Porch, which could not hold al at Jerusalem, and the rest are
mentioned distinctly, ver. 13. yet you see here these officers are called the
church: and when Moses was charged to speak unto all the congregation, be
called for all the Elders of Israel, and said unto them, Exo. 12.3.21. As a
Parliament is a congregation of the mighty, Psalm 82.1. So is a National Synod,
but they are much troubled at this word National church, but why should not we
be as much offended at the word independent church, seeing that there is none
such in the Scripture? Again I answer, when there was but one Nation that
received the ordinances of God. there was but one National church, but now the
Gospel ^s preached to all Nation^, then so many of them as receive and make
profession of it, so many national churches there is: again, as many flocks
make one flock. Genesis 30.36.40. Luke 2.8. and many congregations called are one
church, see Act. 8.1.13.1.20.17.28.36.37. Revel. 2.1. compared with the 7th:
Again, as one congregation may be called a particular church; So when a
Kingdom or Nation receives the Faith, and makes profession of it, we suppose
it may be called a national church; but yet, if they can give any other name
better befitting a Kingdom or Nation that have received the Faith, we shall
not differ much about words or names; only this, as many members make one body;
so, many particular churches make one, call it what you will; and, as many
ships make one Navy, and many regiments make one army, and many companies make
one City: yet although ever, sh^^ ^ath his Officers completely, yet they must
not say they are independent, but m^st s^cke the good of the whole Navy; So
although every Regiment has gov^^^ours of their own, yet they must j^yn
together for the good of the whole Army: and so every Company in the City has
Officers of their own, yet they must ^l^ be helpful for the good of the
whole, and so every congregation, although they have all o^^^ees needful for
themselves, yet they must all join for the good of the whole, and ^o say they
are independent and that they are indifferent what becomes of others, so they
may have their independent government, is much like to the answer o^ ^a^^, when
he said to the Lord, am I my brothers ke^per? see Protestation protested.

9. While they deny Pres^^teries and Synods, they do not seek for that which
makes for peace, as they are commanded, Romans 14.19. Paul and Barnabas might
have decided the controver^^e at Antioch but they being parties would not,
because it would not make for peace, says Paul; L^ok not every man on his own
things, but every man also on the things of others; Let this mind be in you,
which was also in Christ Jesus, Ph^l. 2.4.5. But they will say that they will
not join in Church Government and discipline till they have some express word
for it. But if they will not join with us till then they had as good say they
will never join with us, for in many things the word speaks only in general
terms, as concerning the only Form of excommunication, or the only form of
ordination, o^ the outward gesture of external reverence to be used, and no
other in several ordinances then this doing they may trouble themselves, and
never find the true discipline therein: in all these things they ought to
condescend to the peace and edification of the whole Church and not to make
rents and divisions about these things: for what a confusion in Families would
it be, to set up several independent Churches, when the father shall be of one
Church and the son of another, the husband of one and the wife of another;
the Master of one and the servant of another, how would this hinder all family
duties, and it would not only be as a canker to the duties of the general, but
to the duties of their particular calling.

10. These independent people demand that which they themselves would not
grant, if the power were in their hands: for in new England they will not
suffer men of other opinions in doctrine or government to live within the
bounds of their patent, but they banish them out of it; although they be godly
Christians, they shall not reside there, unless they will enter Covenant,
profess their faith, and submit to their Church orders; these men do not
follow that golden rule of the law and the Propheths, to do ^o others, as they
themselves would be done by Math. 7.12. And these partial men will bear great
de^ects and wants in their own Churches, as want of officers, Sacraments, and
prophesying; some of these many years together, and nor to groan under the
burden of it, when as a ceremony or something of as little moment shall make
them separate from us, making ^ents and divisions amongst us; but let the world
see the unjustnesse of their separaration, especially from the Presbiteriall
government.

11. The independent people hold that one Church, if required, ought to give an
account to other Churches, and that differences of importance in one Church
should be heard in others, and that one Church may be advised and counseled by
another, and their doctrines tried and judged by Synods; and in case they
deserve it, to be admonished and reproved by Synods, and complained of to the
civil Magistrate; These things they will take upon general rules, for I am
sure there is no special rules for them in the word: but further they will not
go, neither shall we desire more help from one particular congregation to
another, then they do, for we hold them all equal in authority as they do,
but yet we expect more from Synods being made up of many congregations, ^eeking
the good of the whole; these we hold to have some power over particular
Congregations, being chosen out of them by their consent for the same purpose,
they may write, conclude and impose, and lay it upon them, and deliver them the
decrees for to be kept, see Acts 15.28.16.4.21.25. And says Paul; Now I praise
you brethren, that you remember me in all things, and kept the ordinances as I
delivered them unto you, 1 Cor. 11.2. But for new Englands Synods which come
together upon courtesy, as many as will, and who will, if none will come from
Stamford, they may choose: and they have one mean Minister weak in parts and
gifts, if not worse qualified, they do not care if he go, they can spare him
best, and they being independent, must look only at their own particular, and
not seek the good of the whole, and it is not much material who goes, for they
have no power to reform any thing, save only to counsel, admonish, and
complain to the civil Magistrate, who they say themselves, has no more power
to reform, or to do any thing, in, or about the Church then heathen Princes;
this is independent government, and the reformation they would have, which is
nothing else but a flood-gate set open for all sects in the world, to the ruin
of the true Church of Christ, as Anabaptists, Familists, Jews and Papists, or
any other, for all would separate themselves into Churches in their own
judgment to do whatsoever Satan or their own corrupt hearts would lead them
unto; well may those cursed blaspheming traitors and Papists at Oxford hearken
to this way, and grant them their full desire; for it is the road way to all
confusion, yea, their own Churches divide commonly upon the death of their
Pastor with contempt and hatred to each other; But God has called us to peace,
1 Cor. 7.15. Let all things be done decently and in order, for God is not the
author of confusion but of peace, as in all the Churches of the saints, 1 Cor.
14.33, 40.

Now forasmuch as the Magistrate is the Father of the country, and the Pastor
of the people, the keeper of peace, the protector of righteousness, and the
avenger of innocence, then he is unworthy to live in a Commonwealth that is an
enemy to such government; But here some will object, that Princes in all ages,
some have been careless of their charge committed to them, to foresee dangers
to prevent them, giving themselves to earthly delights, and slothfully minding
nothing else, and others addict themselves to their game, and so set to sale
all laws and privileges, judgments and grants, other some spoil the poor
communalty of money to spend it wastefully and prodigally, other some exercise
more robberies, pillaging of houses, deflouring of Virgins, murdering of
Innocents, so that no image of God is seen upon them, that ought to shine in
Magistrates, nor no token of the Minister of God is seen in him which was
given for praise to the good, and for vengeance to the evil.

Now men naturally abhor tyrants, and love their lawful Kings, then what shall
poor subjects do in such a case? I answer, Inferiors are to submit to the
government of such Princes, although Pinces do not that which pertains to
them: but they go beyond those bounds which the Lord has set them: yet it
will not follow, that we may sin against them, because that they sin against
God, says Peter: Fear God and honor the King. And ye servants be subject to
your Masters with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the
froward: For this is thanke-worthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure
grief, suffering wrongfully, 1 Pet. 2.17, 18.19. We ought to observe the
providence of God, who disposes of all Kingdoms and sets up Kings as it
pleases him, see Dan. 2.21. Although Nebuchadnezar was a wicked man, yet says
Daniel, the God of heaven has given thee a Kingdom, verse. 37. And says the
Lord, I will give Nebuchadnezar the land of Egypt for his good service, and
the spoil thereof shall be the wages of his Army, Ezekiel. 29.19, 20. And King Saul
was a cruel tyrant, see 1 Samuel 8.12. Yet the people are not freed of their
obedience to him, and says the Lord, I have given the earth to whom it seemed
meet unto me, and the Lord has power to do what pleases him, Psalm. 115.3. And
he made the earth, and man and beasts upon it; then it follows, I have given
all these lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezar King of Babylon, and all Nations
shall serve him, Jer. 27.5, 6, 7. Thus you see God will have this tyrant to be
honored. And David said to Abishai concerning the King, destroy him not, for
who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords Anointed and be guiltless?
and another time says he: God forbid that I should do this thing unto my
Master the Lords Anointed; so David stayed his servants with these words, and
suffered them not to rise against Saul, 1 Samuel 24.6, 7.26.9. And we ought to
have a reverent esteem of them as wives to their husbands, and as children to
their parents: for the King is worth ten thousand of us, 2 Samuel 18.3. The
breath of our ^ostrils is the Lords Anointed, Lam. 4.20. Then they that curse
the King bu^ in their thought, a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and
that which has wings shall tell the matter, Eccl. 10.20.

Then are we unmercifully tormented by a cruel Prince? or are our goods
spoiled by a covetous and a ryotous Prince? and are we neglected by a slothful
Prince? and are we vexed for a godly life by a wicked Prince? then our duty
must be to call to remembrance our sins which are scourged by that scourge of
the Lord, and by humility bridle our impatience, and let us call to mind that
it belongs not to us to remedy such evils, it is only our duty to crave help
of the Lord, in whose hands are the hearts of Kings, and the bowing of
Kingdoms to his will: He is a God who stands in the assembly of Gods, and
judges among the Gods, Psalm. 82.1. And all Kings shall fall before him, and
all the Judges of the earth shall be dashed in peaces like a potters vessel,
that will not submit to the Lord, and kiss his Anointed, Psalm. 2.9.12. Yea,
woe be to them that decree unrighteous decrees, and that turn aside the needy
from judgment, Isa 10.1.2. God reproved Kings for his peoples sake, and
suffered none to do them wrong, Psalm. 105.14. Yea he has broken the bloody
Scepters of proud Kings, and overturned their intolerable government: yet I
say, although God may justly correct their unbridled government by his own
revenging hand, yet let us not think that we may do so, which have no
commandment given us, but to obey and suffer: this I speak concerning private
persons.

Now it may be demanded of some, that in case the chief Magistrate shall thus
tyrannize over his people, whether other Magistrates may not defend them, and
withstand this tyrant in the Cause of God? I answer with Master Calvin, Instit.
4.20.31. If there be at this time any Magistrates for the behoof of the
people, such as in old time were the Ephori that were set against the Kings in
Lacedemonia, or the Tribunes of the people against the Roman Consuls, or the
Demarchi against the Senate of Athens: or as it is with us, the three Estates
in Parliament, holding the principal Assemblies, says he, I am so far from
forbidding these to withstand the outrageing licentiousness of Kings, that I
affirm, that if they wink at Kings wilfully rageing over, and treading down
the poor Communalty, that their dissembling is not without wicked breach of
faith, because they deceitfully betray the liberty of the people, whereof they
know themselves to be appointed protectors by the ordinance of God. And says
he in the 8. Section, no kind of government is more blessed then this, where
liberty is framed with such a moderation, as it ought to be, and is orderly
established for continuance, and so I count them most blessed, that may enjoy
this estate, and if they stoutly and constantly trav^ll in preserving and
retaining it, do nothing against their duty: yea the Magistrates ought with
most great d^ligence to bend themselves hereunto, that they suffer not the
liberty of the people, of which they are appointed governors, to be in any
part diminished, much less to be dissolved, but if they be negligent and
careless therein, they are faith-breakers, and false in their office, and
betrayers of their Country, and the very thinking to bring in any other change
of government, is not only foolish and superstitious, but also very hurtful.

Then would any bring in Monarchical government? let me tell them that it is
seldom seen that Kings so temper themselves, that they will never swerve from
that which is just and right. Again, they are not always furnished with so
great a sharpness of judgment and wisdom, that every one sees so much as is
sufficient for every thing; therefore the wants that are in single persons, are
cause sufficient to prove it to be more safe and tolerable, that many should
have the government, that they may mutually help one another, and one teach and
admonish another, and if any advance himself higher then it is meet, there may
be others to restrain his wilfulness; so then in case a King be a child, and
not able to order the affairs of his Kingdom, or in case he want natural
abilities, or in case he be led away by evil Counselors, then the Magistrates
ought to make supply, that neither the King nor his Subjects may suffer wrong:
This way of government gives more honor to Kings then any other, because this
procures the love and happiness of the Subjects, when as Monarchical brings
fear, misery, and slavery upon them; so then this kind of government is the
best, wherein King and people do rejoice in each others happiness.

Again, it may be demanded, if the chief Magistrate and the rest be at
variance, and the contention increase so through ill-affected persons, that it
produce civil wars amonst us, now what are the inferior people to do in this
case, and who are they to side withal? I answer, first they must not stand as
ne^^ers or spectators to behold and see the ruin of the Kingdom, but they
must enquire on whose side God is, as wise Gamaliel said; If this work be of
men, it will come to naught, but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it, lest
happily ye be found to fight against God, Acts 5.38.39. Should thou help the
ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? therefore is wrath come upon thee
from the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19.2. Neither must we stand as spectators: Vriah said
unto David: The Arc and Israel and Judah abide in tents, and my Lord Joab and
the servants of my Lord are encamped in the open field, shall I then go into
my house to eat and to drink and to lie with my wise: as thou l^vest, and as
thy soul lives, I will not do this thing, 2 Samuel 11.11. Curse ye Meroz and
the Inhabitants thereof; yea curse them bitterly, because they came not to the
help of the Lord against the mighty, Judge. 5.23. Then who is on the Lords side,
who that will march furiously like Jehu against all the cursed enemies of God,
those Antichristian Idolaters, and have no peace with them so long as the
whoredoms of Jesabel, and her witcherafts are so many, and if the Princes of
^ud^^ be li^^e them that remove the bounds, God will po^re out wrath upon them
^^k^ water, Hos. 5.10. Then if such a boundless Prince shall command obedience
to his boundless humor, must he be obeyed? It may be that Ephraim being
oppressed and broken in judgment, will show it in this, because he willingly
walked after the commandment, verse. 11. But now the question is, what did that
boundless Prince get by his commanding, and crackt-brain'd Ephraim for his
blind obedience? (mark says the Lord) I will be unto Ephraim as a moth, and to
the house of Judah like rottenness: Yea I will be to Ephraim as a lion, and as
a young lion to the house of Judah; I, even I, will tear and go away, I will
take away, and none shall rescue him, verse. 12.14. Therefore we must not so
obey the King, as to make us disobey the King of Kings, unto whose Scepter all
Kings must yield obedience: therefore when Daniel disobeyed the Kings
proclamation, he answered with a clear conscience saying, against thee o King
I have done no ^urt, Dan. 6.22.

So then we must put difference between our obedience to God, and our obedience
to man; when God commands, we are not to reason with flesh and blood, nor call
into question the lawfulness of it; God is greater then man, and he gives no
account of any of his matters, Job 33.12, 13. It is our duty to put in practice
with all speed what God commands us: but when man commands, we must bring it to
the trial, and see how it agrees with that perfect rule of Gods command, and
if it agree not with Gods command, we must not obey it, as for example: God
commands that we shall not murder? now if the King do command us to murder,
this contradicts Gods command, and therefore must not be obeyed. King Saul said
to the footmen that stood about him, turn ye and slay the Priests of the Lord;
but the servants of the King would not put forth their hands to fall on the
Priests of the Lord, 1 Samuel 12.17. And King Pharaoh sent unto the Mid-wives
say^ng, when ye do the office of a Midwife, to the Hebrew women, if it be a
son, ye shall kill him, but if a daughter, she shall live: But the Mid-wives
feared God, and did not as the King of Egypt commanded them, therefore the
Lord dealt well with the Mid-wives, Exodus 1.16, 17.20.

Again, the Lord says, thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, or
likeness of any thing, nor bow down to them nor worship them. Now if the King
of Babylon set up a golden Image, and command all to fall down and worship it;
then which must be obeyed? the three Children answered the King saying, we are
not careful to answer thee in this matter, (nay further they say unto him in
plain terms) be it known unto thee O King that we will not serve thy Gods,
nor worship the golden Image which thou have set up, Dan. 3. Again the Lord
says, I will that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands without wrath
and doubting, 1 Timothy 2.8. And men ought always to pray, and not to faint, Luke
18.1. Now if King Darius shall make a decree that whosoever shall ask a
petition of any God or man ^o^ the space of thirty days, shall be cast into the
Den of lions, now which must be obeyed? give ear to Daniel, and he will tell
thee: who regards not the decree of the King, but makes his petition three
times a day, Dan. 6.13. Again, Christ says to his Apostles; Go ye and teach
all Nations, baptizing and teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I
have commanded, Math. 28.19.20. But when Peter and John were obeying this
command of Christ, they were brought before the Councel^ and they charged them
not to speak and teach any more in the name of the Lord Jesus, now what must
they do? Peter and John answered and said unto them: Whether it be right in the
sight of God, to hearken to you more then God, judge ye, for we cannot but
speak the things we have heard and seen, Acts 4.18, 19, 20. After this they
were taken and brought before the Council again, who said unto them, did not
we straightly charge you not to teach in this name? and behold you have filled
Jerusalem with your Doctrine, and intend to bring this man's blood upon us, and
they answered: We ought to obey God rather then men, Acts 5.17, 18, 19. The
fear of men brings a snare, Prove. 29.25. Thus we may see, that although
Magistrates must be obeyed, yet it must be only when they keep within their
bounds, and not else.

But some of our Court Priests will object and say, not through any love to
Magistrates, but only to make divisions amongst us, that every soul must be
subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but of God, the powers that
be, are ordained of God, whosoever therefore resists the powers, resists
the ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to themselves
damnation, Romans 13.1, 2. But here by the way we may see how they post this Text
off from themselves, and then they thunder it against others; but when it is
retorted back to themselves, then they make exceptions, saying, all must obey
but them, but to leave them in their Antichristian pride; I answer, and grant,
that the place of Magistracy is the ordinance of God, and those Kings that keep
within their bounds, are clothed with Gods authority: for says he, by me
Kings reign and Princes decree justice: by me Princes rule, and Nobles, yea
all the Judges of the earth, Prove. 8.15, 16. The God of Israel said unto me:
The rock of Israel spoke unto me, he that rules over men must be just,
ruling in the fear of God, 2 Samuel 23.3. But are Princes always such: The
heads of Jacob and Princes of Israel hate the good and love the evil, they
eat the flesh of Gods people, and flay their skin from off them, and break
their bones, and chop them in pieces as for the pot, and as flesh within the
Caldron, Micah 3.1.2, 3. The Lord will enter into judgment with the ancients of
his people, and the Princes thereof, because they beat in pieces his people,
and grind the faces of the poor, Isa 3.14, 15. Yea God renounceth such
Princes, saying, ye have set up Kings, but not by me; they have made them
Princes, and I knew it not, Hosea. 8.4. Not as though God were ignorant of what
he did, but the meaning is, God did not approve of them, although their office
be his ordinance.

But they will object, that where the word of a K. is, there is power, and who
may say to him, what do thou? Who so keeps the Kings commandment, shall
feel no evil thing, Eccl. 8.4, 5. I answer, the Kings power is over the
outward man, his words and actions, body and goods; but it reacheh not to the
soul and conscience, nor the grace of Gods spirit in us, and though it be
said, be subject for conscience sake, Romans 13.5. It is answered directly in
that place alleged against me, Eccl. 8.2. I counsel thee to keep the Kings
command, and that in regard of the oath of God, not that they have dominion
over our faith, 2 Cor. 1.24. Or that our inward graces were under the Kings
command, but we being sensible of Gods command, we obey them, because he
commands it, saying, let every soul be subject to the higher powers: Put them
in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates, Titus
3.1.

Our inward graces are more worthy then any humane dignity, therefore not to be
brought in subjection to any, we must do good to others with our inward graces
by virtue of Gods command, but they must not be brought under the power of any,
1 Cor. 6.12. But from the other words, who may say to him, what do thou? from
these words, some Sycophants would persuade Kings that their power is unlimited
so that they may do what they list with any man's person and goods, without
respect to the public good of the whole Kingdom, if they do but contradict
their personal will, although they contradict Gods revealed will, these men
cause them to punish the innocent, and pass by the guilty, and yet no man may
say to them why do thou so? to this I said before, that when a King keeps
within the bounds that God has set him, he is clothed with Gods power and
authority, being his Deputy, and about his business: in this case, who may say
unto him, what do thou? Neither is it fitting to say to a King thou art
wicked, nor to Princes, ye are ungodly, Job 34.18. But when a King goes beyond
his bounds, he strips himself of that honor that God had put upon him. Then
John Baptist may say to Herod, why do thou so? and further he may tell him
that it is unlawful to have his brothers wife, Math. 14.4. And Nathan may say
to David, thou art the man; yet by a parable first convince him of it, and they
must entreat him as a Father, 1 Timothy 5.1. 2 Kings 5.13. This being done,
righteous lips should be the delight of Kings, and they should love him that
speaks right. Then should the wrath of the King be to the wicked as
messengers of death: Then the Kings wrath should be as the roaring of a lion
but his favor would be as the dew upon the grass, Prove. 19.12. Then through
the mercy of the most high he should not be moved, but his hand should find out
all his enemies and bring down them that hate him, Psalm. 21.7, 8. And the Lord
would give deliverance to his King, and show mercy to his Anointed to David and
to his seed for evermore, Psalm. 18.50. Yet I say they must not go beyond their
bounds; God intended to use the King of Assytia as a rod to correct I^rael, but
it is in his heart to destroy and to cut off Nations, not a (...) but for going
beyond his bounds, when the work is done upon Mount Sion^ (...) on Jerusalem^
The Lord will puni^h the stout heart of the King of Assy^ia, and bring down
the glory of his high looks, Isa. 10.5.7.12. And when Judah was in captivity
in Babylon, God was but a little displeased, and they helped forward the
affliction, but for going thus beyond their bounds, God sent four Carpenters
to cut off those four horns that scattered Judah, Zech. 1.15.20.21. Therefore
Zedekiah remembering his bounds, says, the King is not he that can do any
thing against you, Ier. 28.5. And King Darius could not do any thing against a
Statute, although he labored to do it till the going down of the Sun, Dan.
6.10.14. Neither could Ahab the King get Naboth's Vineyard although he was
sick for it, 1 Kings 21. Then has the King bound himself by oath and
covenant to his people, that he will sign and seal such laws as the common
people shall choose, and remedy all grievances that shall arise, by signing and
sealing good and wholesome laws amongst us; Says the Lord thou shall not
forswear thy self, but thou shall perform to the Lord thine oaths Math. 5.33.
For breach of oath is a featfull sin, and seldom goes unpunished, see King
Zedechiah his sin, Ezekiel. 17.13. And his punishment. Ier. 52.10, 12. And King
Hoshea suffered a lake for the same sin, 2 Kings 17. Lying lips do not become a
Prince, Prove. 17.7. Neither should a Ruler hearken to lies, Prove. 29.12. Then
cursed be those Counselors that make the King glad w^^^ their wickedness,
and Princes with their lies, Hosea 7.3. King Ahaziah walked in the ways of
Ahah, for his mother was his counselor to do wickedly, for they were his
Counselors to his destruction, for the house of Ahaz^ah had no more power to
keep still the Kingdom, 2 Chro. 22.3.4.9. And King Rehoboam refused his
Fathers grave Counselors, and hearkened to a company of young upstarts, which
not only divided, but almost ruined his Kingdom, 2 Chro. 10.13. But (says
King David) mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the Land, they shall dwell
with me; he that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me, but he that
works deceit shall not dwell in my house, he that tells lies shall not
tarry in my sight, Psalm. 103.6.7. And the King said unto them, what seems you
best I will do, 2 Samuel 18.4. It is not for Kings O Lemuel, it is not for Kings
to drink wine, nor for Princes strong drink, lest they drink and forget the
Law, and pervert the judgment of any of the afflicted, Pro. 31.4.5. For as a
roaring lion and a ranging bear, so is a wicked Ruler over the poare people:
The Prinee that wants understanding is also a great oppressor, Pro. 28.15.16.
Then says the Lord to Job out of the whirlewind, who is this that darkeneth
Counsel by words without knowledge? Job 38.2. The Counsel of the Lord that
shall stand, Pro. 19.21. (Says King David) thy Testimonies are my
Counselors, Psalm. 119.24. They should hearken to them that declare unto them
the whole Counsel of God, Acts 20.27. But it may be some Court-Priest like
Amaziah, that will inform the King saying, The Prophet has conspired against
thee, and the Land is not able to bear his words, and so bid him be gone and
prophecy no more at Bethel, for it is the Kings Chapel and it is the Kings
Court, Amos 7.10.12.13. But for this (says the Prophet) Thy wife shall be an
harlot, thy sons and thy daughters shall fall by the sword, and the land shall be
divided by line, and thou shall dye in a polluted land, and Israel shall go
into Captivity, verse. 16.17. The Pharisees rejected the Counsel of God against
themselves, Luke 7.30. Shame shall be to him that refuses instruction but he
that hears reproof shall be honored, Pro. 13.18. He that reproves shall
afterward find more favor, then he that flattereth with his lips, Pro. 28.23.
Nathan that was so plain with the King, and said, thou art the man, when any
trouble arose in the Kingdom, still Nathan that downright honest man was sent
for: then Kings must not free themselves from all admonition; for, better is
apoore and wise child, then an old and foolish King that will be no more
admonished, Eccle. 4.13. The Lord commands to say to the King and to the
Queen, humble your selves, Jer. 13.18. Then Daniel said to the King. break
off thy sins by repentance, and thine intquity by showing mercy. Dan. 4.27. Now
this admonition must be by them that have a calling to it, neither must it be
without reverence, It is not fit to say to a King, thou art wicked, nor to
Princes, ye are ungodly. Job 34.18. But as Nathan wisely gained upon the Kings
affections by a parable, and also the woman of Tekoa another time, neither be
hasty to take up an accusation against an Elder, and itreat him as a father, 1 Timothy 5.1.19. see Ier. 40 15 16. When the Preacher saw under the sun in the
place of judgment that wickedness was there, and in the place of
righteousness, that iniquity was there, he refers it to God saying, God shall
judge the righteous and the wicked, Eccle. 3.16. the uses follow.

1. Our duty to Magistrates is to think honorably of them; first in regard of
their office, which we must acknowledge to be a jurisdictio^ committed to them
from God, and therefore to esteem and reverence them as the Ministers and
Deputies of God, and let us learn of them that do so as an encouragement of
our better obedience to them. Secondly, we must honor them from the command of
God, which says, honor the King, 1 Pet. 2.17. And the Lord said to Moses,
rake Joshua, a man in whom is the spirit, and set him before the High Priest,
and before all the Congregation, and give him charge in their sight, that is,
tell him the nature and manner of his office, and charge him to be faithful in
it; and then it follows, put some of thine honor upon him, that all the
Congregation of the childen of Israel may be obedient. Numb. 27.18.19.20. And
Solomon jointly together commands us to fear God and the King, Pro. 24.21. So
then Peter would have us to have a high estimation of them, and Solomon joining
them together with God himself, shows that holy reverence and dignity that
is put upon them; Then cursed be those filthy dreamers that despise dommion,
and speak evil of dignities, Jude 8. And says Paul ye must needs be subject
for conscience sake, Romans 13.5. That is, he would have us free in our obedience
to them, without slavish fear of their power, because what is done to them is
done to God, yet this honorable calling cannot excuse the sins that cleave
unto them that are in such places; but the calling it self is worthy of honor
and reverence; then whosoever be rulers must be esteemed with us, and have
reverence in respect of their being rulers.

Secondly, we must not only honor them in our minds, but this must be
testified by our practice, in obeying their lawful proclamations, and in
paying tribute, and in taking public office and charges upon us, that may
serve for common defense, or any other lawful commands; For he that resists,
resistoth the ordinance of God, therefore be subject: Romans 13.1. Again, says
Paul, warn them that they be subject to Principalites and powers, to obey
Magistrates, and ready to every good work, Tytus 3.1. And says Peter, submit
your self to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake. 1. Pet. 3.13. To the
King as Supreme, and to other Rulers that are sent by him, for the punistament
of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well and that they may be
sincere in their obedience to them, Paul exhorts, that there may be prayers and
supplications, intercessions and thankesgivings for all men for Kings and all in
authority, that we may live a peaceable and quiet life, in all, godliness and
honesty, 1 Timothy 2.1. Now if God do thus require obedience to Magistrates, and
he that resists the office of Magistracy, resists Gods ordinance, then let
them know that God will avenge all disobedience to them.

After these things, when I thought I had finished my work, I looking about
me, saw a man approaching toward me, as I thought, to try his power in a
single Duel with me, I shall desetibe him as near as I can. His proper name is
Thomas, his Surname is Nut; his general calling an Anabaptist, his particular I
am uncertain of, yet I suppose, a wood-cleaver; his descent I know not well,
but I suppose him to be one of the children of the old mouse-catcher, who some
years agone cried mousetraps but when mice grew scarce, and his trading failed
him, he proffered 10. l. to be hangman; So now wood is something dear, and
this man having but little trading for his axe, would employ it to cut off men
which are of two forts, either the principal members of the body politic, or
else the living members of the mystical body of Christ as he calls them,
visible saints of the spiritual Kingdom: the ground on which he would build
these principles, is Mat. 18.8.9. If thy hand or thy soot offend thee, cut them
off: These members (says he) are either the members of the body politic, or
the members of the body of Christ; the first of these (says he) are some
principal members of the body politic, as the L. Keeper, which if he offend,
being a hand of the body politic, the rest of the members must cut him off:
but he dares not to stay to tell us what it is that will offend him, lest he
be taken and hanged himself, for we know very well what it is that offends
Anabaptists: First, his very being a Magistrate offends them, and for this
offense, Nut would cut him off if he durst, although such a member were
saithfull both to the King and Kingdom: Again, many other things offend them,
as the manntaining wars in our own defense is cause enough for them to cut off
Magistrates, as also for imposing a Covenant for reformation, or an oath of
Allegiance to Princes: these, and such like are great offenses that Magistrates
give to Anabaptists, for which, this Nut thinks he may cut them off, were it
not that he fears the Nut-cracker at Padington; well, Nut is gone in all haste
from the members of the political body to the members of the mystical body of
Christ, and if they offend, the rest must cut them off; neither in this does he
show what it is that will offend him, but it seems for any offense they must
be cut off, for he has no healing medicines, but like a butcher he aches his
cleaver and chops them off; but I shall take the hammer of Gods word and split
the shel of this Nut, and give you a further taste of the divellish kernel that
is in it: he says that our Savior speaks of a spiritual Kingdom, or body,
or Church of visible Saints, but must we believe this Nut when he says that a
spiritual member of Christ's body must be cut off in this manner that here
Christ speaks of he would have it to be meant by excommunication, but Christ
says, if they be not cut off, the whole body shall be cast into everlasting
fire: and again, if they be not cut off, thou can not enter into life: then
suppose a member of Christ should offend thee, can not thou be saved unless
he be damned? again, to take thine own exposition, suppose this offending
member should not be cut off by excommunication, must all the rest of the body
of Christ be cast into everlasting fire? Again, suppose some of the members be
offended, and other some be not offended, must that member be cut off that
offends thee alone, and does not offend the rest, must that I say be cut off,
or else thou and all the rest must of necessity to hell fire? but in this case
what will thou do? such a member offends thee and no body else, and uniesse
thou cut him off, all must to the Devil, neither can thou cut him off,
because all the rest are against thee: but is thy salvation so pined upon other
men's backs, that if but one fail and be not speedily cut off, all the
Anabaptists must be cast into hell fire? this kernel may please the Devils
palate when he goes a Nutting, but I think no rational man can like the taste
of it: Again, thou do not declare what it is that will offend thee, so that
I suppose, if Christ himself were here on earth, thou would be offended at
him as some others were, for many were offended at him, they esteemed him as a
rock of offense, Romans 9.32.33. Again, thou do confess that the body is
Christ, and ye are the body of Christ, 1 Cor. 10.16.12.12.27. Ephe. 1.23.4.12.
And ye are called members of Christ, see 1 Cor. 6.15.12.14. and members of his
body, Ephe. 5.30.

Then does Christ say, If my hand offend me, or if my foot offend me, I must
cut them off, and cast them from me; or else does Christ say, both I all and my
members must be cast into everlasting fire; and does Christ say, if I do not
cut them off, I cannot enter into life? and does Christ say, it is better for
me that one of my members should perish, then that I with all my mystical body
should be cast into hell? neither does he say, if my eye offend me, I must
pluck it out, nor say, it is better for me with one eye to enter into life,
then to have two to be cast into hell fire; Let thy conscience speak, thou
blasphemer, and tell me whether it be so in thy book: neither is it said, if a
hand or foot in Christ's body offend him, they must be cut off; neither is it
said, that if the eye of Christ offend him, it must be plucked out, or else the
whole body of Christ shall be cast into hell: Then hear the words of Christ; If
thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee: for it is
profitable for thee, that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy
whole body should be cast into hell. And so, If thy hand offend thee, cut it
off, and cast it from thee, for it is profitable for thee that one of thy
members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell,
Math. 5.29, 30. So then the meaning of these words is this: The members of our
body natural before conversion, do nothing but act sin; Now of necessity that
corruption must be cut off from those members: and rather then the corruption
should not be cut off, let that member perish, rather then it should abide on
thy body to act sin; What, are thy eyes so full of adultery that they cannot
cease from sin? 2 Pet. 2.14. Can thou not look on a woman, but thou must
lust after her? thou committest adultery in thy heart, (then says Christ
expressly) pluck it cut, it is profitable for thee, Math. 5.28, 29. It were
better those eyes were out, then so to sin against God: yet this must not be
done till we have tried all other means, and nothing will reform this
lusting member, as we would do in the like case with a tooth, that with pain
much offends us: first, we try if we can take away the pain and save the
tooth, but when all means have bin used, and we cannot take a way the pain, we
had better lose the tooth, then to be so offended with the pain of it. Now the
evil of sin that is in the eye, should offend us as much as the evil of
punishment in the tooth, and we should use all means to remove it, as Job did,
to make a Covenant with his eyes not to look upon a maid, Job 31.1. That is,
we should bind our eyes with the cords of a Covenant from lusting, and we
should bind our feet from carrying us into temptations, see verse. 5.7. And we
should keep our mouth as it were with a bridle, Psalm 39.1. And because our
sins are too strong for us, we should therefore pray the Lord to turn our eyes
from beholding vanity Psalm. 119.37. Thus when all means are used to reclame
our members from sin and nothing will do it, thou had better pluck out thy
eye, and cut off both hands and feet, then to employ them in the service of the
Devil to thy eternal ruin of body and soul.

Again, if we should lose a member here, we should have it restored again at
the Resurrection day, therefore that Bishop who had subscribed with his hand
against God, when the Lord opened his eyes to see what he had done, he suffered
for the truth, and caused that hand to be burnt off, which had so offended both
against God, and against himself, yet I say again, if it be possible, we must
save the member; as Paul says, no man ever yet hated his own flesh, Ephesians.
5.29. For we see if a man have got a hurt in his hand or foot, he will use all
means that may be to heal it, to save his hand or foot; but when nothing will
do it, he will rather cut it off, then endure the pain, and endanger his whole
body: For if one part of the body be in pain, there is no part of the body
free, says Christ, if thy eye be evil, thy whole body is full of darkness,
Math. 6.23. That is, if the eye of the body be not good to see, the whole body
is in danger in all places to be hurt: and so the eye of the soul which is the
understanding, if that be not clear, the soul is in danger to be split on
many rocks; but let us come to Nuts exposition, which is this, if thine eye be
evil, thy whole body is full of darkness: This eye says he, is the Minister
or the Watchman, the which if he be blind, all the Anabaptists are blind also:
and if he be evil, then the rest cannot be good; he said before, that if one
member did offend, he must be cut off, or else all the Anabaptists must perish
in hell fire; and here he says, if one be evil, all are so, if one be blind,
all are blind: then I reply upon him thus, that if they be all alike, that if
there be one bad, there is none good; then why should another be cast into hell
to save Nut, when he is as bad himself; well, Christ says, if thy eye, thy
hand and thy foot offend thee, do so and so; but says Nut to Christ again, if
thy eye, or thy hand, or thy foot offend thee, do so and so: which shows
plainly to all men, that his eye is as blind as a beetle, to discern
spiritual things.

Again, how will Nut construe this word, two eyes, two hands, and two feet in
the my sticall body of Christ, so that if one be cut off, there is but one
remaining: and again, which is the right eye and which is the left in the my
sticall body of Christ; I think all the brains that is in this Nut, knows
not how to give an answer to these things: but suppose they have two teachers,
whom they call their eyes, suppose one of these offend and be excommunicated,
and the other dye in the mean time, and so leave them all stark blind: And so
the blind lead the blind till they all fall into the ditch: I hope they will
not provide more eyes, then they have holes to put them in, so that when one is
gone, to clap another into the hole; Thus we may see the folly of Nuts
exposition, who would see by another man's eyes, but we must all appear before
the judgment feate of Christ, and receive according to what is done in our
own body, and not according to what was done in another man's body.

Well thus you see that Christ here speaks of our natural members, that in
case nothing will take off those sinful corruptions that naturally cleave to
them, those natural members had better be cut off in this life, then that the
whole man should perish eternally, so that neither political, nor mystical
members, but natural members are meant in this place.

But will Nut say it is a great absurdity, when the body is maimed, that the
soul should enter into life? In this he declares himself to be as blind as a
beetle, for all the members at the resurrection shall be restored again
perfectly; but this man sees with another man's eyes, and not with his own: I
may suppose this is the cause why they will not allow of wars under the
Gospel, lest they should lose a member, and so go lame to heaven.

He makes another absurdity, saying, if those corruptions that cleave to our
members offend us, then we must cut them off, but if they do not offend us, we
must not cut them off, and we may enter into life with our corruptions, if so
be they do not offend us. I answer, men are of two sorts; either in the state
of grace, or in the state of nature; Now for those in the state of grace, who
have a new life wrought in them, and they have given their members as servants
to Christ, Romans 6. It must needs grieve them when those members shall act any
sin, says Paul, I keep my body under, and bring it in subjection, 1 Cor.
9.27. Yet says he, this law of sin that is in my members, warreth against
the law of my mind, and against his will, leads him into the law of sin, Romans
7.23. Yet when he cannot subdue those corruptions in his members, it appears
plainly that they did offend him, else what makes him cry out, O wretched man
that I am, who shall deliver me? verse. 24. And although it be said, if they do
offend, yet t^^s is not always a word of diffidence, as appears by such
places as these. If God be God, follow him, 1 Kings 18.21. If I be a Father,
where is mine honor? If I be a Master, where is my fear? Mal. 1.6. If God
spared not the old world, 2 Pet. 2.4. So here, if thy eye, hand or foot offend
thee these are not words of of diffidence, but of certainty only; the doubt may
arise from this, whether thou art converted or not, the which if thou be not,
thou art dead in sins and trespasses, and past feeling, and not capable to be
offended at the sin of thy members: Now these are not here in dispute: being
unbeleevers they are damier already. John 3.18. Is Nut so blind, as to think
these shall enter (...), because sin do^^ not offend them? I leave these as not
to be disputed about, whether they have all their limbs, or whether they want
any, in that condition they cannot be saved. Then the question is only of the
regenerate, whether their (...) off^nd or not? now for them, some are exceeding
watchful, having mortisted their earthly members, Col. 3.5. They that are
Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affect to as and lusts, Gal. 5.24.
Now such as these, these members do not o^ fend them, out are very useful and
delightful to them, acting lively in the ways of God: but then others are
something remiss, and so their members not being e^^^oyed in the service of
Christ, the Devil sometimes prevails with them so, as to ^^ke them work in
his service; by his wiles and subtilties, he deceives the hearts of the simple,
but such as Paul, who is not ignorant of his devices, 2 Cor. 2.11. Such a one
is able to stand against all the wiles of the Devil, Ephesians. 6. But yet the
corruptions in all offend them, for none is freed from it in this life, yet
some keep down their corruptions more then others, and thereupon have less
offense from them then others have; but these offenses it seems, Nut is not
acquainted with, else he would not make it a question, whether corruptions do
offend or nor, and supposing corruptions may be in Gods people, and yet not
offend them.

Another absurdity, he says, is this, the Saints are commanded to cleanse
themselves from corruptions, to make them sound; but says he, if corruptions
of the members should be here meant, then we may enter into life with one lust,
if we do but cut off another: and although we be halt and maimed? I answer,
although the body be maimed, yet the soul is not maimed, neither shall that
maimed body arise maimed, but perfect. Again, the cutting off corruption from
the eyes, hands and feet, and from the rest of the members, neither maimes
body nor soul, but makes them both more perfect, and if Nut were but a
rational man, he would rather have said that corruptions are as wounds and
bruises, see Isa 1.6. Ps. 38.5. Mat. 8.17. As the pool of Bethesda healed the
impotent folk, blind halt, and withered, Joh. 5.3. So the taking away of
corruption heals the spiritual Impotency of halt and blind, says Christ,
bring in hither them that are poor, maimed, halt and blind, Lu. 14.21. Now
Christ sent for them to cure them, and that was done by taking away their
sins and corruptions. Thy sins are forgiven thee, arese and walk, Math.
9.5,

Thus says Christ, but what says Nut? he flatly contradicts Christ, saying,
the taking away of corruptions wounds the man, this is Nut's exposition: Again,
the text says not that halt and maimed shall enter into life Nut is much
mistaken to think any such shall be in heaven, there is nothing lacking that
makes for the happiness of the creature, there is fullness of joy, Psalm. 16.
which could not be if halt or blind were there: well then the words of Christ
are as an answer to a question that might be asked, whether is it better to
enter into life wanting a member, or to be cast into everlasting fire having
all the members? Christ answers, it is better to enter into life although we
want a member: but will it follow hence that if a child of God should lose a
member here, that he must needs enter so into heaven at the resurrection. Other
absurdities he would raise from that other translation, If thy eye hand or foot
cause thee to offend, pluck it out and cut them off, and cast them from thee;
and if one lust cause thee to offend, cut that off, but keep still that which
does not cause thee to offend; but these are mere cavils and answered
sufficiently already. He would gather hence that some corruptions will offend,
and some will not offend: to this I answered before, that all men have some
corruptions, yet some men are dead in sin and past feeling, not capable to be
offended, others have the life of grace in them, and if their members which are
given to Christ should be acting sin, it must needs offend them; then are thy
natural members employed in sin against God, whether it be the eye to
receive sin to the heart from objects without, or whether it be any other
member to act it or to increase and improve it; then either that sinful lust
must off, or else that member that acts it must off, rather then to be employed
in the Devils service to sin against God; and if Nut trample this under his
feet as unsavory salt, it declares plainly that he has no relish as yet of
heavenly things.

After this Nut moves a question, saying, if this be the truth, that hands,
feet and eyes be members most eminent in Churches. how comes it to pass that
this truth has been kept secret so long? but here by Nut's good leave I
question whether it be a truth, and it seems he concludes it to be a truth
before he has the advice of his neighbors, who would have counseled him
better if he had told them that he had some carnest business with some of the
eminent members of the body politic, they would have said to him, do not go
to the foot, and why not to the foot? because it is not one of the eminent
members of the body politic, it is very likely some child might have convinced
his folly; but then it may be he will reply and say, the foot is eminent in the
mystical body, but now turn to the place and see how God has set the members
in the body, 1 Cor. 12 18. and there you shall see how he comforts weak
christians, saying to them, if the foot shall say, because I am not the hand I
am not of the body, is it therefore not of the body? verse. 15. Again, he
speaks to those that are eminent, that they should not despise the weak ones,
saying, the eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee, nor the head to
the feet, I have no need of you, verse. 21. Thus you see the feet are not the
eminent members of the Church, but rather in the meanest place of all: now if
this be so, how will Nut prove his truth (he says) has been hid so long?
here I will not proceed to his rotten answer, because that will fall together
with his rotten foundation.

Again, he says by the way, that Christ will allow of no members of his body,
Kingdom or Church, but visible Disciples: I answer with a demand of him, why
they are called hidden ones, Psalm. 83.3. If they be hidden, they are not
visible, and what is that white stone, and that new name written, which no man
knows save he that has it? Revel. 2.17. If no man see the writing of Gods
spirit but themselves, then sure they are not all visible Saints; and why did
not the Prophet know that seven thousand that had not bowed the knee to Baal?
and why did not the Apostles know the traitor that was amongst them? Is Nut so
eminent to see further into spiritual things then Prophets and Apostles? and
yet I proved him but even now to be as blind as a beetle in spiritual things,
but to these things I shall speak more fully when I come to speak concerning
baptizing Infants.

After this, he falls foul upon our Ministers, saying, that none of our
Univerisity Ministers are faithful, and that God will reveal his mind to
mechanic fools and babes, rather then to learned Ministers, and what he did
to learned Paul, was but one example to show his power; but he has not
promised to reveal his will to any more wise and learned. To these things I
answer, first, they that teach others must needs be first taught themselves
(faith Paul to that young Minister Timothy) abide thou in the things which thou
have learned, and host been assured of knowing of whom thou have learned them,
2 Timothy 3.14. Christ taught that which he received of the Father, John 7.16. And
the Apostles delivered that which they received of Christ, 1 Cor. 15.3. Acts
20.27. And ordinary Ministers must build their Doctrine upon the Prophets and
Apostles doctri^e; this is the right tradition, and if it be truly observed
without addition or detraction, the Gospel will remain in its integrity; the
means whereby Christ teachetn those that are to teach others, are two; one is
by immediate revelation, the other is ordinary instruction in Schools by the
means and ministry of man: now (says Amos) I was no Prophes nor Prophets
Son, therefore not called the ordinary way, but he had his gifts and calling
by revelation, tho Lord sent me to prophecy to Israel. Amos 7.4. But when
revelation is wanting, being an extraordinary calling, then the Schools of the
Prophets remain still, being the ordinary means appointed by God to teach all
those that are to teach others; this manner of teaching has been from the
beginning. The Patriarchs till Moses were Prophets in their Families, not only
in a general way, but in an esprciall manner, they taught their first borne
that they might succeed as Prophets after them. Again, there were 48. Cities,
where not only the people were taught, but also Schools were crected, that
they might be taught which were to be Priests and Levites, and among the rest,
one was called Kiriath Sepher, Josh. 15.15. That is, says Perkins, the City
of books, or as we call it, the University. And Samuel a young man was sent to
the Tabernacle in Shilo to be taught and trained up of (...) the Priest; and
when Samuel was Judge of Israel, he crected Colleges of Frophets, and ruled
them himself, 1 Samuel 10. And in the decayed estate of the (...) Tri^^. Elias
and Elisha set up Schools of the Prophets in flethel and Carmel: And the young
Students were called the sons of the Prophets, 2 Kings 2.3. And Christ
himself, besides the Sermons which he made to the people, tramed up and
taught his twesve Apostles, When they were alone, he expounded all thing a unto
them, Mark 4.34. And also the seaventy when he sont them our. Luke 10. And
says Paul to Timothy; The things thou have heard of me among many witnesses,
the same commit thou so Jaithfull men, who shall be able also to teach others,
2 Timothy 2.2. Again, this teaching is useful to maintain the true
interpretation of Seripture, for the right dividing of the word is a matter of
great difficulty, and what ever men think of it, it requires the greatest
learning in the world. Therefore it is necessary that teachere should first be
taught, and learn the Gospel of Christ, before they teach others. Again, when
men began to lay aside the writings of the Prophets and Aposties, and gave
themselves to study the writings of men, the^^sgnorance, superstition, and
idolatry came headlong into the world. Again says Perkins on his Commentary,
on Galat. page 385. There be sudry kinds of contention lawful, such as these,
1. Contention with an enemy in a just wae, 2. Contention at the Bar with an
adversary in a just cause, 3. Contention in dispuration with an Heretic, 4.
Contention in Schools, disputation for exercise, and for try all sake.

The seeing teaching of them that are to be teachers is of such antiquity, and
to so good use in the Ministry, all men should be exhorted to put to their
helping hands that this thing may go forward. Princes are to maintain it by
their bountifulues and authority, as they have done and do still they must do it
more, and parents must dedicate the fittest of their children to the service of
God in the Ministry, and Students raust love and affect this calling above all
other; of all gifts desire rather that ye may prophecy, 1 Cor. 14.1. And
lastly, all men must pray that God would prosper and bless all Schools of
learning where this kind of teaching is in use, that the ministry may be
furnished at the least with the original tongues in which the Scripture was
first published; for although Christ chese men into the ministry without
learning, yet he furnished them in an extraordinary manner with the knowledge of
al tongues and languages, and although they were furnished with abundance of
grace in their hearts before, yet he charged them to tarry at Jerusalem until
they had this gift also, Luke 24.49. And on the day of Pentecost the holy Ghost
came upon them, and they began to speak with other tongues, Acts 2.1.4. But
now no Minister can look to be surnished in this manner: they must go the
ordinary way now in the Schools of the Prophets to attain to so much learning
as they are capable to receive; this may suffice to satisfy any rational man
that our Universities are lawful and warrantable, and that the Ministers of
the Gospel ought to have the knowledge of the original tongues wherein the
Scripture was first written.

Again, the calling of the Ministers ought to be manifest, both to their own
consciences and also to their hearers, and that for diverse reasons; First they
are Ambassadors, and, as it were, the mouth of God to the people; for this
cause they are to speak in the name of God, and this they cannot do unless
they know themselves, Secondly, the calling of the Ministry tends much to
edification, it is requifite that he should have the assistance of Gods spirit
in a large measure, and the protection of God on him and his Ministry, and
also his hearers stand in need of the operation of Gods spirit in their hearts;
but he that wants the assurance of his calling cannot pray to God in faith for
these things, neither can he apply the promises of God to himself. Thirdly,
the knowledge of their callings breeds conscience of their duties, diligence
and the fear of God. Lastly, the knowledge of their callings in the
consciences of their hearers breeds a reverence in their hearts, and obedience
to the ministry of the word.

Now here it may be demanded how they may know that they are called of God to
the ministry of the word: I answer, they may know it if they find three things
in themselves; the first is the Testimony of their consciences, that they
entered not for praise, honor or lucre, but in the fear of God, with a desire
to glorify him, and to edisie the Church. Secondly, a faculty to do that
which they have a desire to do; in this saculty are two things; 1. A knowledge
of God and of his ways, 2. Aptness to deliver that which they know. The third
thing whereby they may know their calling, is the ordination of the Church,
which appears and gives testimony of their will and ability; he that has
these things is certainly called of God: Now put the case a man wants the first
of these three, and entered with an evil conscience, being carried with
ambitious and covetous desires: I answer, yet his calling still in respect of
the Church is good and lawful, and when he repents of his bad conscience, it
is also accepted of God.

So then Ministers must have a calling or else they cannot preach, for (says
Paul) how shall they preach except they be sent. Romans 10.14.15. No man ought to
take that honor upon himself, but he that is called of God as Aaron was, Heb.
5.4. Vzzah was smitten with death for but touching the Arc, although his
intent was but to stay it from from falling. 2 Samuel 6.7. And the men of
Bethshemesh were slain for but looking into the Arc without a calling, fifty
thousand, 1 Samuel 6.19. therefore the Apostles in the front of their Epistles
declare their calling. This might convince our fantastical Anabaptists, who
think that any man may preach that will, without any special calling, and they
allege for their purpose, that the house of Stephanus addicted themselves to
the ministry of the Saints, 1 Cor. 16.15. I answer, the meaning of the place
is not that they called themselves but that they set themselves apart to the
ministry of the Saints, in the purpose and resolution of their hearts, of all
gifts they desired to prophecy: yet these desires did not make them Ministers
except God were pleased to furnish them with gifts, and they ordained by the
Church; but till then they must give me leave to put it out of my belief that
they were Ministers. Again, they allege that all Christians are Kings and
Priests, and the office of the Priest is to teach: I answer, we are spiritual
Kings over our own corruptions in this world; For grace reigns through
righteousness, unto eternal life through Jesus Christ. Romans 5.21. And in this
world we are a holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to
God by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5. But when iniquity shall have amend, and the
Saints are freed from sin, Romans 6.7. they shall inherit all things, Revel.
21.7. In stead of reigning over their corruptions, they shall reign over all
the creatures when they are again restored to their first perfection, as Adam
did in his innocence, Genesis 1.26. The second Adam will restore them to us
perfect again at the day of judgment, being purified by fire at that day. For
he has made us Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on the earth, Revel.
5.10. And being Priests, when the sacrifice of player shall cease, being in
full fruition, yet we shall offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually,
Heb. 13.15. I heard a great voice of much peoole in Heaven, saying, Hallelujah,
salvation and glory and honor and power unto the Lord our God, Revel 19.1. But
this shall be when all teaching cease, when all the ^ares that did offend are
cast into the furnace of fire, and there are none but Saints. Then they shall
not need to teach every one his neighbor saying, know the Lord for they shall
all know me says the Lord, Jer. 31.34. Whether there be prophesies they shall
fail, 1 Cor. 13.8. Now teaching more properly belongs to the Prophetical
office then to the Priesthood; Every man ought to covet the best gifts, and
desire to prophecy, 1 Cor. 12.31. and 14.1.5.^9. And thus Moses wished that
all the Lords people were Prophets, Numb. 11.29. but neither Moses nor Paul
desired that all were Priests to offer sacrifice; Vzziah went into the Temple
to burn incense upon the Altar of incense, but the Priests said to the King,
it pertains not to thee to burn Incense, and the Lord smote him with
Leprosy, 2. Chro. 27.16.18.19. But all might prophecy or teach, so that they
keep within their bounds and limits appointed them, that is, their own
Families. Fathers may teach their children, and Masters their servants, they
may command to keep the Sabbath all within their gates; but we being spiritual
Priests makes nothing to prove that all may teach publicly. Thirdly, they
allege that the power of the keys is given to the Church: I answer, that it
is so, yet the use and administration thereof belongs to the Ministers only in
their dispensation of the word; So then none are to meddle in the Ministry but
they that have a lawful calling thereunto: Now it belongs to God alone to call
men to the ministry, Paul an Apostle, not of men, nor by men, but by Jesus
Christ, Gal 1.1. The Father thrusts forth laborers into the harvest. Mat.
9.38. And the Son gives pastors and teachers, Ephesians. 4.11. And the holy Ghost
makes overseers, Acts 20.28. And the Churches power and authority to call and
ordain Ministers is no more but a duty or service whereby they testify and
declare and approve of them whom God has called. Now they are called three
ways; first by men and not by God, thus all false teachers are called.
Secondly, when God calls men by the ministry of men, thus are all ordinary
Ministers of the word called. Thirdly, when men are called not by men but by
Christ immediately, and so Paul and all the Apostles were called. Now this last
manner of calling being extraordinary ceased with the Apostles; they were not
only called immediately, but they were inspired immediately, and aided with an
infallible assistance of Gods spirit, of all this they had promises, Mat.
10.19.20. Luke 10.16. But now the ordinary way to furnish them with gifts is
the Schools of the Prophets, and if it please the Lord to sanctify those
gifts, and to give them a willing heart to do service in the Church to the
glory of God, and they have a lawful ordination by the Church, this is the
door of the sheepfold, and he that thus enters into the fold of Christ is a
true shepherd of the sheep, neither may any preach publicly but he that is
thus called and fitted to take such a charge upon him, Acts 20.28. So then it
is not for men of other callings; He that warreth in this warfare must not
entangle himself with the affairs of this life, 2 Timothy 2.4. And (says the
Apostle) It is not reason that we should leave the word of God, and serve
tables; but we will give our selves continually to prayer and to the ministry
of the word, Acts 6.2.4. And who is sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 2.16.

But it may be they will object these words of Paul; For ye may all prophecy
one by one, that all may learn, and all may be comforted, 1 Cor. 14.31. I
answer, this is Schools disputation. If any think himself to be a Prophet,
or spiritual, that is furnished with spiritual gifts, and have a willing
inclination to be a Prophet, to the praise of God, and the good of the Church,
let him acknowledge that the things that I write unto you are the commandments
of the Lord, verse. 37. Let the Prophets speak, two or three, and let the other
judge: the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, verse. 29.32.
But here is no encouragement for Tradesmen to meddle with the Ministry: but
they will object, that men of Cyprus and Cyrene, when they were come to
Antioch, spoke unto the Grecians, preaching the Lord Jesus; And the hand of the
Lord was with them, and a great number believed and turned to the Lord, Acts
11.20.21. I answer, these were extraordinarily called and furnished immediately
from Christ, as the Apostles and those 70. Disciples were: but this manner of
calling is now ceased, as I said before? but they will object that the Rulers
of the Synagogue sent unto them, saying, Ye men and brethren, if ye have any
word of exhortation for the people, say on, Acts 13.15. Hence they would
gather, that any of the brethren may preach. I answer, those brethren there
spoken of were certain Prophet^ and Teachers of Barnabas, and Simon that was
called Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene, and Manaen which had been brought up with
Herod the Tetrarch and Saul, or at the least some of these, as Barnabas, Saul,
and John that were their Ministers, ver. 1.2.5. For when that motion was made,
then Paul stood up, and beckned with his hand, and said, men of Israel, ye that
fear God give audience, verse. 16. So that it was not spoken to all the people,
but for some of them to preach, that were sent amongst them by the Church:
says Paul, have not we power to forbear working, (for so has the Lord
ordained) that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor.
9.6.14. If the Gentiles have been made partakers of their spiritual things,
their duty is also to minister unto them in carnal things, Romans 15.27. So much
for the ministry alone.

Next, he blames both the Magistrates and Divines that are assembled, for two
things. First, for going about to reduce all our distractions and Schisms into
one way of worshipping God I answer, there is but one way to heaven, says the
Lord, I will gvie them one heart and one way, that they may fear me for ever,
Jer. 32.39. Again, there is but one body, and one spirit, one hope, one God,
one Mediator, one faith, one baptism, Ephesians. 4.4. Then why should not all our
distractions and schisms be reduced to this one way of worshipping God, seeing
all other ways miss of heaven? Again, the very end why God sent Christ, was to
gather together in one all things in Christ, Ephesians. 1.10. And the example of
the Primitive Christians, they had all one heart and soul, Acts 4.32. And Paul
exhorts to be of one mind, to live in peace, and the God of Peace and love be
with you, 2 Cor. 13.11. Nay further says he, I beseech you brethren by the
name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that ye speak the same thing, and that there be
no divisions among you, but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same
mind and in the same judgment, 1 Cor. 1.10. But will not they have our
distractions and schisms reduced to one way of worshipping God, then says
Paul, mark them which cause divisions and offenses contrary to the doctrine
that ye have learned, and avoid them; for they that are such fear not the Lord
Jesus Christ, Romans 16.18. They would lead us from the ancient Prophets to walk
in paths, in a way not cast up, Jer. 18.15. Let us enquire for the old way
which is the good way, and we shall find rest for our souls, Jer. 6.16.
Again, we have all one Father, one God created us, Mal. 2.10. And Christ would
have us united in one, as he and his father is one, Joh. 17.22.23.

The second thing for which he blames the collective body of our Kingdom, for
supposing that the land is scourged for this cause, that so many Religions are
suffered, affirming the contrary, that the cause of judgments, wrath and
stripes is this, that all Religions are not suffered: his reason is, first
says he, the consciences of conscious men are as dear to them as their lives,
2. Hatred will pursue them that against Gods rule will judge men for their
consciences; this last reason is grounded upon a false foundation, for they do
not take upon them to judge the conscience; we grant with him, that God alone
is the judge of conscience: and I have showed at large, that Magistrates do but
command the outward man, as his words and actions; and if they offend herein,
they may punish them in their bodies and goods, so then they may command
outward conformity in the worship of God, and if they be Hypocrites, it is from
themselves who are not obedient to Gods command, which alone reaches the
heart: It is true, we must obey them for conscience sake, yet not from their
command, but from Gods command, Titus 3.1. Romans 13.1. Now for his reason that
is built upon this, he says, what hatred must needs pursue them that bring all
religions into one, although it may be proved the true Religion; but says
Christ: If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you: If
ye were of the world the world would love his own: but because I have taken
you out of the world, therefore the world hates you, John 15.18, 19. Blessed
are ye when men revile you, and say al manner of evil against you falsely for
my names sake, Math. 5.11. But says he, our consciences are as dear to us as
our lives. I answ. if their conseience be dearer then Gods word, they may
quickly be deluded with a blind conscience, and may kill Gods people, and
think they do God service, John 16.2. And that Strumpet in the Prove. 30.20. can
wipe her mouth, and say she has done no wickedness; and we seldom hear a
Malefactor plead guilty; then is conscience such a perfect rule, or must it
rule the Word of God, or Gods word rule the conscience? But he replies that
every man's judgment is truth to himself, as theirs is to them. I grant it,
but the word of God must rule over all. Neither do they take upon them to
frame a government for the Church, but they search the word, and endeavor to
find out that form that God himself has set down in his word; and I doubt
not, but ere long, if they humbly submit themselves to the Lord, and be ashamed
of their own ways, that they have a long time walked in, that the Lord will
show them the form of the house, and the fashion thereof, and the goings out
thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the ordinances thereof, and all
the laws thereof, and write it in their sight, that they may keep the whole
form thereof, and all the ordinances thereof, and do them, Ezekiel 43.11. To the
great praise of his name, and to the comfort of all his people.

Arguments against the Anabaptists, proving that Infants borne of Christian
Parents ought to be baptized; with a full answer to all their Cavills that are,
or can be made against it.
FIrst, they are part of the Church of Christ: I hope if the parents be
admitted, the children are not rejected before that they discover their desert
to be justly cast out; well, then I take it for granted, that they are reputed
members of the body of Christ; and therefore they ought to be baptized. For we
are all baptized into one body, whether Jews or Gentiles, bond or free, and
have been made all to drink into one spirit, 1 Cor. 12, 13. Then why should
Infants be debatred of this benefit which is their due, and Christ at his first
institution of Baptism sent out his Apostles to baptize all Nations, Math.
28.19. They were commanded to baptize all Nations: hence I gather, that in the
institution of baptism, Christ made no exception of nation, age, nor sexes;
but the commandment is spoken in a general manner, baptize all, then let us
take heed lest we limit or straighten the command of Christ. And all the
country of Judea, and all the region round about Jordan were baptized of John
in Jordan, Math. 3.5, 6. But were there no children in all Judea, nor in all
the region round about Jordan? or were they not baptized, when it is said all
were baptized? I suppose they will grant that there were children, but they
will say, they did not come to be baptized: for they that came, confessed their
sins, verse. 6. I answer, if they came not then all did not come; but the Text
says, all came. Again, when multitudes came to Christ, they brought their
children, Mat. 14.21.15.38.^9.13. And why not here as well as at other times?
Again, for this word confessing their sins, some few might do it in the name
of the rest, as our Ministers do every Sabbath day, having children in the
congregation: then why may not our children be baptized as well as they?

Secondly, the Apostles practice shows, that they understood that infants
were included in that command of Christ; for when they came to any family, if
but the parents believed, and were baptized, they baptized all the household.
When Lydia was converted, she was baptized and all her household. And the
Apostle told the Iaylor, that if he believed on the Lord Jesus, he should be
saved and all his house; and the same hour of the night he took them and
washed their stripes, and wa^ baptized, he and all his, Acts 16.15.32, 33. And
says Paul, I baptized also the household of Stephanus, 1 Cor. 1.16. Then if the
Apostles understood Christ to speak in general to all Nations, sexes, and ages
without exception, why should we make question of it? says the Apostle, mark
them which walk so, as ye have us for an example, Phil. 3.15.

Thirdly, Infants were circumcised, and baptism is come in the place of it,
why then should not Infants of Christians be baptized? did Christ come to rob
Infants of that benefit which they had before his coming, or did he not rather
come to enlarge his mercies to them? he came to break down the partition
wall, that all might partake of his free mercy, which is not less then it was
before, but greater; First, in giving baptism in stead of circumcision, which
is far easier; Secondly, by admitting all Nations to partake of it, which
before was to the Jews only; 3. In that baptism more clearly signifies our
Regeneration then Circumcision did; hence I gather, that if Christ has given
us a clearer signification then before, our children shall not have less, if
God did not only give Parents the seals of the Covenant, but their Infants
also; will not God do so to Infants of Christians? shall we think that when
Christ put his own name upon them, calling them Christians, that he took away
part of their benefit? If God made a Covenant with the Jews for them and their
Children, and many gracious promises in it, which promises and seals also were
made over to their Infants: is this, so great a benefit, taken from our
Infants? did God say to Abraham, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed
also, Genesis 17.19. And the Apostle says to their posterity, ye are the children
of the Covenant which God made with our Fathers. Acts 3.25. But does not the
same Peter say also, that the promise is to you and to your children, therefore
be ye baptized every one of you? meaning all you that the promises belong to;
be ye every one baptized, both ye and your children: Then why should not
Infants be baptized? If but one of the Parents believe, the children are holy,
1 Cor. 1.14. If the roots be holy, so are the branches, Romans 11.16.

Fourthly, Infants may receive the seeds of grace by the Almighty power and
wisdom of God, although the manner of working it in them be not known to us:
for says Christ; except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye
shall not enter into the Kingdom of heaven; And whosoever shall humble
himself as this little child, shall be greatest in the Kingdom of heaven; And
whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that believe in me, etc. Math.
16.2.3.4.6. Here you see by the testimony of Christ himself, that a little
child is converted and humbled, and believing in him; then who dares deny
these Infants the Sacrament of baptism? and says Christ further; Take heed
how you despise these little ones, for I say unto you, that in heaven they have
their Angels always beholding the face of my Father which is in heaven, verse.
10. Then does Christ give such a testimony o^ them that they are heirs of
heaven by all those signs and tokens, and shall we as much as in us lies, bar
them out of the Visible Church? by keeping them from the seal of the Covenant
that should give them admittance into it, and further Christ does straightly
charge them to suffer little children to come unto him, and forbid them not,
Math. 19.24. But does Christ call them and charge them not to keep them back
from him, and dare any be so bold to withstand this charge of Christ, and as
much as in them lies, deprvive their souls of all spiritual good, what
desperate soule-murderers be these? they are like unto the daughters of
Jerusalem, who in that great famine and terrible siege, were more cruel to
their sucking Infants then the sea monsters, or like the Estridges in the
wilderness, Lam 4.3. The precious sons of Sion comparable to fine gold. were
esteemed as earthen pitchers, verse. 2. So these men, when Christ highly
commends, and greatly delights in young Infants, these cruel parents think
them not worthy of their society in divine ordinances; how do they know but
they were sanctified in the womb as well as Jeremiah, Jer. 1.5. And how do
they know, but they were filled with the holy Ghost even from their mothers
womb, as well as John the Baptist? Luke 1.15. But was John sanctified from the
womb, who was the first Minister of the Sacrament of baptism? what is this,
but to inform John that Infants from the womb are fitted for baptism? And
again, Christ was conceived by the holy Ghost to sanctify Infancy as well as any
other age, that none may be excepted against; then how dare these men make
exceptions where Christ makes none? then may Infants be sanctified in the
womb, and receive the holy Ghost from the womb; Then says Peter, can any man
forbid that these should be baptized that have received the holy Ghost as well
as we? And he commanded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord, Acts
10.47, 48.

Fifthly, the Apostles did baptize them that did but in a general way confess
that Christ was the Son of God, Acts 8.37, 38. And they baptized Simon Magus,
and many in Samaria, when as yet the holy Ghost was fallen upon none of them,
only they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus: Then they laid their
hands on them, and they received the holy Ghost, see Acts 8.15, 16.17. And the
Apostles finding certain Desciples, said unto them, have ye received the holy
Ghost since ye believed? that is, have ye received the special gifts and
graces of the holy Ghost since ye believed with a general faith; but say they,
we have not so much as heard whether there be any holy Ghost: and he said unto
them, unto what were ye baptized? and they said, unto John's baptism, Acts
19.1, 2, 3. Here you see them baptized that can make but a weak account of
their faith; why may not Infants born of Christians be baptized much rather
then these?

6. John baptized them with water unto repentance: but says he, he that
comes after me, shall baptize you with the holy Ghost, Mat. 3.11. That is,
when Christ by his spirit shall make that baptism by water effectual by the
inward working of the holy Ghost, and yet all this but one baptism, Ephesians.
4.5. And Paul speaking to those that were baptized with water, and yet were
ignorant of the holy Ghost, says, John baptizeth unto repentance, and says to
the people, that they should believe on him that should come after him, that
is, on Jesus Christ; And when they heard this, they were baptized in the name
of the Lord Jesus, and Paul laid his hands on them, and the holy Ghost came on
them, Acts 19.5.6. Now this was not another Baptism, but only the inward
baptism of the holy Ghost, as John had told them before, how that he which
came after him should baptize those with the holy Ghost, which then only
received the outward form, Mat. 3.11. Then if this be so, why may not Infants
of Christians now be baptized unto repentance as well as these? But our
Anabaptists will have Christ to be the forerunner of John, to baptize them
first with the holy Ghost, and then John shall baptize them with water, and so
Christ shall prepare the way for John, and not John for Christ; But the spirit
is like the wind, and we cannot tell whence it comes ^^r whither it goes,
John 3.8. That new name written, no man knows, but he that has it, Revel.
2.17. Then twere a vain thing to wai^e for that we shall never know in mother;
so then to children borne of Christian parents we are to do our duty in
baptizing them, and let the Lord alone to take his own time to make it
effectual to them; we must not tie the Lord to convert them, to any limited
time of their age; some the Lord converts in the first hour, and some not till
the last hour of their life. Again, it is said when Christ was baptized and
went out of the water, then the spirit of God descended upon him, and a voice
from heaven came saying, this is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased, Mat.
3.16.17. Then if we would see the work of God appear upon our children, let us
first baptize them, and then we may look for it and not before.

Seventhly, we may take notice of the two Sacraments of the Jews compared with
ours, and their agreement together: first, concerning their Passover, it was
required that they should know the thing signified by it, and that they should
sanctify and cleanse themselves before they did receive it; and when King
Hezekiah supposed that some of several Tribes had not sufficiently prepared
themselves, and yet had been at that Sacrament, he prayed for them, saying; The
good Lord pardon them, and the Lord hearkened to Hezekiah, and healed the
people, 2 Chronicles. 30.18.19.20. And (says Moses) concerning some that were
defiled and had not cleansed themselves, therefore they could not keep the
Passover on that day, Number. 9.6. Now to this Passover our Lords Supper does well
agree, which requires examination and knowledge of the thing signified, and a
remembrance of the death of Christ till his coming again, 1 Cor. 11. But for
the other Sacrament of the Jews, was nothing required of them if so be they
were but children of circumcised Jews, and baptism is come in the place of
it? why then should more be required of our children then was of the children
of the Jews? let them answer if they can.

But suppose they should require some qualification in our children, why may we
not answer that children are the heritage of the Lord? Psa. 127.3. then why
should they be kept from this ordinance of baptism? Again, children were in
the Temple and sang Hosanna to the son of David to the astonishment of the
Priests and Scribes, yet to the great approbation of Jesus Christ, who said to
the Priests, have ye not read that cut of the months of babes and sucklings
thou have perfected praise, Mat. 21.15, 16. Psa. 8.2. But does Christ here
acknowledge an Evangelicall perfection to be in the praise of babes and
sucklings? then who dares to keep them from the ordinance of baptism? Again,
Christ says, of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, then who dares to make
question of that which Christ affirms? and he kindly embraced them, which he
would not have done if they had not been part of his Kingdom, neither could he
be deceived, because he knew their hearts, and he prayed for them, Mat. 19.13.
and his prayers were always heard, Luke 11.42. neither would he pray for the
world, but only for those that were given him, 17.9. and he blessed them; but
who are blessed of Christ but they whose sins are forgiven? Psa. 32.1. And
Christ was displeased with those that kept them from him, which plainly shows
his tender affection to them; and he gave his Apostles a double charge, that
they should neither forbid those that brought them, nor drive way, but freely
give them admittance into his presence; and (says Christ) He that receives
not the Kingdom of Heaven as a little child, he shall not enter therein; and
(says he) their Angels are in heaven beholding the face of my Father which is
in heaven, that is, they stand ready, and hearken for a command from God to be
sent for their good, Psa. 103.20. But the angels are ministering spirits only
for the (...) of salvation, Heb. 1.14. they incampe about those that fear the
Lord, Psa. ^4.7. Then why should Infants be debarred from the Sacrament of
baptism who have so f^re a Title to the Kingdom of heaven. But they will say,
those in the Gospel are to be understood babes in Christ or young converts: To
this I answer, when they brought them to Christ, he took them up in his arms
when he blessed them, Mat. 10.16. which she was plainly that they were little
children. Secondly, the Disciples call them young children and little children
ver. 13. and Luke says, they brought unto him Infants, Luke 18.15. And when
Christ called a little child unto him, Mat. 18.2. he set him in the midst of
them, which argues plainly that he had him in his arms; but see Mar. 9.36.
there you shall see in plain words that he took that very child in his arms
and spoke unto them. Thirdly, Christ says unto his Disciples, who were strong
Christians; except ye be converted and become as little Children, ye shall not
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but now will those men who say this place is
meant of babes in Christ or young converts, will they I say make their
inference thus, that strong christians must become weak in faith? yea the
Apostles must become as babes in Christ, their strong faith must become weak
again, or else they cannot enter into heaven; these men declare their folly as
Sodom delareth her sin, Isa. 3.9. For does not Christ often blame a weak faith,
see Mat. 8.26.14.31. and does he not highly commend a strong faith? Mat.
8.10.15.28. Romans 4.20. Then the true meaning is this, the Disciples had been
reasoning who should be the greatest, Mat. 18.1. Mar. 9.34. then Christ took a
young child in nature up in his arms to convince their pride and envy, as the
Apostle says, in malice be ye children, but in understanding be ye men, 1 Cor.
14.20. So here in pride and envy Christ would have them to be as children,
saying, except ye be converted from your pride and envy ye cannot be saved;
that is, your pride and envy must be mortified and crucified which makes you
affect high places; he that would be first, the same shall be last and servant of
all, Mar. 9.35.36. So, then the Disciples were already converted from the state
of nature to the state of grace, but yet they were not sufficiently converted
from their pride and envy; so then you see all these testimonies of Christ to
be concerning young children in nature, and not of young converts being grown
in age; therefore infants having such approbation and testimony from the mouth
of Christ, I say again, who dares hinder them from the ordinance of baptism?

Eighthly, from the ends of baptism, which are these. First, it is a pledge
unto us in regard of our weakness, to assure us of all the graces and mercies
of God, and especially of our union with Christ, and of remission of sins, and
both mortification of them, and vivification to arise from them to newness of
life, Romans 6.3.4. For he that is baptized into Christ, has put on Christ, Gal.
3.27. The second end of our baptism is to distinguish Christians from Tuckes
and Pagans; for it is a sign of our Christian profession against all the
enemies of Jesus Christ, as Circumcision was a token of the Covenant, says the
Lord, between me and thee, Genesis 17.11. Christians may say as David did; Thy
vows are upon me O God, I will render praise unto thee, Psalm. 56.11. The third
end of our baptism, it is a means of our entrance or admission into the
visible Church of Christ, for says Christ; Except a man be borne of water and
the spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, John 3.5. The Kingdom of
God here has a double signification answerable to the double qualification:
sometimes it is meant the visible Church; so then except a man be baptized with
water, he cannot enter into it, and it is also meant heaven it self, and so a
man must be borne of the holy Ghost, or else he cannot enter into it. The
fourth end of our baptism, it is a means of our unity with the Church and
people of God; For we are all baptized into one body, 1 Cor. 12.13. There is
one body and one spirit, and one hope of our calling; one Lord, one faith, one
baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above and through all, and in you
all, Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6. Then would you have a pledge of Gods love to you in
regard of your children that they are united to Christ, and their sins forgiven
and mortified, and that they are risen with Christ to the life of grace? then
let them be baptized.

And would you have them distinguished from the enemies of Christ, and to have
a sign and a badge of their Christian profession before the world? then let
them be baptized.

And would you have them to be admitted into the Visible Church of Christ? then
let them be baptized.

And would you have them to enjoy the privileges of the Church, and to be at
peace and unity with the people of God? then let them be baptized.

But some will here demand, whether baptism be of absolute necessity to
salvation, or not; I answer, to make covenant with God, and to be in the said
covenant, is of absolute necessity to salvation, for unless God be our God in
Covenant, and we his servants, we cannot be saved; now baptism is the seal of
this Covenant, and therefore necessary but in part; 1. In respect of Gods
command, who has enjoined us to use it, 2. In respect of our weakness that
have need of all helper that may confirm our faith: yet baptism is not
absolutely necessary to salvation. For the want of baptism does not condemn
the children of believing Parents, if they dye before baptism, when it cannot
be had; for they being holy, theirs is the kingdom of God, although they dye
before baptism; the thief upon the cross, and many other holy Martyrs dyed
before baptism, that are now in the Kingdom of heaven; and those parents that
slighted this ordinance, so that their children dyed without it, if they repent
of that sin, it may be forgiven, and their souls may be saved for all that,
yet it is of very dangerous consequence to slight or contemn any ordinance of
God, it is damnable of it self without repentance. There was a law in Israel,
that the uncircumcised man-child, whose flesh of his foreskin is not
circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people; the reason is rendered,
because says the Lord, he has broken my Covenant, Genesis 17.14. Now it was not
the Infant that despised or slighted the Covenant: but it was the parents that
sinned, by slighting or despising the ordinance of God, and did procure this
judgment upon their child; also the child when he came to age refused to be
circumcised; and so he broke the Covenant of God, and therefore he was cut off
from the people; and why may not this be a just judgment of God upon the
Parents neglect of the ordinance of baptism which is come in the place of
circumcision? And if the Lord were so severe with those that were not
circumcised, which was a heavy burden for Infants to bear, see Ezod. 4.26. How
much more now baptism is come in the place of it, which is far easier; But
wash and be clean, 2 Kings 5.13. Then let them take heed how they neglect this
ordinance of God: for when they expect to have them answer for themselves, they
may justly answer with contempt, and despise the ordinance of God, and so for
ever be cut off from his people, and from the visible Church, and so by that
means debard from the ordinary means of salvation. For the Lord adds to his
Church daily such as shall be saved, Acts 3.47. Yet I grant that place is chiefly
to be understood of the Invisible Church, into which whosoever shall enter,
being the Kingdom of grace, shall without fail come to the Kingdom of glory
for ever. But except a man be borne of water, that is, baptized with water he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God here, which is the visible Church, and he
that is entered into it is either in the invisible or in Gods way to it, which
is nothing else but heaven begun, and heaven is nothing else but grace
perfected. We al with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord,
and are changed into the same Image from glory to glory, even by the spirit of
the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. But they will object and say, that Infants cannot be
known to us that they are indeed the children of God, and if they be not, say
they, we may not to baptize them. I answer, the same may be said of men of
years, for we know not certainly whether they be the children of God or no:
therefore by this argument we may not only exclude Infants from baptism, but
men of years, yea all sexes and ages from both Sacraments, and so admit of none
at all into the Church of God. But to come a little nearer to them, do they
believe that the patents are the children of God, and in Covenant with him?
then they ought to believe the same of their children till they manifest by
their wicked life to the contrary. For is God the God of the Parents and not
the God of their seed? this is flat against the tenor of the Covenant;
Therefore if the child have a right to the Covenant, he must needs have a right
to the seal of it.

Secondly, they object that Infants have no faith, and therefore baptism is of
no use to them. I answer, they may have the seeds of faith and regeneration,
although we know it not; For without faith it is unpossible to please God, Heb.
11.6. And he that believes not shall be damned, Mar. 16.16. But howsoever they
have an infolded faith, because that their parents by their faith receive the
promise of God both for themselves and their children, so that the faith of the
Parents is also the faith of their children. And th^^^ to be born of Christian
parents, and in the Church of Christ, is in stead of the profession of faith,
and so it will be useful and profitable for Infants to be baptized.

Thirdly, they will object that Infants know not what is done when they are
baptized. I answer, no more did those Infants that were circumcised, yet it was
useful to them and their parents both to have the Covenant sealed unto them,
and is it not the same also to Christian Infants? many benefits come with it,
it is a means to admit them into the fellowship of the visible Church, and by
that means made right members of it. For as the Father makes a purchase for
himself and his children, and they being Infants at the time of the sealing of
it, and so not able to know what was done, yet the purchase is not in vain for
them; but as those Infants grow to understanding they can rejoice that they
have an interest in their Fathers purchase; so will Infants baptized, when they
come to understanding they will rejoice in the great love of God that should
vouchsafe to take them into Covenant, and seal so many gracious promises unto
them in the Sacrament of baptisine, which will be an engagement to them all
their days, to endeavor to keep the conditions of it.

Fourthly, they will object that the weakness of the Infant is such, that the
coldness of the water to be dived into it, may be the death of the Infant;
therefore say they, it were better to let them grow to more strength, and to
take the warmness of the Summer season, rather then to endanger the life of
the Infant. I answer, it is true that dipping the child does more resemble our
spiritual washing, for says the Apostle, we are buried with him by baptism
into his death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of
the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life. If we be planted
in the likeness of his death, we shall be in the likeness of his resurrection,
Romans 6.4.5. But there is no necessity of dipping the Infant to endanger the
health and life of it in these cold countries, when as the word baptizing
signifies not only such a washing that is by diving of the body into the water,
but that also which is by sprinkling water upon it, and the Lord says by the
Prophet, speaking of these times under the Gospel. Then will I sprinkle clean
water upon you, and ye shall be clean from all your silthinesse, Ezekiel. 36.25.
Therefore without all question in these cold Countries sprinkling is accepted.

Again, Gods word teaches modesty, see Deu. 23.13.25 ^^.12.1 Co. 11.6.14. But
what modesty were it for a man or woman grown of age to go naked into the water
to be baptized, whether it be before one man or before the whole congregation?
says Paul, let all things be done decently, 1 Cor. 14.10. Again, we are taught
to pray the Lord to keep us out of temptation, and we have the example of
David's fearful fall into adultery and murder by seeing a naked woman washing
her self, 2 Samuel 11.2. Abstain from all appearance of ev^^l, 1 These. 5.22.
Now if they should object that men grown in years that were strangers were
circumcised when they were converted to the Jews Religion, therefore it was no
shame to see their nakedness: I answer, none but males were to be circumcised,
Genesis 10.17. see 35.15. and it was done by men; but females were not
circumcised, neither ought they to circumcise any; but both se^es are to be
baptized, therefore we should have regard to modesty, and to keep out of
temptation.

Fifly, it may be they will object and say, if the Infant be sprinkled but on
one part and not on another, then it is baptized but in one part and not in
another, and therefore no true baptism: I answer in the words of Christ, if I
wash thee not, thou have no part with me; yet says he to Peter he that is
washed needs not save to wash his feet and is clean every whit, John 13.10.
Here Peter thought it had been better to be washed all over: but the answer of
Christ is, that one part is sufficient, and circumcision was not in all parts
but in one part, and yet the Infant was by the virtue of that one place
circumcised all over; So Baptism does infuse it self into all parts of the
man, and into all parts of his life, and into all places whithersoever he
comes; therefore that baptisine that is by sprinkling the Infant is a true
baptism, and I have already showed the danger of neglecting this ordinance:
and here I may tell you again, that the Lord met Moses and sought to kill him
because that his child was not circumcised, thereupon his wife in her rage and
fury went her self and circumcised him which was her great sin; yet the Lord
in his great mercy passed by all because the thing was done, and so the Lord
let him go, Exodus 4.24, 25, 26. then take heed of carnal reasoning against
Gods ordinance. Then I conclude, that in hot Countries and for men of years,
diving may rather be used; but in cold Countries and to Infants, sprinkling may
suffice, which also is the custom of our Churches and ought not altogether to
be despised, see 1 Cor. 11.16. where Paul says, if any man seem to be
contentious, we have no such custom, neither the Churches of God; and when
Israel had no settled Church, but traveled from one Kingdom to another, in
such a case circumcision might be laid aside, and yet did not offend the Lord;
But he remembers their kindness when they followed him in the wilderness,
then Israel was holiness to the Lord, and the first fruits of his increase.
Jer. 2.2, 3. Although they laid circumcision aside for a space of time; and
there is much difference between a settled Church and the first planting of the
Gospel; when the Apostles preached, it was to men of years, and such they
baptized that were present, and they were out of the Covenant; but we are
children of Christians, and some of our fathers were in covenant with God and
had the seal of it, which is baptism: And we are the children of the Covenant
which God made with our fathers, Acts 3 23. These things well considered, let
the Reader judge whether God will accept the sprinkling of Infants at their
receiving of Baptism in this cold Climate.

Sixthly, they object that the baptism of Infants is grounded upon no
institution of Christ: I answer, that Christ sent his Apostles to baptize all
Nations, and the Apostles practice where they came baptized whole households, as
I showed before; and the Apostle speaking of the whole Church, says, we are
all baptized into one body. 1 Cor. 12.13. And the Apostle speaking of Isreal's
going through the red Sea, says, they were all baptized in the sea, 1 Cor.
10.3.4. Now if all Nations, all Households, and all the Church was baptized,
where will they find that Infants were excepted against to be debarred of this
ordinance of God? Let them but with an upright conscience tell me what they
think, whether Infants be no part of Nations, Households, or of the Church of
God, and then tell me whether baptizing of them be not grovnded upon the
institution of Christ.

7thly, they object and say, that place in Mar. 18. is not meant of infants,
but of good big ones which were able to go and answer for themselves: this I have
answered already, but says Mr. Calvin in his Institutions 416.7. they are
called by the Evangelist Brephe and Paidia, by which words the Greeks do
signify babes yet hanging. on the breasts, therefore this word ( to come) is
plainly meant, to have access; lo (says he) what snares they are compelled
to make which are hardened against the truth: and where they say that the
Kingdom of heaven is not given to Infants, but to such as be like them, but
this is no sounder the^ the rest; for the very intent and meaning of Christ is
to show that Infants in age are not strangers to him, when he commands that
Infants be suffered to have access unto him; nothing is plainer then that very
infancy indeed is there spoken of, and where he adds, of such is the Kingdom
Heaven, in this word such, are meant very Infants themselves and such as be
like them. Now to compare those actions and carriage of Christ to those infants
with the signification of baptism together, and it will appear to have the
same signification: Then if Infants be brought to Christ, why is it not meet
that they should be received to baptism which is the sign of our communion
and fellowship with Christ? and if the Kingdom of Heaven be theirs, why should
the sign thereof be denied them? whereby there is as it were an entry made
into the Church of God, that so they may be numbered among the heirs of the
heavenly Kingdom; and by our baptism we testify that Infants are contained
in the Covenant of God; and does not that which Christ did to them the same?
his receiving and embracing, laying his hands on them and praying for them,
does not all this declare that they are his, and that they are sanctified of
him? for (says he) I pray not for the world, but for those that thou have
given me out of the world, John 17.9. Then how unjust are they which drive a
way those whom Christ calls unto him, and spoil them that Christ has
garnished with his gifts? and if they shut out them that he willingly
receives, what miserable cruelty is this to their little Infants, let the
Reader judge. Shall not the Infants under the old Testament be denied the seal
which the Lord calls a token of the Covenant betwixt him and us? Genesis 17.11.
And shall Infants now be deprived of it? shall the Jews be assured of the
salvation of their seed, and shall it be taken away from Christians? did Christ
by his coming take away the testimony of their Infants, and leave us none in
stead of it? what an extreme slander is this to Christ who came to put an end
to all dark Types and shadows, and to manifest to the sons of men the
infinite goodness of the Father more clearly then ever it was before: Christ is
the light of the Gentiles, Luke 2.32. Then let us not think that Christ came to
deprive our children of that which the children of the Jews had before his
coming.

Eighthly, they will object and say, that it is no where found that any one
Infant was ever baptized by the hand of any of the Apostles. I answer, although
it be not expressly by name set down by the Evangelists, yet it is plainly
employed, when it is said that they baptized Lydia and her household, and the
Jailer and all his, Acts 16.15.23. But if all this will not suffice to answer
them, I reply, that by the same argument women may be debard from the other
Sacrament the Lords Supper, because that we read of none that received it in
the Apostles times: but if we observe and consider well what the instrution
requires, by that we may know to whom the use of the Lords Supper ought to be
communicated; now the same rule is to be observed in baptism, for when we
consider to what end it was ordained, we may easily see that it belongs as well
to Infants as to elder folks; so that if they be deprived of it, the will of
Christ is manifestly defrauded, then lot us not believe their lies, when they
say that baptism of Infants was not in the Apostles times. But try the spirits
whether they be of God, 1 John 4.1. And search the Scripture daily, and see
whether those things be so, Acts 17.11.

Ninthly, they will object that although Infants were Circumcised, yet it will
not follow that they should be baptized, because that the signs and the
Covenant are different, and also the names of the children. For first say they,
Circumcision was a figure of mortification and not of baptism; so I say too,
that mortification is the thing signified by both: hence I conclude that
baptism does rightly come in the place of Circumcision, because that they both
do signify the same thing. 2. Whereas they affirm the difference of the
Covenant, they are forced to wrest the Scriptures with audacious boldness, and
all because they would make them speak a damnable lie which is this. They say
that the Covenant which God made with Abraham did not exceed this temporal
life, and all the promises therein contained are but for temporal things; but
if this be so, hence it will follow that the Jews were only filled with
benefits like swine fatted with husks, and so at length did perish with
eternal damnation: for say they, Circumcision was but a litterall sign, and
the promises thereof were but carnal. To this I reply, that Heretics may draw
the same inference from baptism, for says the Apostle, we are circumcised in
Christ in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh by the Circumcision of
Christ, (and presently he adds) buried with him in baptism, Col. 2.11, 12.
Thus you see that baptism is directly in the place of Circumcision, and the
fulfilling of baptism is also the fulfilling of Circumcision, for they figure
unto us both the same thing, yet I deny not but the land of Canaan with many
temporal blessings, was infolded in this promise, yet not as the chief, which
was Christ, and in him all spiritual and eternal blessings, that the blessing
of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ, that we might
receive the promise of the spirit through faith, Gal. 3.14. Thus those soule^
murderers do not only seek to murder our little Infants, but also the souls of
all the Israel of God under the old Testament, in saying that Covenant which
God made with Abraham, was but litterall, and all the promises contained in it
were but for carnal things. 3. They say that in the old Testament they were
called the children of Abraham because they carne of him, and now none but the
faithful are called Abraham's children, therefore say they that carnal Infancy
which was by Circumcision grafted into the fellowship of the Covenant figured
the Infants of the new Testament which are regenerated by the word of God to
immortal life. This is a truth, but yet it is not the whole truth; for as the
Serpent beguiled Eve, so does this subtle Sophister seek to seduce those
little ones that believe in Christ. 1. Here you see that he excludes all our
Infants from having any right in Christ, because says he, the circumcising of
Infants, and receiving them, or ingrafting them into the fellowship of the
Covenant, signified those under the new Testament, which are regenerated by the
Word, which no Infant can be; yet I have proved before that they may have the
seeds of faith and regeneration wrought in them by the spirit of God, although
the manner how it is wrought in them be hidden from us: then why should he
exclude these Infants? Again, he calls them all carnal Infants that were
circumcised before that they manifest themselves so to be; not considering that
God is able to sanctify them, and to give them the gifts of the holy Ghost
from their mothers womb, as I have showed in Jeremiah and John the Baptist.
Again, Abraham was called the Father of the faithful, as well to Jews as
Christians; for when a company of wicked wretches called themselves the
children of Abraham; says Christ, if ye were the children of Abraham, you
would do the works of Abraham; Ye are of your father the Devil, and the lusts
of your father ye will do, John 8.39.44. And Abraham rejoiced to see my day,
and ye go about to kill me, this did not Abraham, verse. 56.40. Again, all the
faithful, whether Jews or Gentiles, are all joint heirs with Abraham of the
same promises, and shall come from the East and West, and sit down with him in
the Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 8.11. so then by Circumcision the Jews were
taught that God was the author of their salvation, and by this knowledge their
minds were raised to the hope of eternal life, they were called Gods peculiar
treasure, and his purchased people, and what can be wanting to them when God
has taken charge of them. And Abraham had faith before he received the seal
of the righteousness of faith, that he should be the father of all the
faithful, both of circumcision and uncircumcision, Romans 4.10.11. Yet God was
pleased particularly to embrace the seed of Abraham with his mercy, and that
the same mercy might be the more witnessed to them, he gave them the seal of
circumcision so like unto this is the Christian Church when the parents receive
the seal of the covenant, so must the children also; For if the root be holy,
so are the branches, To. 11.16. Yea, if but one of the parents believe, the
children are holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. And are so accounted of God although they be
Infants, and not yet capable to be converted by the word of God preached unto
them, yet they may have a work upon them by the holy Ghost, which makes them to
be in the Covenant, and to have right to the seal of it which is baptism.

Tenthly, they object other differences to small purpose between baptism and
circumcision; they say that baptism has relation to the first day of our
spiritual battle, but circumcision to the eighth day when mortification is
ended, and by and by they fall soul upon themselves and break the neck of
their own argument, saying that circumcision is a sign of the flesh to be
mortified, and baptism they call burial, into which none can be put till they
be already dead, so that it is enough and sufficient to confute them in naming
their own contradictions; but let them know that ^ortification is a continued
action all the days of our life, and the more we ^^^^ease ^n knowledge, the
more we increase in sorrow, Eccle. 1.18. For we ^ayly find more sin, to be
mortified, and circumcision was not deferred till the ^th day because that
should be the last day of mortification; but God in great mercy to the infant
did forbear the first seven days because they are held to be most dangerous,
as also that it may have a little more strength to undergo so hard a service
and also it was to typifie our Saviors resurrection. Another filly cavil they
would make, that if we thus compare baptism with circumcision, then say they,
none but males ought to be baptized, and yet (say they) you baptize females: I
answer, circumcision being in the generative part, it is all one as if both
were circumcised, so that if but one of the parents were in the Covenant, as I
said concerning baptism, the children are holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. Thus then we see
the agreement between circumcision and baptism in the inward mystery and in
the promises; in the use and in the efficacy of them: Then why may not infants
now be baptized as well as they were circumcised, it being far easier to them to
bear it?

11thly, they object that infants understand not the thing there signified, which
is their spiritual regeneration, this (say they) cannot be in their tender
infancy, therefore they are to be taken for no other then the children of Adam
till they be grown to age meet for a second birth: I answer, if they have the
seeds of faith and regeneration wrought in truth by the spirit of God in their
souls, although the knowledge of it be hidden both from themselves and from
us; it is too weak an argument to deprive them of the ordinance of baptism;
for sometimes the strongest Christian may think himself a castaway, and that
he for the present has not one dram of true saving grace as yet wrought in
him, but must we judge him to be so, because he himself for the present cannot
see it to be otherwise? so then must we judge all Infants to be in old Adam,
because they themselves are not capable to understand their own condition? If
they be in old Adam, they are in the state of death and damnation. And if they
should then dye, they must needs be damned; for in Adam all dye, 1 Cor. 15.22.
But will these men leave them in that condition? what is this, but as I said
before, to esteem the precious sons of Sion comparable to fine gold, to be but
earthen pitchers? These are more cruel then sea monsters to their young ones,
like the Estridges in the wilderness, Lam. 4.2.3. She is hardened against her
young ones, as though they were not hers, because God has deprived her of
wisdom, and has not imparted unto her understanding, Job 39.16.17. Christ
calls them unto him, because he is life, and that they might have life in
them, and these people drive them from him, and adjudge them to death. Neither
will they bring them to Christ that they may have life; they will not use the
means to have them ingrafted into Christ, that so they may be delivered from
the bondage of death; they deprive them of all salvation, in debarring them
from the ordinance of baptism. But they will demand how Infants can be
regenerate, which have neither knowledge of good nor evil. I answer, God is
able to work the seeds of grace in them, although we see it not, and in this
thing we must believe more then we see, or else we shall condemn all those
infants that die before they be capable of knowledge, and so David shall go to
hell to his departed Infant; for says he, I shall go to him, 2 Samuel 12.23.
And how can it be avoided? For we are all shapen in iniquity, and in sin we
were conceived, Psa. 51.5. We are all by nature children of wrath, then those
Infants that dye, must be freed from the wrath of God, and from the guilt of
original sin, or else they cannot be saved. But here is our comfort, God can
sanctify Jeremiah in the womb, and he can give John the Baptist the gifts of
the holy Ghost from the womb, and why not our Infants as well as they? Christ was
conceived by the holy Ghost in the womb, that he might sanctify his elect in
every age, as well at the first hour of their life as at the last, if he please:
so then elect children shall be made holy and regenerate before they depart
this life. And although the word preached be the immortal seed to regenerate
men of years, it is not so to Infants, neither has the Lord so tied himself
only to that means, but he may use some other in case that cannot be had, as
among Turks and Pagans, nor received by Infants; yet we must not limit the
holy one of Israel, nor ty him to ordinary means in extraordinary cases.

12. But they object that baptism is a Sacrament of repentance and of faith
which cannot be in Infants, and we ought to beware lest they being admitted to
the communion of baptism, the signification of it be made void. I answer, it
is evident by Scripture that Circumcision was a sign of repentance; yet Paul
calls it the seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4.11. So then if
Infants among the Jews had faith to seal, why may not Infants of Christians
have the like; I mean the seeds of faith; therefore baptism is not void and of
no effect to them. Again, if circumcision was commanded, baptism is employed,
that is, come in the place thereof, and signifies the same thing, and
instituted by the same authority. Then let them take heed how they rage against
the ordinance of God; and although Infants that were circumcised had no actual
repentance, yet they were truly Circumcised into the mortification of their
corrup and defiled nature, in which mortification they should afterward
exercise themselves when they were grown to riper age; and says John, I
baptize you with water unto repentance, Mat. 3.11. And others that were
baptized had not received the holy Ghost, for as yet he was fallen upon none of
them, only they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. Then laid they
their hands on them, and they received the holy Ghost, Acts 8.16.17. So then
they were baptized into repentance and faith to come, for as yet these graces
be not found actually in them, yet by the secret working of the spirit of God,
the seed of both lies hid in them. Paul calls this the w^shing of
regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost, Titus 3.5. But still they stand
upon an expres word of God to command it. I answer, Circumcision had a command,
and baptism is come in the place of it; then let them show how and when that
command was repeated; for although the sign be changed, the command remains
still, as it was to Circumcision, so it is now to baptism. Again, if they be
elected and have this sign of regeneration, and shall depart before they be
capable to understand the mystery of it, they shall be renewed by the power of
the holy Ghost unconceivable to us, before they go hence and be no more seen:
but if they grow up to age, whereby they may be taught the truth of baptism,
they will be the more engaged to endeavor reformation of their lives, having the
token or sign of regeneration given them from their Infancy; says Paul, we
are buried together with Christ by baptism, Romans 6.4. If this be done by
baptism, then it was no^ done before; and says he again, as many as have been
baptized into Christ have put on Christ Gal. 3.27. That they might henceforth
live unto Christ; and says Peter, baptism is the answer of a good conscience
toward God by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 3.21.

But they often err in this, that they will have the the thing it self
always in order of time before the sign; But if this were so, then Infants
could not have been circumcised, for they could not manifest to others their
regeneration being Infants, but circumcision was to them the witness of good
conscience, the seeds of grace being there but the declaration and
manifestation, was applied to the time to come; so also baptism is to confirm
and establish the Covenant made by the Lord with us, and we then receive the
seal thereof; and when we actually believe being of age, then we set to our
seal that God is true, John 3.33.

13. They object that baptism is given unto forgivenes of sins, but this we
grant as well as they, for we are al born sinners, and stand in need of pardon
from the womb, and also of she sign of it to assure us, as soon as it may be
had, seeing the Lord does not cut off Infants from the hope of mercy, why
should we deprive them of the sign which is far inferior to the thing it
self? so then Infants have remission of sins given them, therefore they ought
not to have the sign taken from them. They say again, that Christ cleanses
his Church by the washing of water by the word, Ephesians. 5.26. And this also we
grant as well as they, for it quite overthrowes their error. For if the Lord
will have that washing whereby he cleanses his Church to be testified by
baptism, why then should we do so much wrong to Infants as to debar them from
that which is given in general to all the members of the Church; And they also
are heirs as well as others to the Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 18.34.19.14. And
baptism is an ingrafting into the body of Christ; then Infants who are
reckoned among the members, ought also to be baptized, lest we be found guilty
of this horrible sin, to pluck away by violence any member from the body of
Christ.

14. They object that the Apostles baptized none but those that did before make
profession of faith and repentance For they said unto Peter and to the rest of
the Apostles, men and brethren what shall we do? Then Peter said unto them,
repent and be baptized every one of you, Acts 2.37.38. And when the Ennuch
required to be baptized, Philip answered, if thou beleevest with all thy heart
thou may Acts 3.37. Hence they conclude that baptism is to be granted to
none but toose that have says and repentance given before. I answ. The first
of these places does not mention says at all, so that it seems by that place
repentance alone may suffice, and the other place does not mention repentance,
so that it seems from that place, that faith alone may suffice, so that of
necessity the two places must be joined together; but if you go to join
Scriptures together, we will join with you, and lay some other Scriptures to
them both, which will soon split your argument; for these to whom Peter and
Philip spoke, were men of years, and sufficient to have the practice of
repentance, and to conceive faith. Now such as these, we grant, ought not to be
baptized till we conceive of their conversion and faith so far as it may be
conceived by the judgment of men, but the case of Infants is to be accounted
otherwise, as for example; When any stranger joined himself in communion with
the religion of Israel, they taught them first the Covenant of the Lord, and
instructed them in his law before that he was marked with Circumcision, because
that he was by birth a stranger to the people of Israel, with whom the Covenant
was made, and with whom Circumcision was established. The Lord when he adopted
Abraham to himself, does not begin at Circumcision, and hide from him what he
meant by that sign, but first he declares what Covenant he intends to make
with him, and then after faith is given to apply the promises, then he makes
him partaker of the Sacrament of Circumcision; but why must Abraham first have
faith, and then receive this Sacrament; and yet his son Isaac shall be partaker
of it at eight days old? I answer, because that he was a man grown in years,
and before a stranger: therefore it was meet that he should first learn the
conditions of the Covenant, our Isaac an Infant begotten of him, is in Covenant
by right of Inheritance according to the form of the promise, which was not
only to be ^is God, but the God of his seed after him, Genesis 17.19. So that his
son had right to it from the womb, although he understood not the conditions
thereof being an Infant, neither ought such Infants to be debard from the
sign, for this that they cannot swear to the form of the Covenant. So then if
heathens which are grown in age shall embrace the faith of Christ, they must
not be marked with baptism till they do evidently declare their faith in
Christ, and repentance for their sins, which only can open to them an entrance
into fellowship of the Covenant: but Infants of Christians as they are received
of God into the inheritance of the Covenant as soon as they are borne, ought to
be received to baptism; but if a Turk or a heathen shall offer himself to
baptism, he must not be rashly baptized of us till after confession, whereby
he may so satisfy the Church.

15thly, they object from the institution of baptism, that Christ sending out
his Apostles to all Nations, commanded them first to teach and then baptize
them, Mat. 28.19. And so in the last of Mark it is said, he that believes and
is baptized, shall be saved; nence they conclude, saying, that teaching must go
before baptis^ne by the express command of Christ to his Apostles, and (say
they) he does assign baptisine to be a state after faith; and (say they)
Christ showed us an example of himself, which would not be baptized till the
thirtieth year of his life: I answer from the first of these, that the
Apostles after they have baptized any, then they are charged to teach them to
observe all things whatsoever Christ commanded them, Mat. 28.19.20. Hence I
gather from their own exposition, thus, that although they do as Christ did who
lived 30 years before that he was baptized, and all that time have bin taught to
reform their lives, yet by their own exposition they must not observe and do
what Christ here commands them till they be baptized, because observation and
reformation are set down after baptism in this place. Then seeing they fall
thus foul upon their own exposition, that they must not observe and practice
till they be baptized, in my judgment it were good to have the^ baptized
betime, that they may begin reformation betime, that they may not only be
taught 20 or 30 years, but they may observe and practice what they have been
taught. But here all may see what unprofitable hearers they make of their
children, who shall hear before baptism, because that teaching is set down
first, but they must not observe and practice till after baptism because that
is set down last, neither will they baptize them that they may observe and
practice. Here I may repeat again what I said before, that the Apostles were
sent amongst heathens that are out of the Covenant, but we are Christians in
the Covenant; and they were men of age, but ours are Infants not capable of
teaching. But do they stand so much upon this, that teaching is set down first,
although observation be set down after baptismein the same place? then let us
to this join another, Io. 3.5. see Acts 22.16. where Christ does not say except
ye be born of the spirit first, and then of water afterward, ye cannot enter
into the Kingdom of heaven; but contrary he says, except ye be borne of
water, and then of the spirit, showing that baptism must give them admittance
into the visible Church of God here, and they must be borne of the spirit, that
is, regenerated, before that they can come into God heavenly Kingdom, and we
know that many were baptized before that they had the gifts and graces of the
holy Ghost given them, Acts 8.16.17. Again, they being sent to teach those that
were capable of teaching, and then to baptize them; but will it follow hence
that Infants must be first taught and then baptized? because Abraham was ninety
and nine years old when he was circumcised, must Isaac be so too? a pretty
conclusion. But I have answered it already, and proved it too weak an argument
to debar Infants born of Christians from the seal of baptism: but further let
me clear this by a similitude, the Apostle says, this we command you, that if
any will not work, neither should they eat, 2 These. 3.10. will they hence
conclude that the Apostle will suffer none to eat but such as work? then what
shall our aged people and Infants do, and our sick and weak and lame people
do? shall we starve them all because they cannot work? this is our
Anabaptists divinity, who make that a general rule for all, which is spoken
only of some; for (say they) because men of years must be instructed before
they be baptized, therefore Infants must be so too, and because men grown and
in health and strength must work or else they must not eat, therefore infants
must do so too, or else they must not eat. Now for the example of Christ, who
they say was not baptized till he was 30 years of age, I hope they will not say
that he wanted fitness till he was of that age to be baptized, for when be was
but twelve years old he disputed with the Doctors in the Teme, pl and all that
heard him were astonished at his understanding and answers, Luke 2.42.46.47.
Then the reason why Christ was not baptized till the middle of man's age or till
he was 30 years of age, was, because he was minded then with his Doctrine to
institute baptism; and that he might procure the greater authority to his
institution, he sanctified it with his own body, who was baptized to sanctify
that ordinance unto us, and he sent out his Apostles to baptize all Nations in
the name of the Father and of the Son and of the holy Ghost, Mat. 28. Though
Jesus himself baptized not, meaning with water, because (says John the
Baptist) he that comes after me shall baptize you with the holy Ghost, Mat
3.11. Thus Christ did then to many, as also now when he make to that ordinance
effectual to the cleansing of their fowls from sin; but if they stand so much
upon the thirtieth year, why then did they suffer Gervetus one of their great
Masters to begin at the age of one and twenty years to boast of himself to be
a prophet? and they suffered him to take the place of a teacher before that he
had been a member of their Church.

16, they object, that if Infants be baptized, they may as well receive the
Lords Supper: I answer, no, that will not follow, for the Scriptures show us a
large difference between those two; baptism is a sign of admission whereby
they are numbered among the people of God; and it is a sign of spiritual
regeneration, whereby we are born again the children of God, whereas on the
other side the Lords Supper is given to men grown in years, and therefore able
to bear stronger meat; and whereas the Scripture never says that any infants
born of christian parents are unfit for baptism, yet none must receive the
Lords Supper but such as discern the body and blood of the Lord, and are able
to examine their own conscience, and able to declare the Lords death; the
Apostle exhorts that every man should prove and examine himself and then eat
of that bread and drink of that cup; therefore examination must go before,
which were a vain thing to look for from infants: again, he that eats and
drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself, not discerning
the Lords body. But if none can partake worthily but they that can discern the
Lords body, why then should we give to our tender children poison in stead of
lively food? Again, the commandment is, that ye shall do it in remembrance of
me, and that other sentence, as often as ye eat of this bread and drink of
this cup, ye do show the Lords death till he come: but what remembrance can
be required in our infants of the thing which they never attained with
understanding? what preaching of the cross of Christ can they comprehend in
their mind? none of these things are prescribed nor required in baptism,
therefore between these two signs there is great difference, and it was so
between circumcision and the passover in the old Testament; for circumcision
(which is well known to answer our baptism) was appointed for infants, but
the passover which our Lords Supper succeeded did not receive all manner of
guests without difference, but it was rightly eaten by them only that were of
age, and did enquire into the signification of it. These things methinks might
satisfy these men if they were not wilfully blinded and obstinately bent to
go on in their error.

Now it may be demanded whether the children of Turks of Jews may lawfully be
baptized. I answer, no, because their parents are out of the Covenant, so that
the case is not the same as with Infants borne of Christans, with whom God has
made a Covenant, and with their seed who are children of the Covenant.
Therefore as we our selves have right to the seal of this covenant, so have
our Infants as soon as they are borne, although the Lord in mercy did forbear
eight days to the Jews, because they were then unable to bear it.

2. It may be demanded whether children of professed Papists may be baptized. I
answer, their parents are baptized in the name of the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost; and though the Papacy be not the Church of God, yet the true Church of
God is hidden amongst them, and for this cause baptism remains still in the
Church of Rome, and their children may be baptized, yet with these cautions.
First, that their parents desire this baptism. 2. That there be Churches which
promise the educacation of the child in the true says.

Thirdly, it may be demanded whether the children of profane and wicked
parents who hold the true religion in their judgment, but deny it in their
lives, may the children of such be baptized? I answ. They may for all that: for
without exception they that were of circumcised jews were circumcised, Genesis
12.23. Although many were wicked, yet al were circumcised. Again, although our
immediate parents were wicked, yet it may be some of our predecessors were
holy, and if the root be holy so are the branches, Romans 11.16. This also may
answer a question whether the children of fornication may be baptized. I answ.
They may, if some besides their parents will answer for their good education:
neither is there any reason that the sins of the parents should hinder the
child of baptism being a thing pertaining to life eternal.

Fourthly, It may be demanded whether children of excommunicate parents may be
baptized. I answ. as before, that if some will answer for their good education,
they may; for the parents although excommunicated, yet still they remain for
members of the Church, having still a right and title to the Kingdom of
heaven, and are not absolutely cast out of it, but with this condition, if they
do not repent; although in part they are in respect of their communion or use
of their liberty, yet not in respect of their right and title; but as a free
man of a corporation being imprisoned, remains a free man still, although for
the time he has no use of his liberty.

5. It may be demanded whether the intention of him that baptizeth be
necessary; I answer, if the word of institution come to the element, it is a
Sacrament, whatsoever the Ministers intention be. Paul rejoiced that Christ was
preached, although many preached of envy and contention, with no desire of any
good to their hearers, Phil. 1.16. Then the intention of the mind is not
necessary, if so be the institution be observed. And the efficacy of the
Sacrament depends not on the will of man, but on the will of God.

6. It may be demanded what is the duty of the Minister in baptizing. I answ.
he stands in the room of God, and what he does according to the institution, is
as much as if God himself had done it with his own hand, and therefore when the
Minister does apply water to the body which is the sign and pledge of grace,
he does withal apply the promise of remission and life everlasting to the
party baptized, and that is as much as if God should say to the party baptized,
calling him by his name, I freely give unto thee the pardon of all thy sins,
and life everlasting, upon condition that thou keep the order set down in
baptism, which is to turn unto me, and to believe in Christ; then here is
ground for a special says. First, God for his part by hand of the Minister
applies the promise of mercy to every particular believer; then again, every
particular believer is by a special faith to receive the promise. For when God
shall speak unto us particularly, and as it were assure us of his mercies with
his own hand and seal; we must needs be moved in our obedience to his will,
and our hearts must be affected with it.

7. It may be demanded whether baptism administered by wicked men or Heretics
or such as cannot preach, be lawful and true baptism. I answer, if such a one
be chosen and put in the place of a true Pastor, and keep the true form of
baptizing according to the Institution in the name of the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, it is true baptism: but if they baptize in the name of any other, it is
unlawful; for were ye baptized in the name of Paul? I thank God I baptized
none of you, lest any should say that I baptized in my own name, 1 Cor.
1.13.14, 15. These things considered, although they were ignorant and could not
preach, or wicked Heretics that did administer it, yet their baptism was
lawful. For the Pharisees and Doctors of the Jews were many of them not of
the Tribe of Levi, but of some other Tribes, and many of them were Heretics
and Apostates, yet they were in the place of good Pastors, and sat in Moses
Chair, and taught some of Moses doctrine; therefore says Christ, hear them.

8. It may be demanded by the Anabaptists who are not pleased with our
baptism, whether those that we have baptized, may not be baptized again by
them. Such Katabaptists were in Calvin's time, that did furiously call upon them
to be baptized again. To this I answer, that they may not be baptized again,
being once baptized; the efficacy of baptism extends it self to the whole
life of man, and we are but once newborn, and once ingrafted into Christ, and
the gift of regeneration is never extinguished; if a man could be borne again,
he should need to be baptized again, because that baptism is the Sacrament of
Incision or ingrafting. Now if any should say that a believer that is ingrafted
into Christ, should by his own sins and wickedness make himself a dead
member, I should tell that man, it is unpossible. For the spiritual Temple is
made of living stones, 1 Pet. 2.5. And they are passed from death to life. John
5.24. And believers are of the houe and flesh of Christ that can never dye
more, Ephesians 5.30.

9. It may be demanded what seal or mark is set on Gods people by this
^acrament of baptism? I answer, there is a twofold seal, one outward, and
^^e other inward. The outward and visible mark or seal is to distinguish
Christians from Turks, Jews, and Infidels; as the blood of the Pascall Lamb
did between the Israelites and the Egyptians. Now the inward or invisible
mark or seal that is set upon us in baptism, being effectual, is the
knowledge of our election; this baptism being effectual, shows unto us that
the foundation of God remains sure, having this seal, the Lord knows who
are his, 2 Timothy 2.19. By virtue of this, says Christ, I know my sheep, John
10. And by this the elect of all nations are marked, Rev. 7.9. The second
inward seal is the gift of regeneration, which is nothing else but the
imprinting of the image of God in the souls of men, and by this believers are
sealed, Epes. 1.13. 2 Cor. 1.22. Now baptism is a means to see this mark in
us, because it is the laver of regeneration: for as the water washes away the
filth of the body, so the thing signified which is the blood of Christ, does
wash away the sin of our souls.

Here I thought to have ended this discourse concerning baptism, being
already, I suppose, sufficient to satisfy the Reader; but I looking about me,
saw one Servetus a mighty Anabaptist, the glory of their company, he came
matching with his twenty arguments, and he set upon me and forced me to give
him Battle. First (says he) the signs of Christ are perfect, therefore
(says he) they that receive them must be perfect, or at least able to
conceive perfection: But here this man is a little too hasty to require
perfection the first day; says Paul, not as though I were already perfect, but
I follow after and press toward the mark, Phil. 3.12, 13, 14. Baptism
extends it self throughout all our life till death, therefore we must grow
unto perfection in degrees. Secondly, he says, the signs of Christ were
ordained for remembrance, that every man should remember that he was buried
together with Christ, but here the man has left his baptism and is fled to
the Lords Supper, see 1 Cor. 11.24.25. Thirdly, he says, all they abide in
death which believe not the Son of God, and the wrath of God abides on them,
and therefore infants which cannot believe, lie in their damnation: I answer,
Christ only threatens the despisers of the Gospel, which proudly and
stubbornly refuse the grace that is offered them; but what is this concerning
infants? says Christ, it is not the will of your heavenly Father that one of
these little ones should perish, Mat. 18.14. But how can this be if they he
still in damnation under the wrath of God? no, the spirit of God can work the
seeds of grace in them although we cannot conceive the manner how it is done.
4. he objecteth that we are first in our natural condition. therefore we must
tarry for baptism which is spiritual: It i^ true, we are shapen in iniquity,
and conceived in sin, Ps. 51. And by nature children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. But
by his good leave, God is able to remedy this even in Infancy, as I showed in
Jeremiah and John the Baptist. Fifthly, then he brings an allegory, saying,
David took neither blind nor lame, but strong soldiers with him into the
Tower of Sion, 2 Samuel 5.8. But here I shall split his allegory with a parable
of Christ, wherein God calls to his heavenly banquet both the blind and the
lame, Luke 14.21. Sixthly, then he brings another allegory, saying, that the
Apostles were fishers of men, Mat. 4.19. And lesus said unto Simon, henceforth
thou shall catch men, and not little children, Luke 5.10. To this I reply, and
demand what that saying of Christ means, that into the net of the Gospel are
gathered all kind of fishes, Mat. 13.47. Neither were the Apostles when they
were sent to preach forbidden to baptize Infants, and when the Evangelists name
them Anthropous, men, which word comprehends all mankind without exception; why
then should they except against Infants, when as God makes no exceptions
against any Age, Sex, or Nation? Seventhly, he says, since spiritual things
agree with spiritual, therefore Infants, which are not spiritual, are not
meet for baptism: I answer, here Paul speaks of Doctrine, where the
Corinthians were very quick to apprehend carnal things, and blames them to be
very dull to conceive spiritual things, 1 Cor. 2.13.14. But what is this to
infants, which are not required to hear points of Doctrine, is any thing here
to hinder them from baptism? He replies, that if they be new men, they must be
fed with spiritual food: I answer, the sign of Adoption may suffice till they
be grown of age and able to bear stronger meat. But he objecteth, that Christ
calls all his to the holy supper: I answer, he admits none but them that
are already prepared to celeb^^te the remembrance of his death; this infants
cannot do, yet Christ does vouchsafe to embrace them, which argues they are
not strangers, although Christ has stronger meat for them, yea many things he
has to say to them which they cannot bear now, John 16.12. Eighthly, he
says, it is monstrous that a man after he is borne should not eat: I answer,
the soul may be fed although they do not eat outwardly of the supper; Christ
is meat to infants though they abstain from the sign, which is the supper;
but of baptism the case is otherwise, for by it alone the gate into the Church
is opened to them. Ninthly, he says, a good steward distributeth meat to his
household in due time: I grant it, but then withal let him prove that baptism
is given to infants out of due time. Tenthly, he brings the commandment of
Christ, to make haste into the harvest, for the fields are already white, John
4.35. I answer, from this place Christ would have his Apostles to take notice
of the present fruit and good success of their labors, that they may the more
cheerfully prepare themselves to teach because they were fitted to hear; but
I say again, what does this concern Infants to keep them from baptism?

11th reason, he says, in the first Church Christians and disciples were all
one: It is true, those that were converted and baptized were both Disciples and
Christians; but what of this? will he gather hence, that infants borne of
Christians are strangers and out of the Covenant? let him prove it.

12. He alleges that all Christians are brethren, but infants are out of this
number so long as we debar them from the supper: I answer, Infants are heirs of
the Kingdom of Heaven; for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat.
19.14.18.14. And they are members of Christ, 1 Cor. 12.13. And the embracing of
Christ was a true token of their adoption, Mat. 19.15. Thus infants are joined
in common with full grown men; therefore although they abstain from the
supper for a time, it hinders not, but that they pertain to the body of the
Church.

13. He adds that none is made our brother, but by the spirit of adoption
which is given only by the hearing of faith; this objection has been often
answered, that it is spoken of men of years which is not required in Infants:
this hearing of faith, but is this sufficient to prove that God neither will,
nor can bring home any of his elect, but by the ordinary means of the Word
preached? shall we shut all the world out of heaven, because they have not this
ordinary means of salvation as we have? why then shall we limit the holy one
of Israel, as though he were not able to graft Infants into Christ by his
spirit, because the manner how is hidden from us.

14. He objecteth that Gornelius was baptized after he had received the holy
Ghost, Acts 10. But what of this, because one was so, must all be so? I have
showed the contrary by many examples, read Acts 8.15.16.17. The holy Ghost was
fallen upon none of them; Yet they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.

15. Here this blasphemer says, by regeneration we are made Gods, and that
they be Gods to whom the word of God is spoken; This, says he, accords not
to children that be Infants. All that I will say at this time to this damnable
error, is this, to show their hellish inference from some places where Kings
and Magistrates by reason of their offices are called Gods, being his
Vicegerents or Deputies upon earth. Hence they would gather that all the
saithfull are deified that they may the better banish Infants out of the Church.

16. He says that Infants cannot be accounted new men, because they have not
been begotten by the word. This I have often answered to belong to men of
years, yet Gods spirit can work without the ordinary means.

17. Here he brings another allegory, saying, in the Law a sheep and a goat
were not offered in sacrifice as soon as they came out of the womb. Here I
might answer, that the first born of man and beast was consecrated to the Lord
as soon as it came out of the womb, Exodus 13.2.

18. He affirms that none can come to Christ but they that have been before
prepared of John. I answer, had those Infants been with John whom Christ
embraced and blessed? away with such false principles.

19. Here he calls for Patrons, such as Trismegistus and the Sibylls, to
prove that holy washing pertain to none but them that are grown of age: here
this man discovers his honorable esteem of the baptism of Christ, who will
reduce it to the Ceremonies of the Gentiles, that it may be no otherwise
administered then pleases Trismegistus, but we more esteem the authority of
God, whom it has pleased to make Infants holy to himself, and to admit them
with that holy sign, the force whereof they did not yet understand: neither do
we count it lawful to borrow any thing out of the cleansings of the Gentiles,
that may change in our baptism the everlasting and inviolable law of God which
he has established concerning circumcision.

20. Last of all he makes this argument, that if it be lawful to baptize
Infants without understanding, that baptism like an interlude may be in sport
administered of boys when they play. But of this matter let him quarrel with
God, by whose commandment Circumcision was common to Infants, before that they
had attained to understanding: was it therefore a thing to be played with, or
subject to the follies of Children, that they might overthrow that holy
ordinance of God? but it is no marvel that those reprobate spirits although
they were vexed with frenzy, do thrust in all the grossest absurdities for
defense of their errors, because God does with such giddiness justly take
vengeance of their pride and stubbornness. So much for the 20. arguments of
Servetus, and his brethren the Anabaptists.

One objection I find since which is this, that Christ and his Apostles did
enjoyne all that they baptized to make profession that they had justifying
faith, although they had it not. I an. Christ said, some of you believe not,
for Jesus knew who they were that believed not, John 6.64.66. And the Apostles
say themselves that the holy Ghost was fallen upon none of those in Samaria, yet
they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, Acts 8.16. Then shall we
think that Christ and his Apostles would enjoyne them to make profession of a
lie, to say they have justifying faith when they had it not? or did Christ and
his Apostles engage themselves to believe that the baptized had justifying
faith, when they knew the contrary, and so believe a lie against their own
conscience? But they display their folly and reply, saying, the knowledge of
Christ was above the rule, and therefore he might cause them to make profession
of a justifying faith, though he knew they had it not; but what blasphemy is
this to make Christ the author of their dissembling? and not only so, but a
desembler himself, to profess that they had justifying faith, which, say our
Anabaptists, was the cause of baptism, when he knew they had it not? Hence we
may gather that knowledge of sin gives free toleration of sin; for Chrst knew
they had no justifying faith, yet he might baptize them. But this is no rule,
say our Anabaptists, for other Ministers, because they do not know that they
have no justifying says, as Christ did; so then by the doctrine of
Anabaptists, if our Ministers know that Infants have no faith, they may baptize
them; but if they do not know that they have no justifying faith, then they
must not baptize them.

Now all sober-minded men may see how rashly they trouble the Church of Christ
with brawls and contentions for baptizing of Infants; but it will be profitable
to consider what Satan goes about with this so great subtilty, even to take
away from us the singular fruit of affiance and spiritual joy (which is to be
gathered hereof) and to diminish also the glory of the goodness of God: for
sweet it is to godly minds to be certified not only by word, but also by sight
to our eyes of the great favor that we have obtained of our heavenly father
both to us and our posterity. How should this stir up thankfulness, that God
is not only in Covenant with us, but with our seed after us? this thankesgiving
and praise unto our God for this mercy, is the thing that Satan seeks to hinder
by depriving our Infants of this ordinance of baptism. Now if Satan could
hinder this assurance of the grace of God to our Posterity, he would soon
stifle all the promises that ever God made to us and our posterity after us in
his word: hence would follow in stead thereof, unthankfulness and
sloathfulnesse to instruct our children in godliness; for what encouragement
have we more then this, to bring them up in the fear of God. when we consider
that even immediately from their birth the Lord takes and acknowledges them
for his Children. Oh then let us labor to see the bountiful goodness of God
toward us, and let us offer to him our children, who will give them a place
among them that be in his family and household of faith, yea he will make them
members of his Church and heirs of his everlasting Kingdom. Then what heart
can be so cruel to debar his little Infants from the ordinance of baptism,
which is the door of entrance to all the mercies of God both here and
hereafter, Psalm. 102.28. For (says Luke) all the people that heard him and the
publicans justified God, being baptized with the baptism of John; But the
Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves. being
not baptized of him, Luke 7.29.30.

FINIS.

