The Gospel Covenant; OR THE COVENANT OF GRACE OPENED.

Wherein are explained; 1. The differences betwixt the Covenant of grace and
Covenant of works. 2. The different administration of the Covenant before and
since Christ. 3. The benefits and blessings of it. 4. The Condition. 5. The
properties of it.


Preached in CONCORD in NEW ENGLAND by PETER BULKELEY, sometimes fellow of
John's College in Cambridge.

(...). GENESIS 17.1.7. The Lord said unto Abraham, I am God all-sufficient, walk
before me and be thou upright; And I will make my Covenant between me and thee,
and thy seed after thee in their generations, for an everlasting Covenant, to
be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. ISAI. 55.3. Incline your ears
and come unto me, hear and your soul shall live; and I will make an
everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. Published
according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. for Benjamin Allen, and are to be sold at the Crown
in Pope's Head Alley. 1646.

(...) they do concern. This Covenant has been a port of refuge, to which
the Saints have always fled in their distresses, they claiming the blessing
therein contained and grounding their hope upon the faithfulness of him that
has promised. This Covenant has been the rock for the anchor of their hope to
fasten upon, when the winds and waves of temptation have beaten upon them. The
troubles of the Church and people of God are not yet finished, by reason
whereof we, no less then our fathers before us, do stand in need of help and
consolation from this Covenant in these days of affliction in which we live.
Neither is it only a consolation to know the great things which God has by
Covenant promised unto us, but it is a foundation to all godliness and holy
walking before God, persuading us to walk worthy of the Lord, as beseems those
whom he has taken into Covenant with him, to be a peculiar people to himself.
God has so linked together the blessing of the Covenant (which is his to give)
with the duty and way of it, (which is ours to walk in) that we cannot with
comfort expect the one, but it will work in us a careful endeavor of the
other. To speak more hereof, I shall forbear. When I had finished this
Treatise, and bethought my self to whom I should dedicate it, I could not
think of any, to whom it was so suitable as your self. You are (to omit other
relations) one of the children of the Covenant, which was first made with
Abraham your Father, and with Sarah your Mother, both which, as they lived by
faith, so they dyed in faith, having now received the end of their faith, which
they waited for. Your honored Father, the thoughts of whom are ever precious
unto me, was a right Abraham indeed; If I should speak less of him, I should
speak too little of that singular piety, and exemplary grace and godliness which
shined in him. I abhor giving titles unto man, but give me leave to bear
witness unto the truth. I knew his faith, his fear, his uprightness and holy
walking before his God, whereby he became as a Prince of God among the people
of the world, Genesis 23.
with whom he lived. Wherein he went before you also, as a pattern to be for
ever in your eye, to be imitated by you. Sir, let it (I beseech you) be your
chiefest care, and count it your highest honor, to walk in the steps of your
pious and blessed Father. His faith follow, considering what was the end of his
conversation. That sweet peace, those heavenly consolations, which he tasted
of, those inward feelings which carried him out of himself, even whiles he was
yet in the flesh, are strong engagements and encouragements unto you, to walk
after his foot, as the Prophets expression is, treading in the same steps of
faith and holiness in which he went before you. I am sure you cannot forget
those dying words of his a little before his end, (You that are in the flesh
think, etc. I spare the rest) in mention whereof I speak a mystery to others
(being but a broken sound) but not to you; you can interpret my meaning and
it is enough to me that you know the meaning of them, for whose sake I mention
them, that you may often remember them for your own good. They will never out
of my heart, and I trust they will never be forgotten by you. Go on (dear
Sir,) in the ways of grace which you are entered into, the Lord having made
good his Covenant toward you, be you also mindful to walk in Covenant with
your God. Set Gods kindness before your eyes, to stir up your self the more to
walk before him in his truth. The more you honor him, the more you honor
your self. Study therefore to do great things for God; seek the peace of
Jerusalem, the prosperity of Sion. Your goodness extends not unto him, but to
his Church and Saints that are here on earth; yet what you do unto them, he
will say, Ye have done it unto me. Remember David's troubles, Joseph's
affliction, Paul's bonds, the distressed estate of Gods Church and people, and
think of Mordecai his Item to Esther. This way was David's spirit working when
he was sitting in peace in his own house; He was considering what the LORD had
done for him, and what he should render to the Lord for all his benefits.
Wonderful was his zeal for the House of God; The cost he prepared for it was
almost incredible, an hundred thousand talents of gold, besides silver and
other things without number; but he lost nothing by all, (no man loses by
lending to the Lord, no more then the rivers do by pouring their water into
the Sea, which they receive back again by secret passages in the earth, and so
are still ever full.) The more he honored God, the more God honored him. He
spared not his riches in things pertaining to God, and God cast in more upon
him still, so that he dyed in riches and honor, 1 Chro. 29.28. Let your life
be like his, and then in death you shall not be divided. The God of all grace,
who has done so great things for you, go on in blessing to bless you, that
you may with Nephthali be satisfied with favor, and filled with the blessing
of the Lord, even with all blessings of heaven and earth, of this life, and of
that to come.

December. 3. 1644. Yours to command in any service of Christ, PETER BULKELEY.

TO THE READER.
CHRISTIAN READER;
I Do here offer to thy view a subject not unsuitable to the state of these
present times. Times wherein there is no peace to him that goes out, or to him
that comes in; but great trouble to all the inhabitants of the earth. Nation
destroyed of Nation, and City of City, God troubling them with all
adversities, setting all men every one against his neighbor. Times they are
wherein death comes in, not ^t our windows (as in the Prophet) but rages with
open violence in our streets; he that rides upon the Red horse, having power
given him to take peace from the earth, and that men should kill one another,
(Apoc. 6.) In these times so full of perplexity and trouble, it cannot but be
welcome news to hear of Conditions of peace; and when death comes to our
doors, and we are at deaths-dore, then to be offered a Covenant of life. This
Covenant here spoken of, is a Covenant of life and peace, and therefore
seasonable. It is also the more suitable, in regard of that holy and gracious
practice begun by our renowned Parliament, going before the body of the
Kingdom, in entering into an holy Covenant with the God of heaven, to become
the Lords people, the only way to a blessed peace. Till we be at one with God,
it will be in vain by humane policies to devise ways of peace with men; but
peace being once made in heaven, will bring peace on earth, and good will
amongst men. If otherwise man still rage, yet shall his rage be restrained and
turn to Gods praise, the Lord on high has a bridle for his lips, and an hook
for his nostrills; he will subdue the oppressor, and will still the enemy and
the avenger. Blessed be they whose care it has been to draw the Land into this
holy covenanting with God; let mercy and peace be upon them, as upon all the
Israel of God. And blessed be that God, who has put this care into their
hearts, as being the only way to obtain an assured blessing. This Covenant so
happily begun, is the principal subject of this book, in which thou may see
both the necessity for every soul to enter into a Covenant with God, and how
it is to be done, as also how those that have made a Covenant with God, are to
walk in it, and what blessings do belong unto those that so walk. When these
things were first preached in New England, there was little thought of
publishing them in such a time. But he which inhabiteth eternity, with whom
all things are present, fits things past, to those that are present, and to
come, that his wisdom might be known to order all, beyond what we conceive or
think. It is now some five or six years since I first began to handle this
doctrine now published, a time then full of trouble in these American Churches,
through the inordinate activeness, and impetuous violence of some busy spirits
(of whom the Country is now well rid through the Lords great goodness) deeming
all others (except themselves) to be wholly ignorant of the Covenant of grace,
and to be shut up under a Covenant of works; All the Preachers in the Land
were legal Preachers, the Christians, legal Christians, as having only the
letter of the Gospel, but not understanding the mystery or spiritual meaning
of it, as it was revealed unto themselves by the spirit. The disputes about the
two Covenants did then exceedingly trouble the minds of many, amongst whom
there was little speech but about the covenant of grace and of works, and of
being under a Covenant of works. I having then in the course of my Ministry
propounded to my self this order to follow, namely on one part of the Lords day
to handle one part of the body of Divinity, concerning God, Creation, Man, his
first pure estate, and so on, concluding that part with his lapsed and fallen
estate; and on the other part of the day to speak of the means of Gods
restoring man again to the state of salvation; I could not then pass by the
handling of the Covenant of grace, without a purposed declining from that,
which both the agitations of the Country, and mine own proposed method did
lead me unto. Hereupon I entered upon the handling of this subject in the
ordinary course of my Ministry, endeavoring my self (so far as the Lord
enabled me) to settle the minds of those amongst whom I lived, in the knowledge
of the truth, concerning which some were wavering, by reason of those spirits
of error which were gone abroad, deceiving the minds of some. This was the
occasion of handling this doctrine. When I had finished it, it pleased God to
give it such acceptance in the hearts of the hearers, that many of the chief
amongst them came to me with a solemn request, desiring me to publish what I
had delivered, that so they might have it continue with them, which request of
theirs, as it was unexpected by me, so was I both unwilling, and unable to
satisfy their desire; unwilling, as being conscious to my self of mine own
infirmities, unfit to publish any thing in this learned age; and unable, as not
having so penned any part of it, as to make it fit for public use. But the
earnestness of their desire on the one side, and the rawnesse of the draught
which I had written for the help of my self, on the other side, so far crossing
one another, gave occasion of a second revising of what was before done; which
also caused some further additions thereunto, and has at last brought forth
that (such as it is) which is now presented to thy view. And thus thou
understandest (gentle Reader) the occasion both of the preaching and publishing
of the doctrine of the Covenant which now comes forth. Which (notwithstanding
the former inducements) I should hardly have adventured to have published, had
I not been encouraged thereto by some others of better note. It is not any
confidence I have in my self which has drawn me forth into public view. I
thank God, I do in some measure know mine own weakness. But if the Lord will use
his weakest instruments to perfect his own praise, who am I that I should let
God? I wish this had been undertaken by some other of greater strength, but
none hitherto appearing in this kind, being desired to what I have done, I
have been content to yield to the desires of those that have persuaded me
hereunto. There is a Treatise of the New Covenant published some years ago by
a precious light in the Church of God, whose work is come almost into all men's
hands. If that worthy servant of Christ, had lived to see these days we now
live in, or then were, when these things were delivered, I doubt not but he
would with much more accuratenesse have handled these things then my weakness
is able to attain unto. But God having carried him to his resting place,
before these questions brake forth, which have since troubled, and do still
trouble the world, it is not to be marvelled that some one coming after him,
inferior unto him, may add something to that which has been before delivered.
The opinions formerly stirring in New England, and now in old, (if fame be not
a liar) have given occasion to touch some things not of ordinary occurrence. As
namely, 1. Whether the Covenant of grace be made betwixt God and man, or only
betwixt God the Father and Christ. 2. Where also (by occasion of the former
question) is handled that place in Gal. 3.16. concerning the one seed of
Abraham, to which the promises are made, which seed is Christ, showing who is
that one seed there called Christ. 3. What the Covenant at Sinai was, whether a
Covenant of works, or of grace. 4. Whether justification may be evidenced by
sanctification, and whether that way of evidencing be a going aside to a
Covenant of works; and whether one under the Covenant of works may be truly
sanctified. 5. Whether the commandment commanding faith, be a commandment of
the Law, or no. 6. Whether faith be a condition only consequent to our
justification, and not antecedent. 7. Whether the conditional promises be
promises of free grace or no, and of their agreement with those promises which
are called absolute. These and some other such passages are herein touched, as
occasion was ministered by the matter handled. And in regard that some of the
same opinions are now stirring in old England, which lately troubled New, my
hope in the Lord is, that this my weak endeavor (the Lord accompanying it with
his blessing) may be of some use now in these times; if not to recall those
that are led aside by error, yet to settle some that are doubtful and
wavering in the truth. But though these things are touched here and there, yet
my chief aim has been to lead on the weak Christian to a practical use of
the truths which are here delivered; in which the greatest part of this work is
spent. If in any of these, thou find thy self helped by this my labor,
either in thy knowledge or practice, return glory to God, and help me by thy
prayers, that I may so finish that little remnant of my course which is yet
before me, that I may rejoice in the day of Christ, that I have not run in
vain, neither have labored in vain. If any that are more judicious shall
vouchsafe to see what is herein performed, and shall think themselves burdened
with interruption by reason of application by use of each point delivered; I
desire them to consider, that as in the preaching, so in the publishing of this
Treatise, it was then, and is now, intended rather for their sakes which stand
in need of both, then for such as need not. I write not to teach the judicious,
but to help the weak, who stand in need not only to know the truth, but to be
led on, to see how the knowledge of it does serve to any use for practice of
life. One thing more I may not omit; Whereas it may be marvailed, that in the
beginning of the Treatise I propound two points to be handled, viz. first, to
show the nature of the Covenant of grace, and secondly, that we are saved by
that Covenant, and not by the Covenant of works, whereas I say, both these are
propounded, and yet I handle but one of them, the reason of my so doing is,
partly because I saw the Treatise to exceed in bulk what I expected in the
beginning, partly because the handling of the former alone does answer the end,
which in the beginning was aimed at, which was to open the nature and substance
of the Covenant of grace, and partly also because this is my first adventure in
this kind. If this which I have done shall find acceptance with the Saints, I
may add the rest in due time, if the Lord give life and strength; otherwise I
shall think this enough and too much, which is done already. In the mean time
I commend this my endeavor, with thee (courteous Reader) to the blessing of
God, beseeching him that is the God of all grace, to enable us so to live a
life of grace here, that in the end we may enjoy the grace of life, according
to the covenant and promise of grace which he has made with us in Christ his
beloved; To whom be glory for ever, Amen. In whom I rest

Thine in any service of love for Christ's sake, PETER BULKELEY.

TO THE READER.
THe blessed God has evermore delighted to reveal and communicate himself by
way of Covenant; he might have done good to man before his fall; as also since
his fall, without binding himself in the bond of Covenant. Noah, Abraham, and
David, Jews, Gentiles might have had the blessings intended, without any
promise or Covenant, but the Lords heart is so full of love (especially to his
own) that it cannot be contained so long within the bounds of secrecy, viz.
from Gods eternal purpose to the actual accomplishment of good things
intended, but it must aforehand overflow and break out into the many streams
of a blessed Covenant, the Lord can never get near enough to his people, and
thinks he can never get them near enough unto himself, and therefore unites
and binds and fastens them close to himself, and himself unto them by the
bonds of a Covenant. And therefore when we break our Covenant, and that will
not hold us, he takes a faster bond, and makes a sure and everlasting Covenant;
according to grace, not according to works, and that shall hold his people
firm unto himself, and hold himself close and fast unto them, that he may
never depart from us. Oh the depth of Gods grace herein, that when sinful man
deserves never to have the least good word from him, that he should open his
whole heart and purpose to him, in a Covenant; that when he deserves nothing
else but separation from God, and to be driven up and down the world, as a
vagabond, or as dried leaves, fallen from our God, that yet the Almighty God
cannot be content with it, but must make himself to us, and us to himself
more sure and near then ever before! And is not this Covenant then (Christian
Reader) worth thy looking into and searching after? Surely never was there a
time wherein the Lord calls his people to more serious searching into the
nature of the Covenant, then in these days. For are there not some who cut off
the entaile to children of those in Covenant, and so lessen and shorten the
riches of grace in the Lords free Covenant, and that in the time of more grace
under the Gospel, then he was wont to dispense under the Law? Are there not
others who preach a new or rather another Gospel or Covenant, viz That actual
remission of sins, and reconciliation with God (purchased indeed in Redemption
by Christ's death) is without, nay, before faith; the Condition (though wrought
of God) of the Covenant of grace, expressly opposed to the Law or Covenant of
works, Romans 3.27. and ever required as the means (and therefore antecedent)
to the attainment of those ends in the constant ministry of the Apostles of
Christ, Act. 2.38. and 10.43? Is it not time for the people of God now to pry
into the secret of Gods Covenant (which he reveals to them that fear him,
Psalm. 25.14.) when by clipping of it, and distinguishing about it, the
beautiful countenance of it begins to be changed and transformed by those
Angels of new light which once it had, when it began to be published in the
simplicity of it by the Apostles of Christ, 2 Cor. 11.3. Nay, is not the time
come, wherein the Lord of hosts seems to have a quarrel against all the
world, and especially his Churches and people, whom he goes on to waste by the
sharpest sword that (almost) was ever drawn out? and is it not the duty of
all that have but the least spark of holy fear and trembling, to ask and
search diligently, what should be the reason of this sore anger and hot
displeasure, before they and theirs be consumed in the burning flames of it?
Search the Scriptures, and there we shall find the cause, and see God himself
laying his finger upon that which is the sore, and the wound of such times; for
so it is said, Isa. 24.1. to 5. Behold, the Lord makes the earth empty and
waste, and turns it upside down, and scatters abroad the inhabitants
thereof; and it shall be as with the people, so with the Priest; and the Land
shall be utterly spoiled. Why? For the earth is defiled under the Inhabitants
thereof; Why so? Because they have transgressed the Laws, changed the
Ordinance, and broken the Everlasting Covenant: and therefore when the Lord
shall have wasted his Church, and has made it as Adnah and Leboim, when
heathen Nations shall ask, Wherefore has the Lord done all this against this
Land? what means the heat of his great anger? The answer is made by the Lord
himself expressly, Deuteronomy. 29.25. viz. Because they have forsaken the Covenant of
the Lord God of their fathers, etc. And no wonder, for they that reject the
Covenant of grace, they break the league of peace between God and themselves;
and hence if acts of hostility in desolating Kingdoms, Churches, families,
and persons, break out from a long suffering God, they may easily see the
cause; and that the cause and quarrel of God herein is just. As all good
things are conveyed to Gods people, not barely by common providence, but by
special Covenant, Isa. 63.8, 9. So all the evils they meet with in this world
(if in them the face of Gods anger appears) upon narrow search will be found
to arise from breach of Covenant more or less. So that if it be the great
Cause of all the public calamities of the Church and people of God, and those
calamities are already begun, and Gods hand is stretched out still; Was there
then ever a more seasonable time and hour to study the Covenant, and so see
the sin, repent of it, and at last to lay hold of Gods rich grace and bowels in
it, lest the Lord go on and fulfill the word of his servants, and expose most
pleasant lands to the doleful lamentation of a very little remnant, reserved
as a few coals in the ashes, when all else is consumed. As particular persons
when they break their Covenant, the Lord therefore breaks out against them; So
when whole Churches forsake their Covenant, the Lord therefore does sorely
visit them. Sins of ignorance the Lord Jesus pities, Heb. 5.2. and many times
winkes at; but sins against light he cannot endure, 2 Pet. 2.21. Sins against
light are great, but sins against purpose and Covenant, nay Gods Covenant, are
by many degrees worse; for the soul of man rusheth most violently and strongly
against God, when it breaks through all the light of the mind, and purposes of
the will, that stand in his way to keep him from sin; and is not this done by
breach of Covenant? And therefore no wonder if the Lord makes his peoples
chain heavy by sore affliction, until they come to consider and behold this
sin, and learn more fear (after they are bound to their good behavior,) of
breaking Covenant with God again. It is true, the Covenant effectually made,
can never be really broke, yet externally it may; But suppose Gods Churches
were in greatest peace, and had a blessed rest from all their labors round
about them; yet what is the childs portion, but his legacy left him written
with the finger of God his Father, in the new Covenant, and the blood of Jesus
Christ his redeemer, in his last Will and Testament? What is a Christians
comfort, and where does it chiefly lie, but in this, That the Lord has made
with him an everlasting Covenant, in all things stablished and sure? Which were
the last breathings of the sweet Singer of Israel, and the last bublings up of
the joy of his heart, 2 Samuel 23.5. God the Fathers eternal purposes are sealed
secrets, not immediately seen, and the full and blessed accomplishments of
those purposes are not yet experimentally felt; the Covenant is the midst
between both Gods purposes and performances, by which and in which we come to
see the one, before the world began, and by a blessed Faith (which makes things
absent, present) to enjoy the other, which shall be our glory, when this world
shall be burnt up, and all things in it shall have an end. For in Gods Covenant
and promise we see with open face Gods secret purpose for time past. Gods
purposes toward his people being as it were nothing else but promises
concealed, and Gods promises in the Covenant being nothing else but his
purposes revealed; as also in the same Covenant and promises we see
performances for future, as if they were accomplishments at present. Where then
is a Christians comfort, but in that Covenant wherein two Eternities (as it
were) meet together, and whereby he may see acco^plishments (made sure to him)
of eternal glory, arising from blessed purposes of eternal Grace? In a word,
wherein he fastens upon God, and has him from everlasting to everlasting,
comprehended at hand near and obvious in his words of a gracious Covenant?

The Church of God is therefore bound to bless God much for this food in
season, and for the holy judicious and learned labors of this aged,
experienced, and precious servant of Christ Jesus; who has taken much pains
to discover, and that not in words and allegories, but in the demonstration and
evidence of the Spirit, the great mystery of godliness wrapped up in the Covenant;
and has now fully opened sundry knotty questions concerning the same, which
happily have not been brought so fully to light until now; which cannot but be
of singular and seasonable use, to prevent Apostasies from the simplicity of
the Covenant and Gospel of Christ. The Sermons were preached in the remote ends
of the earth, and as it were set under a Bushel, a Church more remote from the
numerous society of others of the Saints: if now therefore the light be set
upon a hill, it is where it should stand, and where Christ surely would have it
put. The good Lord enlighten the minds of all those who seek for the truth by
this and such like helps; and the Lord enlighten the whole world with his
glory, even with the glory of his Covenant, grace and love, that his people
hereby may be sealed up daily unto all fullness of assurance and peace, in
these evil times.

Thomas Shepard.

To the Church and Congregation at CONCORD in NEW ENGLAND.
BRethren, Beloved in our Lord Jesus, you have here some part of my labor
wherein I have traveled among you, which your frequent desires have now
brought forth unto light; but had not your forwardness helped it forth, had
been as the untimely fruit of a woman which never saw the Sun. If it find
less acceptance in the eyes of others, then you have supposed, I hope that
having persuaded to the publishing of it, you will be content to bear some
part of the censure which shall pass upon it; This censorious age wherein the
most complete work can scarce pass without the mark of a black coal, will
hardly suffer such a work as my weakness can produce, to escape without a
sharper censure. I look not to escape in this kind. But this advantage I have
against any that shall oppose, that what has been herein delivered, has been
by you received, with an unanimous approbation and consent, as the truth of
God. And knowing some among you to be of a long time trained up in the
knowledge of the truth, having your minds exercised, to discern betwixt good
and evil, able to judge of things that differ, if any shall oppose the things
herein contained, they shall, in so doing, not oppose me alone, but you all,
who by your desire of publishing it, have set to your seal, and given your
approbation thereunto. Such as it is I commend it unto you, beseeching God,
that as you gave testimony unto it when it was delivered to you by lively
voice, so you may now, and for ever, show forth the fruit of it in your
continual practice, to the furtherance of your eternal peace and consolation
in Christ.

Yours in Christ Jesus, PETER BULKELEY.

THE GOSPEL COVENANT: OR The Covenant of Grace opened. Wherein are explained;
1. The differences betwixt the Covenant of Grace, and Covenant of Works, etc.
ZECH. 9.11. As for thee also, by the blood of thy Covenant have I sent forth
thy prisoners, out of the pit wherein there is no water; or as Junius and our
Geneva read; Thou also shall be saved by the blood of thy Covenant, etc.
THis Prophet Zechariah was one of those three Prophets, whom God raised up to
Prophecy to the people of the Jews, after their return from the Captivity of
Babylon; And yet so after, as that it was in part also during the time of
captivity of many of them, many of the Jews remaining still in Chaldea, the
land of their captivity, notwithstanding the liberty proclaimed by Cyrus.
Ezra 1.1.
Whether length of time, (the captivity having continued seventie years) had
made the land natural to those that were young and had been borne there, or
whether under Cyrus they might hope to find more ease from their burdens then
formerly under the Babylonians, or whether the length of the journey, dangers
by the way, the hazzards they might meet withal in their own land, they being
now settled in Babylon, and having houses and orchards, and such like
conveniences about them; whether (I say) it were any of these, or all together,
that hindered them, this is certain, many of them neglected to return to their
own land, in so much as the Prophet is feign to call upon them, as he does in
Chapter 2.6, 7. Hoe, come forth, and flee from the land of the North, deliver
thy self, O Zion, which dwell with the daughter of Babel. Adding to this
call of his many promises, to allure and encourage them thereunto. As first, By
a promise of plenteous increase and multiplying in their own land. Zech. 2.4.
Whereas they might fear, that being but few, and a small number, they might
be scattered and come to nothing, therefore the Lord tells them by the Prophet,
that Jerusalem should be inhabited without walls; meaning that it should not be
able to contain the people in it, for their multitude. A second promise, is
that he would be a protection unto them; I will be a wall of fire about you,
says the Lord, ver. 5. A wall of safe defense to you, and fire to burn up
your enemies, if any invade you. A third promise, that he will be the glory in
the midst of them; giving them a glorious State or Church. Fourthly, He
promises his presence among them, which is the felicity of any people; I will
dwell in the midst of thee, says the Lord, ver. 11. By these manifold
promises, the Lord does by his Prophet persuade the people to return. A
strange thing that being captives, they must have so many motives to return to
the Land of their freedom and liberty.

Now this Captivity of the people of the Jews, as it was res gesta, a thing
real and done, an affliction brought upon them for their sinning against the
Lord: So I find it in Scripture applied to three things, as a resemblance and
type thereof. First, It is applied to the natural estate of all men, who were
at first created free, being subject to none, but only to him who is Lord over
all, but are now by sin like the Jews in an estate of bondage. This
application I find made by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.17.
2 Cor. 6.17. Come out from among them, touch no unclean thing. Which words
were first spoken to and of the Jews, in Esaias 52. ver. 4.11. calling them out
of their Captivity. But the Apostle applies them to all, whether Jews or
Gentiles in their natural uncleanness, calling upon them to come out of the
sinful pollution of the world. Secondly, It is applied to the state of the
Church under the tyranny of Antichrist; for as that Eastern Babel did afflict
and oppress the Jews, which were then the Church of God; so Rome the Western
Babel does keep under the Church of God now, and long time has done, and
therefore the people of God are called to come out of her, Apoc. 18.2.4.
as the Jews were called to come forth from the Eastern Babel, Jer. 51.6.8.
Jer. 51.6.8.
Jeremie speaks it of Eastern Babel, John applies it to the Western, yet not
mis-applying, because the one was a type of the other. Thirdly, It is applied
to the present miserable forsaken condition of the Jews, in which they now
lie, they being now a refuse people, cast off by God, for their casting off of
Christ. Joh. 1.11.
He came to his own, but his own received him not; he would have gathered them,
but they would not be gathered, they rejected him, therefore he also rejected
them: so that they are now scattered abroad again, and become a vassal, a
captive people, having no free State of their own, but living under the
dominion of other people. This estate of theirs, Esaias sets forth in words not
much differing from my text; This people (says he) is robbed and spoiled, and
shall be snared in dungeons; they shall be hid in prison-houses; they shall be
for a prey, and none shall deliver, for a spoil, and none shall say, restore.
Esa. 42.21.
And this their present bondage is typed out by their captivity in Babylon; as
we may see by comparing Romans 11.26. with Esaias 59.20. That which was in the
letter of it, spoken of their deliverance out of Babylon, from under the
Chaldeans, the same does the Apostle apply to their last deliverance, which is
yet to come. The redeemer shall come to Sion, and turn ungodliness from
Jacob. As their captivity in Babel, resembled their present captive condition
now, so their deliverance out of Babel then, typed out their deliverance which
shall come unto them out of their present misery, when the Redeemer shall again
come unto Sion, and turn away ungodliness from them.

Now of this deliverance out of their present captivity; I understand this
Text, Zech. 9.11. As for thee also, by the blond of thy Covenant, I have sent
out thy prisoners out of the pit, etc. By virtue of the Covenant made with
their fathers, they shall be delivered out of the bondage in which they are now
holden.

To apply it to these times, is contrary to the words of the Text, Ob.
for the Text speaks of a thing past, I have sent forth, etc. therefore not of
things to come.

Those which are any whit exercised in the reading the Prophecies in Scripture,
do know that it is an usual thing with them, to speak of things to come, as
if they were already done. To note out thereby the certainty of the
accomplishment, as if they would say, it is as sure, as if it were done
already. Thus Esa. 9.6. Esaias 9.6.
so Apoc. 18. Apoc. 18.
Babel is fallen, etc. speaking as if the things were past, when yet they were
still to come.

Now the reasons moving me to this interpretation, are these three.

Jews here spoken of, and deliverance from it, comes after the manifestation
and revealing of Christ in the flesh. In ver. 9. Rejoice greatly, etc. Behold
thy King, etc. These words are applied by Matthew, Chapt. 21.5. to Christ
coming in person to Jerusalem, that being the accomplishment of this Prophecy.
Now the deliverance in my Text is consequent to that coming of Christ, and
therefore cannot be referred either only or principally to their deliverance
out of that Eastern Babel. Because that was many years before Christ's coming.
And this reason is of the more force with me, because of that which follows
in ver. 10. where it is said, that Christ shall speak peace to the Heathen;
where the calling in of the Nations or Gentiles is prophesied of, as coming
betwixt that coming of Christ in the flesh, and this deliverance of the Jews.
The order is thus: First Christ comes, ver. 9. then the Gentiles are called,
ver. 10. Then the Jews are delivered out of the pit, in which they are holden,
ver. 11. This order observed by the Prophet, enforces us to refer these words
to these times, to the present estate of the Jews, and to look further then to
the first captivity in Babylon.

Judah and Israel; Israel being understood by the name of Ephraim, ver. 13. And
this I take to be a rule for understanding many places in the Prophets, that
when the Prophet does distinctly mention both Judah and Israel, or Ephraim,
making them both to be sharers in the blessing promised, those Pr^phecies, I
suppose, are to be referred to these last times, because it is not to be showed
by any History in Scripture, that the ten Tribes of Israel (understood by
Ephraim) (because Ephraim was the chief of those ten) were ever restored since
their Captivity, or united to Judah again. Now then the promise being made
both to Judah and Israel, or Ephraim, therefore I refer it to those times,
wherein both of them shall be called again, and united together, as before
time. And because this Rule may be questioned, and yet (if cleared) may be of
use in reading the Prophets: Therefore for the clearing of it, let us consider
a place or two. Consider that in Jer. 3.16, 17. Here is a promise made to Judah
and Israel. But to what time is this prophecy to be referred? I suppose to
these last times, wherein both Judah and Israel shall be called again: And
that it cannot be meant of the time of their return out of Babylon, my reasons
are these.

Because in ver. 16. it is said (in the time wherein the prophecy They shall
then say no more, the Arc of the Covenant of the Lord, neither shall it come
to mind, neither shall they remember it; that is, there should be a change of
worship, the ceremonial worship shall be abolished, and they shall use it no
more, they should no more mention the Arc, nor mind it any more. But it was
to have come to mind, and they were to have used it, if they could have
enjoyed it, after they came out of Babylon; for then the ceremonial worship
still lasted: the time of reformation not being yet come; therefore this
prophecy speaks not of that time.

But the Arc was wanting after the Captivity, Ob.
it being perished or lost in the destruction of the Temple; and therefore it
may be referred to those times, because they had not the Arc then.

But let us consider, Esaias speaks, Esa. 52.8. Whereas after their return from
Babel, the want of the Arc then was no blessing, but rather a defect. It being
in those times one of the most lively remembrances of Christ's name unto them,
Exodus 20.14. and Psalm. 30.4. But the Prophet here in Jer. 3. speaks of such a
time when the want of it should be no defect in the Church; they should mind it
no more. A like expression Esaias uses, Esa. 65.17. speaking of the times of the
Gospel, The former things (says he) shall come no more to mind. They speak
both alike, because in the times of these Prophecies, they should have a more
clearer revelation of Christ, then they had by those former things, neither
Arc, nor Temple, nor any other of those ordinances, so setting forth Christ,
as the ministry of the Gospel should do. This change of ordinances therefore
here prophesied of, argues that this Prophecy cannot be meant of the time of
their return out of Babylon; because then those ceremonial ordinances were
not changed nor taken away.

Jerusalem, to join with the Church of the Jews in the worship of God. But
all Nations were not gathered to them at their coming out of Babylon. Indeed
some mixture there was of other people among the Jews; as is gathered Nehe.
13.3. and out of Ezra. But that mixture was plainly condemned as sinful, and
the Jews were commanded to separate themselves from them. But this gathering
of the Nations unto them, is here promised as a blessing. But admit there was
there some gathering and addition of other people unto them, which was not
sinful, some becoming Proselytes, yet this was so little a scattering, that it
cannot be called a gathering of all Nations unto them; for there is as much
said before these times, as this comes unto in Exodus 12.38. At their going out
of Egypt, there was then a mixed multitude of other people, and yet this was
not the time of gathering the Nations to the Jews, but a time of separating
the Jews from other Nations; as therefore no man will say, that there was at
their coming out of Egypt an addition of all Nations unto them, though they
had then a mixed company joining unto them; so neither at this time of their
return from Babylon. Nay, if we consider the times before this Prophecy was
uttered, I suppose there were such a multitude of strangers joined to the
Jews, as was not to be found at this time of their return from Babylon; for
we read that in Solomon's time, there were found an hundred three and fifty
thousand and upwards, as is expressed in 2 Chronicles. 2.17. Yet all this number was
not a gathering of all Nations unto them.

Ob.
Though this Prophecy was not fulfilled at their return from Babylon, yet it
was ^ulfilled in the times of Christ, and of the Apostles, so that we need not
extend it to the times yet to come.

home of the Jews. First, In the days of Christ some few of the Jewish Nation
were converted to the faith, though few, yet some were, and so there were some
of the Gentiles also. As those wisemen, Mat. 2. the Centurion, Mat. 8. the
Syrophenician woman, Mat. 15. a little number of both. Secondly, Afterward
when the Gospel was preached by the Apostles, they preached first to the Jews,
and many of them believed, three thousand in Acts 2.41. and afterward in Acts
5. five thousand: and in Acts 21.20. Thou see how many thousand Jews
believe. Now mark a little answerable increase in the conversion of the
Gentiles also: As the sound of the Gospel went all over the world, so the
success was answerable, Romans 10.18. Romans 1.13. Romans 15.19. so that there were
many Churches of the Gentiles; as is evident in the new Testament. Thirdly, But
yet further, as there shall be a more full degree of calling home the Jews,
then was in either of the times mentioned before, and they shall come in, in
more abundance, Romans 11.12. both Judah and Israel being called, so shall the
Gentiles come in, in more plenty then hitherto. And in this the Apostle is
clear and full in Romans 11.12. where speaking of the calling of the Jews he
says, That if their fall was the riches of the Gentiles, how much more shall
their abundance be? That is, their calling, (which shall be in great abundance)
so that, then most properly is the time, wherein the Nations shall be gathered
to Jerusalem, namely, when the multitude of the Jews shall be called, and all
Nations then added unto them.

A third reason to prove this Prophecy not to be accomplished in Babylon, is
from the 17th verse also, where the promise is, that after the return here
spoken of, they shall not walk after the stubbornness of their evil heart
any more. But if this be applied to their return out of Babylon, we may then
say, this promise was not fulfilled, for certainly they never showed more
obstinacy and stubbornness then since that time, as is evident in their
malicious wickedness against Christ in the days of his flesh. So that it
cannot be referred to those times; but if we refer this promise to the time of
their last conversion, it shall then be fulfilled, because from that time, they
shall never any more turn away from God, but shall continue faithful with him
for ever; as is clearly promised to them in Esaias 59.20, 21. compared with Romans
11. 26. This place then in Jer. 3.16, 17, 18. shows thus much, that the promise
being made to Judah and Israel together, the accomplishment thereof was not at
their return from Babylon, but is to be accomplished in their conversion to
the faith of Christ. Another place to confirm the same rule before named, may
be that in the Prophet Ezekiel. 37.16, 17. And so to the end of the Chapter,
joining together Judah and Israel (resembled by the two sticks in his hand) to
be one people, under one King: But I will not st^y on this: The sum is the
promise here in my Text, being made to Judah and Israel both, therefore this
prophecy belongs to the times yet to come, when both of them shall be turned to
the Lord. And this is the second Reason.

A third Reason is from the enemy spoken of to be destroyed by Judah and
Ephraim together, ver. 13. When I have raised up thy sons, O Sion, against
thy sons, O Graecia: meaning that God would by the strength of Judah and
Ephraim together, beat to powder the Prince of Grecia. But who is he? Some
refer this to the successors of Alexander, the mighty Prince of Graecia,
called the Goat, Dan. 8.5. that ran over all with such speed and swiftness.
But thi^ exposition cannot stand; First, Because these successors of Alexander
did mightily afflict the Jews; but the Jews were not made such a Giants
sword, as to prevail against them. Secondly, Because this conquering the
Prince of Graecia follows the coming of Christ, whereas those successors of
Alexander that troubled the Jews were long before. Thirdly, It cannot (that I
know) be showed that Ephraim or the ten Tribes had any thing to do with these
forces that were guided by the successors of Alexander, as themselves also do
confess, that refer the story to those times, and therefore to make their
interpretation stand, they take Ephraim and Judah for synonymaes, for one and
the same people, which is contrary to all Scripture, they being ever taken as
two people; ever since the division under Rehoboam, only at their calling
home, then they shall be reunited again. Therefore (though I dare not be
peremptory in such particulars, yet) with leave and submission to better light,
I suppose this Prince of Graecia is the great Turk, which is Lord of Graecia
at this day, against whom Judah and Ephraim shall have a glorious victory, and
shall subdue this proud enemy. Upon these grounds, I conceive, the Prophecy is
to be referred to those times to come. I will not omit what I conceive lies
(also) in my Text, which seems to have some special emphasis and force in it,
when it is said, As for thee also, thou shall be saved by the blood, etc. I have
sent forth thy prisoners, etc. He had told them before in verse 9th, that
Christ shall come; then in verse 10. he tells them the Gentiles shall be
called; and then adds in verse 11. As for thee also thou shall be saved, etc.
As if he should say, though thou (O Sion) for thy rejecting of Christ come unto
thee, shall for a time be forsaken, and cast as a prisoner into the pit, into
miserable thraldom, yet at length, even thou also shall be delivered and
brought back into glorious liberty; for a while thou must be a poor prisoner
or captive, in the pit of the prison, and the Gentiles set in the best room;
but yet thou also shall again be brought out of the pit, in which thou art
holden. Thus says the Apostle in Romans 11.23. Though for the present the
Gentiles be taken in, and Jews broken off; yet shall they also be graffed in
again. The Apostle putting in the word (also) in the same emphaticall manner,
as it is here used by the Prophet.

In the words are two things.

First, The present estate and misery of the Jews, they are as prisoners in a
pit.

Secondly, A promise of restitution, they shall be set free.

First, They are prisoners in the pit of the prisonhouse, they are now brought
low; they were sometimes the only people. It was said of them, Blessed art
thou, O Israel, Deuteronomy. 33.29. No people like thy people Israel, 2 Samuel 7.23. But
now they are become a people scattered, and peeled, spoiled, and trodden
under-feet; sometimes they had the high places of the earth in possession,
dwelling in a Land which was the glory of all lands, but now they are brought
down into the lower parts of the earth, prisoners in the pit; they are a
captive, an enslaved people, being made as a very footstool for the enemy to
tread upon. This have they brought upon themselves, for their sinful rejecting
of Christ, and putting from them the Gosp^l of salvation, which was preached
unto them; Christ came unto them, but they received him not, Joh. 1.11. The
Gospel was offered them, but they would none of it, Act. 13.46. and therefore
the Lord has also rejected them, making them the lowest and basest of all
people.

Observe.
See hence what the contempt of Christ and the Gospel brings a people unto;
where the Gospel comes, and is received, it magnifies a Nation, sets it up on
high, it lifts them up to heaven in dignity; as Christ spoke of Capernaum,
Mat. 11. It ennobles a people; as it is said of the Beraeans, that they were a
more noble people, then those of Thessalonica, because they did with such
readiness and high esteem embrace the Gospel when it was brought unto them,
Act. 17.11. But on the other side, when it is despised, God will stain the
glory of that people, and make them to be despised; and the greater the
advancement was, the greater will the abasement be, the contempt of it brings
utmost misery; it finds us in misery when it comes unto us, but when it leaves
us (being despised by us) our misery is increased by it, and made double to
what it was before, though we were prisoners then, yet we were prisoners of
hope, Zech. 9.12. But when we put it away, then we are left without hope,
without help. This sin, is the sin of all sins, it has the guilt of all other
sins in it, and adds more unto them; this is the killing sin, the destroying
and damning sin, Ioh. 3.19. This brings the greatest and utmost wrath; in 1
These. 2.16. it is said of the Jews, that for this sin the wrath of God comes
upon them to the uttermost. It Is a sweet speech of Paul in Romans 5.20. That
where sin abounds, there grace abounds much more; but it is as terrible on
the other side, that where grace does abound (in the offers of it by the
Gospel) there sin, and wrath by sin, abounds much more also, (where that grace
is disesteemed) therefore it is, that Christ tells the Jews, If he had not come
unto them they should have had no sin, but now they have no excuse nor cloak
for their sin, Joh. 15.22. The sins of harlots, whoremongers, swearers,
drunkards, murderers, are less then this sin of rejecting the Gospel of
Christ, Mat. 21. Publicans and harlots are better then they; the filthiness of
Sodom and Gomorrah is known, they were exceeding sinners against the Lord,
Genesis 13.13. their sins were not of the common sort, but exceeded; and therefore
they perished not by the common visitation of all men, but their judgment was
exemplary, to stand as a warning to all ages; a fire not blown by man (as it
is in Job 20.26.) consumed them, the fire of God fell upon them from heaven.
This was terrible; and yet their sin was less then this sin of rejecting the
Gospel, and their condemnation shall be more easy in the day of Judgment,
then theirs shall be, which receive not the grace of the Gospel, when it is
brought unto them, Mat. 10. Heathens shall perish in their ignorance, and those
that dyed under the light of the Law, shall have heavier punishment, but those
that neglect the grace of the Gospel, shall exceed both: when God punished the
wickedness of the Jews before Christ's coming, it was a very heavy plague
which was brought upon them, it was an evil, and an only evil, Ezekiel. 7.5. It
was such a plague that under the whole heavens had not been the like, as was
done unto Jerusalem, Dan. 9.12. And yet afterward when Christ had come to
them, and was rejected by them, his wrath was then more heavy. Oh the miseries
which then they endured! then God stirred up all his anger, and gave way to his
wrath, even to the uttermost; then he fulfilled that which he had before spoken,
Deuteronomy. 32.23. He spent his plagues and arrows upon them, as if he would empty
the treasure of all his plagues which he had laid up in store, in executing
them upon that people. And this the Lord Jesus foretold them while he was with
them, Mat. 22.7. and forewarned them of what would follow, if having the
vineyard in their possession, they did not yield the fruit of it; he told them,
the Lord would miserably destroy those husbandmen, Mat. 21.41. One of our
translations reads it, He will cruelly destroy ((...).) And certainly, the Lord
never showed so great severitie against any people, as he will do against
those which despise the message of grace brought by the Gospel, even as that
people is now become a spectacle of wrath above all people. When the Scripture
threatens a woe, it notes the extremity of that misery which is to come; but
here is woe upon woe threatened against this sin, woe to thee Bethsaida, woe to
thee Chorazin, woe to those places where the Gospel comes, and is not regarded.
It Is a thundering speech of the Apostle in Heb. 10.29. where he says, That
those that sinned under Moses Law, dyed without mercy, and yet much sorer
vengeance shall be unto those that despise the Gospel of Christ. Can any thing
be worse then to dye without mercy? Yes (says the Apostle) those shall have
sorer vengeance; It shall be vengeance that they suffer; yea sore vengeance,
and sorer then those suffered, which under Moses law dyed without mercy; and
yet more, it shall be much sorer, yea so much sorer, as cannot be uttered, but
is left to our consideration to think, How much sorer vengeance, says the
Apostle; and it must needs be such, when the Lord himself professes he will
laugh at such men's destruction, and mock when their misery comes, Prove. 1. And
says, that he will rejoice over them in destroying of them, Deuteronomy. 28.63. No
plagues like the plagues of such as reject the Gospel of Christ.



Joh. 5.23. As the Son did all things to honor the Father, Joh. 8.49. and Joh.
17.4. So it is the Fathers purpose and will to honor the Son, Acts 3.13. 2
Pet. 1.17. This contempt therefore which is offered unto Christ, when he is
offered in the Gospel, and is set light by, God the Father will avenge to the
full. As the blood of Abel cried to God for vengeance against Cain, so does the
contempt done to the blood of Christ, cry to heaven against the despisers of it
much more. Christ's blood has a double cry, and it will prevail both ways.
First, To prevail for mercy toward those that count it precious and trust in
it; for them it says, Father forgive them. But it cries also for judgment
against the despisers of it, that God would avenge the contempt of it upon
them; and this blood will be heard, whatsoever it calls for, whether for mercy
or judgment.

Heb. 2.
and let them with thankfulness and love, entertain the grace which is brought
unto them, by the revelation of Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 1.
If you become despisers, God will work such things among you, as who so
hears them, his ears shall tingle, Acts 1.
and your hearts shall ache in the suffering of them much more; Heb. 2.
for if every transgression and disobedience committed against the Law, or
against the dim light of nature, do receive a just recompense of reward, if
those which are without the Law perished in those sins which they committed
without the Law, and if those which are without the Gospel, perish in their
ignorance, because they know it not, how then shall those escape which have
both law of grace and Gospel of grace revealed unto them, and yet do neglect
those great things? Be warned and take heed; It will be your wisdom now in
this your day to consider the things which concern your peace; 2 Cor. 6.1.
fear lest you should receive the grace of God in vain; take heed of
despising and setting light by the tidings of your salvation, lest the same
things which were ordained to be unto life, be found to be unto you unto death,
Romans 7. and then the greater means you have had to bring you to life, the more
bitter will your death be. This is the great condemnation of the world, that
when grace is revealed and tendered unto men, yet it is not received with love,
that they might be saved by it, Joh. 3.19. It Is put away, and is not esteemed,
lamentable is the case of such people. This made Christ to weep over Jerusalem,
Luke 19.41, 42. because they knew not, they regarded not the things of their
peace, no peoples case more to be pitied and mourned for then theirs, that
enjoy the Gospel, but esteem it not; Let such consider what is said of the
Jews, when they put away the Gospel from them, they did thereby judge
themselves unworthy of eternal life, Acts 13.46. Not that they did think
themselves unworthy of life, nor did they with their mouths speak any such
thing, but as a man may show h^s judgment of a thing, as well by his fact, as
by his words, so did they by their fact in that sinful rejecting of the Gospel
of salvation; they did as it were pronounce a sentence against themselves, by
which all men might see that they were unworthy of the salvation preached to
them; such therefore as do reject the Gospel, do by that contempt testify and
pronounce judgment against themselves, that they are unworthy to be saved.
These as they love not the blessing of the Gospel, so it shall be far from
them, and as they choose the ways of sin and death, so it shall come unto
them, they shall dye in their sins, with a double destruction.

And hear, O England, my dear native Country (whose womb bare me, Admonition
to England.
whose breath nourished me, and in whose arms I should desire to dye,) give
ear to one of thy children, which dearly loves thee. Be thou exhorted
thankfully to accept the grace which is now ready to be revealed unto thee. The
way is now preparing, the high mountains, which with their shadows caused
darkness, are now a laying low, and the low valleys ready to be exalted, the
crooked things to be made straight, that all flesh (that lives within thy
borders) may see the salvation of our God. Thy light is now coming, and the
glory of the Lord is now rising upon thee; though darkness has covered a part
of thee hitherto, through the wickedness of those that hated light, yet now
the Lord himself (I trust) will rise upon thee, and the glory of the Lord
shall be seen upon thee. Now therefore stir up thy self with thankfulness
and joy of heart, to embrace the things of thy peace, which shall be brought
unto th^e. See that thou love the Gospel, not in word and in show only, but in
deed and in truth; and, not for novelties sake, but for truths sake, not
because it is a new way, but because the grace of God which brings salvation is
thereby revealed. Though in respect of order and government, all things may
become new, yet look not after new substantialls, new foundations. Thou have
had the foundation truly laid, by many skillful builders, many years ago;
only some have built thereupon hay and stubble, in stead of gold and precious
stones. Let therefore the roof be new, but let the foundation be the same.
Take heed of too much of that new light which the world is now gazing upon.
Some have reported sad things concerning thee in this respect; so much new
light breaking forth, that the old zeal is almost extinct by it. Herein take
heed. The old way, is the good way; this is now ready to be revealed; the time
of grace is coming unto thee; this is the accepted season, now in the day of
thy salvation; oh be wise to consider it, and walk worthy of it, esteeming the
Gospel, as thy pearl, thy treasure, thy crown, thy felicity; thou can not
love it too dearly; make much of it therefore, otherwise know the neglect of
it, will bring heaviest wrath, and thy judgment hasteneth, and sleeps not.

To New England.
And thou New England, which art exalted in privileges of the Gospel above many
other people, know thou the time of thy visitation, and consider the great
things the Lord has done for thee. The Gospel has free passage in all places
where thou dwell; oh that it might be glorified also by thee. Thou enjoyest
many faithful witnesses, which have testified unto thee, the Gospel of the
grace of God. Thou have many bright stars shining in thy firmament, to give
thee the knowledge of salvation from on high, to guide thy feet in the way of
peace: Be not high-minded, because of thy privileges, but fear, because of
thy danger. The more thou have committed unto thee, the more thou must account
for. No peoples account will be heavier then thine, if thou do not walk
worthy of the means of thy salvation. The Lord looks for more from thee, then
from other people; more zeal for God, more love to his truth, more justice and
equity in thy ways; Thou should be a special people, an only people, none
like thee in all the earth: oh be so, in loving the Gospel and Ministers of it,
having them in singular love for their works sake. Glorify thou that word of
the Lord, which has glorified thee. Take heed lest for neglect of either, God
remove thy Candlestick out of the midst of thee; lest being now as a City
upon an hill, which many seek unto, thou be left like a Beacon upon the top of
a mountain, desolate and forsaken. If we walk unworthy of the Gospel brought
unto us, the greater our mercy has been in the enjoying of it, the greater
will our judgment be for the contempt. Be instructed, and take heed.

Thus of the present state of the Jews, they are prisoners in the pit, but
though the Jews be now as prisoners in the pit, living in a forlorn rejected
condition, yet they shall again be brought forth of the prisonhouse, and
translated into the liberty of the people of God, they shall be called again.
This I conceive is foretold in that place of Jeremie before opened, Jer. 3.16,
17, 18. and Ezekiel. 36.26. etc. which Camero does refer to this conversion of
theirs now spoken of; but the 37. Chapter is more clear, from ver. 15. to the
end of the Chapter, the joining together of those two sticks in the hand of
the Prophet, signifying the joining together of Judah and Israel in the hand of
God, when they both shall become one people unto God, thereto also belongs the
type of the dry bones, there going before. So in Zech. 12.10. They shall look
on him whom they have pierced, and shall mourn for him, etc. This Prophecy is
yet to be fulfilled, because this mourning for him was never seen in that
Nation to this day.

Ob.
But some may say, that in Joh. 19.36, 37. this Scripture in Zech. 12.10. was
then fulfilled, when they crucified him and pierced him. It Is there said, This
was done that it might be fulfilled, etc.



If it be said, that their mourning for him whom they pierced, was fulfilled in
the repentance of those Jews mentioned, Acts 2.37. so as there is no further
accomplishment thereof to be looked for.

I answer; This that is alleged cannot stand with the circumstances expressed
in the Text; for that mourning spoken of, Zech. 12.10. is of such a time in
which God will be with Judah, and with the people of Jerusalem, in a special
manner, in the siege which shall be against Jerusalem, at which time, God will
make Jerusalem, as an heavy stone to break in pieces all the people of the
earth that lift at it, ver. 2, 3. And is of that time, when Jerusalem shall be
built again, upon her own foundation, even in Jerusalem, ver. 6. But these
things do not agree to that time in Acts 2.37. for then Jerusalem did not
break the people that lifted at it, but it self was shortly after broken in
pieces by the Romans; and the Lord was not then with Judah, but fought against
them; and then was not the time of Jerusalems building again, but of its
overthrow, which shortly ensued; this mourning therefore expressed in Zech. 12.
cannot be fulfilled by that in Acts 2.37. But some may say, this that is spoken
of building Jerusalem again, may seem to import, that the Jews shall again
repossesse their own Land, which is but a vain conceit. But let those
Scriptures be examined which speak of their conversion, and it will appear,
that they speak as punctually concerning their inhabiting again their own
Land, and their building and dwelling in their own Cities. Jeremie tells us,
that the City (Jerusalem) shall be builded upon her own heap, Jer. 30.18.
And in Chap. 31.17. Thy children (says the Prophet) shall in the end come
again to their borders: and afterward in ver. 21. Israel is called upon to
return to her own Cities: Return, O virgin Israel, to these thy Cities. See
also Esa. 65.9, 10. Ezekiel. 37.21, 22, 25. Zech. 12.6. There is remaining in that
people, a strange affection unto their own Land, many very aged persons, in the
extremity of their age, using to take wearisome journeys from far Countries,
only for this end, that they may dye at Jerusalem; and carrying also with them
the bones of their parents, husbands, children, and kinsfolk, whereof also,
whole bark fulls not seldom do arrive at Joppa, to be conveyed and buried
again at Jerusalem. But to return to their conversion, passing by the
Scriptures of the old Testament, which might be applied this way, which are
almost without number; the new Testament also bears witness to this truth, as
namely that in Matthew, Mat. 23.38, 39. Your habitation shall be left desolate,
and ye shall see me no more, till ye shall say, Blessed be he that comes in
the name of the Lord. Which words contain; First, Their rejection, (ye shall
see me no more) accompanied with the desolation of their habitation, ver. 38.
Secondly, Their conversion and calling again, they shall at last say, Blessed
be he that comes in the name of the Lord; though time was when they could not
endure the Children to cry (Blessed) unto him, yet the time shall come when
themselves shall bless him, and be made blessed in him. For when it is said,
Ye shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed, etc. Though some
do here take the word ( till, for never) as if Christ should have said, Ye
shall never see me any more: and though it be granted, that the same word is
sometimes taken in that sense, yet it is not so to be taken here, as is evident
by comparing Romans 11.25. with this place in Mat. 23. where the Apostle tells
us, that obstinacy is come upon the Jews, till the fullness of the Gentiles be
come in, and then all Israel shall be saved. Where the word (till) notes out a
definite and determinate time, which shall have an end; and whereas some do
conceive, that this Prophecy of our Savior Christ, might be fulfilled in the
conversion of those Jews mentioned, Acts 2. I suppose that cannot be the
accomplishment of this Prophecy, because in ver. 38. there is a prophecy of
desolation of the house, going before their seeing of him, which is mentioned
ver. 39. But the desolation of the house there threatened, did not go before,
but followed that conversion in Acts 2. And therefore there is another
conversion of theirs to come, which must follow the desolation of their house.
Add hereunto that in the 2 Corinthians. 3.3.13, 14, 15, 16. though the people out
of blindness and obstinacy did cover their hearts then, and does so still to
this day, yet a time shall come when the covering shall be taken away, and then
their heart shall be turned to the Lord. In Romans 11. the whole Chapter, the
Apostle purposely speaks of the rejection of the Jews, but withal shows
that it was neither total nor final; where first having showed the Reasons of
their rejection, then he comes to speak of their calling again, in ver. 12.
in those words, how much more shall their abundance be? Where (abundance) is
opposed to their casting off, and therefore is to be taken for their abundant
access to the faith, which shall be in great number; and the Apostle does not
only intimate such a calling of theirs, but proves it; First, Because if the
root be holy, so also are the branches, (though some be for a time broken off)
ver. 16. they belong to an holy root, and therefore they shall be graffed in
again, because God is able to do it. Secondly, From Gods unchangeablenesse;
Gods calling is without repentance, etc. And from all this concludes, that all
Israel shall come in and be saved; which he confirms by the testimony of Esaias,
that the Redeemer shall come unto them, and turn away ungodliness from Jacob.
This some learned think, Mus^ulus.
was signified by the breaking of the Tables of the Covenant; and the renewing
of them again in Exodus 32. To show how for their rejection of Christ, they
should be broken off, and the Covenant broken with them; but yet so, as that
this breach should at last be made up again; God would again renew his
Covenant with them, and take them to be his people, and he to be their God. I
do not think it a nice and curious observation which is made upon Apoc. 19.1.
where after the destruction of Rome, praise shall be given to God in the Church
in the Hebrew tongue; surely because the Jews the Hebrew people, shall
acknowledge the Lord Jesus Christ with us. So that then not only Graecians,
(Gentiles) but Hebrews, (Jews) shall come in, and praise God with us. Though
they are for the present kept off from embracing the Christian faith, by reason
of the Idolatry of Rome, which they know to be so contrary to the Scripture,
they judging all other Christians by them, yet when Rome is fallen, and that
stumbling block is taken out of the way, when they shall see Christians
generally to hate such abominable idolatry; then Jews and Gentiles together
shall praise and confess the name of the Lord Jesus Christ; they shall then be
called again.

From the stabilitie of the Covenant made with their fathers, thy Covenant,
q.d. God made a Covenant with thy fathers, which thou have an interest in, and
therefore by virtue of this Covenant, for this Covenant sake, thou shall be
brought out of this prison, in which thou art now holden; and thereto agrees
that in Romans 11.28. they are beloved for their fathers sake.

From the Condition of the kingdom of Christ, which is such, Esaias says, Of
the increase of his kingdom there is no end, Esa. 9.7. He does not say, of his
kingdom there shall be no end, but of the increase of his kingdom. If he had
said, of his kingdom there shall be no end, it might have been true, though it
had decreased age after age, etc. but he speaks thus, that of the increase of
his government and kingdom there shall be no end, to let us know the kingdom
of Christ must still increase; it is therefore compared to a grain of
mustard seed, which grows to a great tree, Mat. 13. And is like that little
stone, Dan. 2.35. which grew till it filled the earth. Observe how it has
increased, first it was shut up in the bounds of Judea, then in the days of
the Apostles it began to spread abroad among the Gentiles, but the Gentiles
were so received in, that most part of the Jews were then cast off. But yet
further, there shall be a greater increase of this kingdom, when the nation of
the Jews shall be brought in again, and the rest of the Gentiles together
with them, and then shall that be fulfilled that all the kingdoms of the earth
shall be the kingdoms of the Lord Christ, Apoc. 11.15.

To stir up every one to help forward this glorious work of the

What shall we do to help forward their calling and conversion?

Take away (as much as in us lies) the stumbling block, which one is the
Idolatry of Christian Churches, especially that of Rome, whiles we do any
thing to uphold these Idolatries, we do put the stumbling block before them,
to hinder them; but take away these stones and blocks which they stumble at,
and then their way will be more easy and plain. Secondly, The other is the
carnalnesse and licentiousness of the lives of Christians, this is a great
stumbling block unto them; remove this from before them, let them see a spirit
of grace shining upon us, and appearing in our lives: and then we shall make
plain the way of the Lord for them to return to Sion, see Esaias 57.14.

Esa. 42.22. and been made a prey of, and there has been none to say, restore,
let us therefore speak unto God in their behalf, and say, Lord restore thy
ancient people, bring them back to the fellowship of thy Church; take to you
the words of Micah, Chap. 7.14. Feed thy people with thy rod, and the flock of
thine inheritance in the midst of Carmell; let them feed in Bashan and
Gilead, as in old time; commend their estate unto God, and the rather should we
do this, Because

1. They prayed for us when we were no people, that we might be the people of
God, Psalm. 67.1, 2. When the salvation of God was revealed to them, they prayed
that it might be revealed unto us; We have a little sister (said they) Cant.
8.8. They took thought for us, we being then that little sister, and so let us
do for them.

2. It is from them that the means of salvation is come to us, the Law is
called their Law, Joh. 10.34. It was given as an inheritance to the children of
Israel, Deuteronomy. 33.4. And the spiritual things of the Gospel, are called their
spiritual things, Romans 15.27. And thence is that in Esa. 2.3. The Law shall
go forth of Sion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem: yea, and of them
came Christ concerning the flesh, Romans 9. All the means of grace and
salvation, are theirs first, and from them they come unto us; and thence it is
that Christ himself tells us, That salvation is of the Jews, Joh. 4.22. We
owe them this therefore, as a requital unto them.

3. Consider a further good that shall come unto our selves by their calling
unto Christ, there shall be an increase of blessing coming to our selves. Great
light shall be manifested, and knowledge shall increase, Esa. 24. ult. The
light of the Sun, and of the Moon shall be darkened, by the light which shall
come from that Church, the light of the Jewish Church which was but as the
light of the Moon, and the light of the Gentile Churches, which is as the
Sun, shall both be dim in comparison of the light which shall be in that
Church, when the glory of the Lord is risen upon them. See Esa. 60.1.2. which
speaks of the estate of the Jewish Church after their calling, as appears by
that which goes before, Chap. 59. end. Many of those dark Prophecies, which now
lie hid in obscurity, shall then be brought to light; the accomplishment of
them will then give us the interpretation.

4. Admit we neither had received benefit from them hitherto, nor could expect
any further blessing hereafter, yet consider the glory which shall then come to
Christ by their coming in, the glory of his kingdom shall be enlarged,
Jerusalem shall be a throne of glory to him, Jer. 3.17. then shall the Lord be
glorified in them, all the house of Israel shall glory in the Lord, Esa. 45.25.
and shall draw others of the Gentiles unto them.

5. If there were neither good to our selves, nor glory to Christ by their
calling, yet even pity and compassion should move us; consider who they are,
even the children of Abraham our father, and Sarah our mother; they are our
brethren, and our flesh; and how should it pity us to see the children of our
father in the dungeon, and prison-pit? Oh pray for them, that the blessing of
Abraham their father may come upon them.

For consolation to such parents as have entered into a Covenant Jews, though
there has been a breaking off for a time, yet the Covenant will bring them in
again, and Gods Covenant is the same with you, as it was with Abraham, and
therefore look what mercy Abraham's seed have belonging to them, the same does
belong to yours also; therefore give up your selves unto God, make a Covenant
with him, and this your Covenant shall draw in your children to partake of the
blessing and grace of the Covenant with you, even to many generations, never to
be broken off.

Israel in their distresses, ordinarily used to plead the Covenant which God
had made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; as Exodus 32.13. Deuteronomy. 9.26, 27. If you
have had godly parents, though you have walked frowardly against God, yet cast
not away all hope, but remember the Covenant the Lord has made with thy
fathers, and entreat that it may be extended unto thee. The Lord himself lays
this foundation of comfort for such children, Esa. 51.1, 2. Look unto the
rock whence ye are hewn, consider Abraham your father, q. d. Consider what
mercy I showed unto him, and the same mercy expect for your selves; the oil
that is powered out upon the head, will run down to the rest of the members.

Thus we have heard the scope of these words, as they respect the Jews in
particular, to whom they were first spoken; let us now a little further
consider of them, as they concern our selves. What was spoken of them, is
appliable to all that are in the same estate with them; There is by nature but
one estate of all men, whether Jews or Gentiles, whether we speak of sin or
misery; thereupon it is that what Esaias before spoke of the disposition and
sin of the Jews, in Esa. 59.7, 8. the same does the Apostle apply generally
unto all men, Romans 3.15, 16, 17. As showing thereby what is spoken of the sin
of one people, may be spoken of all, which are in the same natural estate with
them; there may be several degrees both of sin and misery in several people,
but the estate is the same in all. It was noted before, how the estate of the
Jews in their Babylonish captivity, was applied to three other things, as
types of them.

First, to the natural estate of all men, who are in spiritual bondage, as
they were in outward:

Secondly, to the captivity of the Church under Antichrist:

Thirdly, to the servile condition which the Jews are in.

Now, these three are not things so different in nature, that they cannot
sometimes meet all together in one, they being but as so many several degrees
of one and the same natural estate.

First, some are merely natural, and no more, as not having gone so far, as to
defile themselves with the abominations of the Whore of Rome.

Secondly, others have proceeded further, and dallied with that Strumpet, and
gone in unto her, and have drunk of the wine of her fornication.

Thirdly, others have gone further then both the former, even to the execrable
malice of the Jews, so as to hate and malign the ways of Christ, as the Jews
do accurse his name at this day. Now, whether we consider one or other of
these, they are all but so many several degrees of the same estate of nature.
And so there being but one estate of all men, therefore, what is truly said of
one, may be truly said of all, only reserving to each of them that particular
degree of sin or misery, which is proper to them, but the same estate is common
to all. So that the Jews being for their sin cast off, and become prisonees in
the pit, this their estate may fitly be applied to all men that are in the same
natural estate, excepting only the particular degree, as is before expressed;
their height and excellency belong to them alone, and yet the same promises,
in the substance of them, do belong unto all the faithful: so it is concerning
their sin and misery which lies upon them; a particular degree thereof may be
proper unto them, but the same estate is common to all. So then, draw we unto
our selves that which is here spoken of the Jews, and then the sum of this
Text is this, that even as they, so we, are naturally in the prison pit, till
we be brought forth by the blood of the Covenant applied unto us. Let me
explain the words a little, and so make way for the Observations:

What is meant by the Pit here spoken of?

So far as concerns the Jews, it notes out the present outward thraldom in
which they are holden under the nations among which they live; as also that
spiritual captivity in which they lie, being shut up under sin and unbelief,
as it is expressed, Romans 11.32. And in this latter respect, it is common to us
with them; we being all of us captives under the dominion of our spiritual
enemies, as well as they.

What is the water here spoken of? the pit wherein there is no water? the idle
toys, and Frier-like conceits about Purgatory drawn from hence, I pass by, as
not worthy spending time about them. Waters in Scripture, signify two things;
sometimes they signify affliction, sorrow, danger, trouble, and perplexity, as
we may see in Psalm. 18.16. Psalm. 32.6. and 69 1, 2. Sometimes again they are
taken in a quite contrary sense, signifying joy, comfort, and refreshing, as in
Psalm. 23.2. Isai. 12.3. Jer. 2.13. where the Lord compares him self to a
Fountain of living waters, which gives plenteous refreshing and consolation. In
this latter sense it is taken here in this Text, for joy or comfort; so that
the meaning is, that as the Jews, so we, one and other of us, we are shut up as
prisoners in the dungeon and pit of the prison, where there is no water of
comfort to refresh our souls withal, we may find dirt and mire there, in
which we may stick fast, as Jeremiah did, in his prison, but there is no water
of comfort to be found there. The loosing, or sending forth of the pit, is the
deliverance and freedom, which comes by the blood of Jesus Christ, called
here, The blood of the Covenant: First, because it ratifieth the Covenant
betwixt God and us, as we shall see afterward. Secondly, because the Covenant
directs us to the blood of Christ to seek our freedom from it, etc.

Thus having the sense, we may in the words consider these two things:

1. The natural estate of men, set forth in two degrees: 1. We are prisoners
in the pit, captives. 2. Destitute of all comfort, being in a pit wherein is no
water.


2. The promise of deliverance, I have loosed, that is, will loose; I will
grant a deliverance; and this is set forth,

First, by the moving cause, namely, Gods free grace, not expressed, but
employed in this, when it is said, By thy covenant I will send forth, etc. q. d.
by that free goodness and grace of mine, by which I first entered into a
covenant with thee, and for thee, will I send thee deliverance out of this
misery.

Secondly, by the meriting cause of it, The blood of the covenant, the blood of
Christ; for though the deliverance be free to us, by free grace in respect of
any thing done by us; yet it is obtained for us by the blood of Christ.

From all together, observe these four things:

1. That we are all naturally in a state of bondage, as prisoners in the pit.

2. That so long as we continue in this estate, nothing that we do enjoy, can
give us any sound comfort; there is no water in the pit.

3. That though our condition be thus miserable and comfortless, yet there is
both freedom from this bondage, and comfort to be obtained by the blood of the
covenant; in Christ there is both an opening of the prison, ^o those that are
bound, and fountains of living water, to refresh the thirsty souls.

4. That whatsoever salvation and deliverance God gives unto his people, in
setting them free from this misery, he does it by virtue of, and according to
his covenant. These are the sum of all.

These four points the Text offers to our consideration, all which, though
handled publicly, and intended to have been published with that which now
comes forth; yet finding the Treatise to grow bigger then I thought in the
beginning, I have now upon second consideration, resolved to suppress the
three first observations, and to insist only upon the fourth, as being that
which is most pertinent to the present scope intended. The thing then which
here we have now to consider, is this, sc.

That all the deliverances and salvation, by the blood of thy Covenant I have,
etc. He does not say by blood simply, but by the bood of the Covenant, because
the blood goes with the Covenant betwixt God and us. Hence it is, that we read
in 2 Samuel 23.5. when David looked at the Covenant which God had made with him,
he makes that the ground and foundation of all the mercy and deliverance which
he obtained: Herein (says he) is all my salvation, that God has made with me
a sure Covenant. Consider the truth of this point, both in temporary
deliverance, and spiritual salvations, (as the Text points at both, as we
showed before:) First, concerning temporal deliverances, see what God says
unto Noah, concerning his deliverance from the flood, Genesis 6.18. with Chap.
8.1. With thee will I establish my Covenant, etc. and then God remembers Noah,
and all that was with him in the Ark, and brought them to dry land again; his
deliverance was given him by covenant: See also, Exodus 6.4, 5, 6. God promises
to bring his people from under the Egyptian bondage, and why so? because he
remembered his Covenant with their fathers: in Lev. 26.25.44, 45. The Lord tells
them, verse. 25. that if they sinned against him, he would avenge upon them the
quarrel of his Covenant, but yet in verse. 44, 45. if they returned to him, he
would remember the Covenant which he had made with them, and deliver them out
of their captivity. Secondly, all spiritual salvation is communicated by Gods
Covenant, Psalm. 111.9. he sent redemption to his people, because he was ever
mindful of his Covenant, he commanded his Covenant for ever, as the word is
there, i. e. he commanded it to stand fast for ever: So in Mic. 7.17, 18. he
will return and have compassion upon us, and forgive our iniquities, what is
the foundation of this? he will remember his Covenant which he has made with
us, Luke 1.74. that he might show himself mindful of his holy Covenant,
therefore he sent the Lord Jesus to perform the work of redemption for his
people: as in the beginning, when God first promised life to Adam, it was not
without a covenant made with him, (though not the same that we must look for
life by, (as we shall see more afterward,) yet God made a covenant with him
(Do this and live;) so it is now with us, it is by virtue of the Covenant, that
we must expect life and salvation from Gods hand, the beginning of our
salvation (which is begun in the first grace given to us in our conversion, and
turning unto God) is given unto us according to the covenant begun with us in
Christ, and the end of our salvation is according to the covenant which he
makes with our selves, in our own persons.

The grounds and reasons why the Lord takes this course to convey life and
blessedness to us by covenant, are these:

shall know that I am the Lord, Gods glory is in being known, Romans 2.5. and
9.22. God will have his wrath and power known, and so also his faithfulness,
for that is a part of his name, whereby he is made known unto us, and he is not
fully known, neither can be glorified, till his faithfulness be made known. In
Apoc. 19.11. God is called faithful and true, and that is his name; now we
could never have known Gods faithfulness, and truth, if he had not entered into
covenant with us. God might have showed forth his power, mercy, and goodness,
without any promise or covenant, but his faithfulness could not be known, and
therefore says Moses, Deuteronomy. 7.9. The Lord has set his love upon you, and
chosen you above any other people, that you might know he is the Lord, the
faithful God, etc. therein God shows his faithfulness in performing his
covenant with their fathers, by choosing their seed to be a people unto him.
And the Apostle also, when he speaks of Christ's coming in the flesh, attributes
it to Gods truth and faithfulness, in keeping covenant with their fathers,
Romans 15.8, 9. It was mercy to the Gentiles (as he says, that the Gentiles
might glorify God for his mercy) but it was truth and faithfulness to the
Jews; if he had never entered into covenant with us, he might have manifested
mercy unto us, but he could never have made known his faitfulnesse.

The Lord does it to this end, to bind his people the faster to himself, Genesis
31.44. says Laban to Jacob, Let us make a covenant, I and thou, etc. not I
alone with thee, nor thou alone with me, but I and thou, both one with another;
so it is betwixt the Lord and us, there is a mutual tie; the Lord is pleased
to tie himself to us, and we are bound also, and tied to him; hence, says the
Lord, in Jerem. 13.11. I have tied the whole house of Israel to me; In what
bond were they tied? in the bond of the covenant, as it is, Ezekiel. 20.37. The
Lord sees how slippery and unstable our hearts are, how apt we are to start
aside from our duty toward him, as Jer. 14.10. we love to wander, like sheep
that straggle from the fold; and therefore to prevent this unconstancy and
unsettlednesse, and to keep our hearts more stable in our obedient walking
before him, therefore he binds us in the bond of the Covenant: Hence says the
Lord to Abraham, Genesis 17.7. I will stablish my Covenant with thee; and then in
vers^ 9. he adds, thou shall therefore keep my Covenant. Abraham must keep
covenant with God, as he looks for blessing from him.

The Lord does it for the stronger consolation of his people, that to the
faithfulness of the covenant, which the Lord has made with them, he is a God
that cannot lie, nor alter the things which have gone out of his lips, and
therefore we have the stronger consolation, Heb. 6.17, 18. his promises beings
yea and Amen, which cannot fail, 2 Cor. 1.20. This was David's stay, 1 Chronicles.
17. ult. though friends be unfaithful, and many deceive, yet the Lord is
faithful, and cannot fail his people; this is the foundation of their comfort,
a rock for them to stand upon when the storms blow, and the waters beat, and
they find themselves destitute of all other comfort and help.

Jer. 13.11. I have tied them to me, that they might be my people, and that
they might have a name, and a praise, and a glory. And in Deuteronomy. 26.18, 19. the
Lord has avouched thee to be his people, to make thee high above all people,
etc. In Zech. 11. The first staff, which is interpreted to be the Covenant
betwixt God and his people, (as is plainly expressed, verse. 10.) is called by
the name of Beauty, because this is the beauty and glory of any people, to be
in covenanant with God; these are the ends, why God enters into covenant with
his people, and by virtue of it, passes over all the salvation which he
intends to bestow upon them.

Before I come to the Use, I will clear one doubt which is made by some.



Joh. 17.6.10. as if the Father should say to the Son. These I take to be
vessels of mercy, and these thou shall bring unto me, for they will destroy
themselves, but thou shall save them out of their lost estate; and then the Son
takes them at his Fathers hand, and looking at his Fathers will, ( Joh. 6,
37.39.) he takes care that none be lost of them which his Father has given
him. This Covenant is expressed in Scripture,

First on the Fathers part, and here,

1. There is a designation and appointment of Christ the Son, to the office of
the Mediatorship, to be a means of bringing us back to God, and into a Covenant
with him. Hence Christ is said to be sealed by the Father, Joh. 6.27. as marked
out for such a purpose, 1 Pet. 1.18. he was ordained in the counsel of the
Father, before the foundation of the world; hence also said to be chosen of the
Father, Isai. 42.1. noting out his designation to this work.

2. There is a commandment from the Father to the Son, which he must submit
unto, and obey, thereby to effect the salvation of his people; he had a
commandment what to teach and instruct them in, as the Prophet of the Church,
Joh. 12.49. He had a commandment to enlighten the elect with the knowledge of
the truth, Isa. 42.6, 7. to be a light to the Gentiles, to open their eyes,
etc. A commandment also he had, to lay down his life for those that are given
unto him, Joh. 10.18. and to be tender over the Lambs, carrying them in his
bosom, Isai. 40.11.

3. There is a promise from the Father to the Son, the Father covenants with
him: First, to give him the Spirit in an abundant measure, Isai. 42.1. Isai.
11.1, 2. the Spirit shall rest upon him: Secondly, he makes him a promise of
assistance and help in this great work of our redemption, Isai. 42.6. I will
hold thy hand; what is the meaning of that? see Isai. 45.1. says God of Cyrus,
whose right hand I have holden, that is, I have strengthened him to conquer the
nations; so God promises he will hold the hand of Christ, that though he met
with strong oppositions, yet he would strengthen him with his power, that he
should not be discouraged, Isai. 42.4. Thirdly, a promise of blessed success,
that he shall not labor in vain, Isai. 53.10. he shall see his seed, the
sufferings of Christ, were dolores parturientis, as a woman with child, though
she suffer many pains, yet she sees her child at last; so shall Christ see
many believing on his name, so Isai. 55.5. they are the words of promise made
by the Father to the Son, that nations that know him not, should run unto him:
Fourthly, a promise of rule and dominion, that he shall have dominion over all
those that are saved by him; this sovereignty and rule is promised to him in
Isaiah 40.10. The Lord Christ shall come with power, and his arm shall rule for
him: and Isai. 42.4. He shall set judgment in the earth, and the Isles shall
wait for his Law, to submit themselves unto it; and thence it is said in Micah,
4.3. that he shall judge among many nations, etc. that is, rule, order,
command, and direct, as a Judge and Ruler among his people; the which promise
is now accomplished, all judgment being committed to the Son, Joh. 5.22.
Fifthly, a promise of glory to follow, and that, first to Christ himself, and
then to the members of Christ; To Christ himself, Isai. 55.5. A nation shall
run to thee, because I have glorified thee; they are the words of God the
Father to Christ the Son, promising to him glory, and such glory as should make
the nations of the world run unto him: So also, to the members of Christ; there
is a promise of glory unto them, which promise was made known to Christ from
the beginning, and Christ brings out that secret, out of the bosom of the
Father, and reveals it to his Disciples. It is (says he) my Fathers pleasure,
to give you a kingdom; Christ knew the Fathers will, by the covenant passing
between the Father and him, and this will of the Father, concerning the glory
promised to them, Christ does bring forth to light. Thus we see there is a
covenant on the Fathers part, now see it on Christ's part; where,

1. There is an acceptance of the Office to which he was designed by the
Father, he did not take the Office of Mediatorship upon himself, but first the
Father calls him unto it, and then the Son accepts it, and says, Lo, I come,
Hebr. 5.4, 5. Psalm. 40.7, 8, Hebr. 10.7.

2. There is a promise on Christ's part to depend and trust upon the Father for
help, according to the promise made by the Father: thus Heb. 2.13. the Apostle
brings in Christ, promising confidence and affiance in the Father, I will trust
in him; and Isaiah brings him in as looking for help from God, The Lord will
help me, though I have many against me, (men and devils) yet the Lord will help
me, Isai. 50.7.9. he promises to wait upon his Father for support and strength:
whereto agrees also that in Isaiah. 49.5. My God shall be my strength.

3. A promise of submission to his Fathers will, in bearing the reproaches and
injuries that should be done unto him; and to lay down his life for those that
were given to him by the Father, Esa. 50.5, 6. Joh. 10.17, 18. And according to
all this which Christ thus covenanted with the Father, he was careful to
discharge the same, Joh. 17.4.6. Joh. 12.49, 50.

4. According to all this Covenant passed betwixt the Father and Christ, Christ
expects the glory which was promised to himself, and to his members. To
himself, Joh. 17.5. and to his members, Joh. 17.24. He expects the
accomplishment of both from the Father.

Thus far then I grant a Covenant betwixt God the Father and Christ; and
hence it is that God is called the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
Ephesians. 1.3. which is by reason of the Covenant betwixt them; But if any shall
hereupon conclude, that there is no Covenant passing betwixt God and us, then I
say, they deny that which is as clear in Scripture, as the Sun shining at
noone day. I may say of them, as the Apostle does of some, 1 Timothy 1.7. that
when they would be teachers, they understand not what they say, nor whereof
they affirm. There is therefore a Covenant passing between God and man, which
I will prove by these evidences.

1. Consider those express testimonies wherein mention is made of Gods
Covenanting with the people of Israel, which must needs hold forth a Covenant
between God and man, Deuteronomy. 4.23. Take heed unto your selves, lest you forget
the Covenant which the Lord has made with you, etc. Esa. 55.1, 2, 3. where the
Lord calls every one that thirsts after life, to come unto him: These are
called to enter into Covenant with God; but these speeches cannot be applied to
Christ, but to us, that we should come to Christ, and through him make up an
everlasting Covenant betwixt God and us: see also Jer. 31.31. I will make a new
Covenant with the house of Israel and Judah; and in Ezekiel. 20.37. (says God) I
will bring them into the bond of the Covenant; which places hold forth a
Covenant between God and man.

2. Consider more particularly such testimonies as do express Gods Covenant
with sundry particular Saints, as with Abraham, Genesis 15.18. and 17.2.4.7. and
the same renewed to Isaac, Genesis 26. 3. and confirmed to Jacob, Genesis 35.12. all
mentioned together, Levit. 26.42. Psalm. 83.3. 2 Chronicles. 13.5. I think that
there is none so sottish as to say, these persons were Christ.

3. Lest any should say, It Is true, God makes a Covenant with us, but it is
made with us, not in our persons, but in Christ; Therefore in the third place,
consider such Scriptures as do not only express a Covenant of God made with
us, but a Covenant on our part made with God, as Psalm. 50.5. Call my Saints
together, that make a Covenant with me with sacrifice; the Saints make a
Covenant with God. Hence we are said, to pass into Covenant with the Lord,
Deuteronomy. 29.12. as God for his part enters into Covenant with us, so do we also
with him.

4. Consider those places frequently used in Scripture, in which we are said
sometimes to keep Covenant, as Psalm. 25.10. Psalm. 44.17. and 103.17, 18.
Sometimes to transgress and break Covenant, Genesis 17.14. and not to be
faithful in Covenant, Levit. 26.15. From which places I argue thus; Those that
either keep or break Covenant, those are in Covenant, and do make a Covenant
with God, but we are said to break or keep Covenant; Ergo.

5. Consider that the Covenant made with Christ concerning us, was made from
everlasting, 2 Timothy 1.9. and Tit. 1.2. The promise was made to Christ before
the foundation of the world; but there is a Covenant also made in time, Deuteronomy.
29.12. noted in these words (this day;) if there were no other Covenant between
God and us, but what is made with Christ, then it could not be said to be (to
day) because the Covenant made with Christ, was before the world was, and
therefore the Covenant and promise that is made (to day) must needs be made
with us.

6. That Covenant of which Christ is the testator, must needs be a Covenant
with us, else if the Covenant were made only with Christ, then he must be both
testator, and the party to whom the Testament and Legacies are bequeathed,
which is absurd. Men do not use to bequeath a testament to themselves, but
Christ is appointed the testator, Heb. 9. In the covenant between the Father
and Christ, there he is a party, not the testator, but in this he is the
testator, therefore besides the covenant between God and Christ, there is also
a Covenant between God and us, and therefore the covenant is not made with
Christ alone, but with us also.

7. A seventh argument may be taken from the paritie and likeness between the
covenant of works, and the covenant of grace, though there be great difference
between them, as shall be showed afterward, yet they agree in this, in that
they are both made betwixt the same parties, and persons, between God and man;
God made a covenant of works with Adam, and that being broken, he comes and
makes with him a new covenant of grace through Christ, Genesis 3.15. The seed of
the woman shall break the serpents head; one of these covenants comes in the
room and stead of the other, and therefore the parties covenanting are the
same; God and Adam in the first covenant, the same God and the same Adam in the
second covenant.

8. From the end and use of the Sacraments, which is to confirm the covenant
of grace, as being the seals of it, Romans 4.11. Now in reason, these two must
go together, the Covenant and the seal of it; It were a fond thing in a man
to make a covenant with one, and to give the seals to another, they must have
the seals, that have the covenant made with them, but the seals of the
covenant (the Sacraments) are given to us; and therefore the covenant is made
with us also.

9. If there be no promise or covenant made to us, (as some would have it) then
infidelity and unbelief is in us no sin; for as the Apostle says, Where
there is no law or commandment, there is no transgression; so where there is
no promise, there is no unbelief. When God promises, and yet then we believe
not, this makes unbelief a great sin, but if we have no promise made unto
us, then are we not bound to believe; and so our not believing, is no sin.

10. The contrary doctrine is a doctrine tending to licentiousness; for as the
covenant tends (as we have heard) to bind us faster to God, to walk before
him in obedience; so on the contrary, to say that there is no covenant between
God and us, it opens a gap to loosnesse of spirit: For if there be no covenant,
then cannot a man be charged with unfaithfulness to God, though he walk never
so loosly, and therefore let such men as broach such tenants take heed, whilst
they teach such liberty, they be not found to be the servants of corruption, 2
Pet. 2.19. These are the arguments to prove, that there is a covenant between
God and man.

Gal. 3.16. where it is said, The promises are made to Abraham and to his seed,
not seeds, as speaking of many, but seed, as speaking of one; and that one seed
is Christ, and therefore there is no covenant or promise at all made to us, but
only with Christ, or to Christ.

Abraham, as well as to his seed, which is against the tenent they bring it
for; Indeed it seems thus far to make for them, that they are made only to
one seed of Abraham, which is Christ, but in the other it makes flat against
them, because they are made to Abraham, and therefore not to his seed only,
which is Christ, but to those that are faithful and believing, as Abraham was.
If therefore any will maintain, that God makes no promise or Covenant with us,
but only with Christ, then let them answer the Apostle in the same place,
urged by themselves; let them tell us, how the promises were made unto Abraham,
if they are made only to Christ; Let them show how the promise is made only
to Christ, and yet withal made to Abraham, and then we will show how they are
made to Christ only, and yet made to us also. Until they have untyed this
knot, we might leave them without further answer; But for the further
satisfaction of those that desire to know the truth, I will endeavor to clear
the Text, so as to take away the stumbling stone, lest any other should fall
thereby.

For the clearing then of this place, consider these five particulars.

1. How Abraham stands before God, and is to be considered of, when he receives
the promise.

2. Consider what seed or seeds Abraham is said to be father of.

3. How the name of (Christ) is taken in Scripture.

4. In what order the promise is said to come to the seed of Abraham.

5. Consider the scope of the Apostle in this place; and these will give light
to the thing in hand.

1. Let us consider how Abraham is to be considered of us, when the Apostle
says, the promise is made to Abraham. And to this I answer; That he stands as
a public person, as the common parent of all the faithful to the worlds end,
he stands as one receiving the promise by faith, not only for himself, but
for all that should imitate him in his faith; he stands as a pattern and
example of all the children of God, who are to be justified as he was. Hence it
is that in Romans 4.1. and ver. 12.16. he is called Abraham our father, the
father of many Nations, the father of us all, namely, of all that do believe.
As Adam in the Covenant of works, entered into that covenant, not only for
himself, but for all his posterity; so Abraham entered into the covenant of
grace with God, as the father of all the faithful that should believe in
Christ, as he did. In Romans 11. he is said to be the root, into which all the
people of God are graffed. Now this consideration gives us a little light,
though it do not wholly clear the doubt, helping to establish us in the truth;
for as Adam entering into Covenant with God for himself, and his seed, they
(that is, the seed) have thereby right to the promise of life by that Covenant,
in case they fulfill the condition; so here, Abraham taking the Covenant of God
for himself, and his children, the promise and blessing does thereby belong to
them also. As his faith descends down to us as his children, so his blessing
conveyed by the promise, descends down upon us also. Therefore says the
Apostle, Gal. 3.9. They that are of faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham.

2. Consider what seed, or seeds Abraham is said to be father to, and there is
a double seed of his mentioned in Scripture; First, A carnal natural seed,
according to the flesh, proceeding from him by natural generation, but still
remaining in unbelief. And in this sense Christ speaks to these wicked
unbelieving Jews, which went about to kill him, acknowledging them to be
Abraham's seed, Joh. 8.37. meaning in respect of the fleshly generation, and yet
verse. 39. he denies them to be Abraham's children; for then (says he) if ye
were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham; implying that they
were not the children of the promise, therefore seeing Abraham must have a seed
to inherit the promise, and they were not the seed; therefore Abraham must
have another seed, besides the fleshly or natural seed.

Therefore secondly, There is a spiritual seed, that walk in the faith and
steps of the faith and obedience of Abraham, Gal. 37.29. And these are counted
for the seed; according to that in Romans 9.6, 7, 8. they are not all Israel that
are of Israel, proceeding from him by natural generation, these are not
counted for the true seed; there is therefore a spiritual seed beside the
carnal; this the Apostle shows clearly, Gal. 4.22.28, 29. the Apostle says,
Abraham had two sons, the one by a bond woman, the other by a free woman;
Ishmael the son of the bond woman, borne after the flesh, with all those that
are like unto him, looking for righteousness by the Law, are the carnal seed.
Again, Isaac borne by promise, with all those that look, as he did, for
righteousness and salvation by faith in the promise, they are the spiritual
seed. Now mark, the promise is made to Abraham, and to his seed, not seeds,
that is, not to both seeds, both carnal and spiritual, but only to the one,
which is the spiritual; that is, the promise of life is not made to that
carnal seed which looks for life by the works of the Law, but to that seed
only, which looks for it by the promise. See how it was between Isaac and
Ishmael, when God made a Covenant with Abraham, he made it not with both his
sons, but only with one of them, Genesis 17.19. viz. with Isaac. Ishmael had
some blessings cast in upon him for Abraham's sake, ver. 20. but the Covenant
was established upon Isaac, the seed of promise, Genesis 17.21.

As it is thus in the type, so in the antitype, Gods covenant is not made with
those that are as Ishmael, which are borne after the flesh, and seek for life
by the works of the Law; but with those that are as Isaac, the children of the
promise, and seek for salvation by faith in Christ, those only are counted
for the true seed. And thus it is but one seed of Abraham which the promise is
made unto.



Christ is taken in Scripture, and that is two ways; First, Personally;
Secondly, Mystically.

1. Personally, and that most usually, as in those places; A Savior Christ the
Lord; In Christ are all the promises yea and amen; There is one Mediator
between God and man, the man Jesus Christ.

2. Mystically, not for Christ's person alone, but for the whole body of the
faithful united to Christ, and so it is taken, 1 Cor. 12.12. where the Apostle
having spoken of the several gifts powered upon the members of the Church,
says, As many members make one both, so is Christ; that is, (according to all
Expositors) the body of Christ, the faithful that are knit to him by faith,
and it cannot be taken otherwise, and so it is taken here in this place, Gal.
3.16. Mark then, there is Christ mystical as well as Christ personal; And
Christ mystical, being the whole company of the faithful, are this one seed
of Abraham, to which the promise is made, as opposed to the carnal seed, which
seek for righteousness by the law, which have no part in the promise.

But how may it appear (will some say) that this is the Apostles meaning; that
the name of Christ is so to be taken in this place, for Christ mystical?

4. To clear this therefore mark the next point, namely, the order how the
promise is made to Abraham's seed, and in what order the seed spoken of, comes
to partake of the promise; And that is thus; The promise is made first to
Abraham, and then to his seed, to Abraham at first hand, and to his seed as
second in order from Abraham; Abraham is the root, his seed are as the
branches, and therefore this seed being such a seed as comes to have right to
the promise, as second in order from Abraham, therefore this cannot be Christ
personal, but mystical, for Christ personal does not come to have right to
the promise from Abraham, but rather Abraham from Christ. Some more reasons to
confirm this interpretation, you shall see afterward.

5. Add hereto the consideration of the Apostles scope and matter which he
has in hand, and see whether this interpretation do not agr^e with that also;
The scope then which the Apostle aims at, is to prove that we are justified
not by the works of the Law, but only by faith in Christ Jesus, and that
whosoever believes in him, whether Jews or Gentiles, are justified by him,
there being but one way of life for both people, Romans 3.29, 30. Now this one
proposition, (that all both Jews and Gentiles are justified only by faith in
Christ) though it be but one complete truth, yet it stands of three branches or
parts contained in it; for, first, there is in it, faith the instrument;
secondly, Christ the object; thirdly, Jews and Gentiles the subject to be
justified: and though no one of these is in any part of the Apostles discourse
excluded, yet in some passages he drives more especially at some one of them,
and in other passages at another; as for example, Chap. 3.5, 6, 7. here he
speaks more especially of faith, the instrument and means of our
justification; sometimes again he points more particularly at the subject, or
persons to be justified; as in ver. 8.14. mentioning the Gentiles; sometimes he
aims especially at Christ the object of our faith, as v^r. 17. The promise was
made with respect to Christ.

N^w because one of these branches (namely that which concerns the Gentiles)
might seem to be brought in by the Apostle be^^des or ^^ainst the intent of
the promise made to Abraham and to his s^ed (for it might seem that the
promise being so limited to Abr^ham, and t^ his s^ed, therefore the Gentiles
which were not the seed of A^^^h^m, were to have no part in the promise)
therefore to remove this dou^t, the Apostle shows that the believing Gentiles
are a part of that seed of Abraham, to which the promises were made; as he
says, ver. 7. Th^se that are of the faith, they are the seed of Abraham. And
if it be asked, how that can be; he tells you, ver. 29. That if we be by faith
be^^m^ Christ's, then we are Abraham's seed, and heirs by promise: so that be
we Jews or Gentiles, if we ^e of the faith of Christ, we are Abraham's seed,
and partakers of Abraham's blessin^. The reason whereof is given ver. 17.
B^^^use the promise of blessedness was made to Abraham, and to his seed, with
respect to Christ, as being one with Christ, and no otherwise; so that when the
Apostle says, The promise is made to one seed, which is Christ; his meaning is
as if he should have said, Whether they be Jews or Gentiles that believe in
Christ, and are one with him by faith, they are alike partakers of the
blessing, because the promise is made to men, as they are Christ's, and as they
become one with him by faith.

And because the Apostle saw that some others might still object, that though
it was thus before the Law, that men should be justified by faith, yet after
the Law given, there was a new way of justification showed, namely by the
works of the Law.

To this the Apostle answers, No; and gives a double reason of his denial;
First, That the Covenant or Testament of God is unalterable, no man may add or
alter any thing therein, therefore much more is Gods Covenant unalterable, ver.
15. Secondly, Because the Covenant was confirmed before in respect of Christ,
or with respect to Christ, and only to that seed which is by faith made one
with Christ, and therefore being made to that seed only which is Christ's, and
with respect unto Christ; it cannot be disanulled without disrespect and wrong
doing unto Christ, v. 16. And hereto agrees that which follows, verse. 17. that
the covenant was confirmed before with respect to Christ, Christ is the bond of
the covenant betwixt God and us, so as if that covenant which God has made
with respect unto Christ, should be broken and disanulled, it could not but be
a neglect cast upon Christ himself; but this cannot be, therefore the covenant
made with respect unto Christ, and made with that seed which is Christ's, and
one with him, must needs stand fast, and never be disanulled.

Thus then we see, how the taking of (Christ) for Christ mystical, agrees
both with other Scriptures, and with the scope of the Apostle in this place;
and therefore, when they say the promise is made to Christ only, and therefore
not to us, I say it follows not it is to Christ only, and yet to us also,
because it is to Christ mystical, and not to Christ personal. And when they
say it is to one seed, therefore not to us, being many. I answer, it follows
not, if by many, they understand many persons, the persons of all the faithful
making up but one spiritual seed, as the whole number of those that seek
righteousness by the Law, do make but one carnal seed.

1. Thus much I grant; first, that all the promises are made to Christ only,
(even to Christ personal, in this sense, if men mean to Christ, that is, with
respect to Christ, as Gal. 3.17. and that in him they are yea and Amen, as 2
Cor. 1.20. But this does not hinder but they are made to us also, they being in
and through him confirmed to us.

2. I add more, that those promises which do concern us, are not only made to
us through Christ, but they are made first to Christ in our behalf, before they
are made to us, because all the whole work of our redemption and salvation was
transacted between the Father and the Son before the foundation of the world,
and is afterward revealed to us in due time, as is evident, Tit. 1.2. and 2 Timothy 1.9. But this does not hinder but that the same promise is afterward in
time made to us also: Look as it is in covenants among men, while the child is
yet unborn, the father takes conveyance of an Inheritance for him, which he
keeps in his own hand till the child be born, and comes to years, and then he
puts it into his own possession; so it is here, we are for a time hid in the
womb of Gods election, till we be brought forth by the grace of regeneration,
during which time, we are not in our selves capable of receiving any promise of
life made to us, but it is made to Christ in our behalf, and he receives the
promise from the Father in our stead; but yet so, that when we come to be born
anew, the promises are made unto our selves, and we are put into possession of
them.

3. I grant there are some promises made to Christ, not only in our be^alf, and
for us, but to Christ's own person, (as we have showed before, in speaking of
the C^venant between the Father and Christ) but yet so, as that the people of
God h^ve also a right and interest in some of them: Such a promise is that in
Isai. 50.7, 8. which words imply a promise made to Christ; that though Christ
did take upon him the sins of Gods people, yet God would justify him from them
all; and this promise Christ relied on, and yet this promise is by the Apostle
applied to us also, Romans 8.33. that we should be justified by faith in him: so
also there is a promise made unto Christ's person, Isai. 42.1. that he should be
filled with the Spirit, yet not made unto Christ only, but unto us also, Isai.
44.3. from Christ's person they are derived unto us; they belong unto him as the
head, yet unto us as the members; and even those promises which are made thus
to Christ, and to us both, may be truly said to be made to the one seed of
Abraham, which is Christ, namely, Christ mystical, Christ with all his body,
consisting of all the faithful, both Jews and Gentiles.

Before I proceed to Use, I will add two or three Reasons more, to clear this
interpretation, that this seed is meant of Christ mystical, not personal:

Frst, one was named before; because it is such a seed as comes to have right
to the promise, as second in order from Abraham.

Secondly, consider next, that when God says to Abraham, Genesis 17.7. I will be
thy God, and the God of thy seed; look what seed is there meant, the same is
meant in this place of the Galatians, chap. 3.16. Now, what seed is meant, Genesis
17.7. the Apostle expounds Gal. 3.7. They that are of the faith, are the
children of Abraham, and verse. 29. they that are Christ's, they are Abraham's
seed, not only Christ, but those that are Christ's, are Abraham's seed, and heirs
by promise; these therefore are the seed to whom the promise is made.

Thirdly, the Apostle in this place of the Galatians, speaks of such a promise,
as whereby a sinner should receive justification, and forgiv^nesse of sin
before God, for he is handling the matter of ju ^ification, and shows how a
sinner comes to partake of the blessing of life, and righteousness, therefore
he must needs speak of such a seed as stands in need of justification and
righteousness, which do most properly agree to the faithful.

F^u^thly, the Apostle here speaks of two Testaments, one coming after the
other, one disanulling the other, from which I reason thus; look to whom the
latter Testament of the Law was given, unto them was the first covenant or
testament of grace given; now the latter testament, or covenant of the Law, was
given to all the faithful seed of Abraham; for says the Apostle, it is a
Scoolmaster to bring them to Christ, Gal. 3.24. therefore to them also was the
former testament or promise given. That ye may the better discern the force of
this reason, consider how the Apostle in treating of justification, delivers
this heavenly doctrine; that a sinner is justified by faith alone in Christ,
without works. Now he makes an objection; True, might some say, before the
giving of the Law, justification was by free promise, but when the Law was
given, then there was another way of justification appointed, at least to join
works with the promise; and the former way of justification by free grace was
disanulled by the latter, that is, the bringing in of the Law; here is the
force of the objection.

Now, if we shall conceive the promise was made to one seed, and the covenant
of the Law given to another, and not both of them to the same seed, then there
is no color of reason in the Apostles objection; for if the promise of Grace
was given to one seed of Abraham, that is, to Christ personal, and the
covenant of the Law given to another seed, then one need not disanull the
other, but they may both stand together; for if a man make two different
covenants with two several persons, they may both stand, the one not
impeaching the other; but here is the strength of the objection, that it is
supposed, that the two covenants are made with the same persons, and then there
is some seeming appearance of one disanulling the other; therefore the strength
of the objection infers clearly, that both the promise of Grace, and covenant
of the Law, was made to the same persons, to Abraham's seed, to all the
faithful, which are the children of Abraham: Thus this objection is answered,
and the doctrine confirmed; that whatsoever salvation, etc.

David's eyes, that Jonathan the heir of the crown, should enter into covenant
with him; how admirable then is this in our sight, that the great God of heaven
and earth should enter into covenant with the sons of men? he has herein
stooped below himself, and has lift us above our selves; this grace we may
stand and wonder at, that the high God, who is free from all, and bound to
none, no, not to the Angels in heaven, is yet pleased for our good and benefit,
to enter into bonds, and bind himself unto us in the bond of a covenant, to
bless us, and to do us good; this ought to be the admiration of heaven and
earth: See how this affected Abraham, Genesis 17.2, 3. When Abraham heard that God
would enter into covenant with him, Abraham falls upon his face before the
Lord; as first wondering, and being astonished to hear and think of such a
favor: Secondly, abased in himself, as unworthy to touch the hand of the high
God, to make up the covenant with him, he was abased in himself, to see the
Lord so abasing himself for his sake: Thirdly, he falls upon his face, as
thankfully acknowledging the grace offered: Fourthly, readily submitting
himself to the Lords good pleasure and will, as one content to lie down at Gods
feet, submitting to the lowest conditions, to do any thing, believe any thing,
so that he might be partaker of this privilege, to be in covenant with the
great God: See also how this affected David, 2 Samuel 7.18. Who am I, O Lord?
etc. And hence it is, that the Lord mentions this as of his special favor,
which he vouchsafed to Israel, Ezekiel. 16.8. that he entered into covenant with
them, whereby they became his people; let us therefore herein see the abundant
goodness of God to us. Who would not love and fear this God of glory, that is
pleased to come down and condescend to enter into covenant with us? who would
not glorify him for ever and for ever, and willingly bind himself to serve
and honor him? The more he has abased himself, to honor us, in taking us
into covenant with himself, the more let us exalt him and lift him up on high,
as the Lord did with Christ, Phil. 2.8, 9. because he hum^led himse^^,
therefore he exalted him, and gave him a name above ^very name, etc. so should
we exalt the name of the Lord our God, tha^ ^e should take us poor worms, dust
and ashes, into covenant and fellowship with himself.

This lets us ^ee i^ what way we must every one of us expect to receive Psalm.
50.23. to these will the Lord show his salvation; the loving kindness of God
is upon those that fear him, and keep his covenant, Psalm. 103.17, 18. but all
those that break his covenant, and will walk after their own hearts desire,
they may look for salvation, but they shall be disappointed of it, and find
themselves inwrapped in the snares of death. God conveys his blessings only by
covenant, and this covenant must every soul enter into, every particular soul
must enter into a particular covenant with God: out of this way there is no
life, thereupon is the exhortation of Hezekiah to his people, 2 Chronicles. 30.7, 8.
Be not you stiff-necked as your fathers, but yield your selves unto the Lord,
(in the original, give the hand unto the Lord) that is, they should come and
enter into covenant with God; he alludes to the custom of men, when they make
a covenant or agreement, they strike hands, or take one another by the hand; so
says Hezekiah, Give the hand unto the Lord, that is, enter into covenant with
him to be his people, and then the anger of the Lord shall be turned from you.
That this is the meaning, consider the same kind of expression in other
places, Ezekiel. 17.18. the Prophet speaking of Zedekiah, says, he had broken the
covenant, though he had given the hand, etc. he broke the covenant which he had
made by giving his hand: So Ezra, 10.3.9. when the people reformed and entered
into a covenant, they gave their hands that they would put away their strange
wives. These places I bring, to clear that phrase concerning Hezekiah, Give the
hand unto the Lord, that is, enter into covenant with God; this we must do
every one of us for his own part, give up our selves to the Lord, as a people
in covenant with him; as for those that will not come within the bond of the
covenant, but will walk at liberty after their own hearts, such shall never see
peace, nor did they ever enter into the path of life. Such as will be saved,
must become Gods covenanted people, this is the only way wherein we must expect
life and salvation.





1. Break your covenant with your old sins, and your lusts, or else God will
not enter into covenant with you, Mat. 6.24. you cannot serve two masters;
these are so contrary, that so long as you are in league with sin and the
world, you cannot enter into covenant with God, take away the matter of
provocation, which at first brake the covenant between God and you, and then
there is one step made for your entering into covenant with him. Examine thine
own heart, what is that which maintains the breach between God and thee, and
makes God a stranger to thee, and put that away, though never so gainful,
never so pleasing a sin, without this, God will never enter into covenant with
thee; thou can not be in covenant with thy sin and God together, therefore
break thy covenant with sin, if thou desire to be in covenant with God.

2. Go before the Lord as guilty of thy former rebellion, and unfaithfulness
in breaking covenant with him, and judge thy self for it, lay down thy self and
life before God, confessing and acknowledging, that it were just, if he should
destroy thee; condemn thy self for thy former rebellion against him, submit thy
self to the good pleasure of his will, as David says, Here I am, let him do
with me as seems good in his eyes; put thy life into the merciful hands of
God, either to take it from thee, or to give it to thee again, say unto God, If
thou will save me, thou shall show abundant grace, if thou will destroy me,
thou art just; go before God with this spirit of submission, and seek peace
from him, go and put thy rope about thy neck, like Benhadads servants, and
confess thy own guiltiness; without this, God will never enter into covenant
with thee, God will have thee know, thou must take thy life as a free gift of
grace, and that thou stand at his mercy either to save thee or destroy thee.

3. Come with an humble submission to yield up thy self to the obedience of the
will of God; we must receive him from the law of our life by which we must
live. When you come to make a covenant with God, you must not come to give
laws unto God, but to take laws from God, not to impose laws upon him; that
he shall save you so and so, but you must leave God free to make the conditions
of the covenant after his own mind and will; think it honor enough that you
may be a people in covenant with God, and have your life granted by covenant
from him, but for the conditions, leave them to God, let him command and
require what he will, he must be free, or else he will not make a covenant with
you: This is that which Hezekiah exhorted to, to come and give the hand to the
Lord, and serve him, we must come and make a covenant with God, as a servant
with his master, as Subjects with their Prince, a covenant of service, not to
be our own Lords, the sons of David, and princes of Israel; (when Solomon sat
upon the Throne) came and gave the hand unto Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 29.24. they made
a covenant with him, but it was with submission to his power, such is the
covenant which we must make with God, we must give the hand under God,
submitting to him, to be ruled by him. Thence it is, that we are called upon to
deny our selves; If any one will be my disciple, let him deny himself, etc. we
must not cleave to our selves, to our wills, and make our own Laws, we must
deny our own inclinations, wills and affections, refuse to be governed by them,
and resign up our selves to the will of God; this is the resolution we must
come unto, if we will enter into covenant with God, as it was in the sacrifice
of the Law, he that offered it, laid his hand upon the head of it, as
dedicating it to God, and quitting it from himself, as if he should say, I have
no more to do with this bullock, it is now the Lords, (that was in part the
signification of that action) so if we will be the Lords people in covenant
with him, we must resign our selves only and wholly to be for him, Romans 12.1,
2. we mu^t present our bodies as a living and acceptable sacrifice, consecrate
and devote them to God, to live unto him, and to be our own no more: as it is
in a marriage covenant, when a man and woman make a covenant, they do resign
up themselves one to another, not to be to themselves any more; it is a
marriage covenant that we make with God, I will marry thee to my self, says
the Lord, therefore we must do as the Spouse does, resign up our selves to be
ruled and governed according to his will.

4. If we would enter into covenant with God, we must come before him in the
name of a Mediator, that is, the Lord Jesus, in the mediation of his sacrifice
we must offer up to the Lord a satisfaction for all our treacherous rebellion
against him, in that sacrifice we must come and seek reconciliation, and the
renewing of our covenant with God, without such a sacrifice, whereby Gods
justice may be satisfied, there is no hope of a covenant to be made between God
and you: As in the Law, Exodus 34.1. to 8. they come and sacrifice, and so the
covenant is made between God and them. Now these were types of Christ's
sacrifice, come therefore sprinkled with the blood of Christ, and say, Lord,
here is the blood of the sacrifice, which makes satisfaction for my rebellion,
and in this blood enter into covenant with me. They that make a covenant with
God, do it by sacrifice, Psalm. 50.5. And therefore in the mediation of Christ's
blood, and by faith in it look for a reunion and knitting of God and us
together.

5. After all this, that you have broken your covenant with your sins, judged
your selves for them, submitted your selves to the will of God, and come in the
name of a Mediator, then by faith look at the gracious invitation of God, and
consider his readiness and willingness to enter into covenant with you,
though there be an infinite disparity between the God of glory and us, yet he
is pleased to invite us to make a covenant with him; if you seek to him, he
will not turn away his face from you, as Hezekiah says to the people, 2 Chronicles.
30.8, 9. though he might turn away from you in wrath and displeasure, yet he
will not, but will enter into a gracious Covenant with you; He that comes to
me, I will in no wise cast off, says Christ, Joh. 6.37. In that manner
therefore go thou and humble thy self before God, confess thy treachery and
rebellion, and look at God as having a golden scepter in his hand, and entreat
him to enter into a Covenant with thee, and submit thy self wholly to be at
his command, plead the promise of his grace, touch the top of the scepter, and
take hold of the Covenant, and then certainly in time the Lord will speak to
thy soul and conscience, by the testimony of his Spirit, that he will be a God
unto thee, and take thee to be one of his people. Thus you see the way to enter
into Covenant with God.

It may serve for all such as are already entered into Covenant Exodus 19.5. that
if we enter into covenant with him, we should be careful to keep it. In the
things of this life, a strict eye is had to the covenant; In all conveyances of
Lands, we look narrowly to the covenants, and if they be broken, all is gone.
Now ou^ life lies upon our keeping covenant with God; labor therefore so to
walk, that it may appear that you have a care to keep the covenant which you
have made with God. We have made a covenant with him in our Baptism, in our
conversion and turning unto God, and coming to the Lords Supper. Now it is not
enough to enter into Covenant, but we must keep it; we have broken the first
covenant of works, take heed we break not a second, there being no more
place for any more covenants: Now therefore cleave to the Lords Covenant, and
live unto him; Let there not be in any of us an unfaithful heart to depart
from the living God. If we shall again break this second covenant with him,
we shall not only miss of that salvation and life which we hope for, but we
shall perish with a double destruction, we shall pay for all our treachery and
unfaithfulness in this Covenant. This concerns us to look unto more then any
people in the world, let us not break Covenant with God twice. This aggravated
Solomon's sin, that he sinned against God, which appeared to him twice. God
made a Covenant with us, first in Adam, and now again in Christ, and therefore
let us take heed of breaking Covenant with him the second time.

Psalm. 25.10. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth, to them that
keep his Covenant. 1 Cor. 1.9. Faithful is he that has called you to the
fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ. And to the same purpose is that of Moses,
Deuteronomy. 7.12. Therefore do but enter into covenant with God, and keep it with
him, and then be confident of all that rich blessing which the Lord has
promised to his people. There is a promise made to Christ, Esa. 49.7. that
though he was despised of men, and abhorred of the Nations, and contemned by
the rulers, yet (though it was very unlikely in reason) Kings and Princes
should bow down to him, and worship him. But how shall this be brought to
pass? this shall be done, says the Text, because of the Lord that is
faithful. So though we be poor worms, yet the Lord has promised to us life
and glory, and a Kingdom; But can this be accomplished to such as we be? Yes,
because of the faithfulness of God, who has promised, and undertaken to
perform it. Therefore if God have made thee mindful and careful of his
covenant, to walk in obedience to him, then know that the Lord is more
mindful of his own covenant with thee, to perform to thee all that mercy and
blessedness which he has promised to thee; and let this be a pledge unto thee
of the accomplishment of all, even the care that God has put in thy heart to
walk in Covenant with him. Thus we have heard the fourth general
observation, noted out of the Text. But now by occasion thereof, we will lanch
a little further into the deep, having sailed by the shore all this while, and
enter into a consideration more particularly of the nature of that Covenant, by
which God conveyes life and salvation to his people.

There are two covenants which the Scripture makes mention of, one of works,
the other of grace; of both the Apostle speaks, Gal. 4.23, 24. The one is the
Testament or Covenant of the Law, that shuts up all under wrath, the other of
grace, and that proclaims liberty; the one is usually called the
commandment, the other the promise; the one is contained in the Law, the other
in the Gospel.

Now if it be demanded, what covenant it is by which God communicates salvation
to us:

I answer, it is the covenant of grace, and not the covenant of works, by
which the blessing of life and salvation comes.

For the more distinct handling whereof, we must consider these two things
severally.

First, To show what the Covenant of grace is.

Secondly, To show that the Lord communicates his salvation by the covenant of
grace, and not of works.

Concerning the former, that we may discern what is the nature of the
Covenant of grace; this I will set forth by considering these five things.

1. By comparing the covenant of grace with the covenant of works; showing
both wherein they are alike, and wherein they differ.

2. By showing the diverse dispensations of the covenant, both before Christ,
and since Christ's coming.

3. By showing what are the benefits which we receive by virtue of this
Covenant.

4. By showing the condition of the Covenant, what that is.

5. By noting out the properties of the Covenant.

1. For the first, compare the covenant of works with the cov^nant of grace,
and therein first see wherein they are alike, and do agr^^, and that in sundry
things.

1. They agree in the author of them; God is the author of both Covenants, even
the same God. The Manichees thought, one God was author of the Law, (the
Covenant of works;) and another author of the Covenant of grace, contained in
the Gospel; but this heresi^ was exploded long ago.

2. They agree in the parties contracting and making covenant together, both of
them are made with us, God and man are the parties covenanting in both
Covenants, not as if one (the covenant of works) were made with us, the other
(the covenant of grace) were made only with Christ, but both are made with us.

3. They agree in one common end, which is, that God may be glorified in his
creature, in the manifestation either of his justice or mercy, according to the
nature of the Covenant made with him, the glorifying of God is the common end
of both.

4. They agree in this, that in both there is a promise of life and
blessedness; the covenant of works says, Do this and live; the covenant of
grace says, Believe and live; Life is promised in both; Now whether the same
life be promised in both, or whether a terrene felicity and life here on
earth, be promised in the one, and an heavenly in the other, as some think, or
whether a heavenly life and glory in both, as some others think, I will not
determine, it not being much material; It Is enough to know that life and
blessedness was and is promised in both.

5. There is in both C^venants a condition required on our part, for the
attaining of the life promised, we are not left to our liberty in either
Covenants, neither of the two Covenants promise life absolutely, whether we
obey or no, and whether we believe or no, but under the condition of faith or
obedience, the promise of life is made.

6. Both Covenants require a perfect righteousness of us, that we may have
life; no life is promised in either Covenants, but upon the bringing in of a
perfect righteousness^ before God, either of our own, or of another: the
covenant of grace, as well as that of works, will make this good, that no
unrighteous person shall enter into the kingdom of God. Hence Romans 3. last,
the Gospel stablisheth the Law, they agree herein, and do not cross one
another.

7. Both Covenants are unchangeable, never to be reversed or altered. The
covenant of grace is an unchangeable covenant, it is an everlasting covenant,
more unchangeable then the covenant of the day and of the night, more unmovable
then mountains that cannot be moved, as Esa. 54.10. and Jer. 35.20. So
likewise the covenant of works, is an unchangeable covenant, Mat. 5.17. Heaven
and earth shall pass away, but not one j^t of the Law shall fail. Though now
in the estate of corruption, no man attaines life by the covenant of works,
yet this so comes to pass, not because the covenant is changed, but because we
are changed, and cannot fulfill the condition, to which the promise is made;
the covenant stands fast, but we have not stood fast in the covenant, but it
is now become impossible to us, that we are unable to fulfill it; as the
Apostle speaks, Romans 8.3. yea it is the unchangablenesse and stabilitie of
this covenant, which condemns all the world of sinful and ungodly men. The
Law has said, Cursed is every one which continues not in all things, etc. And
the soul that sins (and flies not to the covenant of grace) shall dye; This
word takes hold upon them, and condemns them. Nay more, for the fulfilling of
this Covenant; the Lord Jesus Christ came down from heaven, and b^came man to
fulfill that righteousness of the Law, which was now bec^me impossible to us,
Romans 8.3. So unchangeable is the covenant of works, that rather then it shall
not be fulfilled, the son of God must come down to do it. Thus we see the
agreements between the covenant of works, and the covenant of grace.

But the principal and w^ightier consideration, is to set down the proper
diff^re^c^s between them, which some have gone about to darken and obs^ur^, and
do make them agree too near; and so make a compound of both Covenants, a^ if
one should mix wine and water tog^^^^r, whereby they do disanull the nature
of the Covenant of gr^^^, and tu^^^ it into a covenant of works: Herein
t^^^^fore ^ee ^us^ labor the more carefully to set down the true and real
differences between them, which being done, we shall see the nature, both of
the one and the other more distinctly, and clearly. The differences are many.

doing, the other believing; the one works, the other faith; The one says,
Do this and live, the other says, Believe and thou shall be saved; the way of
life which the Law propounds, is, Do these things comprehended in the Law, and
do them constantly, and then thou shall live, as Gal. 3.12. The Law says, The
man that does these things, etc. But the condition of the Covenant of grace is
faith, Acts 16.31. Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved.

But here a twofold doubt may be moved.



2. Whether works be not required in the covenant of grace. If both these be
required, faith in the Covenant of works, and works in the covenant of grace;
then how stands the difference between the two Covenants?



I answer, It is; but first, it is not the same faith; secondly, nor required
for the same end, as in the Covenant of grace. To explain this, I say, the
Covenant of works requires faith, and that in a threefold act thereof.

1. In regard of dependence upon God, the fountain and author of all good, we
were not in our first and best being which we had by creation, we were not (I
say) so perfect, but we stood in need still to depend upon him that had
created us, for the continuance of that being which he had given us. It is
imprinted in the nature of every creature to depend for sustentation upon that
from whence it had its beginning; as the chicken upon the hen, etc. So the
whole creation looks back unto him that made it for preservation in their
being, as Psalm. 104.21.27. and Psalm. 145.15. And if it be so in these
unreasonable creatures, thus to depend upon their Creator, then was the same in
man much more; the covenant of the Law required this faith of man in the
beginning, though now we be as Gods in our own eyes, selfe-sufficient,
depending upon our selves, and none else, for all the good we hope for; yet at
the beginning it was not so. But man was to depend upon God for his being, and
well-being.

2. Another act of faith required in the Law, was a persuasion that God was
well pleased with him, whilst he walked in the way of love and obedience to his
creator, he was to believe without fear and doubt, that so long as he obeyed
the will of the Lord, he was well-pleased with him.

3. He was to believe the blessing of life promised in that covenant, and to
expect it according to the promise. In all these regards faith was commanded in
the Covenant of works.

It may here be demanded; Thou shall love the Lord thy God, and serve him; but
it does not call for any act of faith at all.

The reason thereof is, not the same faith that is required in the covenant of
grace. But they differ in three things.

1. The covenant of works commands faith in God as a creator, to preserve
our being, but not as a redeemer to deliver us from misery. Adam was not bound
to believe on God as a redeemer; for then he needed no redemption. But the
Covenant of grace, requires faith in God as a redeemer; redeeming us from sin
and misery. The Jews professed they believed on God, but by what faith? When
the faith of the Gospel was preached unto them by Christ and his Apostles, they
counted it a strange thing, they clave to the Covenant of works, they
therefore believed on God as a Creator, but believed not on grace revealed in
the Gospel; by this faith they believed not on him.

2. The Covenant of works required faith to believe in God loving me, as
created holy, and continuing in the same purity and holiness before him, and
no further; but the Covenant of grace commands faith to believe in God loving
us, and pitying us lost sinners.

3. The faith required in the Covenant of works, was mutable, as now all the
righteousness required in that Covenant, and so might be lost, as afterward
it was by the sin of Adam; but the faith required in the Covenant of grace,
is such as is begotten of an immortal seed, 1 Pet. 1.23. and therefore cannot
be lost, but abide^ and continues for ever; It is a faith that cannot fail,
Luke 22.

Thus ye see the same faith is not required in both Covenants; Secondly, It is
not required in the Covenant of grace for the same end as it was in the
Covenant of works; In the Covenant of works, faith was required as a part of
that righteousness which the Law required, it is one of the duties of the Law;
but in the covenant of grace it is required not as any part of our
righteousness, but only as an instrument to receive and apprehend the
righteousness which is wrought for us by Christ; and therefore the faith
required in the Covenant of works, was a giving unto God, but the faith
required in the Covenant of grace, is only a receiving from God, that which he
freely offers us.



Gal. 3.12. The Law is not of faith, (i) it is not the doctrine of faith,
requiring faith, and promising life upon believing; but the Law says thus, The
man that does these things shall live in them; as if he should say, the Law
requires not believing, but doing; therefore those are deceived that would
bring in the faith of the Gospel, to be required in the Law.

For the second doubt,

I answer, It does; as is evident Titus 2.11.14. The grace of God that brings
salvation, teaches us to be zealous of good works; and Mat. 5.16. Let men see
your good works, says Christ; though Christ preached not a Covenant of
works, but of grace, yet he calls for good works. But mark the difference.

1. The Covenant of works does not require works for the same end, as the
Covenant of grace, for that requires works as the matter of our justification
before God; so says Moses, (understanding him in a Legal way) Deuteronomy. 6. last,
This is your righteousness; but the Covenant of grace requires works not as a
part of our righteousness, but that thereby we should glorify God, and
manifest it that we are made righteous by Christ, James 2. we are thereby
declared to be righteous; the godly conversation of a Christian makes it
evident to the consciences of men, that he is a justified man.

2. The works that are required in the Covenant of grace, are not required
from the same beginning; the Covenant of works requires works to be performed
from our own strength and ability received in the Creation, it presupposes
ability in our selves to do what it requires. But the Covenant of grace
requires works to be done by the help of the Spirit of Jesus Christ. Phil.
4.13. I can do all things, says the Apostle, through Christ strengthening me,
that is, the power which the Covenant of grace directs us unto.

3. The Covenant of grace does not require works in the same order as the
Covenant of works does, for the Covenant of works requires works first, and
then faith to believe our selves beloved unto life; but the Covenant of grace
requires faith first, and then that we bring forth good works; therefore
says the Apostle ( Titus 3.8.) Let them which have believed, be careful to
show forth good works: He does not say, Let them which have done good works,
believe; but first believe and then do good works, he places faith before
works; and hence it is that the obedience of the Gospel, is called the
obedience of faith, Romans 16.26. as following faith and springing from it. Thus
then this difference of the condition of the Covenants remains; the one
Covenant commanding works, the other faith.

Those that are of faith, are blessed with faithfu^l A^raham, Gal. 3.9. Though
there be imperfection in your works, yet if your faith be working, and it be
not a dead faith, but fruitful, manifesting it self in a holy life; here is
comfort, it is faith that gives interest in the Covenant of grace, let it
appear that it is a faith unfeigned, and this is the condition, to which God
has promised life and salvation.

Heb. 9.15. Christ is called the Mediator of the new Testament; so also Heb.
12.24. but the first Covenant of works had no Mediator. The reason of this
difference is, because when God came to make a covenant of works with Adam,
then there was no disagreement between God and man, man was yet righteous,
persisting in that innocence and righteousness in which he was created, there
was yet no breach made, the heart and mind of man answering to the mind of God,
and therefore there was no need of a Mediator to bring them together; But when
the Covenant of grace is made with man, there is a former breach between God
and him, and so there is need of a third party, of a Mediator to make them
one. Hence is that in Gal. 3.20. A Mediator is not a Mediator of one; whiles
we are one with God, there is no need of a Mediator, no more then there is
need for one to mediate between a man and himself, (this is the ordinary
interpretation of that place, though it may probably bear another sense) and
so it was betwixt God and man in the beginning, there was no variance then
between them by sin, then God made a Covenant with man, as with his friend,
as Abraham is called the friend of God, but when sin had made a breach between
God and man, then strangeness and enmity followed, God is estranged from us,
and we are enemies unto God, so that without a Mediator, we can never come to
be united into Covenant again. Now man fears and trembles to come before God,
and God being offended, cannot be at peace, unless his Justice be satisfied;
Therefore when Adam had once sinned, he feared to come into the presence of
God, and hid himself, till God revealed and made known to him the Mediator of
the Covenant, that the Seed of the woman should break the Serpents head.

The Covenant of works was delivered to the children of Israel at Mount Sinai,
by the hand of a Mediator, Gal. 3.19.

I grant the Covenant of works was then revealed and made Israel, as being
before almost obliterated and blotted out of man's heart, and therefore God
renewed the knowledge of the Covenant of works to them.

I grant also that the Law was given to them by the mediation Moses, who was a
mediator betwixt God and them.

But I add withal, that the Law though it contain the sum Abraham to be a
God to him, and to his seed, but now the Israelites having been long trained up
among an ignorant and Idolatrous people, they little knew what need they had to
fly to the promise of grace, and therefore the Lord now reveals his Law to
them in that manner, to make them see by the terrors of the Law, that they
cannot come near unto God thereby; this was the Lords end in giving the Law
unto them, and not to stand between God and them as a Covenant of life, by
which they should live. This is evident by that of the Apostle, Gal. 3.19.
Wherefore then serves the Law? The Apostle had before proved that we are
justified by faith in the free promise, and not by works; some then might
object, Why was the Law then given to the children of Israel? The Apostle
answers, it was given to restrain transgression, to convince men of sin, and
to be as a Schoolmaster to bring them to Christ, Gal. 3.24. These then were the
ends of giving the Law; 1. That the knowledge of sin might abound, Romans 5 19,
20. The Law entered that sin might abound, that is, the knowledge of it, that
man might know his sin; Secondly, To lead them to Christ; Thirdly, To
restrain the transgression and sin of man, and to keep them in obedience.
But not (as I said) to stand in the form of a Covenant, for them to be
justified and saved thereby.

The Law is to be considered two ways; First, Absolutely, and by it self, as
containing a Covenant of works: Secondly, Dependantly, and with respect to the
Covenant of grace.

1. Absolutely, alone by it self, and so it was given as a Covenant to Adam in
the beginning, and so considered, it shows the way and means of life, by which
we might live.

2. Respectively, as having reference to the Covenant of grace, and so it was
given to the children of Israel at Mount Sinai; both as antecedent and
consequent thereto. As antecedent to it, to prepare them for Christ, and the
Covenant of grace; and also as subsequent to it, to teach them how to walk and
please God, when they were entered into a new Covenant with him. And thus was it
given unto them.

And here because some may doubt of this truth, I will therefore lay down some
grounds to confirm it, and to make it clear, that the Covenant made with
Israel at Mount Sinai, was not a Covenant of works.

Israel at Mount, Sinai, had Circumcision for the sign and seal of it, which
was the sign and seal of the same Covenant which God made with Abraham, Genesis
17. And therefore this Covenant made with Israel, having the same sign and
seal with the other made with Abraham, it was the same Covenant also; For if
the Covenant had been altered, the seal should have been altered also, the
seals of the one Covenant not being suitable to the other: It were now absurd,
to bring in the seals of the Covenant of works made with Adam, and to annex
them to the Covenant of grace, now made with us in Christ; and no less
inconvenient were it, to put the seals of the Covenant of grace, to the
Covenant of works. Now if this Covenant made with Israel was the same with
that which was made with Abraham, (having the same seal and confirmation) then
surely it was not a covenant of works, but of grace, because the covenant made
with Abraham, was a covenant of grace, and not of works, Romans 4.

Gal. 5.3. where he says, If ye be circumcised, ye are bound to keep the
whole Law? As implying that Circumcision was a seal of the covenant of works,
binding them to the observation of the whole Law, that they might be justified
thereby; even as Baptism binding us to believe on Christ for forgiveness of
sins, is therefore called a Sacrament of the Covenant of grace.

We must consider Circumcision two ways: First, Abraham; and then, as it was
abusively urged and intended by those Judaizing Apostles, which sought to
corrupt the truth. In the Primitive institution of it, it was appointed to be a
seal of the covenant of grace, as is evident, Romans 4.11. But the false
Apostles urged it as a work of the Law, as a duty and work to be done
necessary to justification and salvation. Now the Apostle in saying that if
they were circumcised, they were bound to keep the whole Law, does not look at
the Primitive institution of it, but has respect to that which the false
Apostles intended, urging Circumcision as a work of the Law, necessary to their
justification and salvation; and thus taking it, the Apostle does truly tell
them, that if they were circumcised in this manner, and to this end, they were
bound to keep the whole Law, because by what reason Circumcision was
necessary, by the same reason all the rest of the Law was necessary also; and
if they were bound to observe Circumcision, to be justified by it, then were
they also bound to observe the whole Law, because if we be justified by
works, we must do all the Law to obtain justification by it. This is the
Apostles intent, but this does no more prove Circumcision to be a seal of the
covenant of works, then our Baptism is. Concerning which, I may say as much
as Paul does of Circumcision, if any shall esteem Baptism as a work by which
to be justified, I will then say to such a one, that if he be baptized in this
manner, and for this end, to be justified by it, as by a work, that then he is
bound to keep the whole Law.

But did not Circumcision in the Primitive institution of it,

Yes, but not in that sense as now we speak of, Abraham, and all his seed,
and all such people as should join themselves unto them, to observe all the
ordinances and commandments of God. But how, not as works to be justified by,
but as means by which they should testify themselves to be a separated
people, severed from other people of the world, having peculiar Laws given to
them to walk by. They had ceremonies to lead them to Christ, such as no other
people had; they had Judgments and Laws of State, given by God himself, so
as no other people of the world had the like; they had the Moral Law revealed
unto them more fully then any other people; and in the observation of all
these, they were to testify themselves to be the people of God, not
communicating with the Laws of other Nations, but walking in their own, but
yet not so as to justify themselves thereby. Circumcision bound them to the
observation of the Law, in the former way, but not in the latter.

Sinai, bound them to the keeping of the Ceremonial law, and therefore was not
properly a covenant of works. Hence says the Apostle, Heb. 9.1. to 6. That
the first Testament or Covenant had ordinances of divines service, etc. By the
first Testament, meaning the Covenant delivered at Mount Sinai. Now these
ordinances mentioned by the Apostle, were types and figures of spiritual
things, belonging to the Church of the new Testament, and did appertain to the
covenant of grace, signifying the blessings we receive by Christ; and if these
ordinances respecting Christ, were given in the first Testament or Covenant,
then surely that Testament or Covenant was not a Covenant of works.

Sinai, did so convince of sin, that withal it showed the way of
forgiveness; for it taught men to look for righteousness by the blood of the
sacrifice, which was (in type) the blood of Christ, and therefore it so
revealing and showing Christ, it could not be the covenant of works.

Adam made with all, none excepted, not with one people more then another. But
this covenant made with Israel, was made with them, as with a select, chosen,
and peculiar people, whom God had taken to himself out of all the people of
the earth: and thence is that Preface before the Law, I am the Lord thy God,
that brought thee out of the land of Egypt; God had separated them to himself
from Egyptians, from Canaanites, from Edomites, etc. and then revealed his
Covenant unto them; therefore this covenant made with Israel alone, cannot be a
covenant of works, which is made with all flesh.

That covenant which God made with Moses his person, was Moses, as appears,
Exodus 34.27. therefore, etc. If any shall say, that God then made a covenant of
works with Moses, then it must follow, that Moses was not now, nor before,
under a covenant of grace, which is contrary to the Apostle, Heb. 11.23, 24.
when he says, By faith Moses when he came to years, etc. or else, if he were
before, and now, under the covenant of grace, and yet now God makes another
covenant with him, putting him under the covenant of works, then a man may be
at the same time under both covenants, of works and grace, and so both under
blessing, and curse, and in a state both of life and death.

If it had been a covenant of works which God made with Israel Sinai, then
should he have called them from a covenant of grace, to a covenant of works,
from a covenant of life, to a covenant which now (in this estate of corruption)
ministers nothing but death, which is contrary to the Apostle, Gal. 3.17. where
he shows the Law cannot disanull the former Testament, this were to make the
Lord go from a covenant of grace to a covenant of works, and it were the same
in effect, as to make them perfect by the flesh, when the Lord had begun with
them in the spirit, Gal. 3.3. God carries on his people from faith to faith,
from grace to grace, and not from grace to works. Therefore the covenant then
established with them, was not a covenant of works, for them to expect life by,
but only the covenant of works was then revealed with reference to the
covenant of grace.

That covenant which was made by a sacrifice coming between, Exodus 24.2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8. that sacrifice typed the sacrifice of Christ, that blood typed out
Christ's blood, but Christ's blood does not confirm the covenant of works, but
of grace.

But against this some do object diverse things.

Israel at Mount Sinai, had not Christ for the Mediator of it, Heb. 8.6. But
Christ was the Mediator of the covenant of grace, ever since that covenant was
first made, even in the time of Adam, Genesis 3.15. and of Abraham, Joh. 8.5. and
of Moses, Acts 15.11. and before his coming in the flesh, as well as since, Heb.
13.8.

Moses stood betwixt God and them, Deuteronomy. 5.5. and as a Mediator he took the
Law from God to deliver it unto them, Gal. 3.19. he did not so stand in that
place of Mediator, in his own name, but in the name of Christ, as representing
Christ, of whom he was therein a type and figure, so that what Moses did in
that Mediatorship, Christ did it in him. It is said of Christ, 1 Pet. 3. He
went and preached to the old world in the ministry of Noah; so he went and was
Mediator between God and Israel in the ministry of Moses; and as Aaron was
Mediator between God and them in the Priestly office, so was Moses in the
Prophetical office, and yet neither of them in their own names, and for
themselves, but both of them as they were types of Christ; and thus Christ was
Mediator of that typical covenant in his type, and afterward Mediator of the
Evangelicall covenant in his own person.

established upon better promises, then the first covenant made at Mount Sinai,
Heb. 8.6. Now these better promises, are promises of life upon better
conditions, (i) upon condition of faith in Christ, and not upon that impossible
condition of perfect obedience to the Law. The covenant of grace therefore
being built upon better promises then the former covenant at Mount Sinai,
therefore the covenant at Mount Sinai cannot be a covenant of grace, because
the promises of the covenant of grace are always the same, Acts 15.11.

Heb. 7.22. and 8.6. and 9.23. Now mark, shall we from those better sacrifices
of the new Testament, conclude that the former Testament which had sacrifices,
though it wanted these better sacrifices, was a covenant of works? No, the
covenant of works (taken properly) has no sacrifices at all. The same I say
concerning the better Testament, Heb. 7.22. and 8.6. Where the comparison is
betwixt the Testament under the Messiah, and the Testament under Levi, as the
verses before do make manifest: the Testament under the Messiah is called a
better Testament then that under Levi; yet was that Testament under Levi, a
Testament or Covenant of grace, and not of works. This therefore I conceive,
that those better promises, are not so called in regard of the substance of the
promises, but of the manner of propounding them; Even as the sacrifices of the
new Testament, are said to be better then the sacrifices of the old, not in
substance, but in the manner of exhibiting; (If I may so speak) they had the
same sacrifices in substance, as we have, even the Lamb slain from the
foundation of the world, Rev. 13. But he was then slain only in types and
figures, not really or personally. But now in the new Testament, there is a
real and personal offering up of Christ himself, and not in the type only,
and therefore it is called a better sacrifice. And so it is in the promises,
the promise of eternal life was then made, but how? seldom plainly expressed,
but shadowed over in the promise of their dwelling in the land of Canaan, which
was to them a type of heaven; but now we have the promise of eternal life
plainly and nakedly set before us: so that we may say as they said, Joh. 16.
Now speak thou plainly, and speak no parables, now the Lord speaks to us
without putting such vailes before our eyes, which held them that they did not
see into the end of that which was spoken, so as now, in this sense, our
promises are better then theirs, because more clearly and plainly revealed. In
a word, the Covenant under the Messiah is compared with the Covenant under
Levi: the sacrifices of the one, with the sacrifices of the other; the promises
of the one, with the promises of the other; Look then, how the one is better,
so are they all; as the sacrifices of the one are better then the sacrifices of
the other, so is the Testament, and so are the promises; which betternesse, is
not in the substance, but in the manner of revealing.

The Covenant made at Mount Sinai, was the Covenant of the

This objection is answered by that which was before delivered only it was
delivered to them, and not as a Covenant by which they should be saved, no more
then it is to us, though we have it in our Bibles.



Sinai, was such, as no salvation could be attained by it, for therefore it is
said, not to be faultlesse, Heb. 8.7. But the Covenant of grace did always
bring salvation. Therefore, etc.

to be faulty, yet not so as to hinder or debar from salvation, but only it
was defective, in respect of the full perfection of the new Covenant, as it is
now revealed. It was not so clear and manifest as now it is, there was then a
defect in comparison of what it is now, by the revelation of Jesus Christ, but
not faulty, to as that interpretation would make it. Compare herewith Heb.
10.1, 2, 3, 4.

Sinai, that the covenant of grace promises forgiveness of sins, and the
writing of the Law in our hearts, which the former covenant at Sinai did not.
Therefore it was not a covenant of grace, but of works.

Sinai did not promise forgiveness of sins, scil. so clearly; and the
writing of the Law in our hearts, scil. so abundantly, in so full a measure, as
the new covenant does, but if from the denying of the full measure, we shall
deny the whole benefit in any measure, this will not follow: no more then this
follows, that because the Prophets did not reveal Christ so plainly as the
Apostles, therefore they did not reveal him at all. They had types of the
forgiveness of sins in the killing of the sacrifice, in putting their sins
upon the head of the Goat; So also the Law was written in their hearts, else
David could not have said, Thy law is within my heart, but not so fully as in
the new manifestation of the Covenant under the Gospel. In Joh. 7.39. it is
said, The Spirit was not yet given, because Jesus was not yet glorified; not
but that the Spirit was then given in a measure, but not so abundantly as after
his ascension. So here, etc.

But in Gal. 4.22.24, 25. the Covenant at Sinai is expressly distinguished Sinai
being signified by Hagar, which brings forth children to bondage, who was cast
out with her son, and ha^ no inheritance with Isaac, the son of the free
woman, therefore the covenant at Sinai must needs be a covenant of works.

It is not to be denied, Sinai; but we must withal remember what was before
expressed, concerning the twofold consideration of the Law; First, Absolute,
in it self, as it was given to Ad^m; Secondly, Respective, depending upon the
promise of grace, in which respect it was given to that people of Israel. Now
the Apostle speaks of the Law and covenant of works both ways. First, he
speak^s of it in the relative consideration, as it had respect to that people,
and to the covenant of grace before made with them in Abraham and of this
consideration of it, he speaks from Chapter 3.17. to Chapter 4.21. and then
from the beginning of ver. 21. of the fourth Chapter, to the end of the
Chapter, there he begins to entreat of the Law, as simply considered in it
self. And indeed, if we so consider it simply by it self, it does contain
nothing but a covenant of works, and begets children to bondage, which shall
have no inheritance with the children of promise, which lay hold of the new
Covenant; but yet the former truth still holds firm, and unshaken, namely,
that it was not a Covenant of works, as it had respect to that people, that
is, it was not given to them with intent that they should look to be
justified, and to live thereby, but only to lead them to Christ, and to
restrain transgression, as the Apostle fully shows in the third Chapter. This
twofold consideration of the Law here spoken of, is evident to any that does
with attention read those two Chapters, and attends to the scope of them; for
that which the Apostle speaks concerning the Law, and the Jews being under
the Law, Chap. 4.1, 2, 3. etc. cannot be meant of those that are under it, as
under a Covenant of works, but of those that were children of God by grace,
though yet under age, etc. Again, that which he speaks of the Law in Chap.
4.29, 30. with the verses before, from ver. 21. to the end, cannot be applied
otherwise then to the children of the Law and Covenant of works, strictly and
properly so called. And therefore this twofold consideration of the Law is
grounded upon the Text it self. And the Apostle arises from one of these unto
the other; First, speaking of the Law as it had reference to that people,
showing for what end it was given unto them, which he handles Chapter 3.17. to
Chap. 4.21. and then falls to an absolute consideration of it in it self,
showing the danger of being under the Law, being so considered simply as a
covenant of works, namely, that it casts us out of the inheritance, which is
given only to the children of promise; the Covenant then which God made with
Israel at Sinai, was a covenant of grace, God renewing with them the former
covenant made before with them in Abraham, but withal did then show them the
covenant of works, what it was, thereby to force them to cleave unto the
former promise of grace.

The sum is, that though the Law (which contains the covenant of works) was
delivered to the Israelites at Mount Sinai, by a Mediator, (Moses) by reason of
that reference it had in them to the covenant of grace, yet was it not so given
by a Mediator unto Adam, to whom it was given as a mere covenant of works, by
which he should live. And in this appears the difference between the one
Covenant and the other, the covenant of works is without a Mediator, there
being no breach between God and man, when the covenant of works was given. But
the covenant of grace is by a Mediator, to make up the breach which sin has
made between God and us, so as now in this estate of sin, there is no peace
with God, no blessing from God, but it must be obtained by the Mediator between
God and man, Jesus Christ. Hence is that, Ephesians. 2.13.16.18. where the Apostle
shows how both Jews and Gentiles are made near to God by Christ; We were
aliens and strangers, but now are made Citizens with the Saints, and of the
household of God, and have entrance and access to the Father by Christ. Neither
is there any other blessing to be looked for, but as it comes to us through the
hand of the Mediator; he it is that has received gifts for men, Psalm. 68.18.
and he gives gifts to men, Ephesians. 4.8. by him we have remission of sins, Ephesians.
1.7. by him we receive the Spirit of life and grace, Joh. 1.16. By him the
Mediator, we enter and are brought into covenant with God; by him we are kept
in covenant with him; by him we receive all the blessings of the Covenant; and
without a Mediator there is no peace, no blessing to be looked for. All the
promises of the Covenant are made by him, and fulfilled; (2 Cor. 1.20.) In him
they are yea and Amen: though every promise do not by name mention Christ, yet
it has respect unto Christ, and without Christ we can receive nothing that
comes in the nature of a blessing, or that comes from grace. Grace comes only
by Jesus Christ, Joh. 1.17.

This serves to let us see the misery of all such as are under the none to
plead for them, not one in heaven and earth to stand betwixt Gods wrath and
them, to turn it away from them, but they shall be left unto themselves to dye
and perish in their sins: The Law has no Mediator, Christ is no Mediator to
such as are under the Law, he has not a word to speak for them; he tells
such, Joh. 17.19. how little they must expect from him, he prays not for
them, he pleads only for them that fly to grace through him; these that enter
into a covenant of grace, have Christ their advocate; but as for those that are
under the Law, they have God against them, the Law against them, they have all
creatures to accuse and to testify against them, but have not one to mediate
for them, no Christ, no Mediator to stand up in their cause, to turn away from
them the wrath which they have provoked.

It may serve for direction, Do we then desire to be in covenant Israelites
said unto Moses, Go thou and speak unto God for us; so let us say unto
Christ, Lord Jesus, Go thou and plead with the Father for us, if we come
near unto God without thee, we dye, the fire will consume us, we are
destroyed. This is the way. All men hope well of themselves, and trust to their
own righteousness, or else, they think that the promises of God are large,
and that Christ is a Mediator for all men; and as the Jews trusted in Moses,
Joh. 5. so do all now trust in Christ; And usually none are more confident
then those, that never knew their need of a Mediator betwixt God and them. But
as the Israelites had they not heard those thundercrackes, seen the lightning,
and tempest, and earthquake, had not these made them afraid, and shaken their
hearts, they would never have gone so unto Moses, and besought him to be a
Mediator between God and them; so surely is it with us, we never come to
Christ to mediate for us, till by the Law we see our selves to be dead
condemned men. Here therefore begin, look upon the terrors of the Law, see and
read thine own condemnation and curse against thee by that Covenant; and then
as the Israelites when they were slung with the fiery Serpents, they looked up
to the brazen Serpent, by it to be healed, and as they in their fear went unto
Moses, so let us in our fear go unto the Lord Jesus, who is the only
Mediator between God and us.

It may serve for encouragement unto such as are smitten down with the terrors
of the Almighty, so as they dare not approach near unto God, to offer up any
service, or sacrifice unto him, but God appears in their eyes as a consuming
fire, they had rather fly unto the holes of the rocks, and have mountains to
cover them, and hills to fall upon them, then to approach before the face of
the dreadful and just God: As Exodus 20.21. the children of Israel stood afar
off from God, they durst not draw near, because they saw God as a consuming
fire, Exodus 24.7. so it is with some fearful consciences, God is terrible unto
them, they dare not come near where the Lord is, to have any thing to do with
him: thus it was with Adam after he had sinned, he runs into the thicket to
hide himself from the presence of the Lord; and rather would he have had the
trees fired about his ears, and himself to have been turned to ashes with
them, then to have been brought forth before the face of God, to answer for his
sin which he had done. Thus also it was with David himself after his sin of
pride in numbering the people, 1 Chronicles. 21.30. But let such remember what the
Lord spoke to the children of Israel in the like case, Exodus 20.18.20. Fear
not, says Moses, for God is come to prove you, that his fear may be in you,
that you sin not; fear not with a slavish and servile fear, to fly from his
presence; only fear him with a reverend fear, fear to sin against him: Let
them not be afraid to come before God, but consider though there is no access
to the Lord, whiles they be under the Law, there being none there, to mediate
for them; yet let them fly from that Covenant to a Covenant of grace, and here
there is an Advocate, a Mediator ever standing at the right hand of God, to
plead for such as come unto God by him; so that though we have been enemies and
strangers, yet coming for grace in the Mediator his name, there is hope we may
find grace and acceptance by him; therefore, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.18, 19.
Through him we have access unto the Father, etc. and Chap. 3.12. In him we
have boldness and access with confidence. Heb. 7.25. He is able to save all
that come unto God by him. Be our case never so miserable in our own eyes, yet
if we come unto God by him, he is able to save us to the uttermost; and if we
come unto him, he will not cast us away, Joh. 6.37.

For comfort to such as are entered into Covenant with God, by might in his
Justice break with us, and we^ would break with God through our sinful
infirmity, and backsliding disposition that is in us, yet the Mediator the
Lord Jesus Christ, standing betwixt God and us, keeps us together, that we can
never fall asunder; he pleads with the Father to reconcile him to us, when he
is angry with us, he pleads also with us, and when we are going back from
God, he brings us to him again, by renewing in us our repentings before him;
he draws the heart again before the throne of grace, powers upon us a spirit
of grace and supplication, puts in our mouths words of confession, and stirs
up in us sighs and groans of spirit, entreating the Lord that though we have
gone back from him, yet he would again receive us graciously, Hosea 14.2. And
thus by means of this our blessed Mediator and Advocate we are holden and
continued in Covenant with God, so as the Covenant of his grace and peace made
with us, stands fast through Christ, notwithstanding our manifold declinings
and turnings back from him.

Romans 4.4.
is called (...), a debt, as due unto the work unto which it is promised. But
that which is promised in the covenant of grace, is called (...), a gift, as
being freely given to the person, without respect to any work, or if to the
work, yet for the persons sake. This word (gratis) freely, puts the difference
between the covenant of works and of grace. In the covenant of work, God
justifies the doers of the Law, but not (gratis) freely; but in the covenant of
grace God justifies freely, without respect to the work, out of love to the
person. This is noted in the speech of Moses concerning Abel; Genesis 4.4.
God had respect to Abel, and to his sacrifice; Abel being a believer, and
under grace, God had respect to his sacrifice, but it was because he first had
respect to Abel himself. Hence also is that argument of theirs in Judges
13.23. Judge. 13.23.
If (say they) the Lord would slay us, he would not have accepted an offering
at our hands. They reason from the acceptance of their service, to the
acceptance of their person; because the person is accepted first, and therefore
if the offering be accepted, then the person much more. But on the contrary,
the Lord threatens, that when he took no pleasure in their persons, Mal. 1.10.
then their offerings should not be regarded. And so when Elijah and the
Priests of Baal offered the same kind of sacrifice, God accepted the sacrifice
of Elijah, but not of the other, because his person was accepted, but theirs
were not. In 1 Kings 8.52. 1 King 8.52.
God is said to have his eyes open to hear the prayers of his people; it is
not the eye which hears, but the ear; yet God is said to have his eyes open
to hear our prayers, because there is something first in Gods eye, which makes
his ear to listen unto our cry: First he looks favorably upon our persons,
and has a gracious respect unto our selves, and then he bows his ear to the
prayer which we make before him. According to that, Psalm. 34.15. Psalm. 34.15.
The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ear is open to their
prayers. Thus it is in the Covenant of grace, Gods acceptance begins first
with the person. And hence it is that when God has cast favor upon the
person, then he accepts weak services from them. A cup of cold water is better
accepted from such an one, Mat. to last. Micah 6.6, 7.
then a thousand rivers of oil from another hand; yea though there be
imperfections and weaknesses in the thing done, yet God passes by the
weaknesses for the favor he bears unto the person. As we may see in Jacob,
he seeks the blessing, but mixeth so much imperfection and sin in it, that if
God had not accepted his person, he might have brought a curse upon himself in
stead of a blessing; but God had said, Jacob have I loved, and therefore though
he liked not his dissembling, yet he passed by his infirmity, and Jacob got
the blessing. And so David, 1 Samuel 11. ult.
though the thing which he had done displeased the Lord, yet God took not his
mercy from him, as he took it from Saul; for Saul was under a covenant of
works, and David under a covenant of grace. Herein the Lord would show, that
it was the person, not the work which he had respect unto. But Adam being
under a covenant of works, he finds acceptance with God no longer then his
work is found perfect before him. All his personal indowments, excellent
gifts, and the Image of God which was stamped upon him, by which he was but
little inferior to the Angels, all these could procure him no favor or
acceptance any longer then his work was right; because he was under the
Covenant of works, his person is accepted according to his work.

Tit. 1. last.
Themselves are abominable, and so are all their works abominable. Psalm. 14.1.
And till they come to have their persons accepted in Christ, it is in vain to
tell God of their services, and what great things they have done; he regards
none of their works, they are to him as the filthiness of a menstruous woman.
Though they do such things as are highly esteemed amongst men, yet they are
but abomination in the sight of God. In Luke 18. Luke 18.
the Pharisee tells the Lord what a number of good works he had done, fasting,
praying, paying tithes, dealing justly, etc. But what does all this avail him?
he goes away without any acceptance before God. So Mat. 7.22. Mat. 7.22.
and Luke 13.26. Luke 13, 26.
they shall come and say unto Christ, We have eaten and drunk in thy
presence, and prophesied in thy Name, and done many great works: But see what
the Lord says, Depart away from me, I know you not. Their persons were never
accepted by grace in Christ, and therefore all that they had done was but as if
they had brought a carrion for sacrifice, or had offered swines blood before the
Lord. Here therefore begin, if we would have our works accepted, come before
God in humility and sense of our own vileness, as the Publican did, and
seek to be accepted through grace in Christ, and then come and offer thy gift,
and so coming, both thou and thy sacrifice shall find acceptance with God. But
as in his own might shall no man prevail, 1 Samuel 2.9. 1 Samuel 2.9.
so now (in this state of sin and corruption) in his own work shall no man
find acceptance in Gods sight.

accepted for its own sake, or through grace in Christ, your persons being
first accepted in him? If you look to your works, God regards neither you nor
them; but if you fly to the abundance of grace, looking for your acceptance
there, then fear not, thy weakest endeavors are accepted before God, and do
find favor in his fight. Our comfort lies not in the excellency of our duties,
but in our free acceptance in Christ. Think thus, thy works being done never
so weakly, are not worse then thou thy self wast, when first thou wentest to
the throne of grace, begging to be received through grace. If then God did in
mercy accept thee when thou wast so vile, doubt not, but out of the same grace
and mercy he will accept thy work also; his promise being that he will spare
such, as a man spares his son that serves him, Mal. 3.17. Mal. 3.17.
Great cause have thou to be humbled and displeased with thy self, that thou
can perform no better service to thy God, that thou art so dead and
livelesse in the things of thy God, who has so graciously looked upon thee.
But no cause therefore to think that thy service is not accepted; because Gods
acceptance begins in the person, not in the work, accepting the work for the
persons sake. And therefore if God have accepted thy person, he will accept thy
work also.

The fourth difference is this; In the Covenant of works, a man Adam, he finds
him furnished with a sufficiency of power which was put into him in his
creation. But when he comes to make with us a Covenant of grace in this estate
of sin, he finds us of no strength: Romans 5.6. Romans 5.6.
impotent, feeble, possessed with a spirit of infirmity, made up of
weaknesses, having no power; and therefore Isa. 40.29. the Lord promises unto
such that he will give strength unto them, and increase power. The Lord knows
the infirmity of our flesh, how impossible it is for us to fulfill any part of
the righteousness which the Law requires, Romans 8.3. Romans 8.3.
He knows also what powers we have against us, Ephesians. 6. and therefore he
tells us, that we are kept not by our own power, but by his power through faith
unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. 1 Pet. 1.5.
And hence is that in Joh. 10.28. Joh. 10.28.
Christ tells us, that none shall pluck us out of his hand. And this is the
reason, that though Adam fell from his first estate, and lost the life promised
in that Covenant made with him, yet we fall not; he had more strength of grace
then we, and we have more corruption then he, (for he was then pure without
sin) yet being left to his own liberty, he willingly forsook the commandment
of God, and fell into a state of perdition. But we being weaker then he, (yet
being once taken into the Covenant of grace) though we have the same powers of
darkness against us as he had, yet we fall not so as to sin unto perdition,
as he did; because we are supported by the power of God. Adams life was put
into his own hand, ours is put into the hand of Christ, we are committed to
his care and trust; The Father has given us unto the Son, the Son has
taken us, at the hand of the Father, and has undertaken with the Father for
us, to present us before him. As in Genesis 43. Genesis 43.
Judah undertakes with his father for Benjamin, At my hand (says he) shall
thou require him, etc. So does Christ undertake for us; at his hand the Father
requires us, and Christ has engaged his own faithfulness to keep us till he
have presented us perfect before his Father.

Christ: as 2 Cor. 12.9. 2 Cor. 12.9.
And those that are strong in themselves, are indeed weak in the power of God,
having no help nor assistance from him, and so are quite overthrown.

This may stay the minds of those that are weak, they think they Romans 14.4.
Romans 14.4.
do but commit your souls to him in well-doing, as 1 Pet. 4.19. 1 Pet. 4.19.
And then consider that noble resolution of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 1.12. 2 Timothy
1.12.
I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that
which I have committed to him; go thou, and do likewise. If a friend relying
upon thy trust and faithfulness should bring a Jewel to thee, and entreat
thee to keep it carefully, thou would be ashamed to be careless of it.
Christ is the faithful and true witness; therefore commit thy soul to him,
and he will keep it, He can do it, Jude 24. Jude 24.
and he is faithful and will do it, 1 These. 5.24. 1 These. 5.24.
it being his covenant and promise; and he cannot deny himself.

In the covenant of works, Gods highest end is the glorifying of etc. as Jer.
31.31, 32. Jer. 31.31, 32.
I will be merciful to your iniquity, etc. The Covenant of Works forgiveth no
sin, there is nothing but strict justice in that Covenant. In this Covenant,
God looks not at any man's repentance and turning from sin, but only considers,
whether he has sinned: As in Courts of Justice, where there are tried matters
of life and death, there is no regard had, whether the party be penitent, or
no, but whether the fact be committed, and if found guilty, he is led to
execution; so in Gods Court of Justice, which he keeps according to the tenor
of the Covenant of Works, Justice acts and does all. Justice indictes, Justice
examines, Justice pronounces sentence, Justice executes the punishment; and so
whosoever has sinned, receives according to the evil that he has done. And
hence it is, that when Adam had sinned, the inquisition is not, whether he
repented him of the evil that he had done; but, what have thou done? Have thou
eaten of the tree, whereof I said unto thee, thou shall not eat? And the Lord
finding that he had offended, pronounces curses and death. But in the Covenant
of Grace it is otherwise. There God looks at the repentance of his people, and
accepts of humiliation, and faith in Christ. Hence is the counsel of the
Apostle, Acts 2.37. Acts 2.37.
Repent, and be baptized, etc. When they saw the horrible sin which they had
done, in killing the Lord of life, they being the children of the Covenant, he
tells them, that yet there was mercy for them, they might obtain forgiveness of
sins. Hence also, Jonah 3.10. Jonah 3.10.
when God saw their repentance, and that they turned from their evil ways, he
also turned from the evil which he said he would do to them, and did it not.
The voice of the Covenant of Works, is like the first speech of Nathan to
David, Thou art a child of death; the voice of the Covenant of Grace, is like
his after speech, when he saw David's humiliation and repentance, The Lord has
put away thy sin. In the Covenant of Works, God speaks, as Ezekiel. 18. Ezekiel. 18.
The soul that sins, it shall die: In the Covenant of Grace, he speaks, as
Ezekiel. 33.11. Ezekiel. 33.11.
As I live, says the Lord, I desire not the death of a sinner. They are both
expressed in one place, Exodus 34.6. Exodus 34.6.
The Lord gracious and merciful, slow to anger, yet not acquitting the wicked,
but visiting iniquity, etc. In one Covenant, God condemns both sin and
sinner; in the other, he condemns the sin, but spares, and gives life to the
sinner, to glorify his grace thereby. In the Covenant of works, he aims to
make his power and justice known; as Romans 9.22. and cap. 2.5. Romans 9.22. and
cap. 2.5.
But in the other, to glorify grace; as Isa. 48.9. and Ephesians. 1.6. The reason of
this difference is, because God will be glorified in all his attributes; as he
is glorious in all, so he will have the glory of all to be seen. He will have
his power and wisdom known in the creation of the world, his goodness known
in the continuance and preservation and ordering of it, his faithfulness in
keeping covenant with us, according to the covenant made, his justice in a
covenant of works, his grace in a covenant of grace which he makes with us in
Christ Jesus.

that in the covenant of works (under which yet they stand) there is no grace
showed, but strict justice without any mercy. Let such therefore bethink
themselves, what a God they must meet withal, and with whom they must have to
do, even with a just God, a God of judgment a God of vengeance, that will not
spare their misdeeds; what ever justice can require of them, they must satisfy
to the utmost mite; were it so that mercy and justice might sit on the bench
together, that justice might be tempered and mixed with mercy, your sentence
might be the more tolerable; But these two sit in two several Courts, Justice
without mercy, and therefore when nothing but justice shall judge you, who can
stand? what flesh may abide it? In Psalm. 78.5. Psalm. 78.5. with
the cup of the Lords wrath is said to be full mixed, but in Rev. 14.10. Rev. 14
10.
it is said to be pure wine, unmixt, both together imply, that it is both mixed
and unmixt; how both? mixed of all sorts of plagues, but unmixt without any drop
of mercy, pure wrath, without any dram of mercy to allay the bitterness of the
cup of wrath, and how bitter then will this cup be? more bitter then gall; yet
this must all the wicked of the earth drink, and wring out the very dregs of
it, Psalm. 78.5. Psalm. 78.5.
This is an hard saying, but a true saying, as God is true; Therefore Isa.
27.11. Isai. 27.11.
God speaking of the wicked people of the Jews, says he, He that made them
will not have mercy on them, neither show them any favor. And in Ezekiel. 5.11.
Ezekiel. 5.11.
He threatens that his eye shall not spare, neither will he have any pity. And
Hos. 1.6. Hos. 1.6.
I will no more have mercy, etc. And James 2.13. They shall have judgment
without mercy. As God will be made marveilous in his mercy toward those that
are vessels of mercy prepared unto glory, 2 These. 1.10. 2 These. 1.10.
so as men shall wonder at the abundance of grace showed toward them; so on
the contrary, God will be admired and wondered at in his judgments upon all
sinful and ungodly ones; he will make their plagues wonderful, Deuteronomy. 28.59.
He will deal with his own servants only in a way of grace, with these only
in a way of justice. And if so, what will their end be? Justice will spare
neither high nor low, it is impartial, and alike toward all. Justice will
pass by no transgression, but will have an account for all, greater or less,
wicked thoughts, idle words, foolish jests; Justice will not remit any part of
the punishment which the Law calls for, but it will have the full to the utmost
furthing. Let this strike all their hearts, who are yet under a Covenant of
works, with a fear of this just God, who will judge them without mercy. And
let this cause them to fly to the throne of grace, and there to enter into a
new Covenant with God. As the Angel counseled Lot, so do I counsel thee,
hasten to get shelter under the wing of grace, that thou may be freed from
the wrath of the just God.

our aims and Gods aims, our ends and Gods ends meet in one, when we come to
seek grace in his sight. Many an one comes before God, begs mercy, and yet
obtaines it not; as Prove. 1.28. Prove. 1.28.
because they ask amiss, they seek it not in Gods way. Consider therefore,
what seek thou in begging mercy at his hand? Do thou seek only to have
thy sin pardoned? only to be saved from wrath? this will not argue thy peace,
that thou art under grace. But do thou as well seek the glorifying of his
grace toward thee, as the obtaining of thine own peace with him? if God have
put this disposition of heart into thee, that thou could be content to lie
down in the dust, and to take shame for thy sin before Angels and men, so that
the abundant riches of his grace may be glorified in taking away thy sin, if
thy desire be not only that thou may see his salvation, but that the Lord
himself may be made mavelous, and his grace magnified in thee, then thou art
herein another David, a man after Gods own heart, thy thoughts are as Gods
thoughts, thy intents and ends the same with Gods ends. Take this therefore as
a pledge of his grace toward thee. Never could thou so desire the
glorifying of that grace, if God had not a purpose of grace toward thee.
Natural desires of our own good, may perhaps work a desire to have our sin
forgiven, but nature (though elevated to the highest) cannot reach this, to
desire the glorifying of grace, as our end.

thee accepted, if it will please to glorify it self; now then consider; this
is the very end which the Lord aymeth at in saving his people, scil. to
glorify his grace in such, as seeing their own unworthiness, do fly to
grace alone to be accepted in Christ Jesus. I say more, If thou were not
unworthy, there could not be any communication of grace to thee; for were there
not unworthiness in us, there could be no grace shown from God. When God will
glorify himself in a way of justice, he will abase all the haughtiness of
man; no excellency of man can then stand in his presence; so on the contrary,
when God will glorify himself in a way of grace, there is no unworthiness of
man can hinder it; he will exalt the most vile, the abject, the most despised,
and contemptible, that not we, but grace it self may be glorified, 1 Cor.
1.27, 28. 1 Cor. 1.27.
therefore do not wrong the grace of God, but fly thereto in the sense of
thine own baseness, and this is the readiest way to find acceptance.

It may serve for direction unto all such, as desire to enjoy the Moses did,
and then we shall obtain it, as he did. Now Moses sought it for this end, that
his mercy might appear, Exodus 32.32. Exodus 32.32.
If thou will pardon their sin, thy mercy shall appear, (this reading I choose
and embrace as the best) as if he should say, they have indeed committed a
great sin, but the greater their sin is, the more shall thy mercy and grace
appear, if thou will forgive. Thus Moses prays, and see how it prevails with
God: In ver. 10. the Lord seemed to have been resolved to consume them, and
bids Moses let him alone, that his wrath might wax hot against them; I will
destroy them, (says God) I will not be entreated for them; yet Moses
notwithstanding goes before God, confessing their vile and heinous sin, but
withal prays, Oh yet forgive, and then thy mercy shall be magnified. And this
prayer of his prevailed with God, he stayed his hand, he changed his mind; as
ver. 14. and destroyed them not. These are prevailing requests with God, when
we plead for the glorifying of his own grace. In Joh. 12.28. Joh. 12.28.
our Savior prays to his Father, Father glorify thy Name, and there comes a
voice out of the cloud, I have glorified it, and will glorify it again: so
let us seek grace from God for this end, that it may be glorified in us.
Father glorify thy grace; and then the Lord in his time will answer us; I have
both glorified it, and will now glorify it again. In this way we cannot
miss of obtaining the thing we seek for at Gods hand.

B^asha, 1 Kings 16.2, 3. 1 King. 16.2, 3
says that because he walked in the ways of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who
made Israel to sin, therefore God would make his house like the house of
Jeroboam. They both make Israel to sin, and therefore they are both alike in
punishment; so also he speaks of Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 23.31. Ezekiel. 23.31.
that because she walked in the way of her sister, that therefore he would
give her cup into her hand. Hence says the Apostle, Romans 2.6. to 17th, Romans
2.6. to 17^h.
That every soul that continues in well-doing, shall have glory and honor,
but unto the disobedient shall be tribulation and wrath, whether Jews or
Gentiles, etc. Where actions are alike, God will deal alike with all such as
are under the Covenant of works: What is just toward one, is just toward
another, when actions and works are alike; Now God will deal justly with all:
He that commands us to give to every man his due, Romans 13.7. will not himself
withhold due from any; here therefore God will deal alike with all. Let one
fulfill the Law, and he shall live thereby; Let another fulfill it, and he also
shall have the same life. Let one break it, and he shall dye, and as many as
break it, shall lie under the same condemnation. But now it is otherwise in
the Covenant of grace; grace deals diversely with men that are equal in
themselves; where there was no difference before, grace makes a difference, as
Romans 3.23, 24. Romans 3.23, 24
All have sinned, etc. there is no difference in our selves, we are all shut
up in condemnation by sin; but are all justified? No; but only those that are
of the faith of Jesus. Hence says the Apostle, Romans 9.10, 11, 12, 13. that
when Jacob and Esau were both in the same condition, neither of them having
done either good or evil, yet grace put a difference betwixt them, and
preferred one before the other; They were alike in themselves, but yet they had
not the like grace vouchsafed to them from God. Justice is due, but grace is
free; Justice must do right, but grace may communicate it self, to whom,
where, and in what measure it will. Hence is that in Romans 9.15. Romans 9.15.
I will have mercy upon whom I will have mercy, etc. He does not say, I will
deal justly with whom I will, he cannot deal unjustly with any; But
concerning grace he says, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy.
Therefore to manifest the freeness of his grace, the Lord sometimes prefers
those that seem least worthy, he sets the younger before the elder, Jacob
before Esau, Ephraim before Manasseh, and the Gentiles which were aliens from
God, before the Jews which counted themselves to be the only people. Consider
those two speeches in Mat. 20. Mat. 20.14, 15
The one ver. 14. Take that which is thine own, and go thy way: the other,
ver. 15. I will do with mine own as I will. Here is our own, and Gods own;
our own, is that which we look for according to our agreement which we have
made with God, for the work done. As those hired into the Vineyard, they
agreed with the Master of the Vineyard for so much; and that which they so
agreed for, for their work, that was their own, due by Justice; But that
which was not by agreement, nor for work, but comes by grace, that is Gods
own, with which he may do even as he will: our own is that which is due from
Gods justice, Gods own is the gift of his free grace. To every one God will
say, take thine own. And where there is no difference in work, Justice will
make no difference in wages. And if any begin to complain that others are
better dealt with then they, the Lord answers to such, I will do with mine
own as I will; Grace is mine own, and I owe it to none, I will show it where
I will; It is grace which makes the difference, herein may God deal diversely,
giving more to one, less to another, as pleases him. And hereto agrees that
in ver. 16th, He that is first shall be last, and the last first. He that
should be last in a way of Justice, shall become first in a way of grace; Those
that Justice would set last and lowest, Grace will advance and set highest.

This may serve to stop every mouth that is ready to open it self grace; you
have your own, therefore complain not, you have what you can require in a way
of Justice, and more, and therefore let God do with his own what he will.
What if God will show more grace to another then to you? Is he therefore
unrighteous? you your selves will take the same liberty to show the fruits of
your kindness and courtesy where you will; And will you be more free then
God? Let not your eye be evil, because his is good; murmr not against God,
repine not against men, if they have received more, if God have given them more
gifts then unto you, grudge not. The spirit that is in us lusts after envy,
James 4.5. James 4.5.
And the Jews were moved with envy when they saw the Gentiles preferred
before themselves. But learn to submit to the Lords dispensation; neither
murmr against him, nor envy against men, remembering grace is free to give to
whom and w^^re he will.

Luke 23.39. to 44. Luke 23.39. to 44.
they were both in the same condemnation, yet one flying to grace, found mercy
with the Lord, one went to Paradise, the other to hell. Though you are as vile
as the damned in hell, yet grace may save you.

Except you repent, you shall likewise perish, Luke 13.2, 3. Luke 13.2, 3.
God is the same, his justice the same, now as before. It follows the same
rule to judge by, therefore where the sins are the same, if you be not under
grace, you must look for the like vengeance. Consider what the Apostle says, 1
Cor. 10.7, 8, 9, 10. Be not you murmurers, idolaters, fornicators, as they
were, lest you meet with the same judgments as befell them. Therefore take
heed how you go on in an impenitent course in any sin, lest the same plagues
be inflicted on you. Take heed of the covetousness of Judas, the hypocrisy of
Ananias, the obstinacy of the Jews, the pride of Nebuchadnezzar, the
murmurings of the Israelites, the lukewarmnesse of Laodicea, lest ye taste of
the same miseries. Justice can make no difference.

The seventh difference is this: That the Covenant of works is Romans 5.16. Romans
5.16.
The guilt came of one offense unto condemnation, but the gift is of many
offenses unto justification, etc. Adams one sin brought guilt upon him, and all
his posterity, because he was under the covenant of works; and therefore
justification can be had by that Covenant no more. But it is not so in the
Covenant of grace, neither one sin, nor many sins do exclude from life in
this covenant; But this gift is of many offenses, etc. And this holds true, not
only of such sins as are committed before our entrance into a covenant of
grace with God; but of such sins as are committed afterward; as is evident,
Psalm. 89.31.34. God having made a Covenant with them, though he chastise them,
yet his Covenant will be not break, etc. The reason of this difference is,
from the sum and scope of the Covenant of works, which is to bind us to a
total, full, perfect, and constant obedience of the Law in all things unto the
end, Gal. 3.10. so that one, or once failing, breaks that Covenant. But in the
Covenant of grace, God promises, not only to forgive, but to multiply
forgivenesses, Isa. 55.7. Isai. 55.7.
Hence though in many things we sin all, as James 3.2. yet, 1 John 2.2. 1 John
2.2.
we have an Advocate with the Father. And 1 John 1.7. The blood of Christ
cleanses us from all sin. No number of sins does exclude from salvation,
till they be accompanied with final Apostasy, impenitency and unbelief, till
as Heb. 3.12. we do by an evil heart depart away from the living God: Hence
also says the Apostle, Romans 5.19. Where sin abounds, there grace abounds much
more. God will glorify his grace by our sin. As sin takes occasion by the
Law, Romans 7.10. so grace takes occasion by our sin. God will glorify his grace
thereby, and make it mavelous in the eyes of the world, so that men shall
wonder that such grace should be showed in pardoning such sins; that they
shall say, as Micah 7.18. Micah 7.18.
Who is a God like unto thee, who passest by the transgression of the remnant
of thy people!

Consolation to the weak Saints of God, many falls they are subject unto, by
reason of which they are cast into sad fears and doubts concerning themselves,
yea so far as to make conclusions against themselves, that they cannot belong
unto God, because (as they think) if they were the Lords people, and his grace
were effectual in them, they should not be so often overcome. But such must
know that so long as the sins that are in us be repented of, and mourned for,
it is not one nor many infirmities which can make void the Covenant of grace,
which we are entered into, or hinder us of the blessing that comes thereby. We
must remember, that we are not under the Law, but under Grace; we must not be
too severe against our selves, like Novatians denying pardon to second falls;
In so doing we set such limits to the grace of God, as he himself has not
set. God has not said, He will pardon once and no more, or that he will pardon
sins before grace received, but not those committed after, God never so
stinted his grace, but his gift of grace is against many offenses unto
justification of life. In denying therefore of pardon to our selves for sins
iterated, and for our often infirmities, (so long as there is a spirit of
repentance working in us, and we are humbled for them before God) we do not
only wrong our selves, and deprive our souls of the peace we might enjoy, but
we do wrong to the grace of God, as if that grace were not sufficient for us,
as if that God could not, or would not, renew his gracious pardon to us, as we
renew our repentance toward him. Let such consider what the Lord has
commanded us to do, we must not only forgive seven times, but seventy times
seven times, if our brother turn again and say, it repents me. And can we
think that God looks for more mercy from us toward our brethren, then he
will show toward his own children? He has bidden us daily to pray for the
forgiveness of our sins, as knowing that we are subject to daily
infirmities, and do stand in need of daily mercy and forgiveness. And
therefore to limit Gods grace, as we are apt to do, is in effect to turn the
Covenant of grace into a Covenant of works, as if there were no more grace
under the one, then under the other. Know therefore that whiles there is in us
an holy watchfulness, against the sin that dwells within us, whiles it is our
desire and care to please the Lord, whiles we feel in our selves the spirit of
grace, causing us to mourn over him whom we have pierced by our sins, though
we be overtaken again and again through the infirmity of the flesh that is in
us, yet know, that it is not one, nor many offenses that can deprive us of the
blessing of this covenant of grace in which God has promised to multiply
forgivenesses according to the multitude of his great mercies. Yet let no man
abuse this doctrine unto carnal liberty: this is childrens bread, impure
dogs, and carnal livers, that make no conscience of sinning, have nothing to
do with this consolation; it is only to support the weak, to comfort the
feeble minded, not to encourage the wicked and impenitent in their sin. Let
such know, that though God abound in mercy, and do multiply forgivenesses unto
such as are humbled for their sins; yet he will multiply plagues also upon
impenitent wretches that go on in their evil way. To such neither many, nor
any one of all their sins shall be forgiven, but being under the law, they
shall make an account to God for every transgression, God will repay them all
their wickednesses, not one shall be forgotten or forgiven. He is indeed
abundant in goodness, reserving mercy for his people: and so he is also
abundant in wrath against rebellious sinners, and will abundantly reward the
proud doer.

That the covenant of works (if it be accomplished and fulfilled) Adam (who was
under the covenant of works) had fulfilled that covenant, he might have come
before the Lord, and said, Behold, Lord, I have fulfilled the commandment which
thou gave me, and done thy will, now therefore justify me, and give me the
life which thou have promised: here Adam had had something in himself to glory
in. Thus the Apostle speaks of Abraham, that if he had had the righteousness
of works by his fulfilling of the Law, he should have had whereof to glory
before God, Romans 4.1. Romans 4.1.
he might have said as the elder son did in Luke 15.29. Luke 15.29.
a type of one under the covenant of works, I have served thee these many years
and never brake thy comandment, etc. Hence is that in Romans 11.4. To him that
works, the wages is counted a debt. Man might have required life from God as a
due debt. But in the covenant of grace a man has nothing left him of his own
to glory in before God. But all his glorying is in the grace of God, as 1 Cor.
1.30, 31. 1 Cor. 1.30, 31.
Christ is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption,
that wh^soever glories, should glory in the Lord. The covenant of grace
teaches us to look at our selves as lost and undone creatures, but withal to
look at the riches of grace, and to glory in Christ. As Paul 1 Timothy 1.13.14. I
was a blasphemer, etc. But the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ was abundant
toward me. This difference the Apostle lays down on both parts, both in
respect of the covenant of works, and of grace, Romans 3.27. Romans 3 27.
Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By what law? Of works? No, the law of
works does not exclude boasting, but it is excluded by the law of faith, which
is the sum of the covenant of grace. And so Ephesians. 2.9. Ephesians. 2.9.
We are saved by grace, and not by works. Why so? lest any man should boast, as
implying, that there is matter of boasting if saved by works, but not in b^ing
saved by grace. It is with us now, as with a company of condemned prisoners,
all have received the sentence of death; but though some be executed, yet
others are spared by favor from the Prince; what have those that are saved to
glory in more then the other? Nothing in themselves, only in the favor of the
Prince. As in Pharaohs two officers, whereof one was restored, the other
hanged: so it is with us, we are all condemned, all have received a sentence of
death in our s^lves, and in some God will show forth his wrath, and make his
power known, Romans 9.22. Rom 9.22.
others he will spare, reserving them as vessels of mercy prepared unto glory.
But nothing has one to glory in more then the other, but only in the riches
of grace which was showed to the one, and not to the other. They that are saved
may say, I was in the same condemnation, but the Lord has had compassion on
me, because it so pleased him. Here is that which grace teaches us to glory
in. He that is under the Law, if he fulfill the Law, may say, as Deuteronomy. 9.4.
Deuteronomy 9.4.
For mine own righteousness, etc. But he that is under grace must say, as
Deuteronomy. 9.6. Deuteronomy. 9.6.
Not for mine own righteousness, but according to his great mercy. Tit. 3.4.5.
Tit. 3.4 5.


Gal. 6.4. Paul who taught a covenant of grace, and no where more then in that
Epistle, yet wishes a man to prove his own work, that so he may have matter of
rejoicing in himself, and not in another. Therefore it may seem that even the
covenant of grace teaches a man to glory in himself.

There is a twofold glorying, one of confidence, Romans 3.27. Rom 3.27.
Ephesians. 2.9. Ephesians. 2.9.
as was showed before, n ither does he give any allowance to this in the place
alleged, Gal. 6.4. Secondly, there is the glorying of a good conscience before
men, and this is allowed unto the Saints. Thus Paul himself, 2 Cor. 1.12. 2
Cor. 1.12.
My rejoicing is the testimony of a good conscience, and 1 Cor. 9.15. And this
glorying is either sincere and upright, or hypocritical and unsound. Sincere
glorying is when a man being privy to his own integrity, pleads his own
faithfulness against the calumnies and accusations of men. As Job when he was
accused to be an hypocrite, was forced to plead the uprightness and holiness
of his former conversation, chap. 30. and 35. And so Paul when he began to be
vilified among the Corinthians, was constrained to plead his own faithfulness
and diligence, and great labors in the work of Christ, which he did in the
integrity of his conscience, lest the Gospel should be despised. Hypocritical
glorying is when a man's glorying in himself arises not from the soundness of
grace, and the uprightness of his own conversation, but from a vain, proud
comparing himself with other men, as b^ing more excellent then they in his own
eyes: like the Pharis^e, Luke 18.11. Luke 18.11.
I am not as other men, etc. Now the Apostle speaks of this last kind of
glorying, whereas some had fallen by infirmity, v. 1. others were ready to
please themselves, that they had not discovered so great weakness as others
had done, and so were apt to think better of themselves, and therein to boast.
The Apostle therefore exhorts them not to glory in this, that they were
stronger then such as had so fallen, but to examine whether all were well with
themselves, and sound within; because otherwise the matter and ground of their
rejoicing is in another weakness, and not in their own goodness; rather in
another falling, then in their own sure standing by grace, and so they glory
in another, not in themselves, which is but an unsound and vain kind of
rejoicing, and this the Apostle condemns.

But Hezekiah glories even before God, Isai. 33.3. Isaiah 33.3.
Remember, O Lord, says he, what I have done, etc.



Luke 18.11, 12. Luke 18.11.12.
he is full of his own goodness, and as the Church of Laodicea, Rev. 3. The
spirit of the law makes a man to say as the proud King of Ashur, Isai. 37.24,
25. Isaiah 37.24.25.
It Is I that have done all this, etc. But the spirit of grace is another spirit
(as it is said of Caleb and Joshua, that there was another spirit in them,
Numb. 14.24. Numb. 14.24.
) whatsoever such an one does as has the spirit of grace working in him, he
is still in himself as nothing, as Paul says of himself, 2 Cor. 12.11. 2
Cor. 12.11.
that though he was not behind the chief Apostles in the labor of the
Gospel, yet he was still as nothing in his own eyes. Had Paul been of a
Pharisaicall legal spirit, we should have had other language from him, then to
say, I am nothing. He would have had his trumpet blown before him to sound out
his excellency and worth, he would have gloried of his goodness, not only
before men, but before God. But Paul had the spirit of grace in him, and that
made him to see that he had nothing in himself to glory in, but only in the
grace of Christ. The spirit of the law will magnify the works of the law, and
will cause us to magnify our selves because of them: but the spirit of grace
will make us vile in our own eyes, and our works to be but as a spotted
garment, Isai. 64. leaving us nothing in our selves that is of worth to glory
in before God.

But may not a child of God rejoice and take comfort in his obedience and fruit
of holiness which he brings forth?

He may, as is evident, 2 Cor. 1.12. 2 Cor. 1.12.
and Gal. 6.4. but how?

But how may I know that the comfort which I take from them is from the spirit
of grace, and not from the spirit of the law?

The spirit of the law makes a man go no further then himself, Luke 18.11.
Luke 18.11.
But the spirit of grace teaches a man to lo^k at all he does, as wrought in
him by the power of Christ, as the Apostle says, 1 Cor 15.10. 1 Cor. 15.10.
By the grace of God I am what I am. And so ascribes no more to himself,
though he has done more, then he does to others that have done less.

The spirit of the Law hardens the heart against grace, keeps Romans 10.3. Rom
10.3.
they being led by ^he spirit ot the law, and glorying in their own
righteousness, they could not submit to the righteousness of faith; it was
too great a submission for them: But the spirit of grace teaches a man so to
see his own uprightness, and to take comfort in it, that withal it makes him
in lowliness and humility of spirit, to fly to grace for acceptance of his
best performances, and to get pardon for the defect of them, as we may see in
Nehemiah chap. 13.22. Nehem. 13.22.
Remember me, O Lord, says he, and pardon me according to thy great mercy.
And so Paul, 1. Cor. 4.4. 1 Cor. 4.4.
he knew his own faithful^esse, yet he durst not adventure himself to come
before God to be justified thereby. Let such therefore as glory in themselves,
and in their own works, see by what spirit they are led, even by the spirit of
the law; these are under the covenant of works. Those that glory in grace, and
in Christ alone, these are under the covenant of grace.

The covenant of works rested in, and trusted unto, can never (in this state of
corruption that we are now in) work settled comfort, peace, and quietness of
heart. Let a man walk as exactly as flesh and blood can attain unto, and let
him (withal) build as confidently on this foundation, as he possibly may, yet
the heart will be still in suspicion, in doubt, in fear, uncertain what to
trust unto, doubtful what his estate is. But the Covenant of grace rested in,
and trusted unto, does settle the soul in peace. Let a man renounce his own
righteousness, and fly to the free covenant and promise of grace, and stay
wholly upon it, here is a sure anchor for the soul to rest upon. Let waves
swell, and winds blow, yet he has built himself on a sure rock which cannot
fail, and the more confidently that a man adheres to the Covenant of grace,
the more assured peace he will find.

This difference the Apostle lays down, Romans 10. from the 5th ver. to 10. Romans
10. from ve^. 5. to 10.
where having before in the third verse laid down a distinction of a twofold
righteousness, one of works, the other of faith, then next he commends the
righteousness of faith, which is by the covenant of grace, above that which is
by the covenant of works, and persuades to cleave to the one before the other,
by this Argument, namely, because the righteousness which is by works, leaves
a man full of scruples and doubts, making a man to be doubtfully, enquiring,
who shall ascend up into heaven, to tell him whether there be a place for him
there, or who shall go down into the deep, to tell him that he is saved from
that infernal misery. This dubious anxiety, does the Doctrine and Covenant of
works leave a man in; but the Covenant of grace takes away all these scruples;
It says not, Who shall go up into heaven, etc. It tells us, that Christ is
ascended to prepare a place for us; nor says it, Who shall descend, etc. It
teaches us to believe, that Christ is descended for to deliver us; So that
this doctrine of grace frees the mind of those scruples and perplexities,
which the doctrine of works leaves a man entangled in. He that rests on
works, is like a wave of the Sea, tossed and tumbled up and down, and finds no
rest; he that rests on grace is like one built upon a rock, and therefore
cannot be shaken. The reason of this difference is, Because the Law which
contains the sum of the Covenant of works, does discover the perfect
holiness of God, the purity of his nature, his hatred against sin, his
strict justice and judgment, so as the soul that is but in the least measure
privy to his own impurity and sinfulness, can never grow up to any confidence
before God, by any thing which he has done. When we have done the best we can
reach unto, yet the heart will still be doubtful, whether that which we have
done, be fully answerable to the holiness which the holy God requires and
looks for. And thus it was with the young man, Mark. 10. Mark. 10.
that was so perfect in his own eyes, who thought he had kept all the
Commandments of the Law mentioned to him, yet he comes as one unsatisfied in
his own mind, and doubtful, whether he had done enough to bring him unto
life. And therefore comes to Christ, to know what more he should do beside
what he had done already. The Papists, who build upon their works, teach a
doctrine of doubting; No man (say they) can come to be assured and settled in an
undoubted persuasion of his own salvation; and well may they teach such a
doctrine, when they build upon such a sandy foundation of their own works. Let
them establish their own righteousness with all the strength they can, as the
Jews did, Romans 10.3. Romans 10.3.
yet as long as they rest here, and do not submit to the righteousness which
is offered by grace, the issue will be anxiety of mind, fearfulness of heart,
conscience will be perplexed, it will never find rest nor peace: but let a man
renounce his own righteousness, and fly to the Covenant of grace, and cast
himself wholly upon grace; here is a sure rock for the anchor of our faith to
rest upon.

Let us then hereby see the way of peace, to quietness of heart, Isai. 26.3.
Isai. 26.3.
even to stay our selves upon this rock; fly to the rock that is higher then
we; as Psalm. 61.2. Psalm. 61.2.
build upon the foundation of grace, and come off from the foundation of our
own works: they that rest upon the Covenant of works, will be diffident of
their own estate, they are upon a rock that is no higher then themselves, and
when the waters swell, they will quickly get above them. But if we rest on the
foundation of grace, that is a rock that is higher then our selves, there is
safety, all the surges and waves of greatest troubles, can never get above the
top of this rock; stand here, and we are safe for ever. Hence Romans 5.1, 2. Romans
5.1, 2.
Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, etc.

But many that do believe, and build on this foundation,

These doubts and fears of theirs, that build upon their works; the cause of
their fear is, not because there is not a sufficient foundation to bear them
up, but because their adhaerence and dependence is feeble and weak. They are
weak in faith, they are flesh and spirit, there is in them a spirit of faith,
which cleaves to grace, and there is also a spirit of unbelief, which is
leaning to their own works, and this causes their doubtfulnesse. But it is
otherwise with those that do wholly rest upon their works. Let a man build
himself upon these never so resolutely, let him establish his own
righteousness with all the strength he can, yet this will never give him
assurance, not because he does not adhaere firmly to his foundation, but
because his foundation is naught and shakes under him. Suppose two men, both in
fear of drowning by water; one stands on a firm rock, the other on a
quicksand; he that stands on the quick-sand, stands there resolutely, he that
is on the rock is doubtful and weak in his resolution; So it is in this case.
In the one of these, the foundation is firm, but adhaerence is weak; In the
other adhaerence is strong, but his foundation is unsound. The way to true
peace is to rest wholly upon grace, and the more we commit our selves to grace
alone, the more peace. Hence says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 1.12. 2 Timothy 1.12.
I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he will keep that which I
have committed to him. And 2 Timothy 4.18. 2. Tim. 4.18.
The Lord shall deliver me, etc. When fear shall seize on hypocrites, which
have trusted in themselves, and in their own works, then shall those have
confidence which have rested on grace; these shall be able to look death in the
face, and shall have confidence in the day of Judgment.

Romans 8.3. Romans 8.3.
What the Law could not do, etc. And Romans 9.31, 32. He says that the Jews
which followed after the Law of righteousness, did not attain unto that
righteousness. The Papists may talk of perfect keeping of the Law, but the
Scripture teaches us another doctrine, Prove. 20.9. Who can say, I have made my
heart clean? And 1 King. 8.46. There is no man that sins not. But the
Covenant of grace is possible, and therefore the Saints do plead this before
the Lord, Psalm. 44.17. Psalm. 44.17.
that they have been faithful in his Covenant. They do not plead themselves
to be without sin, against the Covenant of works, and yet they can say, they
had not dealt falsely with God in the Covenant of grace. Nay the Lord himself
looks at them as fulfilling and keeping Covenant with him, Psalm. 103.18. Psalm.
103.18.
One of these Covenents is, as Acts 15.10. Acts 15.10.
a yoke too heavy for us now to bear; the other, as Mat. 11.29, 30. Mat.
11.29, 30
an easy yoke and a light burden. The Pharisees that were teachers of the
Covenant of works, laid load and heavy burdens upon men's necks, Mat. 23. Mat
23.
But the Commandments of the Covenant of grace, are not grievous. The Covenant
of grace may be fulfilled, 1 John 5.4.
or else no man could be saved.

To provoke us to come from under the Covenant of works, Paul speak in that
manner to the Galatians, Cap. 4.21. Gal. 4.21.
Ye that will be under the Law. They had a mind to return to the Law, though
they had had grace revealed to them. We have a mind to live and dye under that
Covenant, as the fish in the Sea, and the mole in the earth: But see what it
is, a severe and rigid Master, the will of it can never be accomplished.
Therefore fly from it to this amiable and gracious Lord, that accepts of
weakest endeavors, so they be done in sincerity. So long as we strive to do
the will of the Lord, and fly to grace for pardon and acceptance, we do
fulfill the Covenant of grace. Therefore cast off that yoke which cannot be
borne, and take the yoke of Christ upon us, for that is easy, and his burden
light, Mat. 11.29, 30. Mat. 11.29, 30


Though we do by sin break the Covenant of works, and so make it void, that
there is no life and salvation to be had thereby, yet there is hope and help
by flying to the Covenant of grace; But if the Covenant of grace be broken and
made void, as it may to those which only externally lay hold on it, there is
no more help for such a soul. It Is in vain to fly back to the Covenant of
works. I deny not but many sins may be committed by those that are under the
Covenant of grace, which yet do find help and mercy from God, as was showed
out of Romans 5.16. Romans 5.16.
Because the bond of the covenant is not broken. As it is between man and wife,
though she be foolish, passionate, and wilful; yet these do not break the
Covenant of marriage, so long as she remains faithful; So here. But if the
Covenant of grace be made void, then there is no more help nor hope. It is in
the Covenant of works, as it was under the Law, Number. 35.6. and 25. If a man
had committed manslaughter, he was subject to the avenger of blood, yet there
were Cities of refuge for him to fly unto, where he was to remain to the death
of the High Priest; so it is with those that sin against the Covenant of
works; though one has committed bloody sins, yet there is a refuge for him,
which the Apostle seems to allude unto, Heb. 6.18. Heb. 6.18.
We have strong consolation, that have made our refuge, etc. The Covenant of
grace, is (as Isa. 25.4.) a refuge against the tempest, etc. Here is a safe
Sanctuary, it saves such as are condemned by the Covenant of works. But if a
man sin against the Covenant of grace, so as to make it void to himself, there
is no refuge for him, no remedy for him, as Solomon speaks of those that being
often reproved, harden their neck, Prove. 29.1. Hence is that in Heb. 10. from
26. to 31. If we sin wilfully, after we have received the knowledge of the
truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins, etc. The reason of this
difference is; Because in the Covenant of works, we have to do with justice;
but in the covenant of grace, with grace and mercy: and therefore as when a man
has committed a trespass against the Law, and Justice condemns him, yet the
grace and favor of the Prince may save him; but if he contemn the favor of
the Prince, then he must dye: So though we have provoked justice, yet we may
fly to grace, and get help there: but if we have offended against mercy, and
made grace our enemy, whither can we then go? there is no refuge then left
for us.

danger in sinning against the Covenant of works, but it is more dangerous to
sin against Grace. For there is help for such as break the Covenant of
works, but no help for such as make void the Covenant of grace to themselves.
These are the killing and destroying sins, that leave no remedy. It is true,
(as was said before) that the Lord passes by many weaknesses of his servants,
that desire and endeavor to cleanse themselves from all filthiness, and
spares them as a Father his son, Mal. 3.17. Mal. 3.17.
But contemptuous sins against Grace, are beyond all help. This is to sin
desperately. Herein men stumble at the stumbling stone, they think that now
under the days of grace (though they be yet under the Law) they may sin
without danger, and continue in their evils; but here the danger is the
greatest, therefore take heed how you make Grace your enemy. If the Law
condemn us, Grace may save us; But if Grace save us not, who shall plead for
us?

How do men sin,

1. By neglecting and slighting the offers and tenders of Grace, Mat. 22. and
Lak. 14. the Father invites men to the marriage of his Son, and so to receive
all the blessings, that are prepared, and made ready. There is mercy ready,
forgiveness ready, etc. But mark their answer; They cannot come, the profits
and pleasures of the world hinder them from embracing the tenders of Grace;
What follows then? the sentence goes out of the mouth of Grace it self, They
shall not taste of my Supper. Grace invites, but it is refused, and therefore
passes that direful sentence. So Psalm. 81.11. Psalm. 81.11.
God offers himself to be a God unto them, but they will have none of him,
Then he gave them up to walk after their own hearts lusts, etc. When we will
not have his Grace upon his terms, then God gives up to Justice. When God
calls upon us, as he does upon his people, Isai. 55.1.3. Isai. 55.1.3.
Come unto me, and incline your ear, take me to be a God unto you, and I will
make a sure and everlasting Covenant with you; if then we depart away from
God, as Hos. 11.2. Hos. 11.2.
and we will have our lusts, and keep the Idols of our hearts, then the
offers of grace are made void unto us.

2. When men turn back from the grace which they have received, and grow weary
of it; when we are convinced of the excellency of grace, and do take hold of
the Covenant, as it were with one hand, but not with all our heart, and
therefore do Apostatise and turn back to our own lusts, then do we frustrate
all the promises of grace to our selves. This exposes grace to contempt, as if
there were more good to be found in sin, and in the world, then in the grace of
Christ. Hence says the Apostle, Heb. 10.26. and 39. Heb 10.26. and 39.
That they that sin wilfully after they have received the knowledge of the
truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin. They that draw back, do it to
their own perdition; and so Psalm. 73.27. Psalm. 73.27.
They that turn back from thee shall perish. If they be entangled again,
says the Apostle Peter, 2 Pet. 2.20. 2 Pet. 2.20.
then their latter end is worse then their beginning. Here is another way to
make void the grace of God to our selves.

3. When we turn the grace of God into lasciviousness, as Jude third verse;
when men presume upon grace, they sin presumptuously, and think that Grace
shall bear all, save all, and though they go on presumptuously in an
headstrong way, yet Grace shall pardon all; This Paul meets withal, Romans 6.1.
Romans 6.1.
Shall we fin that grace may abound, etc. Men are ready to abuse the precious
Grace of God; we will sin, and grace shall abound. This turning of grace into
wantonness, frustrates the Covenant of grace unto our selves, Jude 3.4.
verses. Let us therefore take heed that we sin not against grace. I would to
God that none of these things were found in the Generation of Jacob, among our
Churches; sins against Grace, are the most dangerous sins, therefore beware.



Tim. 1.9. Tit. 1.2. 2 Timothy 1.9. Tit. 1.2.


I answer, that both covenants must be considered two ways.

First, as they were in mente divina, in the counsel and purpose of the Father.

Secondly, as they are actually enacted and stricken with us.

Now if we speak of the former, how they were in the eternal purpose of God,
then I say it is true, that the covenant of grace was from eternity. But so was
the covenant of works also, which appears by these two things: First, both
these purposes (that I may so speak for our conceiving, though both are but one
in God) I say both these, I will glorify my self in my justice, and, I will also
glorify my self in my grace, are from eternity, one as well as the other,
Romans 9.22.23. Now the means of glorifying his justice, is by entering with m^n
into a covenant of works: therefore as the end was from eternity; so was the
means also. Secondly, Christ himself when he received the promise and covenant
of grace for us, did withal receive a commandment and covenant of works to be
fulfilled by him in our behalf. Hence he is said to be made under the law,
Galat. 4. Galat. 4.
he received a commandment from the Father, John 12.49. John 12.49.
And was sent to fulfill the righteousness of the Law for us, Romans 8.3. Romans
8.3.
By which means he becomes the end of the Law, Romans 10.4. Romans 10.4.
And as he was made under the Law, and did fulfill it in fullness of time, wherein
he was sent: so he was preordained hereunto before the world was, 1 Pet. 1.20.
1 Pet. 1.20.
So that in respect of Gods counsel and purpose, there is neither prius nor
posterius betwixt these covenants, but they are from everlasting, neither of
them before nor after another. But if we look at the manifestation and enacting
and striking of the covenant with us, the covenant of works was first, in as
much as the state of perfection was before the state of imperfection, in which
the covenant of grace was made with us.

Therefore for a man now to suppose an accomplishing of the covenant of works
to be saved thereby, Adam was in his creation before his fall, and is in effect
the same as to say, that we have no need of a covenant of grace, as then Adam
had not.

The covenant of works is revealed by the light of Nature; but above. Natures
light teaches men to look for life and righteousness by works, and this is
written in all men's hearts, Romans 2.15. Romans 2.15.
And therefore if you should ask all the men in the world severally one by one,
How do you hope to be saved? They would all answer, By works, and by doing
good. All men by nature have something of the law in their hearts, though sin
has blotted out a great part of it: but the covenant of Grace is not known but
by the revelation of the Spirit. Hence, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.6, 7, 8. 1
Cor. 2.6, 7, 8.
that the Gospel is a mystery, an hidden wisdom, which none of the Princes of
the world knew, though they have the greatest helps to find out hidden things;
but it is brought by the Son out of the bosom of the Father, John 1. John 1.
Flesh and blood does not reveal this doctrine, Matthew. 16.17. Matthew. 16.17.


Mat. 11.25. Father, I thank thee that thou have revealed these things unto me,
etc.

Adams loins, and he standing as a public person in the room of all his
children, when God made that covenant with him: but the covenant of grace is
not made with all men, but only with the faithful, with those that are given
unto Christ by the Father, John 17. John 17.
And therefore by the covenant of works, God is a God to one as well as to
another; God is not God of one people more then of another, by the covenant of
works, for it was made equally with us all in Adam, it being made with him for
all his posterity. And therefore seeing we are all equally the sons of Adam,
this covenant makes no difference betwixt man and man, but all are shut up
under it, all bound to fulfill it; and if they break it, (as we all do) then
liable are we to the sentence of death. But in the covenant of grace God is the
God of one people, and not of another. Hence is that in Genesis 17.21. Genesis 17.21.
God says that he will establish his covenant with Isaac, and not with
Ishmael: So it was made with Jacob, and not with Esau, with Abel, and not with
Cain, with David, and not with Saul; not with Judas, but with Peter; with the
Jews first, and not with the Gentiles; and after with the Gentiles, and not
with the Jews. By this covenant one people becomes a more peculiar people then
another. As first of Peter, 1 Pet. 2.9.10.
2 chap. the covenant of grace is not universal, it is not made with all, as
the covenant of works was.

Let none therefore look for the blessing of life and salvation, by being a son
of Adam, Zach. 13.8, 9. Zach. 13.8, 9.
says, That two parts shall be cut off, and to the third he will say, You are
my people. Let us not therefore flatter our selves with vain hopes, that he
that made us will save us: No, he that made you will have no compassion on you,
so long as you remain an impenitent and disobedient people, Isai. 27.11. Isai.
27.11.
All do not so much as hear of this covenant, nor know it; all that do hear
of it, and have knowledge of it, do not enjoy the blessing of it, as Matthew.
13.11. and Matthew. 11.25. Matthew. 13. Matthew. 11.25.
Therefore it were good for every one of us, that we would begin to suspect our
selves, and to question our interest in this covenant. Ask our selves, yea and
ask others, and go and enquire at the Lords own mouth, Am I within this
covenant? Have I any part or portion in the blessing of it? Sure I am, that I
am by nature under the covenant of works, but am I translated into the covenant
of grace?

The salvation brought by this covenant, Jude verse. 3.

True, it is common to all that do believe,

One that is under the covenant of works, may get from under that covenant, and
may come to be under the covenant of grace: but he that is once under the
covenant of grace, can never be brought back under the covenant of works any
more. A member of Adams body may be lost; but a member of Christ's body can
never be cut off. Adam being under the covenant of works, lost himself wholly,
and therefore may lose a member of his body much more. But those that are
engraffed into Christ, are safe, he saves himself, and all that belong to him,
Esaias 63.5. John 17.12.



Matthew. 8. the ship in which Christ was, was tossed with wind and water, so as
the Disciples were afraid, yet it sunk not. The law has no more power against
you, ye cannot come under the power of the law any more, Romans 6.

Thus much of the differences between the covenant of works and of grace; which
differences are carefully to be observed and kept inviolable: for if we begin
to confound these two covenants, we bring in a confusion into all Religion. As
the Papists have done by confounding the differences between the covenants.
They make the covenant of grace to differ no otherwise from the covenant of
works, then a thing more perfect from that which is imperfect, and to be
distinct only in respect of degree; and so in effect they make them all one.
They call the commandments given by Moses, the old Law, and the Gospel the new
Law: and herein they make all the difference, that the new Law (as they call
it) gives rules of greater perfection and difficulty then the old Law. As
where the old Law (as they term it) commanded, Thou shall not kill; the new Law
forbids one to be angry unadvisedly, etc. And hence, scil. from the confounding
of these two covenants, follows their doctrine of the possibility of the
keeping the whole Law. That whereas the Scripture speaks of an Evangelical
keeping of the law in uprightness and sincerity, and acknowledges it in the
Saints, as in Zachary and Elizabeth, they not putting difference betwixt Law
and Gospel, they apply this to a legal keeping of the commandment, which is
quite contrary to the mind of the Spirit of Truth speaking in the Word. Hence
also they teach, that there is but o^e way of justification in both covenants,
which is by works, as they say. The new law gives more grace to fulfill the
commandment of it then the old does, but the way of justification is the same:
thus they teach. Therefore we must be careful of keeping these differences
between the covenant of works and of grace.

But Christ who was the Minister of the covenant of grace, a new commandment,
John 13.34. and 15. chap. 12. Joh. 13.34. and and cap. 15.12.
and therefore it is a doctrine of works as well as the former commandment
given by Moses.

It is true that the Gospel and Covenant of grace, has its commandment

The commandments of the covenant of grace, are in part we believe in the Name
of the Son of God, that we may have life by him, 1 John 3.23. 1 John 3.23.
thereupon the Gospel is called, the Law of Faith, as opposed to the law of
works, Romans 3.27. Romans 3.27.


Though the doctrine of grace command the same duties as the

2. Having thus far spoken of the differences between the covenant of works
and of grace; I now come to the revelation and dispensation of the covenant of
grace, to see how diversely it has been administered in the several times and
age^ of the Church, before and after the coming of Christ.

1. And here I will first show that the covenant of grace is the same in all
ages of the Church.

2. The different manner of the dispensation.

1. For the first; the Fathers before Christ were under the same covenant of
grace as we be; not they under one covenant, and we under another, and this we
will show in two things: First, that they had the same promise and hope of life
and salvation as we have. Secondly, they had it upon the same ground, and in
the same way, scil. by faith in the free grace of God by Christ.

1. They had the same promise and hope of eternal salvation. This is necessary
to be considered, because of the Anabaptists, which teach, that they lived and
died without hope of life eternal, only fed with temporal promises, and
fatted like swine with earthly blessings, but without hope of a better life.
But the contrary is evident by the promises that were made to them, L^vit.
26.12. Levit. 26.12.
I will be your God, and ye shall be my people; but Christ says, that God is
not the God of the dead, but of the living, Matthew. 22.32. Mat. 22.31.
But it is more plain, Deuteronomy. 38.29. Happy art thou, O Israel, saved by the
Lord. If they had had only temporal promises, they might have been called a
miserable people, according to that of Paul in 1 Cor. 15.19. 1 Cor. 10.19.
If in this life only we had hope, we were of all men the most miserable, they
could not have been called an happy people. Isai. 33.22. Isai. 33.22.
The Lord is our King, and he will save us. They did therefore look for, and
expect life and salvation. And Christ speaking of Abraham, and so of the rest
of the Fathers before Christ, says, That many shall come from the East and
West, and sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of God.
Therefore the old Patriarchs are in heaven, Mat. 1.8.1
and therefore it is an hellish and diabolical doctrine, that they were fed
only with temporal promises. In Heb. 11.10. it is plain, they had not only
the hope of an earthly inheritance in Canaan, but the hope of an heavenly
inheritance in the Kingdom of God. And in reason, what more absurd then to
imagine, that Abraham should be called the Father of the Faithful, and we to
be called his children, and yet we to have an eternal inheritance in heaven,
and Abraham the Father of us all, to have only a temporal here upon earth.
Again, the Saints professed themselves pilgrims and strangers upon the earth,
Heb. 11.13. and David, Psalm. 39.12. Psalm. 39.12.
Which shows that they had hopes of a better inheritance then that of Canaan.
Again, they had the same Spirit as we have, Psalm. 51.12. Psalm. 51.12.
Take not thy holy Spirit from me, says David. Now the Spirit is the pledge of
our inheritance, Ephesians. 1.14. Ephesians. 1.14.
And therefore if they had the same Spirit, then the same inheritance.

2. As they had the same promise and hope of life, so they had it upon the same
ground as we have, even by faith in the free grace of God in Christ Jesus. They
had the same Gospel of grace that we have. Hence is that, Romans 1.2. Rom 1.2.
the Gospel was promised before by the Prophets to the Fathers. And Romans 3.21.
Rom 3.21.
The righteousness of God without the Law is manifested, being witnessed by
the Law and the Prophets. It is manifested without the Law, that is, without
the works of the Law, yet has witness of the Law, that is, of the writings
of Moses, who teaches a man to look for justification by Grace, and not by
works. Hence also says Christ, Joh. 8.56. Joh. 8.56.
Abraham saw my day; therefore he had Christ revealed to him. See Camero, tom
1. p. 127, 128. etc. Heb. 13.8.
To the same purpose is that in Hebr. 13.8. Christ the same yesterday (for the
time past, before his coming in the flesh) to day, while in the flesh, and for
ever after; He is the same, not only in regard of essence, but also in regard
of the efficacy of his office, from the beginning to the end of the world. So
also in the Songs of Mary and Zachary, Luke 1.54.72. Luke 1.54.72.
The revealing and fulfilling of our redemption by Christ is made to be the
accomplishment of the promises made unto the Fathers. What is now fulfilled was
then promised; hence also says the Apostle, Act. 15.10, 11. Act. 15.10, 11
We hope to be saved, even as they. And Heb. 4.2. Heb. 4.2.
Unto us was the Gospel preached as unto them, and to them as well as to us.
And the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 4.6. 1 Pet. 4.6.
says that unto them that are now dead, who lived in the days of Noah, was
the Gospel preached. Hence Jude 3. it is called the common salvation, common to
all believers, both before and after Christ.

This may teach us to abhor that swinish opinion of the Anabaptists, Mat.
8.11. Mat. 8.11.
Hence the state of rest and immortality is called Abraham's bosom, Luke 16.
Luke 16.
Abraham is the Father of us all, and therefore when we dye, we are said to be
carried thither, as the child runs to the bosom of the father or mother when
any thing troubles it; therefore if Abraham's bosom be the place of our rest,
it is then plain that Abraham and the rest of the Fathers are entered into
their rest, as we hope to enter into our rest.

Jude 3. There is a generation in the Land, that are altogether looking after
new light, and new truths, and the old truths delivered to Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, are nothing with them. But let us take heed, lest while we gape after
new light, and new truths, we drink not in old poisoned errors, and be fed
with windy fancies in stead of bread. Ask for the old way, Jer. 6.16. Jer.
6.16.
The old way is the good way, wherein you must find rest to your souls; Men
have itching ears, itching minds, and itching tongues also, itching to be fed
with, and to be venting novelties. It has been the blemish of our English
Nation, that they have been always newfangled, running after new fashions,
taking up the fashions of every Nation. The poverty of our estates will not
here permit us to follow new fashions, but yet still the vanity of our minds
is working and doting upon our new opinions, whereby men are led into paths,
that were not trodden by the Fathers of old. God charges the false Prophets,
Jer. 18.15. Jer. 18.15.
that they led his people from the ancient ways. Whiles every one is forward
to vent his own imagination, and has liberty so to do, every one saying, I
have seen, I have seen, (when indeed they have seen nothing but the vanity
and lying imagination of their own heart) they fill the world with idle
fancies, which breed questions, rather then godly edifying. Ask therefore for
the way which Abraham, David, Moses, Isaiah, and Jeremy, with the rest of the
Prophets walked in, and departed not therefrom. Though we have cause to praise
the Lord for the abundant manifestation of the Doctrine of Grace in these
days, more then before Christ's coming in the flesh, yet the Doctrine is the
same; As the light of the Sun which shines at noone-time, or midday, is the
same light which shined in the morning, only more clear and bright then
before; so the Doctrine of Grace, though more clearly manifested then formerly,
when hid under types and shadows, yet the truth is the same. We hope to be
saved by grace, as they did, and they had the same Doctrine of Grace as we
have, therefore seek we after the old way.

2. But though the substance of the Covenant was the same then and now, yet
there is a difference in regard of the manner of dispensation and revealing, it
being diversely propounded, according to the several times, ages, states, and
conditions of the Church, delivered one way before the coming of Christ, and
another way afterward. And therefore in regard of the old way, and manner of
administration of it, it is called the old Covenant, and in regard of the new
manner of dispensing, it is called the new Covenant. The same Covenant therefore
is called both new and old, as is evident, Heb. 8.8.13. Heb. 8.8, 13.
But lest any should think, that the old Covenant there spoken of, was
properly and strictly the Covenant of works, see what is said before, Page 59,
60. etc.

Wherein stands the difference between the old and new manner of the
dispensation of the Covenant of grace.

It stands principally in four things.

1. One more burdensome, another more easy.

2. One more dark, the other more clear.

3. One more weak, the other more lively and strong.

4. In regard of the extent of the dispensation, one dispensed to that one
people of the Jews, the other to all Nations.

First, The Covenant, in the former dispensation of it, was more burdensome,
and heavy to be borne, and is now made to us more easy: which appears by
those places of Scripture-speeches, which the Holy Ghost uses of the
Ordinances of the old Testament. Acts 15.10. Acts 15.10.
They were a yoke which neither we nor our Fathers could bear; and Colos.
2.20. Colos. 2.20.
If (says the Apostle) you be freed from these worldly Ordinances, why are you
burdened with traditions? He did not say, Why will you take upon you the
observation of traditions, but why are ye burdened with them? implying they
were an heavy burden. So Galat. 4.3. Galat 4.3.
he comparing the state of the Church then and now, he says they were then in
a kind of bondage in respect of us now. In the days of the New Testament, the
burden is made light, etc. Therefore says Christ, Mat. 11. Take my yoke upon
you, for my yoke is easy, and my burden light. He takes off the burden of
the Ceremonial Law, that we need not be b^^thened with it. Consider the
burden that lay upon them.

First, The burden of their costly Sacrifices, that if any had but touched an
unclean thing, he must come, and offer sacrifice, sometime a bullock, sometime
a lamb; If we were for every offense to offer such sacrifices, we should count
it an heavy burden.

Secondly, They had long and tedious journeys to Jerusalem; the Land lay more
in length then breadth, and Jerusalem stood almost at one end of it, and
thither thrice a year all the males were to go and appear before God, Deuteronomy.
16.16.

Thirdly, They were restrained from many liberties which we now enjoy, we are
allowed many creatures for meat, which they might not eat, as the Hare, swine,
etc. Difference of meats is now taken away.

Fourthly, They were tied to the observation of many days, the new Moons, and
many Ceremonial Sabbaths, to which they were bound, and not at liberty, as we
are. Now whether we respect one of these, or all together, it was a
burdensome thing to them. But now the yoke is made more easy, therefore
Christ compares the Jewish Church to a child that in his nonage is under
tutors and governors, till the time appointed by the Father. But the Church
now is like a man grown up, that has his patrimony in his own hand, Gal. 4.1,
2. Gal. 4.1, 2.
Though we be bound to the duties of the Moral Law as well as they, yet a
great yoke is taken off from us.

Israel, of whom the Lord complains, Hosea 11.3.4. Hosea 11.3.4.
that though he had taken off the yoke, and laid meat before them, yet they
were like an unruly beast that kicketh with the heel. If now when the Lord
has taken off the yoke of the Ceremonial Law, and has given us the Covenant
of his grace without those burdens that lay upon them, if yet we deal
unkindly with him, and count those spiritual services which he requires from
the inward man to be a burden unto us, how may the Lord complain of us much
more? Let us therefore give unto the Lord voluntary and spiritual sacrifices;
the lesser that our burden is, the greater is the sin, if we serve not the
Lord with a cheerful heart in the services he requires from us.

Secondly, The Covenant was then revealed more darkly and obscurely, but now
the dispensation of it, is more clear and evident: the light now is
mavelous, it is as the Sun shining at noonday. Hence Romans 16.25, 26. Romans
16.25, 26.
the Gospel is called the revelation of the ministry which was kept secret
since the foundation of the world, but it is now made manifest, etc. Though it
was revealed before, yet it was but darkly, but now it is revealed more clearly
since the coming of our Savior Christ; so also Ephesians. 3, 4, 5. Ephesians. 3.4, 5.
and Colos. 2.26. Colos. 2.26.
Consider the truth of this in some particulars.

First, Consider the promise of eternal life, it was darkly covered over, not
clearly promised to them: The promise of eternal life is very rarely in
express terms mentioned in the old Testament. I know but one place (which is
in Dan. 12.2. Dan. 12.2.
) where plain mention is made of life eternal. It was shadowed out to them in
the promise of inhabiting in the Land of Canaan, which was a shadow of eternal
life; so the threatening of eternal death, was typed out by the threatening of
exclusion out of the Lords Land. Hosea 9.3. Hosea 9.3.
When they should be driven into captivity, it was a type of their sending into
hell, if they did not return to walk with him in his Covenant. And hence are
those promises, They shall inherit the land, and dwell in the earth, Psalm.
37.11. Psalm. 37.11.
Not as if that were all they were to look for, but because it was the type of
another and better inheritance in heaven. This was the cause that made Jacob,
Genesis 49.29. Genesis 49.29.
give that charge to his sons, that they should not bury him in Egypt, but
carry him into the land of Canaan. And Joseph, Genesis 50.24, 25. took an oath of
his brethren, that they should carry his bones with them; And why was this
done, but because they looked at that Land as more then an earthly possession,
taking it as a type of heaven, and by giving that charge, they testified their
faith in the promise of God concerning the possession of life eternal?
Therefore also it was that Abraham, though he endured many troubles and
injuries in the land of promise, and had time to have returned into his own
Country, yet he would not, Heb. 11.15. Heb. 11.15.
because he looked at that, as a land of promise, and a type of the rest that
remained for him in the kingdom of God. Thus was the promise of eternal life
obscurely propounded.

Secondly, Consider the revealing of Christ, either the person of Christ, or
his offices, and we shall see that they were darkly propounded unto them in
respect of what they are to us. Christ was but shadowed out to them in types,
and figures, and dark prophesies. Concerning, his person it was revealed unto
them that he should be God, as Isai. 9.6. Isai. 9.6.
where he is called the mighty God; and also that he should be man, and
therefore said to be borne, Isa. 9.6. But how he should be both God and man in
one person, was very darkly revealed. Which made the Jews that they could not
answer to that question, how Christ should be both Lord and son to David. So
for his offices; his Mediatorship was typed out by Moses his being between God
and the people; his Priesthood typed out by Melchisedek among the Canaanites,
and Aaron among the Jews; and his sacrifice by their sacrifices: his
Prophetical office shadowed to them by Moses, who revealed the mind of God to
the people. Therefore says Moses, Deuteronomy. 18.18. Deuteronomy. 18.18.
A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you like unto me; which is
applied unto Christ, Acts 3.22. Acts 3.22.
His Kingly office typed out in the kingdom of David and Solomon, Luke 1.31.
Luke 1.31.32.
God shall give him the kingdom of his Father David. But how dark these
things were unto them, you may perceive by the speeches of the Disciples unto
Christ, who knew not how he should execute those offices, they knew not that he
should dye, they dreamt of an earthly kingdom; they saw Christ under a veil,
but we see him with open face, 2 Cor. 3. 2 Cor. 3.
end.

Thirdly, The benefits that come by Christ were not so clearly made known to
them as they are to us. Justification was signified by the sprinkling of the
blood of the sacrifice, Exodus 24.7, 8. Exodus 24, 7, 8.
So sanctification was typed out by the water of purification; The benefits
which are so clearly revealed unto us, that Christ is our wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, were but darkly propounded unto
them. So that the light now is become like the light at noone day, the light
that they had was but like the dawning of the day, or the light of the stars.
Hence is that of Christ, Mat. 13.16, 17. Blessed are your eyes, for they see,
and your ears, for they hear, etc.



1.

2. The Church was then in its minority and infancy, but now it is of full age,
Gal. 4.1, 2. Galat. 4.1, 2.
Therefore as a Father gives some hints of his purpose and will, to his child
when he is under age, but makes known all his mind to him when he is grown
up; so dealt the Lord with his Church then, as with children, etc.

3. It was meet that this glory should be reserved to Christ himself, he being
the great Prophet of the Church, that he should reveal more to the world then
ever was known before. It was not meet that all should be revealed before his
coming, but that he should have the glory of revealing those deep things which
were hid with God, making them known to his Church and people. And therefore
they were more darkly revealed before. Only this observe, that the further the
times were from Christ's coming, the less light they had, and the nearer to
Christ, the more light sprung up. The promise to Eve was more dark, more
clear to Abraham, and still more clear to David, etc. And the reason of this
is,

First, Because Christ is the light of the world; Now as the Sun the further
it is from rising, the less light it gives, and the nearer to rising, the
more, so did Christ the Sun of righteousness.

Secondly, The more light was discovered near the coming of Christ, to stir
up the mind^ of people to wait for Christ, and his coming; The more known the
more desired, Ignoti ^^lla c^pido, the less known the less desired.

Thirdly, Before the Law was given, there was less sense of sin, and therefore
the less revelation of Christ: But as the sense of sin increased by the
revelation of the Law, so there was more clear revelation of Christ to them;
Though at the best, it was but dark in comparison of what it is now in the
days of the New Testament.

This should teach us with thankfulness to accept and prize these days of the
Son of man, them? Abraham saw Christ, but it was afar off. The Israelites
saw him, but he was then veiled. But now we see him with open face. How may
we stand and admire this grace, and say with the Disciples, John 14.
Lord, why is it that thou will reveal thy self to us and not to the world?
Count it not a small mercy, that we have Christ revealed so clearly now more
then formerly. It is one of the great promises of God unto his Church, as we
may see, Isai. 11.9. Isai. 11.9.
That the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of God. And Jerem. 31.34.
That all shall know the Lord, etc. These are the days fore-spoken of, wherein
we do in a degree and measure see eye to eye, Isai. 52.8.
though something more may be added in the conversion of the Jews. As God
therefore promises it as a blessing, so count it a blessing. Christ takes the
veil from before his face, and says, Behold me, behold me, O ye sons of
men, Isai. 65. Isai. 65.
Therefore,

First, grow up in the knowledge of the covenant, and of the blessings of it.
We should not now be ignorant of what God has promised on his part, nor what
he requires on our part. If we have any intimation given us of a Legacy in some
rich man's will, O how careful are we to enquire into it! How much more should
we labor to know this Testament?

Secondly, labor also to grow settled in the doctrine which the covenant
teaches us, not being carried away with every new fangled conceit, but
grounded in the truth which you have received. Be children in malice, but in
knowledge and judgment be men of ripe age, able to discern between things
that differ, and to try all things holding fast that which is good. Unless we
do thus,

First, we lose the benefit of the days of light in which we live, if we be
still ignorant of the covenant, and of the benefits thereby to be received, and
live not by faith in them, as good we had never heard them, we take Gods grace
in vain: In vain should the Sun rise and give light, if we shut our eyes,
and will not see it.

Secondly, if we be still ignorant of the doctrine of the covenant, and
unsettled, it argues a sinful neglect, and great contempt of the grace of God,
and of the light we enjoy; and therefore as men open their windows when the
day appears, though they had drawn their curtains before, so let us open our
eyes to discern the doctrine of the grace of God.

Thirdly, if any be now ignorant and ungrounded in the doctrine of grace, it is
a token of a dangerous estate: therefore says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.4. If our
Gospel be now hid, it is bid to them that are lost, in whom the God of this
world, etc. And so for ungroundednesse, see what the Apostle Peter says, 2
Pet. 3.16. 2 Pet. 3.16.
That they that are unstable and pervert the Scriptures, do it to their own
destruction. Seeing the doctrine of grace is so clearly manifested, let us
labor to know it, and to be stablished therein, that so we may turn neither to
the right hand nor to the left.

Seeing the light of grace does more clearly shine now then in Paul, Acts 27.
we should rejoice in the light, striving against all discouragements we meet
withal, and walking on cheerfully in the way that is set before us.

To teach us to walk more exactly and inoffensively, considering John 11.9.10
Endeavor to walk inoffenso pede: If we stumble, it is not for want of light,
but of heedfulnesse. Let us strive to walk evenly, considering we have more
light then the Saints had formerly. Labor to suppress our inordinate passions
and affections, pride, worldliness, self-willednesse, emulation: keep these
within, these should be like the wild beasts of the field, which retire to
their dens when the Sun arises, they are afraid to be seen in the light; so
these wild lusts of ours, should not dare to appear in these days of light,
they cannot stir forth but the light will discover them, sin is now more
conspicuous, and more odious. Let us therefore walk soberly, modestly, and
orderly.

Thirdly, the third difference in the manner of dispensation is, in respect of
power and efficacy. The dispensation of the covenant works more powerfully and
strongly now, then in the days before Christ's coming: It was then more weak
in the consciences of Gods people then now, if we speak of the body of them.
Hence says the Apostle, Heb. 7.18.19. The commandment going before was
disanulled by reason of the weakness of it; It was not then simply and
absolutely weak and unprofitable, so that it could not communicate life and
salvation to any, but comparatively weak in respect of the lively and powerful
communication of it now. Hence also, Galat. 4.9. Gal. 4.9.
they are called weak and beggarly rudiments. The covenant then did not bring
men to that perfection in grace, as the new covenant does. And this was because
there was a less forcible influence of the Spirit accompanying the
dispensation of the covenant then. The spirit was not then given in that large
measure as now, because Christ was not then glorified, Joh. 7.39. And because
the spirit was given in a less measure, therefore those ordinances were less
profitable. The liberal pouring out of the Spirit was reserved unto the time
of Christ's ascension, to the end it might be known that it is from Christ
glorified that we do receive the Spirit, as John 16.7. If I go not away
(says Christ) the holy Ghost will not come. When Christ ascended, then he gave
plenitude of gifts to men, Ephesians. 4.7.8. Ephesians. 4.7, 8.
Then the Spirit was shed down abundantly, as Titus 3.6. It was given before
more sparingly, but now more fully. And this we may see in some particulars.

1. There was less power of faith in the Saints before Christ, then since. When
the doctrine of faith was more fully revealed, then was faith it self more
revealed in the hearts and lives of the people of God, Gal. 3.23. Gal. 3.23.
Before faith came, (says the Apostle) implying there was a time when there
was less faith in Gods people. According to the measure of the manifestation
of the doctrine of faith, such is the apprehension of faith.

2. The spirit of love was less in them then it is now in Gods people. For
according to the measure of our faith, so is our love. The less they knew the
loving kindness of God toward them in Christ, the less they loved. Hence
says the Apostle, Gal. 4.6.7. that God has sent the spirit of his Son into
our hearts, crying Abba Father, and therefore we are no more servants but
sons, etc. It was a more servile spirit which wrought in them, being drawn by
the terrors of the law, more then by the promises of grace; but we have the
spirit of adoption, the spirit of love, and of a sound mind, as 2 Timothy 1.7. 2 Timothy 1.7.
Love reigns more under the dispensation of the covenant now, then before.

3. They had a less measure of comfort to support and carry them on against
the discouragements and troubles that they met withal: we have the comforts of
the Spirit in a more full measure. Luke 2. Luke 2.
Christ is called the consolation of Israel, therefore the more we have Christ
imparted to us, the more means of comfort have we. Hence is that speech of our
Savior, These things I say unto you, that your joy may be full. It Is a full
joy which we have now in comparison of what they received. Therefore in these
respects the dispensation of the covenant of grace is more powerful now, then
it was then.

To stir us up to walk in more power and fruitfulness, David, and Abraham,
and other Saints sinned thus; and therefore though we sin in the same kind,
we may attain life as they did. The covenant offers us more grace, it is
dispensed in more power and efficacy, their slips are for our caution, not for
a warrant to us.

First, Labor to be filled with the spirit of power, and of a sound mind.
Those that are weak, and sensible of their own infirmity, should strive to
grow in strength, that they may be able to say as Micah 3.8. Micah 3.8.
I am full of power. And as the Apostle Paul, Phil. 4.12.13. Phil. 4.12.13.
I can do all things through the power of Christ. We must not be infants and
babes, but grow up to be men in Christ, that the power of Christ may appear
to dwell in us. There is power enough in Christ, and we have the promise of all
the grace that is in Christ, to supply our wants withal. Every one that will,
may come and take freely; he is a full conduit, every one that has an empty
vessel may go and fill it. Do therefore as those that have their vessels
empty, and would have them filled with water, they set them under the conduit
pipes, and there they stand until they be full. Christ is a conduit full of
grace, and every ordinance is as a pipe, by which he powers into us some of his
spirit. Here therefore we must come and stand under Christ, that he may power
down upon us, st^nd with our vessels open, with open hearts, that we may be
filled, as Zach. 4.3.12. Zach. 4.3.12.
The bowls of the candlestick stand under the dropping of the Olive trees, and
so receive oil continually to maintain their light; so must we. Christ's divine
power gives us all things that pertain to life and godliness, 2 Pet. 1.3. 2
Pet. 1.3.
Let us but receive, and we may be fulfilled.

Secondly, as we should labor to be filled with the Spirit, so should we
endeavor also to express the power of it in our conversation.

1. In laboring to subdue our corruptions, wrath, impatie^cy, emulation,
pride, worldliness, etc. Let us set our feet upon the necks of these tyrants
that have risen up against us, and fought against our souls. Labor to show
forth such power of the Spirit, that we may become more then conquerours.

2. In being filled with the power of Faith, to bear afflictions, wants, and
necessities, if God call us thereunto. Let us not then shrink and fail, but
rest upon the faithful covenant of God, who has promised us all good things
for this life, and the life to come, 2 Timothy 1.8. 2 Timothy 1.8.
Faith will help us in extremities.

3. Labor to be fruitful in all goodness, endeavoring to do good to every
one, according to the measure received: Vessels that are full, desire vent,
Job. 32. And if we be vessels of mercy, filled with mercy and grace from above,
we should also vent forth to others that grace, and those blessings which we
have received. Be not like dry vessels that will vent nothing. Be also patterns
of goodness and holiness unto others. In these things grow up to the fullness
of the stature of Christ.

Thirdly, as we should thus grow in the power of grace, so should we express
more of the comfort of grace, and joy of the holy Ghost, which is powered forth
now more abundantly then before. Let us imitate that pattern, Acts 9.31. They
walked in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the holy Ghost. We
should not walk heavily and droopingly, with faces cast down, and spirits
discouraged, but labor to express the heavenly joy of the Saints above,
rejoicing in Christ with joy unspeakable and glorious, 1 Pet. 1.8. 1 Pet. 1.8.
Rejoice in the plenteous grace which is opened to us abundantly. The Fountain
is open, we may come and take freely. Look how it would joy a poor man, if a
rich friend should say unto him, Come unto me in all your wants, I will help
you: so should it be with us, though we are poor and in wants, yet we have a
rich friend in heaven, the Lord Jesus Christ, and he will open the rich
treasure of his goodness to us, if we go unto him.

The fourth difference is, in regard of the extent of it: The covenant of grace
in the old dispensation of it, was revealed only unto one people, the nation
of the Jews, but now it is extended to the Gentiles also, and free to be
revealed to all nations. There was a long time wherein the Gentiles knew
nothing of this covenant between God and man, but walked in darkness, and in
the vanity of their mind, and therefore they are called, The Gentiles which
knew not God, 1 Thessalonians. 4.5. 1 Thessalonians. 4.5.
And, Gentiles in the flesh, Ephesians. 2.11 Ephesians. 2.11.
And said to be without Christ, without promise, without covenant; yea, to be
without hope, Ephesians. 2.12. Ephesians. 2.12.
For being without Christ, who is our hope, they must needs be without hope
also. We may see in the Scripture, how that (during all the time of the old
Testament) all the holy things of God by which life and salvation are conveyed,
are appropriated to the Jews alone: The law is called their Law, John 8.17.
John 8.17.
And, the inheritance of the children of Jacob, Deuteronomy. 33.4. Deuteronomy. 33.4.
To them were committed the Oraccles of God, Romans 3.2. Romans 3.2.
To them pertained the covenants and the promises, etc. Romans 9.4. Rom 9.4.
Thence also the Gospel, in the first dispensation of it, was promised unto
them, and also preached unto them, and from them came to the Gentiles.
Salvation is from the Jews, Ioh. 4. Hence also the spiritual things of the
Gospel are called their spiritual things, Romans 15.27. Romans 15 17.
The calling of the Gentiles was such a mystery to the Jews (though believers)
that when Peter preached to Cornelius and his family, they contend earnestly
with Peter about it, Acts 11.2. Acts 11.2.
And the Apostle himself durst not adventure to go unto them, till confirmed
in the thing by vision and voice from heaven. The Jews before Christ's coming,
were the only people of God, except some few gleanings of the rest of the
nations, as the first fruits of the rest that should be called. The Jews only
were the children, the Gentiles were counted but as swine and dogs, as our
Savior calls the Syrophanician woman, Matthew. 15. Matthew. 15.
The Jews were the righteous Nation, Exodus 19.6. Exodus 19.6.
The Gentiles called, Sinners of the Gentiles, Gal. 2. Gal. 2.
They were carried to serve dumb Idols in stead of the true and living God;
yea, they sacrificed to Devils, and not to God, 1 Cor. 10.20. 1 Cor. 10.20.
Thus before Christ's coming in the flesh, the covenant of grace was dispensed
only unto the Jews: but now it is published to every creature, or is free so
to be. Matthew. 28.19. Go and preach to all nations, etc. Now it is made
manifest, though before it was kept secret. Before, God was known in Israel,
but now his name is great in all the world. Romans 16.25, 26.
The Gentiles that were far off, are now made nigh by the blood of Christ,
Ephesians. 2.13. Ephesians. 2.13.
Hence also says the Apostle, Romans 3.29. He is the God of the Gentiles also,
and not of the Jews only. The covenant is now revealed unto all.



Noah, Genesis 9.27. Genesis 9.27.
God shall enlarge Japhet, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem: but the
accomplishment of it was long after, and that in two degrees.

First, the foundation of it was laid in Abraham's calling out of Vr (where he
worshipped strange Gods, Joshuah 24.2.) into the land of Canaan.

Secondly, the full accomplishment of it was at the bringing up of the children
of Israel out of Egypt, when he gave them the ceremonial law. When Abraham was
brought forth of Vr, then was the foundation laid of that partition wall; and
when God brought them forth of Egypt, then was the wall fully finished and set
up.



speaks, Matthew. 15.24. Matthew. 15.24.
I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Thence also is
Christ called, a Minister of Circumcision, Romans 15.8. But afterward Paul calls
himself a Minister of the Gentiles, Romans 15.8. Romans 15.8.
This separation lasted long, from Abraham's calling to Christ's ascension was
about a thousand eight hundred years, and from the Israelites going out of
Egypt was above a thousand four hundred years.

Why did not God reveal the covenant of his grace as generally before Christ,
as since Christ's coming?

It was so, because it so pleased him, Matthew. 11. Romans 9.15. Rom 9.15.
he may reveal his grace to whom he will, and conceal it from whom he will.
In the Jews therefore whom God chose to manifest his grace unto, the Lord
would show forth a pattern of his free election of grace, choosing them rather
then any other people. On the contrary, on the Gentiles he would show forth an
example of his just rejection, leaving them to deserved wrath.

Why did God at last reveal his covenant to the Gentiles?

To make his grace and goodness the more conspicuous and Romans 11.32. He has
shut up all under unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all. That God should
look upon such a people as they were, this sets forth the riches of his
grace more abundantly.

For the further glorifying of Christ, that his Name should be Psalm. 2.8.
Psalm 2.8.
Isai. 66.19.

To teach us a double lesson: First, Humility; secondly,

First, Humility, the doctrine of grace is revealed to us that were Gentiles in
the flesh, without Christ, without hope, we were aliens, an abject, a base,
and rejected people, not the posterity of Abraham, or Isaac. Let us remember
our base estate, remember the rock whence we were hewn, the wild nature of
that Olive which we grew upon, and let this make us humble and lowly in our
own eyes. We are ready to think we are the only people. If we begin to be
arrogant, then call to mind what we were, strangers from God, and aliens from
the Commonwealth of Israel. This we had need to remember our selves of. Paul
thought it needful to put the Ephesians in mind of it, Ephesians. 2.11. Ephesians.
2.11.
and the Romans, cap. 11. and the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6.11. there is the same
spirit in us; we had need therefore to look back to what we were, that so we
may not be high minded, but fear, least for our pride and unprofitablenesse,
we be left in the same estate we were in.

Secondly, Thankfulness unto God, that whereas our Fathers sat in darkness
for many hundred years together, yet the grace of God is revealed unto us. Be
abundantly thankful for it, that we which were dogs before, are now set at
the childrens table; He has made known his Covenant to us, which was kept
secret from ages before, wherein though they would have been glad to have seen
and heard the things which we do; yet they could not; what do we owe unto
God for this mercy? Do therefore as they in Acts 13.48. Acts 13.48.
they were glad and rejoiced that the Gospel was preached to them; so let us.
Let us also praise and glorify God for it, as the Gentiles are stirred up to
do; Romans 15.9, 10. when the Jews heard that God had given the Gentiles
repentance unto life, they glorified God; much more should we do it for our
selves.

And thirdly; Let us learn to give up our selves to the obedience of Grace, as
they did, Romans 1.5. This is that the Gospel teaches, 2 Tit. 11.12. There is
much profession of faith in New England, but let it appear in the life;
manifest our thankfulness in our obedience of the Gospel of Christ; or else
the more the Grace of God is revealed to us, the heavier will our judgment be.
2 These. 1.8. God will come in flaming fire, rendering vengeance to them that
obey not the Gospel of Christ.

5. Here might be noted a fifth Difference, that the old Cove^^nt was to last
but for a time, till the time of reformation, Heb. ^.4. but the new Covenant is
to last for ever to the end of the world. Which makes against the opinion of
those which teach the abolition of the ordinances of the New Testament, at the
setting up of Christ's kingdom which they plead for; but this I pass by. It is
an everlasting Gospel, and the ordinances of it everlasting, to last as long as
the world shall last.

3. Now follows a third point concerning the covenant of grace, to be spoken
to; and that is touching the blessings and benefits of the Covenant. And these
are necessary to be considered of, and looked into, for sundry reasons.

First, That those that are in covenant with God, might know the great things
which are given unto us of God, 1 Cor. 2.12. Now we can never know the things
which are given unto us of God, but by knowing of the covenant which conveys
all the blessings which God does impart unto his people; therefore it is
necessary that we should know the blessings of the Covenant, that so we may
take comfort in them; rejoice in them, and see our own happiness, what an
happy thing it is to be in covenant with God; Men that have great possessions,
will sometimes get upon the top of some high place, to take a view of their
large revenewes; so should we ascend on high in our Meditations, to consider
the great blessings which the Lord passes over unto us by his Covenant. We
should do as M^ses, get up to the top of Mount Nebo, and view all the land,
all the several blessings of the Covenant; And as God bids Abraham, Genesis
13.17. to view the length and breadth of the land which he would give unto him;
so should we view the length and breadth of the promise; Walk through the
Covenant as we are able, to see the height and depth of it, that so we may
know what great things the Lord has made us possessors of, and so rejoice in
our portion, and take consolation therein. Indeed we can here behold them but
as in a Map darkly, we must reserve the full view of them till we come to
enjoy them, as they shall be exhibited to us hereafter.

Secondly, It may be useful also to others, that are strangers to the Covenant
and promises, that they by hearing how great the blessings of the Covenant are,
they may be allured and drawn thereby to come and take hold of the covenant,
whereby such great and wonderful things are communicated unto them. This
draws some, when they see the goodness of God unto his people, Zach. 8.23.
Zach 8.23.
Isai. 60.9. And thereby they are encouraged to join unto them, and become one
people with them. This stird Balaam himself, to consider their happiness, and
to say, How goodly are thy Tents. O Jacob! and therefore wished, Let me dye the
death of the righteous. This does many times efficaciously work upon the
hearts of those that are without the Covenant.

Thirdly, The consideration of the Benefits of the Covenant, will help to make
the burden of it (as it seems burdensome to flesh and blood) more light, and
the bonds more easy. If we look at the bond of the Covenant alone, we shall
be ready to say, as Psalm. 2.3. Psalm. 2.3.
Let us break these bonds, and cast these cords from us. But if we look into
the blessings of the Covenant which it brings, these will make the bonds more
easy, that the soul will say, Lord bind me as fast as thou will, that I may
never start from thee; knit my heart unto thee, that I may fear thee for ever.
It will make the service of the Covenant an easy servitude, yea it will make
us see glorious liberty in it. If this be considered, we shall not say, as
Mal. 3.14. and Job 21.15. What profit is it, that we have served the Lord, and
kept his ordinances, etc? but that in keeping his Covenant there is great
reward, Psalm. 19. Psalm. 19.


Fourthly, Whereas the Lord does cast in many blessings upon his people,
spiritual and temporal, (the Lord dealing in all his ways toward his people
according to his Covenant with them) now the consideration of the many
blessings which we do enjoy by the Covenant, will lead us to the right
fountain from whence we do receive them, even to see the faithfulness of God
in them, who keeps covenant and promise with his people; We shall thereby see,
that as he has spoken it with his mouth, so he has fulfilled it with his hand.

Fifthly, The knowledge of the blessings of the Covenant will help to support
our faith in all trials, exigencies, and straights, which we fall into; if we
know what the promises of the covenant be, it will bear us up that our faith
faint not, though for the present we be cut short of the blessings which we
have a promise for. Herein faith is supported, that though God may try us, yet
he will not forsake us, if the blessing be not yet come, yet it will come, it
cannot fail, the Covenant being faithful; the Lord will perform mercy to
Jacob and truth to Israel, Micah 7. last. Thus it is every way useful and
profitable to know the blessings of the Covenant.

And here lift up our hearts to look for great things, great blessings, such
as the great God has promised; the blessings are suitable to the person that we
enter into Covenant withal; The things of the Covenant are great things, Hos.
8.12. Hos. 8.12.
Princes and Monarchs when they enter into Covenant with other Nations, they
do not make Covenants about childrens toys and light matters, but such as
concern the welfare of the Kingdom; so when the great Monarch of heaven and
earth enters into Covenant with us, it is about the great things of our
salvation, the great things of heaven, yea of God himself. The Covenant is
full of blessings, it is a rich storehouse, replenished with all manner of
blessings. It is not dry nor barren, but like the fat Olive or fruitful Vine,
the fruit whereof cheares the heart of God and man. God himself is delighted
in the communication of his grace to his people; and they are delighted with
the participation of his grace from him. The Covenant is a tree of life to
those that feed upon it, they shall live for ever. It is a Well of salvation,
Isai. 12.3. Isai. 12.3.
It Is a fountain of good things to satisfy every thirsty soul, Zach. 13.1.
Zach. 13.1.
It is a treasure full of goods, as Deuteronomy. 28.12. Here is unsearchable riches in
this Covenant, which can never be emptied, nor come to an end. Our finite
narrow understandings can never apprehend the infinite grace this Covenant
contains, no more then an egge-shell is able to contain the water of the
whole Sea. Yet it is not in vain to consider them as we are able to express
them, though they be above that which we are able to speak or think. As Moses
though he could not see Gods face, nor discern his glory to the full, yet he
was permitted to see his back parts; so we may take a little view of the
blessings promised, though the full cannot be seen. As in a Map, we have the
bounds of a Lordship set forth, the rivers, woods, meadows, pastures, etc.
these are seen darkly in the Map, but they are nothing to that when they are
seen in their own beauty and greenness; to see the silver streams in the
rivers, the beautiful woods, the large meadows, fat pastures, and goodly
orchards, which are far more excellent in themselves, then when they are
seen in the Map. So we can show you but a little Map of those glorious things
which the Covenant contains; but by that little that you do see, you may be
raised up to the consideration of the things that are not seen, but are to be
revealed in due time.

Now the blessings of the Covenant are infolded and wrapped up in the promises
of it, every promise of Grace containing a blessing in it, as every threatening
of the Law contains a curse. They are now infolded in the promise, the time of
unfolding is not yet come. The time of full discovery is when the heavens come
to be folded up, Heb. 1.12. Heb. 1.12.
then the promises shall be unfolden, and then we shall fully see the
blessings of the Covenant: We have now a right and interest in them, which is
safe and sure, but as yet we have them but by promise only; and therefore it
is, that the terms of Covenant, and promise, are taken for the same, Ephesians.
2.12. Ephesians. 2.12.
Romans 9.5. Hence also we are said to be heirs (in hope) of eternal life, Tit.
3.7. Titus 3.7.
not in present possession, but in hope. Therefore if we would see what are
the blessings of the Covenant, we must look into the promises; Now the
promises and blessings of the Covenant, are of two sorts; First, of things
spiritual and eternal. Secondly, of things temporal, that concern this
outward life. The spiritual blessings of the Covenant are chiefly comprehended
in these places of Scripture, Jer. 31.31.33. Jer 31.31.33.
This shall be my Covenant, says the Lord, after those days, I will put my
Law in their hearts, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. And
they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, saying, Know the Lord, for
they shall all know me from the least of them, to the greatest of them; for I
will forgive their iniquity, and remember their sin no more. So Ezekiel. 36.25,
26, 27, 28. Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27, 28.
Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean from all
your filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you; A new heart also
will I give you, etc. So also, Jerem. 32.38, 39, 40. They shall be my people,
and I will be their God: and I will give them one heart, etc. Genesis 17.7. Genesis
17.7.
I will be a God unto thee, and thy seed. These places compared together, with
such other, do express the sum of all the great things promised in the
Covenant.

First, Here is that great promise, I will be your God, and you shall be my
people.

Secondly, But if any say, Alas, how can God be a God unto me so sinful as I
am, that have sinned and provoked him as I have done, therefore to take away
this, God says, that shall not hinder, I will forgive your iniquities, and
remember them no more.

Thirdly, But if the soul say further, that though God should take all my
former sins away, and pardon them, yet I have such a sinful wretched nature
in me, that I shall break out into new sins against him, and bring a new
guiltiness upon my self; The Lord removes and takes away this also, and
promises that he will renew our natures, and give us hearts of flesh, he will
wash us from our filthiness, and write his law in our hearts, and enable us to
keep his Statutes, etc.

Fourthly, But because some may yet say, Though God should do all this for me,
yet such is my infirmity and weakness, that I shall depart again from the
Lord, I shall never hold out; Therefore the Lord makes answer to this also, and
tells us that he will never depart away from us, and that he will put such a
fear of him into our hearts, that we shall never depart from him, Jer. 32.40.

To begin with the first, which is the great promise of the Covenant, I will be
thy God, Genesis 17.7. Genesis 17.7.
Jer. 31.33. Jer. 31.33.
This is set in the midst of the promises, as the heart in the midst of the
body to communicate life to all the rest of the members; This promise has
influence into all the rest; As Christ speaking of the Commandments of the
Law, calls that commandment of loving the Lord with all our heart, the great
Commandment; so may this be called the great promise of the New Covenant; It
is as great as God is; He is an infinite God, the heaven of heavens is not able
to contain him: Yet this promise contains him, God shuts up himself in it, I
will be your God.

1. Here is sufficiency. It is a promise of infinite worth, an overflowing
blessing, a rich possession, an hid treasure, which none can rightly value. It
was a great promise that Balak made to Balaam, Numb. 22.17. Numb 22.17.
I will promote thee to great honor; A greater which Ah^suerus made to Esther,
cap. 5.6. That he would give her the half of his kingdom; A greater then
that, which was made to Christ, Mat. 4. if he that made it had been able to
have performed it; But this promise passes them all. If we had a promise of
an hundred worlds, or of ten heavens, this is more then all. When God said to
Abraham, I will be thy God, what could he give or say more? As Heb. 6.13. God
having no greater to swear by, swore by himself; so God being minded to do
great things for his people, and having no greater thing to give, gives them
himself: well therefore might the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1. 2 Pet. 1.
(looking at these promises) call them exceeding great and precious promises;
This is the greatest promise that ever was made, or can be made to any
creature, Angels or men. Herein God gives himself to be wholly ours, all his
glory, power, wisdom, goodness, grace, holiness, mercy, kindness, all is
ours, for the good of his people that are in Covenant with him, Quantus,
quantus est, he is all ours. Hence says the Lord to Moses, Exodus 33.19. Exodus
33.19.
I will make all my goodness to pass before thee. And the Apostle, 1 Cor.
3.19. All things are yours; and all shut up in this, I will be thy God. When a
man takes a wife into the Covenant of marriage with him, what ever he is, he
is wholly hers: he gives himself and that which he has to her; so when the
mighty God of heaven and earth takes his people into covenant with him, he is
an husband to them, and marries them to himself, and therefore what ever he is
in the glory and excellency of his nature, it is all for the good and comfort
of his people. Consider God essentially or personally, all is theirs. God in
his essence and glorious attributes communicates himself to them for their
good. And God personally considered, as Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, they all
enter into Covenant with us, Isai. 54.5.

The Father enters into a Covenant with us, he promises to be a Father to us. 2
Cor. 6.17.
Hence says the Lord, Exodus 4.22. Exodus 4.22.
Israel is my son, my firstborn: and Jer. 31.9.20. Jer. 31.9.20.
Is Ephraim my dear son, is he my pleasant child? The Lord speaks as
though he were fond of his children, delighting in them, as Psalm. 147.11. Psalm.
147.11.
pitying of them, Psalm. 103.13. As a Father has a care for his children to lay
up something for them, so the Lord has a care to provide both heavenly and
earthly inheritance for his children; he has a care to nurture and instruct
them in his ways, Deuteronomy. 32.10. Deuteronomy. 32.10.


2. Christ the Son is in Covenant with us, and speaks to us, as Isai. 43.1.
Isai. 43.1.
Thou art mine: and Hosea 13.14. I will redeem them, I will ransom them; O
death I will be thy death; Thou have destroyed my people, but I will destroy
thee. There is the Covenant of the Son with us; He brings us back to his
Father, from whose presence we were banished, and sets us before his face for
ever. He undertakes with us to take up all Controversies which may fall between
God and us. He promises to restore us to the Adoption of sons, and not only
to the title, but also to the inheritance of sons, that we might be where he
is, Joh. 17.24.

3. The Holy Ghost makes a Covenant with us; as Heb. 10.15, 16. Heb. 10.15, 16
Whereof the Holy Ghost also is a witness to us, testifying of this Covenant
which he makes with us. For after that he had said before, This is the Covenant
that I will make with them, I will put my Law into their hearts, and in their
minds will I write them, etc. Though the Father be employed in it, yet here is
the proper work of the Holy Ghost. What the Father has purposed to his people
from all eternity, and the Son has purchased for them in time, that the
Holy Ghost effects in them. He applies the blood of Christ for the remission of
sins; he writes the law in our hearts, he teaches us, he washes us from our
filthiness, and comfort us in our sadness, supports us in our faintings, and
guides us in our wanderings. He that effects these things for us, is there said
to make a Covenant with us. Thus God personally considered, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, are in Covenant with us.

2. As there is sufficiency in this promise, so also a propriety to all the
faithful; Therefore it is said, not only I will be God, but I will be thy
God, and so every faithful soul may say, God is my God; 1. They have a right
in him. 2. They have a possession of him. First, They have a right in him. The
name (God) in the promise is a name or title of relation, as the words (...)
and vir; which signify not only a man in general, but a man with special
relation to such a woman as he has by Covenant betrothed to himself. So here
the name God, it notes forth the relation in which God stands to us. Hence it
is said, he is not ashamed to be called their God. Heb. 11.16.
Therefore when he had made a Covenant with Abraham, he called himself the God
of Abraham, and afterward, the God of Isaac, the God of Jacob, the God of
Israel. As a woman may say of him to whom she is married, this man is my
husband; so may every faithful soul say of the Lord, he is my God. Secondly,
They have possession of him. He does impart and communicate himself unto them,
in his holiness, in his mercy, in his truth, in the sense of his grace and
goodness. He does not only show himself unto them, but communicate himself
unto them. Hence it is said, 1 John 1.3. 1 John 1.3.
We have fellowship with the Father, etc. and Christ is said to come and sup
with them, Rev. 3.20. Rev. 3.20.
and to kiss them with the kisses of his mouth, Cant. 1.1, 2. And to be near
to them in all that they call upon him for, Deuteronomy. 4.7. Deuteronomy. 4.7.
It is true, we have here but the first fruits, the earnest penny, a little part
of that fullness which shall be revealed, because we live by faith and by
promise more then by sense and sight. And thence it is that sometimes Gods own
people seem to feel God departed from them, as Isa. 45.15. Isai. 45.15.
and 65.15. Yet they enjoy God still, even in such desertions; First, In regard
of his Grace pardoning their failings. Secondly, In his power sustaining;
Thirdly, In his grace sanctifying them; Fourthly, In all these they have a sure
pledge of a more full communion with him when the fullness of time is come.





First, it we consider what it is that is given: it is no less then the great,
mighty, and infinite God.

Secondly, unto whom he has given himself; even to us a generation of sinful
men, the wretched children of apostatizing Adam, that he should give himself
to us, though we had forsaken him, and cast him off, this is wonderful grace.
It was no small thing that the Lord would at first enter into covenant with
Adam, though carrying upon him then the lively image and representation of Gods
holiness, yet this was less wonderful, a righteous God to be in covenant
with righteous man, the holy God to be in covenant with man endued with the
like holiness: But this is the wonder of grace, that the just and holy God
should enter into covenant with, and communicate himself to such sinful,
polluted, loathsome, and unclean creatures as the sons of men be. We might
justly have been left to the God of this world, 2 Cor. 4.4. 2 Cor. 4.4.
because we had preferred him before the true God. But God is pleased to give
himself to us, to become our God. This Angels may stand and wonder at, here is
infinite grace. Justice can lay no claim to this blessing, well therefore may
we say unto it, Grace, Grace.

Thirdly, it is more grace still, because his entering into this covenant with
us, his bestowing of this grace, is of himself only, of his own good will and
pleasure, without our seeking or enquiring for him. Indeed before we get full
interest in the covenant, we are glad to seek and sue; but the Lord begins and
offers himself unto us, as 2 Cor. 6.17. 2 Cor 6.17.
Come out from amongst them says the Lord, and I will be a Father unto you.
Men seek not after God, as Psalm 14.2. but the Lord takes them by the hand, and
says, as Psalm. 81.11, 12. O Israel, I will be thy God. So also he tells his
people, Ezekiel. 16.6, 8. that when they lay in their blood, them he said unto
them, Live; and swear unto them, and entered into a covenant with them.

And yet here is more grace still unto those that God enters into covenant with,
in that he is not the God of the whole world, but of a remnant, a little
handful of people whom God has chosen. Out of the whole mass of sinful men,
the Lord picks out a few base, poor, despised ones, things of no account, as 1
Cor. 1.27, 28. and gives himself to such, passing by those that count
themselves Gods in comparison of other men; passes by Saul that sits on the
throne, and chooses David that follows the sheep; here is the grace of the
covenant: this may cause us to wonder and say as Judas, John 14.22. What is the
cause that thou will show thy self to us, and not to the world?

To teach us all that do hear of the covenant, and of the rich Psalm 81. God
offered himself to them, but they would have none of him. God is a God to us,
and not to the world; let us be a people unto him, and not to the world. The
covenant between God and us, must be as the covenant between man and wife,
Hosea 3.3. Thou shall be for me, and I will be for thee. The Lord takes it ill
when (as Isai 57.8.) his people run after other lovers, and commit fornication
with Idols, and with the world. Live therefore unto him, who lives and works
all things for us, and for our salvation.

To teach us in all our straits and necessities, to fly unto this cannot yield
it, do not thou therefore fail us. Look unto this promise, I will be a God
unto thee. This course the Church takes, Isai. 63.15.16. Isai 63.15.16
and by virtue of his covenant they plead for mercy in their great misery.
Doubtless thou art our Father, look down, etc. This also the Church pleads
with God in time of famine, Jer. 14.21. Jerem. 14.21.
Break not covenant with us, it is thou the Lord our God that must give rain,
etc. This is a sweet plea for every child of God to plead with the Lord by.

Micah 6.3. Wherein have I grieved thee? Lay against me the matter of
accusation. Oh that we could say the like unto him. But let us labor so to
walk in all holy fellowship and care to please him, in reverence and fear of
him, that we may not do any thing but that which is acceptable in his sight.
It may also direct us how to walk toward every person in the Trinity, seeing
they all enter into covenant with us. Let us carry our selves to the Father as
children in fear of him, with faith depending upon him, walk before him in
child-like obedience. Let us labor to honor the Son, who has abased himself
to redeem us unto himself, 1 Cor. 6. last. 1 Cor. 6. last.
And seeing the holy Ghost is our Sanctifier and Comforter, labor to walk as
the Temples of the holy Ghost, keeping our vessels in holiness and honor,
that he may delight to dwell in us, and take heed of grieving the holy Spirit
of God, whereby you are sealed to the day of redemption, and submit your selves
to his gracious directions in all things.

my own. It is somewhat to say, we have an house of our own, necessaries of our
own, bread of our own to eat, clothes of our own to put on, so as we need not
go to others to supply our wants; but what a blessing is this, that the soul
may say, I have a God of mine own, God is my God. It is the misery of the men
of the world, that they are forced to speak of God as of the God of another
people, as Laban, Genesis 31.29. The God of your Fathers; and Pharaoh, Exodus
10.16. Pray to the Lord your God, etc. They cannot speak of God as their own
God. But this is the felicity of the people of God, that they can challenge an
interest in God, and say as David, Psalm. 63.1. Psalm 63.1.
O God, thou art my God. This is more then if we could say, as Psalm. 50.10, 11.
Psalm 50.10, 11.
That all the beasts upon a thousand mountains are mine. Value therefore this
blessing. The greater God is in himself, the greater blessing and consolation
it is to us, he being wholly ours. All the nations of the earth are as the drop
of a bucket unto him, yea as nothing, Isai. 40.12.15, 17. All the great things
which the world admires at, and gazes upon, they are all nothing in comparison
of him. And therefore God being so infinite, what an infinite blessing is it to
have him for our God? In Genesis 15. Genesis 15.
Abraham asks God, Lord, what will thou give me? The Lord answers him, I
will give thee my self, take me as thine, use me as thine. The same he speaks
of every faithful child of Abraham, Use me and acknowledge me and all my
power, Grace, and mercy, and kindness, as thine own. See how David was
affected with this, 1 Chro. 17.20, 21, 22.24. Thus we have taken a little view
of this great blessing of the covenant, I will be a God unto thee. But because
this is the main and principal Promise of the covenant, being Substantia
foederis, as Junius call it, Anima foederis, as Paraeus, Caput foederis, as
Musculus calls it, therefore we will a little further sift into this promise,
and see what it may contain within the bowels of it. Now if we would know what
this implies when the Lord says, [I will be God unto thee,] we must first
consider, what it is to be God; and then we shall see what it is that he
promises to be God unto us. Now to be God implies these three things:

1. To be All-sufficient, both to his own Being and Blessedness, and to the
blessedness of the creature.

2. To have all that blessedness and sufficiency, that is in him, from
himself, and not from another.

3. To be God over all, to have dominion and sovereignty over all, as Romans 9.

To apply these things to the point in hand, That God will be a God to us,
implies these three things:

1. That he will be an All-sufficient God to us.

2. That he will be all this good to us from himself, and from no other.

3. That he will be God over us, to bring us again under the first dominion; as
Micah. 4.8. Micah 4.8.
to rule over us, and govern us according to his will.

First, for the first, that God will be an All-sufficient God to us, this is a
part of his covenant, that he will be to us a full blessing, so as that we
shall be wanting in nothing that is good for us. Hence it is, Genesis 17.7.
that when God tells Abraham, He will be his God, and the God of his seed, if
Abraham should now ask what that is; says God, verse 1. I am God
All-sufficient, and also my goodness and sufficiency is thine, I will be
enough to thee, thou shall need no more. Hence also is that in Jeremy 31.14. I
will satiate your soul with fatness, and my people shall be satisfied with
goodness, says the Lord. God is enough to them that are his.

Psalm 16.3.
to be a sufficient fullness unto him. That is too little for a Prince, which
is enough for a private man. Now God is the most excellent Being, and therefore
that which is sufficient for himself, must needs much more be so for us. That
water which fills the s^a, will much more fill a cup; and therefore said David
when he enjoyed God, My cup runs over, Psalm. 23.

Thirdly, because what ever good is in the creature, is more eminently and
abundantly in God himself: he is the Fountain, and they are the Cisterns.
What ever good is in Angels or Men, or other creatures, is more abundantly in
God. And therefore if all the good of all creatures joined together, were able
to satisfy and to be sufficient for a man (as we would think it were) then is
God much more.

Thirdly, there is in God a sutablenesse to the desires of the soul of man. It
is the happiness of the creature to have a thing suitable to it: Now the soul
being made after the Image of God, it is best satisfied with God, and nothing
else can satisfy it. As no creature satisfied Adam till Eve was made, that was
suitable to him. Similitude breeds content. The soul is a spirit, and d^sires
spiritual things: Now God is a Spirit. Again, the soul is of an intellig^nt
nature, reaching after the knowledge of high and hidden things: Now God is
light and wisdom to sati fie the soul in this, by filling it with light by
the knowledge of himself. Again, the soul is an immortal substance, which
dies not, and the desires of it are immortal: So is God, therein satisfying
our souls d^sires.

Fourthly, if God be our God, then all the creatures are ours, and for our
good. If God be ours, then all that is his is ours: now all the creatures are
his. Hence says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3. end; All things are yours. As when a
virgin marries a Prince, his riches, glory, and all are for her good: So God
having taken us into covenant with himself, all that he is, and has, is for
our comfort and blessedness.

As God is able thus to be an All-sufficient God to us, so he will be to those
that are his.

First, because it is the nature of goodness to be communicative of it self;
and therefore God being good, he will let out himself unto his people. He
cannot satisfy himself unless he do it.

Secondly, the Lords end in taking us into covenant with himself, is to make
us an happy and blessed people, which we cannot be, but only by the enjoyment
of God himself; blessedness standing in a confluence of all good, which cannot
be found but in God alone. There is in man himself nothing but vanity and
misery: he was at first full of grace and goodness, an Image of the blessed
God, but now he is become a spectacle of misery. So all other things under the
Sun are to him turned to vanity and vexation of spirit. As a deal of wind in
the body does not refresh it, but gripe and pain it: so all the windy comforts
of the world cannot satisfy, but rather trouble us, till we recover our
fellowship with God. As we lost our felicity in losing God; so we must recover
it again by recovering him. Therefore we find in experience, that the soul
never finds settled test, till it come to rest in God. As the Be goes from
flower to flower, because there is not full contentment to be found in any one:
so the soul^ from creature to creature, til it comes to God. Hence the Lord is
called the rest of the soul, Psalm 116.7. And this the Lord knowing, that the
soul cannot find rest any where else, but in him; therefore he will
communicate himself to them: this being his end, to make the creature bl^ssed
by enjoying of him.

Consider how God is an All-sufficient God to us in two respects:

First, in respect of all our occasions and necessities, whatever our case be.
It Is Gods prerogative alone to be an universal good. The things of the world
can help but against some one thing; bread against hunger, drink against
thirst, clothes against cold and nakedness, houses against wind and weather,
friends against solitariness, riches against poverty, Physic against
sickness etc. But God is an All-sufficient good, he supplies all the
necessities of his people, he is all in all to them, he is habitation to them,
he is life, etc. he does good to the inward and outward man; his grace is
sufficient to help all the defects of the soul. Look upon the guilt of sin,
there is abundant grace to pardon: Are our infirmities many? there is power in
Gods grace to heal them. Are our corruptions strong? the power of Gods Spirit
can overcome them, and make us able to keep his Statutes and Judgments, and to
do them. Are our consciences disquieted, and our peace broken? His joy is able
to make us rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious.

Again, his sufficiency extends also to the body: all the welfare of the
outward man is laid up in God; he is the God of our life, Psalm. 42.8. Psalm
42.8.
and the strength of our life, Psalm. 27.1. Psalm 27.1.
He is a quickening spirit, 1 Cor. 15.45. 1 Cor. 15.45.
which though it be true in regard of the inward man, which he does also
quicken by his Spirit and grace; yet it is there spoken of the outward man, of
the body which the Lord shall quicken after death, and does now keep alive by
his power. For in him we live, and move, and have our being, Acts 17.28. Acts
17.28.
When God formed the body at first out of the dust, whence had it life? Not
from it self, nor from any creature: God breathed into him the breath of life:
and so he still keeps the breath in our nostrils, and upholds our soul in
life, or else we should presently return to dust.

Secondly, God is an all-sufficient good in respect of all times and seasons,
both for this life and the life to come. Other things serve but in their
seasons, as it was said of David, that he served his time; so do the things of
this life, but they continue not, our health and strength are with us in youth,
but they stay not. The flowers give their smell in the spring, but by and by
they are withered and gone. The Sun gives light in the day time, but hides it
self in the night; clothes keep us warm, but they wear away. But God is a
lasting, yea and an everlasting good; He is God and changes not, and therefore
is called, God from everlasting to everlasting, Psalm. 90.2. In a word, he is
sufficient,

First, to save us from all evil, and thence he is said to be a Wall of fire
round about his people, Zach. 2.8. So also a Cloud against the heat, a Shield
and Buckler against the Sword, etc. an all-sufficient protection to his people
against all evil.

Secondly, an all-sufficient good to communicate all blessings to us which we
stand in need of; therefore he promises to open his good treasure. Deuteronomy.
28.11.12.
And he tells Abraham when he enters into covenant with him, that he will be
his exceeding great reward. I will be all things to thee. Hence the Lord is
called a Sun, Psalm 84. that as the Sun is the cause of all fruitfulness to
the earth, brings forth corn, grass, and herbs, and withal cherishes them:
so the Lord by the influence of his grace and goodness, brings forth
something out of every creature for the good and comfort of his people.

Thirdly, he is able to make up all our losses; whatever we have forgone for
his Names sake, and his Gospels, we shall have an hundred fold more either in
the same kind, or in contentation, or inward peace of conscience. Thus the
Prophet tells Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25. when he asked what he should do for the
hundred talents, says the Prophet, The Lord is able to give thee more then
this. Have we with Abraham forsaken our native country, and our kindred? The
Lord is able to make up all.

Fourthly, He is sufficient to work for us and by us, what ever we desire
according to his will. What ever enterprise we have in hand, or go about,
though we have mountains against us, as Zach. 4.7. yet the Lord can make them
plains, and work all our works for us. Have we any grace to be wrought in us?
He can make all grace to abound in us. He has abundance of spirit, Heb. 13.21.
and can work both will and deed. Thus you see that God is every way sufficient
to his people.

Paul did, Phil. 4.13. Phil. 4.13.
and 2 Cor. 6.10. as having nothing, and yet possessing all things. He lived to
God, and enjoyed him, and he was an all-sufficient good to him. We may enjoy
God in any condition, in the meanest as well as the greatest, in the poorest as
well as the richest. Nothing can separate us from God but sin alone. God will
go into a wilderness, into a prison, into a low condition with his people,
and he is able to make up all to them that they are cut short of. Our
discontents therefore do not arise from the change of our condition in outward
things, but because we want our fellowship with God. If we do not find a
sufficiency, it is because we do not enjoy him our all-sufficient good. What
is the cure then? We must stir up our faith, and consider our Covenant,
think with our selves what God has promised to be to us, even our God, our
all-sufficient good. If we had faith but as a grain of Mustard seed, and did
exercise our faith in this promise, and live by it, we might command these
storms of discontent which trouble us, to be at peace and be still. We might
then say, as Psalm. 42.11. Psalm. 42.11.
Why art thou cast down within me, O my soul? etc. Have not thou an
all-sufficient good? a God to enjoy? Here then is the way to true contentation.
Labor to enjoy God, live upon him, he is the rest of the soul, an
all-sufficient good.

for us, and do they bring a kind of satiety and fullness with them, so that
we are satisfied with our portion? this is because God is in it, and fills the
blessing with his fullness, and so makes it to fill us; and makes us say with
Jacob, I have enough, therefore when we are not satisfied with what we have,
it is a sign that God has left the creature, and then it proves an empty and
windy vanity to us. So much satiety, so much of God in every blessing.

For direction where to pitch our affections, and settle the desires Set not
your hearts on riches, Psalm. 62.10. Psalm 62.10.
L^y not out your money for that which is not bread, Isai. 55.1, 2.
and your silver for that which satisfies not. Nothing can fill the heart but
the fullness of God.

For comfort unto all those that are in Covenant with God, to Moses to the
people of Israel, Deuteronomy. 33.29. Deuteronomy. 33.29.
Happy art thou, O Israel, who is like unto thee, O people saved by the Lord?
And as David, Psalm. 33.12. Psalm. 33.12.
Blessed is the Nation whose God is the Lord. Take notice therefore of your
blessedness. This is a blessedness that has the confluence of all good in
it. Let others bless themselves in their wealth, dignity, in titles and
places of honor, and in their power and authority over men, this is a poor
and miserable blessedness; But let us say, as Psalm. 144.15. Blessed are they
whose God is the Lord; Rejoice therefore in your portion, you have an
all-sufficient God to save you from all kind of evil, to minister to you all
kind of good, to work all your works for you, and in you, and the time will
shortly come when you shall say, I have enough, my cup runs over.

But we see many that profess to be in Covenant with God,

For the present I say in a word thus. 1.

2. Peradventure Gods own people sometimes walk not in the way of the
Covenant; for as there is the blessing of the Covenant, so also the way wherein
they must walk, and they starting out of the way, miss of the blessing.

3. The lives of Gods people are not to be judged of, by their outward
appearance, but by their inward state and condition; many a man lives poorly
for outward things in this world, and yet finds more sufficiency and fullness
in that estate, then many a man that has barnes full, and fares deliciously
every day. For first, they have necessaries as well as they that have more,
though but little beforehand. They have every day a certain provision prepared
for them: As the King of Babylon provided for Jeremiah, 2 Chronicles. 36. 2 Chronicles.
36.
Again, though Gods servants have many times but little, yet they have as much
comfort in that little, as those that have greater abundance, Psalm. 37.16. They
have as much peace, quiet of heart and conscience, as free from fear and care,
as cheerful and comfortable, and find as good a savor in that homely
provision they feed upon, as others in their honey-combe. And whence is all
this, but from hence, that the fullness of God is in that little which they
enjoy? There is a full blessing in it, God has put himself into it, and
though it be but little and mean in show, yet it is much in substance. And
lastly, If Gods servants want at any time, he sees a little to be better for
them then more abundance, not because God cannot fulfill their necessity, or
is not willing; he is able to supply their wants, and will in due time
administer all Grace to them. God is a sufficient God to his people, and
therefore blessed are the people that are in such a case, yea blessed are the
people whose God is the Lord.

2. As God will be a sufficient God unto us; so he will be all this to us from
himself. God has his all sufficiency from himself, therefore called Jehovah,
(...), and (...). He is the first cause of his own blessedness, and
communicates all blessedness to his people from himself. Man may communicate
good to man, the Father to the children, a Minister to his people, one
neighbor to another, but he cannot do it from himself, but as he has first
received from God. The vessel may give you water, but not from it self, but
what it has from the fountain; the fountain only gives it from it self. So
it is between God and the creature. God is the fountain of living waters, who
immediately communicates all to his people; and thus the Lord will be to them
as he promises, Isai. 44.24. Isai. 44.24.
I am the Lord that makes all things, that stretches out the heavens alone,
and spreads abroad the earth by my self. There is the force of the promise,
that whereas the enemies were mighty, and the people of God thought it
impossible that they should be redeemed out of Captivity, God takes a
resemblance from the work of Creation, and applies it to the work of their
redemption; that as he stretched out the heavens alone, and spread abroad the
earth by himself; so by himself alone he would work out salvation for his
people. So Isai. 59.16. Isai. 59.16.
God speaks like a man that looks that others should come and help him,
but none came, therefore his own arm brought salvation, and sustained his
people Israel. The Lord alone will be a sufficient blessing to his people.
Hence Isai. 45.7. Isai. 45.7.
The Lord says that he forms light, and creates darkness, he makes peace,
and creates evil. Sometimes God so creates evil, that if it be asked whence
it comes, or what is the original of it, we must answer, as Isai. 47.11. we
cannot tell whence it comes, but only from the Lords immediate hand. The Lord
makes it evident, that it comes from him, that men are forced to say, as
Jehoram, 2 Kings 6.33. 2 King. 6.33.
This evil is of the Lord; or as the Magicians, Exodus 8.19. This is no other
but the finger of God. So on the contrary, the Lord so works from himself in
the communicating of his goodness and mercy to his people, that they may see
and plainly perceive, that it is the immediate hand of God, that has wrought
all. This may be made manifest, both first in the want of outward means, and
secondly, in the enjoyment of them.

First, In the want of means, here God steps in and makes a supply, and
becomes all things unto his people; sometimes God withholds from his people the
means of life, and yet they live, that it may appear that our life is not in
the means, but in God, that he is our life, and the length of our days, as
Deuteronomy. 30.20. Deuteronomy. 30.20.
And that in him we live, and move, and have our being, Acts 17. Thus Moses,
when he had neither bread nor water for forty days, yet he lived, and was as
strong as though he had daily eaten his appointed food. So also was it with
Elijah, and our Savior Christ, Mat. 4.2. So also with the people of Israel,
God suffered them to be hungry, and yet they did not famish, that it might
appear, that man lives not by bread only, but by every word of God, Deuteronomy.
8.3. Hence is that in Isai. 41.17, 18.20. Isai. 41.17, 18.20.
The Lord will open rivers in the high places, and fountains in the valleys,
for the poor and needy, etc. And for what end will the Lord do this? that
they may know and consider, that the hand of the Lord has done this, etc. Thus
was the Lord good to the Israelites in the wilderness, he was all things to
them. First, they had no settled habitation, but the Lord was an habitation unto
them, Psalm. 90.1. Psalm. 90.1.
Again, they had no ordinary bread for forty years together, and yet they
were preserved alive, that they might know that the Lord was the God of their
welfare, as Moses says, Deuteronomy. 29.6. Deuteronomy. 29.6.
Again, they had no means of renewing their clothing, and yet they wanted
not; as Deuteronomy. 29.5. Their clothes waxed not old upon them, nor their shoes
upon their feet. Again, they were often to journey and travel by night as
well as by day, and they knew not one foot of the way they should go,
therefore the Lord himself was a guide unto them, He went before them by day
in a pillar of a cloud, and in a pillar of fire by night, Exodus 13.21. Exodus
13.21.
Therein the Lord fulfilled that which he speaks, Isai. 48.17. Isai. 48.17.
I the Lord thy redeemer lead thee in the way wherein thou should go. Hence
is that in Deuteronomy. 32.10.12. The Lord alone led him, and there was no strange God
with him. He alone provided for them, he alone fed them, he alone conducted
them, he alone did all for them.

As it is thus in temporal benefits, so also in spiritual blessings, the Lord
is from himself all in all unto his people. In Ezekiel. 11.16. Ezekiel. 11.16.
the Lord tells them, that he would carry them into captivity, and now lest
they should be discouraged for want of the Temple and Ordinances, therefore the
Lord promises, that he will be a Sanctuary unto them; he will supply unto them
the want of public ordinances from himself. Hence is that in Isai. 54.17.
Isai. 54.17.
it is said that they shall be taught of God; and Romans 8.26. Romans 8.26.
that the spirit helps the infirmities of Gods people; when the servants of
God would pray, but they cannot, the Spirit himself makes up their wants, and
fills their hearts with groans which pierce the heavens. So when they are to
speak before the adversaries of Gods truth, and they know not how to answer,
then the Lord puts an answer into their mouths, as Mat. 10.20. Mat. 10.20.
So also in the preaching of the Word, the Lord himself puts words into the
mouths of his servants, that whereas they may say as Moses, Exodus 4.10. I am
of a stammering tongue and cannot speak, or as Jer. cap. 1.6. I am a child,
etc. yet the Lord is a mouth unto them, and they speak words not which man's
wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches, 1 Cor. 2.13. 1 Cor. 2.13.
that they which hear them are forced to say, God is in you of a truth. So
also in the comfort and peace that God gives unto his servants, he gives it
not as the world gives, by abundance of earthly comforts and outward
prosperity, but when all things threaten trouble, yet then he gives peace from
himself, Joh. 14.27. Joh. 14.27.


Secondly, Consider how God is all to his people from himself, even in the
possession and enjoyment of his good blessings; sometimes the Lord continues to
us the means of life, and yet so works and orders all, that the benefit and
blessing is evidently seen to come not from them, but from the Lord alone; And
this he makes to appear diverse ways.

First, Sometimes God lets us enjoy the creature, and yet we want the blessing
for a season, till he command a blessing to come. Sometimes we have rain, but
not the rain of blessing, yet afterward, he causes it to come in mercy, and
to become a blessing. The Sun shines in the firmament, but we want the heat
of it, the warmth and quickening power of it is withheld, to let us see that it
is not the Sun, but the Lord, by which we do enjoy the blessing. We cast our
seed into the ground, but it does not prosper, afterward it grows and
flourishes. Sometimes we carry out much, and bring in little, what is the
reason? It is to let us see the truth of that, 1 Cor. 3.7. 1 Cor. 3.7.
that it is the Lord which gives the increase. Sometimes we carry out little,
and bring in great increase, as Zach. 8.10.12. The reason is, it is the Lord
who gives us to possess all things.

Secondly, Sometimes the Lord gives us the means by which we live, but it is
in such a strange and unwonted manner and way, that the hand of God is as
evidently seen in the giving of the means, as if he had upholden our life
without means. Thus Exodus 16.12. Exodus 16.12.
the Israelites had a kind of bread in the wilderness, but it was in such a
strange and miraculous manner, as though they had lived forty years without
any food. The usual way by which we have bread, is out of the earth; according
to that in Psalm. 104.14. Psalm. 104.14.
But the bread by which God fed them, was bread from heaven, Psalm. 105.40. As
if God had made heaven a garner or storehouse, to lay up Corn for the
necessities of his people. So Elijah was fed with bread and flesh, which are
ordinary food, but the means by which he had them were as strange as though he
had lived without them. God appointed the Ravens there to feed him, 1 Kings
17.4.

Thirdly, Sometimes God gives some means to his people to enjoy, but the
means are weak and feeble and unable to work for our good and comfort,
without a special blessing from himself. Here therefore the Lord comes in,
and puts his own strength to the weakness of the means, and makes them work
for us abundantly, above that which we could expect or think. Thus when
Daniel refused to eat the Kings meat, and chose pulse, thin grewel or herbs,
or such course stuff, yet his countenance was better liking, then they that
did eat of the Kings meat; their well liking came not from the meat, but from
an extraordinary blessing that came from God, Dan. 1. Dan. 1.
So Gideon must have Soldiers and weapons of war, and yet such a small
company, and weak furniture, that Israel must be forced to say, I have not
wrought salvation for my self, but it is the Lord that has done it. So it is
in spiritual means. God sometimes gives but weak means to a people in
comparison of what others do enjoy, yet many are turned to God by their
ministry. As by the sound of the trumpets of Rams horns, the walls of
Jericho fell down, so by the ministry of weak man the Lord throws down the
strong hold of Satan's kingdom, to the end that the excellency of the power,
may appear to be of God, not of man, 2 Cor. 4.7. 2 Cor. 4.7.


Fourthly, Again, sometimes the Lord increases and lengthens out the little
and short provisions which he makes for his people, so that by reason of the
increase which it receives from God, it is made as sufficient, as if it were
an hundred or thousand-fold more. Thus with the woman of Sarepta, 1 King.
17.14. 1 King. 17.14.
the Lord increased the meal in the barrel, and the oil in the cruse, that
it failed not, till the day that the Lord sent rain upon the earth. Thus it
was also with the widow that was in debt, 2 Kings 4.3. she had nothing to pay
withal, but a pot of oil, yet the Lord so multiplied it, that there wanted
not oil, till there wanted vessels to receive it. The Lord sometimes causes
the little provisions which he makes for his people, so to last, that they
want not meat, till they want bellyes to receive it. Thus also it was with
those five thousand that our Savior fed with a few loaves, Mat. 14. And so
also with the Israelites in the Wilderness, Deuteronomy. 29.5. that when no supplies
of clothing could be made to them, then the Lord made that suit of apparel
upon their back, and those shoes which were upon their feet to continue; this
was by the blessing of the Lord.

Fifthly, Sometimes the Lord gives the same means to one as to another; But
there is a great difference in the comfort and blessing which is enjoyed by the
one and by the other. One has food, so has another, but one eats and is
satisfied, as the Lord promises that his people shall be, Joel 2.26. Joel 2.26.
the other eats, and is not satisfied, as he threatens, Hos. 4.10. One is
strengthened, and grows strong to labor, the other is impotent and feeble. The
Lord hereby shows, that the being satisfied and receiving strength, is not
from the means, but from the blessing which he is pleased to communicate to
his people from himself. So it is also in the means of grace, many people
enjoy the same external means, the same ministry, the same exhortation and
promises; some are thereby converted and turned unto God; others remain blind,
ignorant, and carnal; the reason is, because that as the one seeks not unto
God but only unto man, so man only speaks to the one, but to the other God
speaks by his own Spirit, and works from himself over and above that which
man does or can do. Thus we see that both in the want, and in the possession
of the means, the Lord is all to his people from himself. Now the reasons why
the Lord does thus work from himself are; First, for the glorifying of
himself. Secondly, for the comfort of his people.

For the glorifying of himself, to make his goodness and sufficiency self, I
will work for your good. The Lord herein deals with his servants, as Joseph
did with his brethren. Whilst he walked more strangely toward them, and spoke
to them by an Interpreter, so long he suffered his servants, and as many as
would, to be present, he cared not how many were standing by; but when he
meant to let them know that he was Joseph their brother, when he would open
all his heart to them, and let them see his abundant love, then says Joseph,
Cause every man to go out from me, Genesis 45.1. So it is here, whiles the Lord
comes to us, by so many outward and ordinary means, he converseth with us but
somewhat strangely, speaking as by so many Interpreters, by them to interpret
his mind and will to us; but when he will show himself to us more fami iarly,
then he bids away unto all these former means, silver, gold, and corn, etc. and
when all these are set aside, then he comes and says plainly, Now you shall
see what I my self will do for you; and that I, who am the Lord
all-suffi^ient, am the Lord your God, and from my self I will bless you, you
shall now see my immediate care of you. And when the Lords people see this,
thereby they know him better, and honor him more, thereby are they forced to
say, as Psalm 148.13. Psalm. 148.13.
His Name only is excellent, his Name only is worthy to be exalted. Before
they were ready to ascribe some excellency to the means and instruments,
sacrificing to their own nets: but when they come to nothing, and the Lord has
by himself fulfilled our desire, then are we lifted up to glorify him, he
alone is seen to be an all sufficient God unto his people. So that if we ask,
Why is the Lord alone in doing good to his people, and there is none with him,
as David was asked, 1 Samuel 21.1. 1 Samuel 21.1.
The answer is, because I will not give my glory to another, says God, but
will have my whole glory to my self alone: He is alone, that he alone may be
glorified.

the time of the trials of Gods people, their faith is put to soar plunges,
that they begin to question, as they said, Exodus 17.7. Exodus 17 7.
Is The Lord amongst us, or not? And are ready to say, as Isai. 49.14. Isai.
49.14.
The Lord has forgotten me, etc. But when they see what he has done, how he
has ridden on the heavens for their help, and on the clouds in his glory, and
all for their succor and good, when they see the Lord himself supplying their
wants from himself, then they change their mind, and say, as Exodus 15.11.
Exodus 15.11.
Who is like unto thee O Lord, amongst the Gods? who is like thee, glorious in
holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders? There is no God like our God,
who has done marvellously for us, and we who have such a God shall never be
ashamed.

This may serve to help our faith against the discouragem^nts Moses, Why have
thou brought us hither? So we begin to quarrel with Gods providence, and
without selves, and to question whether we have done well to come hither or
no. But against this discouragement learn we to live by faith in this doctrine
now delivered, that God will be all things to his people from himself alone.
Therefore though means fail, yet let not our hearts fail: for the faithful
God will not fail us: he has tied us to means, so that we may not neglect
them, neither can we maintain the comfort of our lives without them, but the
Lord stands in no need of them, he needs not silver or gold, wool or flax,
nor houses full of store, he needs not a fruitful land to provide for the
necessities of his people, he can without them provide for our good. If we
were left to provide for our selves, then we might d^sp^ir when means are cut
off; but the Lord has said, Cast your care upon me, I will care for you. As
Joseph said to Pharaoh; Without me God will provide an answer for Pharaoh; so
may silver and gold, and such things, say to us, Without us God will provide
for the wealth of his people. Though our means be gone, yet God is the same,
and if our faith were before fixed upon the Lord, then show it now when means
fail us. If we cannot now trust him, our former says was in the means, not
in the Lord. The more our straits be, the more look after the Lord himself,
that he should from himself minister needful things unto us. When the stream
fails, and runs no more, then go to the fountain, where the waters are
sweeter, and more sure. See the speech of faith, Hab. 3.17.18. Hab. 3.17.18.
Though the Fig Tree do not blossom, nor fruit be in the vines, and the
f^^ids yield no fruit, etc. yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the
God of my salvation. Though all means fail, yet will I rejoice. In the Mount
will the Lord be seen, Genesis 22.14. If we could but grow up to more dependence
upon him, to live by faith in him alone, it would be our great advantage: for
though means do prove as a broken reed, or as a false hearted friend, yet the
Lord is faithful, and they that trust in him are blessed, he will by himself
create peace and comfort to his people.

Exodus 20 24. Exodus 20.24.
that in every place where he sets the remembrance of his Name, thither he
will come and bless his people, and what is wanting from the place, shall be
made up from the Lord himself, He turns a barren land into fruitfulfulnesse
for his people, Psalm. 107. Psalm 107.
If the places be barren wherein we live, let us be the more humble, the more
fruitful in well-doing, the more diligent in prayer, the more strong in faith:
And then we shall see, that we abiding with him in the places he has set us
in, he will be with us and bless us so as we shall want nothing that is good.

For direction to all such as desire to find the accomplishment Psalm. 73.25.
Psalm. 73.25.
And then when their hearts are taken off from these r^eds and broken staves
which they r^sted on, when it is with them as the Prophet speaks, Isai. 17.7,
8. that they look unto t^eir maker, and not to the creature, not to their own
devices and projects, but only to the holy One of Israel, then will the Lord
appear in his glory, and will make it manifest, that from himself he will be
an all-sufficient good to his people. Let all other things be to us as though
they were not, use them as though we used them not, see a fullness of all
things in God. Let us cast our selves upon the bounty, kindness, and
all sufficiency of the Lord: And then will he arise and help us, and do for us
according to our need. Imitate the practice of Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20. when
he saw himself destitute of help, Our eyes (says he) are unto thee, O Lord,
we know not what to do. Let the Lord s^e that our hearts are withdrawn from
the creature, and those helps which we leaned upon, and that we do faithfully
rely upon him; and then will he ride upon the heavens for our help, as Deuteronomy.
33.26. Deuteronomy. 33.26.
and say, This is a people that will not lie, they have cast themselves upon
me, and therefore I will not fail them nor forsake them; I will be an
all-sufficient good unto them.

For comfort unto godly and faithful parents, that having look to the
all-sufficient God, that from himself will be all in all to his people. Though
there be no blessing in the hand of the Parent, yet there is in the hand of
the Lord. What he would have done for the children by the hand of the Parents,
he will now do it from himself by his own hand. It is said of Isaac, that
after the death of Abraham God bl^ssed him, Genesis 25.11. Genesis 25.11.
If Isaac prosper whiles Abraham lives, he might seem to be upholden by the
substance of his father. But when Abraham was d^ad, then it was evident that
the blessing upon Isaac came from the Lord: So whiles the Parents estates
continue, children might seem to be enriched by them; but when their fathers
estates are wasted, and come to nothing, and yet the children are provided for,
and prosper, then it appears to be from the Lord. Let therefore both parents
and children depend upon him, and live by faith in him, who will be a Father to
them, an all-sufficient good to those that trust in him.

3. Now to the third and last particular in this promise, I will be your God.
To be God, implies sovereignty and superiority over all, To be over all, as
Romans 9.5. Rom 9.5.
and above all, a^ Ephesians. 4.6. Ephesians. 4.6.
This therefore is also comprehended in the promise, That he will be God over
us and above us, to rule us, to command us, to direct and order our ways for
us. That though he do advance and set us up on high, when he takes us into
covenant with himself, as Deuteronomy. 26.18, 19. yet so, as that he will be Lord and
G^d over us, as Pharaoh said to Joseph, when he advanced him to that high
honor, Yet (says he) on the Kings Throne I will be above thee: So though God
do lift up his people by entering into covenant with them, so that all the world
are but servants to minister unto them for their good, yet will the Lord still
retain his sovereignty over them, and be exalted above them. As he will be
above all his ^nemies in that wherein they deal proudly (as he was above the
Egyptians, Exodus 18.11.) to break them in pieces with a rod of Iron: So he
will be above his own people to rule them with a golden Scepter. And this is
a blessing of the covenant of grace. Now this benefit implies these things:

First, that the Lord will bring his people from under the power and dominion
of other Lords which have gotten the superiority over them, and bring them into
subjection unto himself alone, so that whereas they might say concerning the
time before, as Isai. 26.13. Other Lords have had dominion over us besides
thee, yet now they shall rule over them no more, but they shall be subject to
him only. Hence (says the Lord, Joel 3.3, 4, Joel. 3.3, 4.
etc) They have cast lots for my people, etc. And what have you to do with me,
O Tire and Zydon, and all the coast of Palestine, will you render me a
recompense? etc. The meaning is, as if God should speak to the enemies of his
Church, You have trampled upon my people, and dealt cruelly with them, and this
you have done in revenge against me, because I have plagued you. Will you thus
recompense me? I will break you in pieces, and deliver my people from under
your power. As a King when he make^h a covenant with a people to be King over
them, he then covenants with them to save them out of the hands of all their
enemies, to suffer no foraigne power to tyrannize over them: So it is here, the
Lord promises that no tyrant shall rule over his people, neither sin, nor
Satan, nor the world, nor the lust: of their own hearts, but he himself will
rule over them.

2. When he has delivered us from our enemies, then he will be God over us, to
command us, and appoint us what we shall do to please him. Though he
communicate himself to us in all his goodness, grace, and mercy, yet he will
not lose his sovereignty over us. In Exodus 4.16. Exodus 4.16.
Moses was called a God unto Aaron, because he was to command, appoint and
direct Aaron in all, and Aaron was to execute all according to the direction
received from Moses: So the Lord he is to be God over us, that we must neither
sp^ak nor do, but according to the command of God. As a man when he makes a
covenant of marriage with a woman, he covenants with her to be her head to rule
her, that she shall be subject to him to please him; or as when a man hires a
servant, etc. So when the Lord takes us into covenant with himself, it is that
we shall be his servants to do his will, pleasure, and commandment. When
Isaac sent away his son Jacob to Padan Aran, he blessed him; but withal, he
g^ve him a charge, Genesis 28.1.6. Genesis 28 1.6.
in both verses, the blessing and the charge are m^ntioned together: So when
the Lord gives this blessing to us, That he will be our God, the charge
goes with it; see that you keep the charge of the Lord your God, and that you
do whatsoever I comm^nd you.

3. B cause the Lord knows, (as he speaks himself, Isai. 48.4. Isai. 48.4.
) that we are obstinate, and our neck is an Iron sinew, etc. and are r^ady to
say, as Jer. 2.31. We are Lords, we will not come at thee, we will have none
to command us: Therefore the Lord promises this al^o, when he says, That I
will be a God over you, that he will subdue the rebelliousnesse of spirit that
is in us, and the stoutnesse of our hearts, that he will bend and bow these
stiff necks of ours, and make us pliable to his will in all things. He will
subdue our rebellions, Micah 7.19. He will overruled our unruly, proud, and
presumptuous spirits, and cause us to keep his Statut^s and Commandments to
do them. This the Lord promises, Ezekiel. 20.33. As I live, says the Lord,
surely with a mighty hand, and wi^h a stretched out a^m, and with fury powered
out, will I rule over you. These words are a promise of grace, that though they
had other purposes in their minds, they were thinking to go after their Idols,
and to become as other countries, serving wood and stone, as verse 32. yet
says the Lord, it shall not be so, I will overruled these sinful Idolatrous
hearts of yours, and you shall not serve these false Gods which you are doting
upon, but I will bring you unto my self, and you shall serve me. And this
exposition is confirmed by the 34, 37, 38. verses compared together. I will
bring you into the wilderness, and there plead with you face to face, and
th^re make you ashamed, and I will make you pass under the rod, and bring you
into the bond of the covenant, and purge out from among you the rebels, etc.
This is therefore a promise of grace. There is indeed one word which seems to
favor another interpret^tion given by some, as if God did herein threaten a
judgment, because he says, I will rule you with wrath powered out, verse 33.
But this does not hinder, but the words may be taken up as a promise of grace.
For the wrath here threatened, may be intended against the coun^ries into which
they were scattered a d who held them in bondage, as verse 34. or else it may
be extended to the hypocrites and reprobates amongst themselves, whom the Lord
would separate and cut off from them, as verse 37.38. God might threaten wrath
to them, though he extend grace and mercy to his own people. Or if it be
understood of the judgments which he would execute upon his own people taken
into covenant with him, yet this makes nothing against the interpretation
before given. Because the Lord does by his corrections in which he shows
himself angry with his people, subdue their stout hearts, and overpower their
rebellious natures, and make them submit themselves unto him, he makes those
messengers of his wrath to become means of good unto his people; he lays his
yoke on them to tame their unruly spirits. Thus says the Lord concerning
Solomon, 2 Samuel 7.14. That if he did sin against him, he would correct him. And
it is said, 1 Kings 11.9. that God was angry with Solomon, and he powered out
wrath against him, stirring up adversaries to trouble him. A father rules over
his child^en in love and tender compassion, and yet by reason of their unruly
disposition, he is sometimes forced to show himself angry with them by some
sharp corrections: So it is with the Lord in the rule that he exercises over
his people. Therefore though we do restrain the wrath powered forth, to be upon
his own children, yet it may be a promise of grace that the Lord will by
means thereof, bring under and overruled the stubbornness of their hearts,
and govern them with a mighty hand, whether they will or no. Thus he
overruled the spirit of the Prophet, Ezekiel. 3.14. Ezekiel. 3.14.
that though he had no mind to preach to the Jews, being such a rebellious
people, yet the hand of the Lord carried him to the performance of it with
indignation of his own spirit which was against it.

4. When he has subdued our spirits unto him, and brought us to submit unto
his will, then he will be God over us, to teach, instruct, and direct us in the
way wherein we should walk, that if either ignorance or heedlesnesse do turn
us out of the way, then the Lord guides us into the right way wherein we ought
to walk, as Isai. 48.17. And this he promises to do, Isai. 30.21. You shall
hear a voice behind you, etc. we are apt to hear and pass by, as though we
heard not, therefore the Lord is said to call after us, as one that speaks
behind us, and cries to us, Ho, Ho, you are out of your way, this is the way,
etc. This also h^e promises, Psalm 25.9.12. Psalm. 25.9.12.
that when he has once meekned our cross spirits, and made us willing to obey
him, then he will guide us in judgment, and teach us the way which himself
chooses for us.

And thus the Lord will be God over his people, a God above them, as a Prince
is ov^r his people, an husband over his wife, a father o^e his children, a
master over his servants, or a shepherd o er his flock, to rule and order them
according to his own mind. And this is no small benefit and blessing of the
covenant. For look as it is for the good of a people to be under the government
of a gracious King, the good of the wife to be under the government of a
prudent husband, the good of a child to be under the government of a godly
father, and for the good of the fl^ck to be under the guidance of a skilf^ll
shepherd: So it is for the good of the people of God, that he will be
pleased to be a God over them, and that he will not leave them to the
rebellious lusts of their own hearts. This is a rich blessing of the covenant
of grace. As it is said of Solomon, that because the Lord loved Israel,
therefore he gave them such a King, 2 Chronicles. 2.11. So because the Lord loves
his people that he takes into covenant with himself, therefore he will be
King over them to rule and govern them. Hence the Prophet joins these two
together, Isai. 49.10. Isai 49.10.
God that has compassion upon them, will lead them: he out of compassion
takes the guidance of his people upon himself. When he will manif^st his
wrath against a people, then he suffers them to walk after their own wills;
but here is infinite grace and mercy, when he takes them into his own
government. Consider this in a few particulars.

First, consider what power we are under by nature, we are under the dominion
of cru^ll tyrants, Satan the God of this world is Lord over us, and we are
holden under his power, who labors to make a prey of our souls, Ephesians. 2.2.
Ephesians. 2.2.
and Acts 26.18. Now what a blessed change is this, to be brought from under
his power, and to be translated under the government of the gracious God?

Secondly, consider how unable we are to guide and govern our selves, as Jer.
10.23. Jer. 10.23.
It is not in man to guide his own way. The best souls would wander into the
way of eternal perdition, if they were left unto themselves. And therefore
when the Lord will become our guide to lead us in the way of life, what a
benefit and mercy is it? It is a benefit to a traveller that when he is ready
to miss his way, then he meets with a guide to direct him, how much more when
we are ready to miss the way to eterna^l life? We are as sheep, a foolish
creature, which is apt to wander; and this David found, Psalm. 119.178. Psa.
119.178.
and therefore prays to the Lord to lead him.

Thirdly, as we are not able to guide our selves, so there is no other
creature that can guide us aright unto life, as the Lord speaks, Isa. 51.18.
There is none to guide her among all the sons which she has brought forth etc.
They may perh^ps guide our feet, but our hearts will be erring and wandering
still. As the Israelites, though they had Moses himself that great Prophet, to
guide them and show them the good way, yet they erred in their hea^ts, Psalm.
95.10.

Fourthly, consider the peace accnmpanying and following the guidance of the
Lord, Jer. 6.16. Ask for the old paths (says the Lo^d) which is he good way,
and you shall find rest to your souls. Who can express the sweet peace of the
people of God, when their hearts are framed to a willing obedience to the
guidance and government of the Lord? Whereas when they are led by themselves,
and their own hearts, then there is nothing but confusion and disturbance. It
is a misery that comes upon a people, when God will not guide them, but
withdrawes his government over them. When there was no King in Israel, then
they had many miseries, many troubles; much more is it so in spiritual
regards, when God leaves us to the wanderings of our own hearts, how many
miseries and sins are we subject unto? This was their curse, Romans 1.24. Romans
1.24.
to be given up unto themselves, and then they ran into all manner of
wickedness. And this was the misery of the Gentiles, Acts 14.17. Acts 14.17.
that God suffered them to walk in their own ways. Hence the Church complains.
Isai. 63. last. Isai. 63. last.
We are as they over whom thou never barest rule, as it is in the old
translation; when they had complained before how they had erred from the ways
of God, their hearts had been hardened from Gods fear, now they shut up all in
this, We are as they over whom thou never barest rule, there is the misery
they complain of. Or if we read the words as the new translation renders
them, it is all one in effect: We are thine, therefore bow our hearts to the
fear of thy Name. They, that is, our adversaries (as verse 18.) are a people
over whom thou never barest rule, they are a forlorn and forsaken people; this
the Church looks at as their enemies misery. Therefore it is the blessing of
the people of God, when God will take them into his government.

liberty from our enemies, but there is subjection required to the Lord. We
must not look only after gifts, mercies, kindnesses, pardon, and such tokens
and pledges of grace, but look also for this, to be under God, and to set up
him on high to be a God and Lord over us; And let us not count this our misery,
but our blessedness, that we are brought under his gracious government.
Herein the Lord shows his mavelous kindness, that he will take the care of
us; Would we not wonder to see such a Prince as Solomon, to take his subjects
children to tutour them and train them up under him? Now we are but poor
ants and worms upon earth, but the Lord of heaven offers to take the
government of us upon himself; This is infinite mercy; whither would our
unruly hearts carry us, if he should leave us to our selves? Who is there that
has any experience of the sinful evils that are in his heart, but will
acknowledge this to be a benefit, that the Lord should rule over him with an
outstretched arm? If God leave Hezekiah but a little, how is his heart lift
up with pride, so that he must have a Prophet sent to him on purpose to humble
him? If God leave David to himself, to what evils is he not ready to fall?
And is there not the same spirit in us? The more contrariety and opposition
that there is in us to the will of God, the greater mercy it is that he will be
King over us. Learn therefore to count it no small blessing, and when God
begins with us to overruled the rebelliousnesse of our hearts, and to bring
them into order, take heed that we spurn not with the heel, nor lift up our
selves: But let us humble our selves, and submit our selves to him, that he may
take the guidance of us into his own hands. Hear the rod and kiss it, and
take it as a mercy, that he is pleased to take the care of us, to correct our
wanderings, and bring us back into the ways of our own peace. Take heed of
walking contrary, lest he say to us, as to the Israelites, that he will reign
over us no more.

For trial and examination, whether we be a people in Covenant

How may we know that the Lord has taken us into his government, and that we
are ruled by him alone?

By these four things we may know it.

First, Where the Lord sets himself over a people, Solomon were counted happy
that they might stand before him, and minister unto him; so it is the
happiness of Gods people, that they are under him, and in subjection unto him:
The Lords government is not a Pharaoh-like tyranny, to rule them with rigor,
and make them sigh and groan, but it is a government of peace; he rules them
by love, as he first winnes them by love. He conquers them indeed by a mighty
strong hand, but withal he draws them by the cords of love. He overcomes our
evil with the abundance of his goodness; therefore his spirit, though
sometime it be called a spirit of power, yet it is also a spirit of love, joy,
and peace; though the spirit put forth his power in vanquishing our enemies
that held us in bondage, yet it overcomes us by love, making us to see what a
blessed thing it is to have the Lord to be over us. Thus when the Lord is in
Covenant with a people, they follow him not forcedly, but as far as they are
sanctified by grace, they submit willingly to his regiment. Therefore those
that can be drawn to nothing that is good, but by compulsion and constraint,
it is a sign that they are not under the gracious government of the Lord God.

Secondly, If God be God over us, governing us by the government of his grace,
we must yield him universal obedience in all things. He must not be over us
in one thing, and under us in another, but he must be over us in every thing;
Gods authority is cast away by refusing obedience to one Commandment, as well
as by refusing obedience unto all. His authority is seen in one, as well as
in another. And he that breaks one, does in effect break all, as James 2.11.
James 2.11.
When God comes to rule, he comes with power, to cast down every strong
hold, and every high thought that is exalted against the power of Christ. He
comes to lay waste the whole kingdom of sin, all must down, not a stone
left of that Babel. The Lord will reign in the whole soul, he will have no
God, no King with him. And therefore herein look unto it, if he be God over
us, he alone must rule over us, and no other with him. Consider whether Gods
dominion has its full extent in us; whether there be not some corruption which
thou desire to be spared in: Can thou give up thy self wholly to the power
of grace, to be ruled by it? Can thou part with thy Absalom, thy beloved
lust, and be content that God should set up his kingdom in thy whole soul?
Then is God over thee, and thou in Covenant with him. But if thou can not
submit that the life of some darling lust should go; if there be any sin
that is dearer to thee, then to obey God; if thou have thy exceptions, and
reservations, and wilt not yield universal obedience, then art thou an alien
from God and his Covenant; God is no God unto thee, nor art thou one of his
people.

Thirdly, Where the Lord governs and sets up his kingdom over the soul,
he carries and lifts up the heart to an higher pitch, and above that which
flesh and blood could or would attain unto. And that both in the things
themselves, and the ends which they aim at in them. He makes a man undertake
such things as his own heart would refuse and turn from; as Ezekiel. 3.14. Ezekiel.
3.14.
he was very backward to preach to the Jews, and yet when he saw it was the
Lords mind he submitted. So Paul (Romans 15.20. Romans 15.20.
) enforced himself to preach the Gospel, yet it was not a constrained force,
but the love of Christ constrained him, 2 Cor. 5. 2 Cor. 5.
So Moses, though at the first very loath to go to Pharaoh, yet when the power
of grace prevailed in him, he contends with Pharaoh as with his equal in the
cause of God, and would not yield to the fiercenes of the King, not for an
hoof; so though he fled from the serpent at the first fight, yet at Gods
commandment he takes it up in his hand. This also we see in Abraham when he
was commanded to sacrifice his own son, though he loved him, yet he loved
God more, and therefore obeyed, which nature alone could never have done. In
all these they wrought against the stream, doing that which flesh and blood
could never have done. Again, the power of Gods Grace in his government lifts
up the soul to higher ends and aims, then flesh and blood can attain unto.
The kingdom of Gods grace, is called the kingdom of heaven, his aims and
ends are on high, not earthly but heavenly, his government is an heavenly
regiment, the Lord governs the hearts of his people to the same end which he
has propounded to himself. Gods ends and our ends meet in one, which is the
glorifying of his Name. This puts the difference between all formal
hypocrites, and those that are ruled by the spirit of grace: hypocrites are
ruled by their own spirit, and they never aim at higher then their own ends,
their own honor, credit, profit, etc. Though their actions may be spiritual,
yet their ends are carnal; but when God takes the heart into his guidance,
then he makes us to set up him as highest in the throne, and all is done for
his honor. It makes a man to use and employ himself, wisdom, strength,
riches, credit, and esteem in the Church, and all for God, not for himself;
God is his last end in every thing, as most worthy to be glorified by all.
Indeed a man in Covenant with God may do many things for himself, aiming at
the furtherance of his own good both spiritual and temporal, and also aim
at the good of other men, but this is not in opposition, but in subordination
to God and his glory; that last and maine end must sway all other ends. Nothing
must be done to cross and hinder his glory; this is the government of Gods
Grace. Consider how Gods spirit guides thy heart to those things, and aims,
that flesh and blood cannot at all reach unto; for if thou have only thine own
end and aim, then thou art thine own, and not under the government of God.

Fourthly, The Covenant of Gods grace causes the peace of God to lodge in that
soul in which it rules. Romans 14.17. Romans 14.17.
The kingdom of God is righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. Grace
and peace go hand in hand; There is a reign and rule of grace, Romans 5.21.
Romans 5.21.
And so there is of peace, Colos. 3.15. Colos. 3.15.
As under the reign of Solomon, there was abundance of peace, so there is
under the government of Christ, he is the King of Salem. And the more the soul
is subjected unto his government, the more peace it finds. And that may be
seen in these two things.

First, In the dispensations and administrations of Gods providence, though
things go cross against us, we meet with many troubles, Gods providence
seem to cross his promises, yet there is peace to the soul in it; therefore
says Christ, Joh. 16. last. In the world you shall have trouble, but in me
you shall have peace. Certain it is, that if ever our hearts be out of quiet,
it is because there is some sedition and traiterous conspiracy, which has been
rising up against the kingdom of Christ, and this works trouble; but where
the soul is subjected to the regiment of grace, it makes it to rest in peace;
In all wrongs, injuries, and crosses, it knows the Lord will right them; In
all wants, it knows that he will provide; In all kind of trials, that he will
with the temptation give an issue in due time. But the heart that is unsubdued
to Gods kingdom, is ready to fret against God, and sit down discontented when
any thing crosses him.

Secondly, As it rests in peace under the dispensations of Gods providence,
so it rests in peace in regard of the spiritual enemies of our salvation,
which fight against our souls. Whatsoever threatens our ruin, the soul
shrowds it self under the wing of the Almighty, and concludes with the
Prophet, Isai. 33.22. The Lord is my Judge, he is my King, and he will save me.
Let us examine our selves by these things, and we may see whether we be under
the government of God, and so whether we be in Covenant with him.

Paul, O wretched man that I am, etc. when they find themselves foiled again
and again, and can get no help against those evils, let them fly to this
promise of grace; let them lay this promise of the Covenant before them, and
remember what the Lord has said, I will rule over you with a mighty hand,
Ezekiel. 20.33. Ezekiel. 20.33.
Remember the Lord of his promise, and claim it, that it may be made good unto
thee. And say, Lord, thou have promised, that thou will rule over me; why is it
then that these tyrants rule and reign in my soul? why does unbelief, pride,
worldliness rule? Thus make we our refuge to the throne of Grace, and then as
the Lord will fulfill the other promises of his Covenant, so he will also
fulfill this, and will rule us by his Grace; he will come and plead the cause
of his people against all their enemies, and say as Isai. 52.5. Isai. 52.5.
What have I to do here, that my people are taken away for naught? they that
rule over them make them to howl, etc. His meaning is as if he should say,
What do you mean, Egypt, and Ashur, to trouble my people, that you put me
also to trouble in rescuing them? let them alone, or else I will make you feel
my power, etc. So it is in the enemies of our souls, when we are forced to
howl unto God, by reason of the bondage of our corruptions, he will set us
free, he himself will be a God over us, to rule us by his Spirit.

This being one of the blessings of the Covenant of Grace, to have Macedonians,
2 Cor. 8.5. 2 Cor. 8.5.
They gave themselves to the Lord. The Lord gives himself to us, good reason
that we should give up our selves to him. O happy day when the soul is
persuaded to give up it self into such an hand! Think it enough that ye have
spent the time past in the service of sin and Satan, those cruel Lords which
you have obeyed, 1 Pet. 4.3. 1 Pet. 4.3.
and now for time to come give up your souls to him, that is ready with
stretched out arms to receive those that come to him. When God calls to us to
return, then let us answer, Behold we come unto thee, Jer. 3.22. Jer. 3.22.


And for a motive, consider,

First, That though you may stand out against the government and authority of
Gods grace, yet you cannot resist the government of his power, but there the
Lord will be above you, as he was above Pharaoh and the Egyptians, Exodus
18.11. Exodus 18.11.
He thought to have been above God, and to have kept the children of Israel in
bondage, but wherein they dealt proudly he was above them; If thou will not be
subject to his grace, yet thou shall be subject to his power, which no creature
can resist, therefore all the while that thou stand out against the
government of Gods grace, thou do but spurn against the prick which is hard
to do.

Secondly, Look at this as one of the great blessings of the Covenant, to be
under the Lords government and guidance; Is it not better to be under the
government of the blessed, holy, gracious, and merciful God, then under the
unclean, wicked and cruel enemy Satan the Devil? But it may be some will
say, they will be under neither, but that cannot be, there are no more
spiritual regiments in the world; he that is not subject to the government of
Gods grace, is a subject to the Devil; What a glorious privilege is this,
that a Christian may say, that no creature, nor Angel, nor Devil, nor sin,
has power over him, but God alone? This is even to be a King upon earth, Let
every soul therefore be exhorted to come under this government, and let us not
do as the Israelites, 1 Samuel 8.7. 1 Samuel 8.7.
who cast off God from being their King. Cast not off the Lord, lest he cast
off you, and you become a reprobate people, but if you will be your own men,
you will not have God to be over you, if it seem evil unto you to serve the
Lord, then choose you whom you will serve, go every one and serve his own
Idols, as Ezekiel. 20.39. Ezekiel. 20.39.
and walk after your own counsel, but withal remember what Samuel told the
Israelites, that if they would have a King, they should at last cry out for the
King that they had chosen; so you, that will not have God to rule over you, but
your own lusts, you will cry out one day and howl for the King that you have
chosen, and you shall then know the difference between the service of the Lord,
and of the God whom you have obeyed. Come in therefore and seek the Lord, and
give up your selves to be his people, that he may reign over you; come within
the kingdom of his grace here, and he will prepare a kingdom of glory for you
hereafter. Thus much of the first and greatest blessing of the Covenant of
grace, I will be your God.

Jer. 31.34. Jer. 31.34.
I will forgive their iniquity, and remember their sin no more. By this
promise the Lord takes away that great scruple and fear that might fill the
hearts of his people, as thinking that the greatness of their sins would
exclude them from ever having benefit by the former promise; for if the soul
hearing such a promise revealed, I will be your God, should now reply and say,
Yea he will be the God of the just, as of Abraham and such as have not sinned
against him, but I have sinned, and my transgressions are exceeding many, and
they stand up as a partition wall between God and me, how can he then be a God
to me, or communicate himself and his goodness unto me so vile and sinful?
Now the Lord in this promise takes away this objection, and says, I know you
have sinned, I have seen your rebellions against me, yet this shall not
hinder, but yet I will be your God, and what ever sins you have committed, I
will do them away, and put them out of my sight, and will be your God: and
thus the Lord seems to answer his people, Isai. 48.4.9. compared together. The
Lord having promised deliverance to his people, they might say, We are
unworthy; I know it, says the Lord, that thou art obstinate, and yet verse
ninth, For my Names sake I will defer my anger, etc. As if he should say, In
regard of thy self, and thy own stubbornness, thou deservest to be cut off,
and left in thy misery, yet for my praise I will do thee good. The sins
therefore of Gods people shall not break off their interest in God, they may
serve to magnify the grace of God toward them, but shall not lessen nor hinder
it. Well therefore may this promise be reckoned amongst the blessings of the
Covenant of Grace, and be set in the next place to the former promise, I will
be your God. This promise of pardon and forgiveness of sin, is one of the
great blessings of the Covenant of grace, as sounding forth nothing but Grace
and blessing; Grace from God, and blessing to us; Grace from God, according to
that, Exodus 34.6, 7. Exodus 34.6, 7.
The Lord gracious and merciful, pardoning sin, forgiving iniquity and
transgression, etc. So it also imports kindness and blessing to us, as Psalm.
32.1. Psalm. 32.1.
Here is Grace, yea rich Grace in this promise of forgiveness of sin, as Ephesians.
1.7. Ephesians. 1.7.
It is grace, because nothing but grace and mercy can forgive. God is just, but
it is not justice that does pardon sin; Justice takes vengeance for sin, it
will not spare our misdeeds; but grace takes pity and forgiveth. Again, it
is grace, because we have nothing to satisfy withal for the evils which we
have done, and therefore there is the more grace to us in pardoning. Again,
there is grace in it, because God has power in his hand to take vengeance; He
does not pass by sin, as men do offenses, when they dissemble forgivenes,
because they cannot tell how to be avenged, and yet carry rancor and malice in
their hearts, but God forgives, though he has power to destroy and take
vengeance, as Deuteronomy. 32.35. Deuteronomy. 32.35.
He is able to destroy, Mat. 10.28. Mat. 10.28.
and yet chooses to forgive. Hence Exodus 34.6. Exodus 34.6.
the Lord joins these together, strong and gracious, etc. This shows him to be
gracious, that he is strong and yet pardons; There is infinite grace shines
forth in forgiving the sins of men; And this will appear if we consider
these things.

First, consider the nature of sin, which is a kind of wrong doing unto God,
there is injurious provocation in it, provoking the jealousy of the mighty
God. As if a wise should wrong her husband by forsaking him, and joining her
self to another man, how could such a wrong be recompensed? Yet such wrong we
do unto God: for in every sin we commit, there is a turning unto the
creature, and forsaking the Creator. Here is grace therefore in forgiving such
injuries, as Jer. 3.1. If a man put away his wife, and she become another man's,
will he return to her again? etc. But thou have played the harlot with many
lovers, yet return unto me, says the Lord. Wherein does grace and kindness
appear more, then in p^ssing by wrongs? It is an easier thing to show many
courtesies and benefits to one that never wronged us, then to forgive one petry
injury: yet here is the grace of God unto us, etc.

Secondly, consider against whom our sins have been committed, and that will
set forth grace more: They are not committed against man alone, but against the
Lord. Now a Prince will sometime forgive a trespass against a common ordinary
subject, but that which is against their own person they seldom spare. Our
sins are against God, 1 Samuel 2.25. 1 Samuel 2.25.
and yet he pass^th by such transgressions. This is abundant grace.

Thirdly, consider to whom sin is forgiven, and to whom it is not forgiven: it
is forgiven to us that were enemies, but not to his own dear Son when he
came to be a mediator between God and us. He could not have one sin forgiven
him, God would not spare him, Romans 8.32. Romans 8.32.
but took the full satisfaction of sin from him; but yet he spares us that
were enemies. Here is grace indeed.

Fourthly, consider the quality of the Lords forgiveness both in the freeness
and fullness of it: he forgiveth freely, as Romans 3.24, 25. Romans 3.24.25.
Being justified freely by his grace, etc. Hence says the Lord, Isai. 48.9,
11. Isai 48.9.11.
For my Names sake will I defer my anger, etc. For my own sake will I do it:
for how should my Name be polluted? and I will not give my glory to another. I
will do it freely: for if I should take any satisfaction from thee, I should
pollute my Name, and darken the glory of my grace, and give it to thee, that
thou would think that thou were pardoned for thy sacrifices and thy
goodness. The sin that God pardons, he does it freely for his praise sake.
Papists may talk of their satisfaction to God for their sins, but these are
but the words of men, and they cloud over the glory of Gods grace, and take the
glory of God to themselves. But upon such terms God will never forgive.
Amongst men though one have offended another, yet the consid^ration of former
or after courtesy may deserve to have such an offense passed by: but it is not
so with God. Nothing that we can do, can plead any such worth; his
forgiveness is free, as Isai. 43.25, 26. Isaiah 43.25, 26.
I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for my own sake; Put me in
remembrance, (says the Lord) let us plead together: whereas we are ready to
think, that it is not only for his own sake, but also for our sakes, for
something which we have done, that he forgives our sins. The Lord takes this
away, and says, Come, and remember me now, and tell me what it is that I
should pardon thee for, the Lord looks at nothing in that soul which he
pardons, but only at his own praise: he does it freely. Again, as God does
it freely, so he does it fully: his forgiveness is a full forgiveness; he
puts away all our sins, old, new, great, small, guilt and punishment, so
that the sins of Gods people are before God as though they had never been
committed, never to be required at their hand. The expressions the Scripture
us^th here, are very excellent; it is called, a taking away our iniquities,
H^sea 14.2. Hosea 14.2.
The blotting out of sins, Psalm 51.9. taken from debt-books, that when the
debt is paid, then they blot it out of their book: so God when he pardons, he
blots out our transgressions, that he never means to call us to account for
them.

Sometimes it is called, the putting them away as a mist, or as a cloud which
is made to vanish by the Sun, and is no more seen, Isai. 14. Isaiah 14.
It is also called, a casting of them behind the back, Isai. 38. Isaiah 38.17.
A casting of them into the bottom of the sea, Micah 7.18. M^cah 7.18.
that they shall be buried never to rise again. It is called, a covering of our
sins, that they cannot appear in his presence, nor be seen of him any more,
Psalm. 32.1. Psalm 32.1.
and the 85.2. Yea, they are so hid and covered, as that the Lord sees no
iniquity in Jacob, nor transgression in Israel, Numb. 23.21. and 85.1. Numb
23.21.
Not meaning as the Familists dote, That there is no sin which the Lord can
take notice of in hi^ ^^o^l^^ but, that though God do see sin in them by the
eye of his knowledge, yet he does not see them by the eye of his judgment, to
lay them to their charge. Nay, the Lord will so far put away the sins of
his people, that if he should after come and make inquisition for sin in
them, yet there shall not be one found, as Jer. 50.20. Jer. 50.20.
they are past and gone as the waters of Noah, never to return again. If we
consider all these, the provocation that is in sin, and how many they are,
and against whom they are committed, to whom they are forgiven, and how freely
and fully they are pardoned, we must needs say, Here is grace, yea riches of
grace in the forgiveness of sin: It is therefore a blessing of grace.

Secondly, as there is grace shown from God in the pardon of sin, so infinite
benefit and blessing comes to us thereby, Psalm. 32.1. Blessed is the man
whose iniquity is forgiven, etc. This is not a promise of no value, but is one
of the most great and precious promises of the Covenant, of more worth then
thousands of gold and silver. How great a benefit this is, will appear, if we
consider how great an evil sin is which by forgiveness is taken away. The
greatness of the one will set forth the greatness of the other. Now sin is
the greatest evil in the world, and that both in it self, and to us.

First, in it self it is the greatest, whether we consider it simply in its
own nature and being; or causally, making evil the subject that it dwells in.
In the former respect it is the greatest evil, because it is contrary to the
greatest good. God is good, he is goodness it self, his will also is holy,
just, and good. Now nothing is so contrary to God, and to the goodness of his
holy will, as sin is: this crosses the holiness of his will. And as for the
other, if we consider fin causally, what is it which makes the creature evil
(as we read of evil Angels, Psalm 78.49. Psalm. 78.49.
and of evil men, 2 Timothy 3.13. 2 Timothy 3.13.
) Whence is it that they are become evil? It is only by sin, they were
created good, but sin has corrupted them and made them evil. And that which
makes other things evil, must needs of it self be much more evil. Take away
the sin from Devils, and they are good; they are evil only by sin.

Secondly, but that which more nearly concerns the point in hand, is to
consider, how sin is the greatest evil unto us, and that appears,

First, because it is sin, and sin only, which excludes us from God, and makes
a separation between God and us. Poverty, reproach, sickness, etc. these are
evils, but they are not such evils as are able to separate us from God, Romans 8.
Romans 8.
God was with Joseph in prison, with Jeremiah in the dungeon, with those that
wandered up and down in wildernesses in sheepskins, and goat skins, Heb. 11.37,
38.
being afflicted, destitute, and tormented. But sin is as a partition wall
betwixt God and us, it separates betwixt us and our God, Isai. 59.1, 2. Isai.
59.1, 2.
Sin breeds an alienation and strangeness betwixt us, so as till sin be taken
away, there can be no communion betwixt God and us. But now by the forgiveness
of sin, this partition wall is pulled down, so as we have free access unto
God, and may come into his presence, and behold his face, and stand before him,
being accepted in his beloved. Now by the forgiveness of sin we return again
unto our former estate in which we stood before our fall, before that sin had
broken us off from God. Now as the Apostle says, 1 John 1.3. We have
fellowship with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. In our fall sin
brake off our communion with God, but by the forgiveness of sin we have
liberty to recover this our communion with him again.

Secondly, sin is that which hinders all other good things from us, Jer. 5.25.
Jer. 5.25.
If we want any thing that is good for us, thank our sin for it: God is good,
and ready to do good, free to communicate his goodness to all his creatures;
why then are good things restrained from us? It is our sin which intercepts
them, and cuts us short. But now when sin is done away by forgiveness, then is
the former hinderance removed: this does as it were turn the cock which stops
the course of the blessing from coming unto us, and now we recover an interest
in all the good things of the world, so as all things are ours when sin is
not ours, but is taken away from us.

Thirdly, it is sin which brings all sorrows and miseries upon us, this is
that which brings sword, famine, pestilence, nakedness, and all such outward
calamities, sin i^ ^he true cause of all these. These spring not out of the
dust, nor come by chance, but are the fruit which grows upon the forbidden
tree of sin: but let sin once be forgiven, then are these things which are in
themselves evil, turned unto good unto us: Affliction is good when the sin
which causes it is gone and done away; one that has his sin forgiven, may
rejoice in affliction, Romans 5. Romans 5.
yea, he may be exceeding joyous in all tribulations, 2 Cor. 7.4. 2 Cor. 7.4.
When sin, which is the sting of every cross, is removed, is pulled out, then
may we take up that cross which before we fled from as from a serpent, and put
it in our bosom, and not be hurt by it.

Fourthly, it turns good things into evil unto us: sometimes God gives good
things even to wicked and evil men, making his Sun to shine, and rain to
fall upon the wicked and unjust, Matthew. 5.45. Matthew 5.45.
But so long as sin is unpardoned, though the things be good in themselves,
yet they are not good unto them; sin corrupts the good things they enjoy, it
turns blessings into curses, as the Lord says in Malachi 2.2. Malachi 2.2.
I will curse their blessings, their health, wealth, peace, and prosperity, are
as snares unto them to work their ruin, Psalm. 69 22. Psalm 69.22.
But where sin is pardoned, there is no more curse, Apoc. 22. Apocal 22.
Then the blessing returns to the creature, and is in the creature; the rain
is a rain of blessing, Ezekiel. 34.26. Ezekiel. 34.26.
our meat and our talk a blessing, our prosperity a blessing, we are then
blessed in all we enjoy, in all we put our hands unto.

Fifthly, what an evil sin is, and what a benefit forgiveness is, we may
conceive, if we do but look on such men as have felt the sting of sin in their
own consciences, and have felt the burden of it ^ying on them: Look upon Cain
crying out in the horror of his conscience, My sin is greater then can be
forgiven, Genesis 4. Genesis 4.
Look upon Saul complaining that God was departed from him; I am (says he) in
great distress. 2 Samuel 28.15.
Look upon Judas when his sin pressed upon his conscience, how unable he was to
bear it, very anguish of conscience on earth makes him cast himself into the
gulf of hell. Prove. 18.14.
The spirit of a man will bear his infirmity, all outward sorrows, so long as
his conscience is at peace, free from the trouble of sin; but when sin comes
and burdeneth the conscience of a man, this none can bear. This David found to
be a burden beyond his strength, he was not able to bear it, Psalm. 38.3.
Psalm 38.3.
A stone is weighty, and the sand is heavy, but sin upon the conscience is
heavier then them both, Pro. 27.3. Prove. 27.3.
This burden makes the whole creation to groan under it, Romans 8. Romans 8.
And whosoever has felt the guilt of his own sin lying upon him, such an one
will easily conceive what a blessing this is to have sin forgiven. By
forgiveness the burden is lightened, the wound is healed, the soul is eased of
that anguish and bitterness which it was in before. While our sin was
unpardoned, we looked at God as an enemy to condemn us, but now we have peace
toward God, we are reconciled, the cause of the enmity being taken away. All
this considered, well might D^vid say as he did, Blessed is the man whose sin
is forgiven, and iniquity covered, Psalm. 32. Psalm 32.
Now this great blessing God has promised in his covenant, he will forgive the
sin of his people which give up themselves to walk in covenant with him. He
will not remember against them their former iniquities, their sins shall be as
if they had never been: he will see no iniquity in Jacob, nor transgression in
Israel, he will pass by the sin of the remnant of his heritage, he will
remember their sins no more: yea though their sins be great, yet he will
forgive them; though they abound, yet his grace shall abound much more in the
forgiveness of them, Romans 5.20. See Isai. 43.25. And this the Lord will do:

First, because mercy pleases him, Micah 7. It is a pleasure to him to show
mercy to his covenanted people. Never did we take more pleasure (nor so much)
in the acting and committing of our sins, as he does in the pardoning of them.
He is the Father of mercy, 2 Cor. 1. 2 Cor. 1.
And therefore delights in mercy, as a father delights in his children. It
does him good to see the fruit of his own mercy in the taking away of the sins
of his people.

Secondly, it is the purpose which he has everlastingly purposed within
himself, to make his grace glorious in those whom he has by covenant given
unto Christ to be saved by him; he will have the praise of the glory of his
grace, Ephesians. 1.6. Ephesians. 1 6.
He will not lose this glory, he will be admired in the Saints, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10.
2 Thessalonians 1.10.
He will make the world to wonder, when it shall be known what sin has been
committed by them, and pardoned by him. Gods people are called vessels of
mercy, Romans 9. Romans 9.
As those therefore which are vessels of wrath, shall be full of the wrath and
indignation of the Almighty, to make his wrath known in them: so the vessels of
mercy shall be filled with mercy, filled up to the brim; God will have no empty
vessels, all shall be full, one sort filled with wrath, the other with mercy.

Thirdly, The Lord has received a satisfaction to his Justice in Christ; what
ever Justice could require at our hand, Christ has satisfied for us to the
utmost farthing. So that now Justice cannot complain, though that sin be
forgiven unto us, because it was fully punished in Christ.

Fourthly, If the Lord should not forgive the sins of his people which
believe on Christ, Christ his sufferings should be in vain. To what end was it
for him to suffer, the just for the unjust? Why was the chastisement of our
peace laid upon him, if we should also suffer for our own sins? God would
never have laid our iniquities upon him, but that he intended to forgive them
unto us.

Fifthly, There is no other way to have sin done away, no other means to get
free from sin, but by forgivenes. Either God must forgive sin, or all the world
must be condemned, and lie under his curse for ever. But there are a remnant,
that God will save from perishing in the condemnation of the world, etc.

Sixthly, The Lord has not only promised forgivenes, and spoken it with his
mouth, but his act and deed gives us assurance that he will faithfully perform
unto us that which he has promised, his dealing with us does evidently declare
his gracious inclination toward us, and his readiness to forgive.

First, His great patience in waiting for our repentance and turning unto him,
he waits for this very end, that he might be gracious, Isai. 30.18. Isai. 30.18.


Secondly, His proclaiming of his Name, as he does in Exodus 34.6. The Lord, the
Lord, gracious, merciful, forgiving iniquities; why does the Lord thus
proclaim his Name, and tell us openly that he is a God forgiving iniquities,
etc. but that we might take notice of his graciousnesse toward us, and might
be encouraged to look unto him for forgiveness? Even as Kings proclaim their
pardon, that they might be acknowledged to be gracious Lords.

Thirdly, His gracious invitation also assures us that he will forgive; Come
unto me, says Christ, Mat. 11.28. If sin burden you, I will ease you. Yea he
entreats us to accept of reconciliation, and to be reconciled unto God, 2 Cor.
5.20.

Fourthly, Consider his commanding of us to forgive one another; he commands
other men to forgive us, which is an argument that himself will forgive. For,
first, herein he shows his love toward us, that he would not have the hatred
of any creature to lie against us, no not so much as the displeasure of a weak
man; but would have us to enjoy their love; how much less then will he let his
own wrath lie upon us, which is infinitely more heavy then the displeasure of
all the creatures in the whole world? and secondly, If he would have us to
forgive one another, which have so little love and compassion in us, how much
more will he forgive us, his compassion being so tender and pitiful toward
the work of his own hands? These acts of his goodness do confirm this unto
us, that he is a gracious God ready to forgive.

This lets us see the only way to get free from the guilt of our Saul did, 1 Samuel 15. 1 Samuel 15.
or by hiding it from the eyes of the Almighty, as they do, Psalm. 94.7. Psalm.
94.7.
Others think that God cannot know them, as Job 22.13, 14. Job 22.13, 14.
or that he will not regard them, as Psalm. 94.7. But mark what the Lord
himself says, Hos. 5.3. Hos. 5.3.
I know Ephraim, and Israel is not hid from me. And in Amos 5.12. Amos 5.12.
I know your manifold transgressions, and your mighty sins. And in Hos. 7.2.
Hos. 7.2.
I remember all their wickedness, says the Lord; yea he has Our sins laid
up as amongst his treasures, Deuteronomy. 32.34. Deuteronomy. 32.34.
and sealed up as in a bag, Job 14.17. Job 14.17.
to bring them forth against such Atheistical hypocrites, in the day of his
visitation. Others think to make amends for their sins, that they will
appease God with thousands of Rams, and ten thousand rivers of oil, as Micah
6.7. but the Lord will be appeased by none of these. Our only way is to fly to
grace, and to free forgiveness, all other means, whether pardons from men, or
satisfactions from our selves, will not free us from the guilt of the least
sin, the taking away of our sins must either be by free forgiveness, or they
must lie upon us for ever.

Is forgiveness of sins one of the blessings of the Covenant? then bond of
the Covenant (as the Prophet speaks in Ezekiel. 20.37.) and the blessing of the
Covenant, go together; so as those that will not come within the bond of it,
shall never partake of the blessing. When God draws his people into the bond
of his Covenant, then he is about the forgiving them their sins. Consider
that of the Apostle, Romans 11.26, 27. Rom 11.26, 27.
when God does take away the sin of a people, then does he also make a Covenant
with them, and takes away ungodliness from them. A loose ungodly walking,
contrary to the Covenant which God makes with his people, is an evident
demonstration that our sins are still bound fast upon us, and they will be as
fetters and snares to bind us hand and foot to cast us into utter darkness.
This benefit of forgiveness of sins, is proper only unto those that are a
people in Covenant with God, and do by Covenant bind themselves unto him, to
walk before him as becoming his people.

I will be merciful to their iniquities, and remember their sins no more.
When he had before said that he would be their God, now lest any should be
beaten off from drawing near unto him, to renew their communion with him, he
subjoynes this promise, I will forgive their iniquities. As if he should say,
though you think I will not be a God unto you any more, because of your
sins, yet these shall not hinder; for I will forgive them, they shall stand
in my sight no more.

Amos 5.15. Amos 5.15.
It may be the Lord will be merciful to the remnant of Joseph, though before
in ver. 12. the Lord had told them, that he knew their manifold and mighty
sins; yet the Prophet here puts them in hope, it may be, the Lord will yet be
merciful; much more should we be encouraged by the plain promises of God.
And therefore when we hear the Lord say, I will be merciful, I will forgive;
let every soul say within it self, Surely then I will try, I will seek, I
will sue for mercy, that I may be forgiven.

But what should I do that I may be forgiven?

1. Enter into thine own heart, Lament. 3.40. Lam. 3.40.
This is the Lords own direction, Jer. 3.12, 13. Jer. 3.12, 13.
when the Lord first promised that he would show himself merciful, and not
let his wrath fall upon them; yet presently adds, But know thou thine
iniquity, for thou have fallen by rebellion, etc.

2. When thou have found out thy sin, go then before the Lord and confess and
judge thy self before him, as Ezra 9.6. Ezra 9.6.
Confess thy self worthy to be destroyed. Do as the Prodigal did, Luke 15.
Luke 15.
I am no more worthy to be counted thine.

3. Present before the Lord the sacrifice of the Lord Jesus, bring no
satisfaction of thine own, make no mention of thine own righteousness, or
good deservings, but fly only to the bloody sufferings and sacrifice of
Christ, to find acceptance and reconciliation through him; without that blood,
there is no forgiveness, Heb. 9. Heb. 9.


4. Come not before God with an heart purposing still to continue in thy sin,
but together with prayer for pardon, join prayer for a spirit of grace and
holiness, to make thee a new heart and a new spirit, that sin may live in thee
no more: be willing to bind thy self by Covenant to the Lord, to glorify that
grace showed on thee, if he will please to be gracious toward thee, in taking
away this sin, Hos. 14.3. with 9. Hos. 14.3. with 9.
Thus come before the Lord, and then, as men that have any great legacy left
them by the will of another, they will entreat for it, they will plead the
Testament of the Testatour, and if that will not prevail, they will bring it
into the Court of Justice, and there sue for it: So let us do, beg, entreat,
require the performance of this legacy of the new Testament, which grace has
bequeathed unto us; and if this obtain not, then bring our cause into the
Covenant of grace, and there sue and plead, before the throne of grace. There
bring out the words of the Testament, and say, Lord here is thine own Covenant
and promise, hold the Lord fast to his promise which he has made, and plead
with him, and say, Lord, why are thy mercies restrained from me? where is thy
faithfulness? why do not thou pardon mine iniquity? Though I be worthy to
perish, yet remember thy Covenant, make good thy promise, in which thou have
caused thy servant to trust. Such importunity the Lord will not take ill, he
delights thus to be overcome by the pleas of his people. Do thus, and he that
has promised, will also fulfill, and will take away all thine iniquity, and
receive thee graciously, Hos. 14.3.

their iniquity is pardoned, their sin is forgiven. It was a word of comfort
Christ spoke to the palsy man, Mat. 9.2. Mat. 9.2.
Son be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee. So Isai. 40 1, 2.
Isai. 40.1, 2.
And thence was that speech of Christ to Mary in Luke 7.48.50. Thy sins are
forgiven thee, go in peace. There is peace indeed, when Christ promises sin
to be forgiven. Now so it is to all the covenanted people of God, their sin is
forgiven, here is their comfort. See Psalm. 103.17, 18. Psalm. 103.17, 18.
If we keep his Covenant, his loving kindness and mercy is ours to forgive
us our sins. Shall man (says Eliphaz) be more just then God? shall man be
more pure then his maker? Job 4.17. Job 4.17.
So may we say in this case, Shall man be more faithful then God, more
mindful of his Covenant and promise then his Maker? No; God is the faithful
God, keeping Covenant and mercy with those that fear him. If we then which are
so apt to break our Covenant with God and men, if we be careful to keep
Covenant with him, how much more will God perform this promise of his Covenant
toward us, to pardon our sins? If we be not unfaithful toward him, he
cannot be unfaithful toward us. Nay though we were in part unfaithful, yet
cannot he deny himself, 2 Timothy 2.13. 2 Timothy 2.13.




scil. a careful, conscionable, and constant endeavor to walk in Covenant
with God, Psalm. 103.17, 18. Psalm. 103.17, 18.


But I have many failings in the keeping of my Covenant.

Yet so long as you do not renounce your Covenant,

2. An affectionate and cordial love to the Lord Jesus, who has washed us
from our sins in his blood, is a sure sign that our sins are forgiven us,
Luke 7.47. when we so think of Christ, as that nothing is too much for him,
nothing enough, all we do, or can do, is too little for him, and as nothing,
to that which our soul desires; this love never goes alone, but is
accompanied with this blessing of forgiveness. And sure thus it is with those
that feel in any measure the efficacy of Christ's blood easing their
consciences from the guilt of sin; They could be content to wash Christ's feet,
not with tears only, but with their hearts blood, and to dye for love of him,
who has loved them, and given himself for them to save them from their sin.

3. The mortification and dying of sin in our hearts, is a sign that our
sins are forgiven us; When Christ takes away Jacobs sins, he also turns
away ungodliness from Jacob, Romans 11.26, 27. Romans 11.26, 27.
If sin live in us, the guilt of it remains still upon us. I mean if it live
in us in full strength.

4. If we have a tender heart to mourn over Christ, whom we have pierced.
Time was, when we could tread under feet that precious blood, by which we are
sanctified. But now it melts the heart to think, that that blood, which we
have so despised, should yet be sprinkled upon us, to wash us from our sin.
This kindness of Christ toward us, makes our hearts to mourn over him, Zach.
12.10. Zach. 12.10.
They shall mourn over him, or for him, not for our selves, but for him,
mourning that we have pierced him, and grieved his Spirit by our sins.

5. An heart willing to forgive and to do good unto those that have done evil
against us, Mat. 6.14. Mat. 6.14.
when we cannot only forbear them, but forgive them, and bear a loving
heart to them, that have been unloving toward us. This disposition of heart in
us, springs from an higher fountain of grace, which has been shed down upon
us, in forgiving our sins. When the heart can reason with it self, to
suppress revengefull desires, when they are stirring in us, and can argue, as
Mat. 18. and Ephesians. 4. Mat. 18. and Ephesians. 4.
the Lord is willing to forgive me my debts, and ought not I also to forgive my
fellow servants that has offended me? Such a disposition of heart is a fruit
and token of the forgiveness of our sins, Mat. 6.14. The grace that has
been showed us in the forgiveness of our sins, works an answerable
disposition in us, making us ready to forgive the sins of our brethren.

6. A free and full confession of sin; when we deal openly with the Lord,
freely willing to open all our whole heart before the Lord, discovering known
sins, secret sins, the most prevailing, beloved, and inward corruptions,
willing to take the shame of all unto our selves, and still to be more vile in
our selves, that mercy might be glorified in our forgiveness. When we can
bring out the whole pack, and not keep a sin back, (so far as we know any
thing by our selves) but lay all open and naked before the face of God, till
there be no more to be found; such confession has a promise of forgiveness, 1 John 1.9. 1 John 1.9.
There may be a forced confession, as was that of Saul, when he was so fully
convinced of his sin, that he would no longer deny it, 1 Samuel 15. And of
Judas, who out of extremity of horror and rage of conscience, was made to
confess his wickedness in betraying innocent blood. There may be also a
formal, superficial, and partial confession, when we do in a general
fashion confess our selves sinners, which confession has no promise of
forgivenes, because these confessions are ever accompanied, first, with a
desire (if possible) to maintain our own innocence; secondly, with a spirit of
unbelief, and misgiving heart, fearing lest our own mouth should judge us, and
we become witnesses against our selves: Thirdly, with a spirit of pride, loath
to confess our selves to be so vile as we must acknowledge our selves to be,
if we should confess all our sins against our selves. But when a man is
willing to search out all his sin unto the last, that he may lay open all his
heart, and confess all his iniquity against himself before the Lord, being
vile in his own eyes, and desiring to be more vile, loathing himself for all
his abominations: of such an one that can thus come before the Lord in humble
confession of his sins, I doubt not to say unto him, Go thy way in peace,
thy sin is forgiven thee. If God give us a heart thus humbly to confess, it is
unto us a sign there is in God a heart mercifully to forgive.

Exhortation to all the Saints that have tasted of this rich grace Ephesians. 1.6.
Ephesians. 1.6.
The Lord himself publishes this as his own glory, that he is a God forgiving
iniquity, transgression and sin, Exodus 34.6. Exodus 34.6.
And the servants of God have herein given glory unto him, as Micah 7.18. Micah
7.18.
Who is a God like unto thee, who passes by the transgression of the remnant
of thine heritage? We should make the praise of this grace to ring through the
whole world, that heaven and earth may take notice of it, and wonder at the
grace that has been showed on us. This grace can never be sufficiently
glorified by us.

To teach us willingly to become servants unto this God of all Hos. 14.5. Hos.
14.5.
When the Lord there promises to heal the rebellions of his people, by taking
away their iniquities from them; mark what this works in them, ver. 9. What
have we (say they) any more to do with Idols? with our former sins? we
will serve them them no more, we will henceforth serve thee our gracious God,
which promisest to heal all our backslidings. His will we be, him will we
serve. And thus much of the second Benefit.

The third Benefit of the Covenant, is the renewing and sanctifying Luke 1.
Luke. 1.
When he has made us imputedly righteous, he will have us inherently righteous
also. And by the promise of this benefit, the Lord answers another scruple,
which his people might be subject unto; We might think with our selves, this
is indeed a great benefit, which the Lord has promised hith^rto, namely, to
forgive all my sin; But though the Lord should perform all this mercy unto
me, forgiving unto me all my former sins unto this day, yet I have such a vile
sinful nature within me, that I shall return and sin again as wickedly as
ever I did before, and so shall bring a new guiltiness upon my self. Hereto
the Lord answers: No, it shall not be, I will renew, alter, and change that
sinful and wicked nature that is in you, I will make your heart a new heart,
so as you shall be enabled to do my will, and walk in my ways. I will
sanctify you to be an holy and precious people to my self.

This renovation and sanctification of our nature, stands first in cleansing
away our sinful corruption, and then in an infusion and filling of us with the
holy graces of the Spirit. As a vessel which we intend for any honorable
use, first we scour and rinse out the filth that is in it, and then we
sweeten it with other things, and so make it fit for service and use. Satan had
defiled us with his loathsome filthiness, but so many as the Lord sets apart
unto himself, to be vessels of honor in his house, those he cleanses from
all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and seasoneth them with all the sweet and
gracious gifts of his Spirit. Hence it is that we are said to be made partakers
of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. 2 Peter 1.4.
and to be renewed with the ren^wing of the holy Ghost, Titus 3.5.

And we are said to be created new in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.10. because as in
our first creation we were then created holy and righteous after the Image of
God: so now we are renewed unto the same image again. The Lord does with us as
the Potter does with his vessel, when the first fashioning of it is broken, he
returns and makes it another vessel, as seems good in his eyes, Jer. 18.3. By
this work of renovation and changing our natures, there is a new disposition
wrought in us, clean contrary to that which was before. Whereas before, the
wisdom of the flesh, and our corrupt will was quite contrary, and even enmity
against the Law of God, and would by no means be brought into subjection,
Romans 8.7. Romans 8.7.
yet now we are made to love the Law, and delight in the Commandments of it in
our inward man, Romans 7. Romans 7.
The law is not now any more a law without us, to urge and enforce us, but it
is a law within us; it is written not in Tables of stone, but in the heart,
according to that promise, Jer. 31. Jeremy 31.
I will write my laws in your heart^, and in your inward parts will I put
them. By which writing there is stamped upon the heart an inward disposition
and inclination of mind and will, to do the things which the law does command.
The law being there within us, it is unto us as our own bowels, loving it and
making precious account of it. This blessing the Lord promises in his
covenant, as we may see in Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27. Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27.
I will power clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean; yea, from all your
filthiness will I cleanse you. A new heart also will I give unto you, and a
new spirit will I put within you: and I will take away the stony heart out of
your body, and give you a heart of flesh, and I will put my spirit within you,
etc. And hence I think it is, that the Lord calls himself, Psalm 71.21.
The holy One of Israel; not only because he is holy in himself, and will be
so acknowledged by them; but because he sanctifies his Israel unto himself,
making them holy according to that Levit. 20.8. Levit. 20.8.
I am the Lord which sanctifies you. And in Isai. 43.15. Isaiah 43.15.
I am the Lord your holy One. And in Habbak. 1.12. Habbak. 1.12.
the Prophet calls the Lord his holy One. Art not thou of old, O Lord, my God,
my holy One? He is not only our merciful God to pardon us, but our holy one
to sanctify us. And for the same cause we read of the promise of the Spirit,
Gal. 3.14. Gal. 3.14.
Because God has promised to give his Spirit unto those that he takes to be
a people to himself. This bl^ssing of sanctification the Lord will perform
unto all his people, making them an holy people unto himself.

First, because he has for this end chosen them, that they might be holy,
Ephesians. 1. Ephesians. 1.
and therefore he will bring them to that estate of holiness, to which he
has chosen them. What he has chosen us to, he will bring us to, Gods purposes
are not in vain, he will perform to us all the good he has intended toward
us.

Secondly, Christ has purchased the spirit of grace for us, Joh. 17.19. John
17.19.
For their sakes (says Christ) sanctify I my self (offering up himself as a
consecrate offering unto God) that they may be sanctified by the truth. It was
for our sanctification that he offered up himself.

Thirdly, he has filled himself with all grace for that same end, that we
might be filled by that abundance of grace which is in him. Psalm, 68.18. Psalm
68.18.
he received gifts for men, not to keep them to himself alone, but to
communicate unto us, that out of his fullness we might all receive grace for
grace, John 1.16. And therefore Christ is said to be not only righteousness
unto us, but sanctification, because he has filled himself to the end that he
might also fill us with his own sanctity and holiness.

Fourthly, Christ has prayed for our sanctification, John 17.17. And we know
that he was heard always, no prayer of his ever returned empty, but came back
with a full bl^ssing.

Fifthly, Gods covenant is to give us all things that pertain to life and
godliness, 2 Pet. 1.4. 2 Pet. 1.4.


Sixthly, the Lord is an holy God, and therefore will have those that are in
covenant with him, to be an holy people, Lev. 11. It would be a d^shonor to
God to have his name called upon a sinful and profane people, Ezekiel 36.20.
Ezekiel. 36.20.
And beside, the end of the covenant betwixt him and his people, is Communion,
God takes a people into covenant with him that he might communicate himself
unto them, that he might possess them, and they enjoy him; but God cannot
communicate himself in the sweetness and familiarity of his love unto
unsanctified ones. And therefore he will have his covenanted people to be holy,
that he may communicate himself unto them.

Seventhly, when the Lord gives himself unto a people to be a God unto them, he
gives himself wholly unto them, keeping back nothing from them which might
make them an happy and blessed people. And therefore as he does communicate
himself to them in his mercy and grace, to pardon their sin, so he does also
in his purity and holiness to sanctify them, and to cleanse them from their
sin.

Eighthly, God will be glorified in all his people, whom he takes near unto
himself, Levit. 10.3. Levit. 10.3.
and in Isai. 43.21. Isaiah 43.21.
This people have I formed for my self, they shall show forth my praise. But
God could have no glory from us in this world, if he should not sanctify us.
Herein is he glorified, when we bring forth much good fruit, John 15. John 15.
and shine forth in good works, Matthew 5. Matthew. 5.
and show forth the virtues of him that has called us, etc. 1 Pet. 2. In these
things God is glorified by us; but this glory we can never bring to God, till
he have sent down his Spirit of glory and grace upon us. Now lest this blessing
of sanctification should seem too little to be reckoned among the great
blessings of the covenant, let us therefore consider how great a privilege this
is, to be renewed and sanctified by the grace of Gods holy Spirit. This is
intended to us as a blessing, in Isai. 44.1, 2, 3. Isa. 44.1, 2, 3
The Lord makes many sweet promises to his Israel; and in verse 3. I will
(says the Lord) power my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thy buds.
When God powers on any his Spirit, then he would have us to know, that he
powers on them a rich blessing. My Spirit and my Blessing, says God. As it is
a man's curse to be left under the power and dominion of sin: so contra, it is
a blessing to be set free from sin, and to be renewed unto holiness. Therefore
it is that when Christ converts us from our sins, he is said to bless us in
converting us from our iniquities, Acts 3. ult. Acts 3. ult.
It is a blessing indeed. This is a better blessing then was that wherewith
Esau was blessed, who had the fatness of the earth for his dwelling place, and
the dew of heaven to m^ke it fruitful. This is one of those spiritual
blessings wherewith Christ has blessed us in heavenly things, Ephesians. 1 3. Ephesians.
1.3.
It is such a blessing as makes blessed those that receive it.

For first, by being sanctified in our selves, we come to have a sanctified
use of all other blessings which we enjoy. To the pure all things are pure, but
to the impure all things are impure and defiled, Titus 1. end. Titus 1. end


Secondly, holiness is the Image of the blessed God, it conforms unto him,
makes us like unto him. This is our excellency and our glory in the eyes of
Angels and Men, in nothing are we so glorious as in holiness; this is a Crown
and Diadem upon our head: and therefore David calls the Saints by the name of
excellent ones, Psalm. 16.3. Psalm. 16.3.
Sanctity makes a man to excel himself, and preferres him above the common
condition of men. The Spirit of Holiness is a Spirit of Glory, 1 Peter 4.14. 1
Pet 4 14.
and Grace is Glory, 2 Cor. 3.18.

Thi^dly, it makes the Lord to take a delight in us, even as a father does
delight in seeing his own Image in his children. God loved us before with a
love of benevolence and good will; but now he loves us with a love of
complacency, taking pleasure in his people, as the Prophet speaks Psalm.
147.11.149.4. Psalm. 147.11, 149.4.


Fourthly, by being sanctified we also are made to delight in God. How
precious are thy thoughts to me, O God? says D^vid, Psalm 139.17. Whom have I
in heaven but thee? And Psalm 73.25. Psalm. 73.25.
When shall I come and appear in the presence of God? Psalm 42. Psalm 42.
Hereby the Lord becomes the God of our joy and gladness, Psalm 43.4. Psalm 43
4


His presence is sweet unto us, his voice is pleasant, his word, ordinances,
and whatsoever else he communicates himself in, they are delightful unto us,
and we take pleasure in them. It is a pleasant thing to a sanctified heart, to
be praising God, and to be exerci^^d in any thing in which we may enjoy
communion with him.

Fifthly, By being sanctified, we have peace increased in our inward man. God
becomes a God of peace unto us, in sanctifying of us. 1 These. 5.23.
Thereby he stills those raging and strong lusts, which had wont to disquiet
our hearts. While sin reigns, there is no peace, not only is the Conscience
perplexed by it, but the affections of the soul are set at variance one
against another. Pride would have one thing, and covetousness would have
another; Hypocrisy and profaneness are divided one against another; Like so
many contrary winds which lie upon the face of the deep, and dash the waves one
against another. Thus a multitude of contrary passions and lusts, distract and
divide the soul asunder, so that while sin rules in us, there is no peace. But
when grace begins to have its kingdom set up in us, it then brings with it a
blessed peace. Holiness and peace go together; All the faculties of the soul
being sanctified by grace, they do now aim at one end, which is the doing of
Gods will, and this unity makes peace.

Sixthly, By being sanctified, we are made instruments and means of blessing
unto others; When God called Abraham to follow him, out of his native Country,
this was the promise by which he encouraged him to follow him, I will bless
thee, (says he) and thou shall be a blessing. It was promised as a blessing to
Abraham, that he should be a blessing to others. Thus Israel is a blessing in
the midst of Aegyp^ and Ashur, Isai. 19.24. Isai. 19.24.
They are set as a blessing round about Go^^ holy mountain, Ezekiel. 34.26. Ezekiel.
34.26.
The remnant of Jacob (Gods sanctified ones) are among many people, as dew from
the Lord, and showre^ ^^on the grass, Micah 5.7. Micah 5.7.
They are a blessing. So long as a man (...) grace, and is unsanctified, he is
an useles, unprofitable creature, Psalm. 14. Psalm. 14.
They are altogether unprofitable, like that girdle which the Prophet speaks
of, which was corrupted, rotten, and good for nothing, Jer. 13.7. Jer. 13.7.
They are very corrupt, yea very corruption, Psalm. 5.9. Psalm. 5.9.
and not only corrupt, but they are corrupters of others, Isai. 1. And so are
rather a plague and curse to others, then a blessing. But when the Spirit of
grace has entered into the soul, and sanctified it, then (...) that was before
unprofitable, is now become profitable, and being a vessel of mercy, filled
with blessing himself, he lets out himself unto others, and becomes a
blessing unto them.

Seventhly, By being sanctified in our natures, we are made ^^t to live the
life of God, from which we have been estranged; ever since our mothers womb,
we have been strangers from God, and from the life of God; we have of our
selves neither knowledge how to do well, nor any ability to do what we know;
we only wander away from God, and bid God depart from us, Job 21. Job 21.
We have neither will nor strength to do any thing that is holy and right in
the Lords eyes: But when God sanctifies us, then a new spirit enters into us,
and sets us upon our feet, and stirs and works in us, carrying us on to the
doing of the will of God; Then we begin to live for God and with God. In a
word, how great a blessing this is, we may conceive by the lamentable complaint
of the Apostle, groaning under the bondage of his corruption, Romans 7.
Who shall deliver me (says Paul) from this body of death? He knew himself to
be already delivered from the law of death, and the power of it, so that death
could not hurt him, and yet Paul would have another deliverance still; There
was yet one thing which troubled him, the body of death, the sin which hangs
so fast on; the remnant of corruption which like fetters hampered him, that he
could not so perfectly fulfill the will of God. This plague of the heart
within, Paul desired to be healed of, who (says he) will help me, who will
deliver me from this misery, and set me free out of this bondage of corruption?
Paul was many a time in bonds, in persecution, and manifold sufferings for
Christ's sake, but never do we hear him complain so of these; he never said,
Who will deliver me and set me free out of this prison, out of these bonds, out
of these pinching wants, etc. But that which most troubled him, was his sinful
corruption of nature within; This is the plague which above all other he
desires to be delivered from. And surely such is the disposition of all those,
whose hearts God has effectually touched with his spirit of grace, that if
they had the kingdoms of the world for their own, they could be content, to
forgo all, so they might be rid of sin, and have their sanctification
perfected in them.

Now as we have s^^ne that this sanctification is a singular benefit and
blessing unto us; so let us consider also how it springs forth unto us out of
the same fountain of grace, as did the former benefit of forgiveness of sins.
These two streams issue out of the same fountain of grace. When God
sanctifies us, adding this benefit to the former, we may then say, Grace,
grace; we do herein receive a double grace; Grace in forgiving, grace in
sanctifying of us; here is grace upon grace. It is a blessing of rich grace.
And this will appear, if we consider,

First, How impiously and wickedly we have forsaken our first holy and blessed
estate, in which the Lord had created us. God made man righteous, Eccles. 10.
ult. Eccles. 10. ult.
but he would be finding out many inventions of his own, and if he could not
invent them in the shop of his own brain, then he would take them out of
Satan's forge, by those inventions thinking to make himself more excellent then
God had made him; and so did wilfully cast away that glory of grace, with which
he was clothed, defaced the Image of God which was stamped upon him, bringing
upon himself a sinful and shameful nakedness, to the contempt of his person
before all creatures; cast off his God that had formed him, setting light by
the God of his salvation, choosing to obey the cursed suggestion of Satan, Gods
enemy, rather then to retain his communion with God. This did he, and we in
him, and now the Lord might have said unto us all, Let him that is filthy, be
filthy still. Seeing you have thus defiled your selves, you shall never be
cleansed, until I have made my wrath to fall upon you, Ezekiel. 24.13. It is
wonderful grace, if ever the Lord will return to such, to renew us and
sanctify us by his grace; Our sin was like the sin of Angels, who kept not
their first estate, no more did we, we sinned as they did, but we are
sanctified, and not they, here is grace toward us, not toward them. They are
suffered still to persist in their malicious wickedness, but we are renewed
again according to the Image of him that created us, Ephesians. 4. Ephesians. 4.


Secondly, Consider the loathsomenes of the sin and corruption which we have
brought upon our selves, and does now lie upon us; A wicked man is loathsome
(says Solomon) Pro. 13.5. Prove. 13.5.
So loathsome is the sin that is in us, that we are made even to loath our
selves, and to count our selves more filthy then the dung of the earth, Ezekiel.
6.9. When the Lord formed man in the beginning, it was not silver or gold, or
any such precious matter, out of which he fashioned him, but it was out of the
vilest of the Elements, out of the earth, the dregs and setlings of all
creatures. The matter out of which man was then made, was but vile and base.
Wonder it was that God would set the gracious Image of his holiness upon so
contemptible a creature. But though it was then but vile, yet it was (as I may
so speak) innocent, harmles. The pollution of sin had not as yet defiled it,
there was nothing in it as yet, which should make the holy God to loath the
creature which he had made; sin had not as yet stained the earth with its
filthiness. But now by sin man is become abominable, his uncleanness is as the
filthiness of the menstruous; the filthy leprosy of sin is not in his forehead
alone, but is spread all over him; so that the Lord might say unto him, Depart,
depart ye polluted, stand apart, the pure eyes of my holiness cannot endure to
behold such loathsome filthiness. But now behold and wonder, even the God so
glorious in holiness, Exodus 15.11. even he seeing us lie polluted in our blood,
he does not pass by on the other side, but he takes pity on us, and takes us
and washes us with water; he washes us from our blood, and anoynteth us with
oil, Ezekiel. 16.6.9. yea and clothes us again with white linen of sanctity and
holiness, adornes us with ornaments of grace, which are as jewels of silver and
jewels of gold, etc. ver. 10, 11, 12, 13. and makes us beautiful by his own
beauty which he puts upon us. And is not this grace? Had we seen our blessed
Savior rise up from the table to wash the foul feet of his servants, we would
have wondered. How much more wonderful is this, that he should take us filthy
lepers, and wash us in the waters of Jordan, until we be wholly clean?
Consider that place in Ezekiel. 16.9. how the Lord himself amplifies this grace
toward us in washing us from our polluted blood. No less then three times
together does the Lord there mention this, When I saw thee polluted in thy
blood; (says the Lord) and again, When thou wast in thy blood; and a third
time, Even when thou wast in thy blood, then I took thee and washed thee, and
said unto thee, Thou shall live. Why does the Lord so ingeminate, so double and
treble this, When thou wast in thy blood? but only that we might the more
observe his abundant grace toward us in purifying such loathsome unclean ones
as we are. Doubtless David when he had defiled himself by that great and foul
sin, he counted it mercy and rich grace to have a clean heart renewed in him,
Psalm. 51. Psalm. 51.


Thirdly, Consider how unable we are to cleanse and purify our selves; we are
like little babes, who can defile themselves, but would lie in their uncleannes
for ever, should not the nurse wash and cleanse them; we once stripped our selves
of the garments of grace, but now we know not how to put them on any more; we
were men, at that time, when (in Adam) we laid them by and put them off: But
now like little children we should starve with cold and nakedness, should not
the Lord pity us, and put these garments of grace upon us. We are, says the
Apostle, of no strength, Romans 5.6. Rom 5.6.
not able to think a good thought, 2 Cor. 3.
nor to will one good desire; but it is God that works in us both will and
deed of his good pleasure of grace toward us, Phil. 2.13. Phil. 2.13.
It is not in our willing or running, but in God showing mercy, Romans 9.16. Romans
9.16.
And it is not unworthy our observing, how in ver. 18. he opposes mercy to
hardening, (He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens) to
teach us to look at it as a special mercy, when he is pleased to take away the
hard and stony heart from us, and give us an heart of flesh, soft and pliable
to his will.

Fourthly, As we could not renew and sanctify our selves, so neither could any
other help us, and restore us again to the holiness we had lost; In Ezekiel. 16.5.
Ezekiel. 16.5.
the Lord tells his people there, how little help they had from any other,
when they lay in their misery, there was no eye that pitied them, to do any
thing to them, or to have compassion on them. The Priest and the Levite, they
come and look on, but they pass by on the other side, there is nothing done to
heal the wound which Satan by sin had given to our souls, but they are let
alone to putrify and corrupt the whole man more and more, so as from the
crown of the head to the sole of the foot, there is nothing but sores, and
swelling, and wounds full of corruption, Isai. 1. But when the Lord saw that
there was none to help, then he himself (like the good Samaritan) comes and
washes our wounds, pouring in wine and oil, to cleanse and to heal us. Such
was our pollution, so deeply set, that all the water of the Sea, all the blood
of bulls and goats, could not cleanse us; yea though we should wash in Nitre
and take us much soap, yet our iniquity would still stand undone away before
the face of God, Jer. 2.22. Only that spirit of life, that spirit of holiness,
that spirit of power which is in Christ Jesus, that spirit being shed down upon
us, that cleanses us, washes us, sanctifies us; without this, all helps under
heaven had been in vain, without this spirit, neither Word, Sacrament,
Commandments, promises, or being trained up in the Communion of the Church,
and Christian families, neither any nor all these could avail to renew us to
the grace from which we are fallen, 1 Cor. 6.11. 1 Cor. 6.11.


Fifthly, Let me add this one thing more, If we should look at God himself
only as just, and not as gracious, we could never have hoped to have obtained
this blessing from him. Justice could have said no other unto us, then as Ezekiel.
20.39. Seeing you would not obey me, go therefore and serve every man his
Idol, serve your sin. When we had turned the glory of God into a lie, and had
worshipped the creature above the Creator, (who is blessed for ever) Justice
would then have given us up unto vile affections, and to our own hearts lusts,
and to a reprobate mind, to do the things that are not convenient, so
receiving in our selves such a recompense of our error as was meet, Romans 1.
Romans 1.
This would have been the reward of Justice upon us for our sin; But here Grace
comes in and powers down upon us a spirit of grace and of sanctification,
Zach. 12.10. Zach. 12.10.
to wash us from our uncleannes, that we might be an holy people unto God. And
hence it is that in 1 Pet. 5.10. when the Apostle prays for the perfecting of
our sanctification in us, he looks at God as a God of all Grace; The God of all
Grace (says he) which has called us unto his eternal glory by Jesus Christ,
confirm, strengthen, and stablish you, etc. As thereby showing from what
fountain the benefit of sanctification comes, namely, from Grace, from the God
of all grace. He is a God of all grace toward us in sanctifying of us.

This may help to settle us and confirm us in the truth, namely, benefits of
the Covenant of Grace. Ergo. If so be the forgivenes of our sins were
promised in the Covenant of Grace, and Sanctification were a blessing of the
Covenant of works, then might it well be said, that to evidence one by the
other, were a turning aside from the Covenant of grace to that other of works;
But when they are both promised, both communicated to us by the same Covenant,
there is no color to charge this way of evidencing our estate, with turning
aside to another Covenant.





1. This opinion imports thus much, That one under the covenant of works, may
perform acts that are holy, which is false; he may indeed do such things as
are materially holy, as being commanded of God, whose word and Covenant does
sanctify them, and make the things holy in themselves, but they are not
formally holy, but, (coming from their impure hearts) thereby they are polluted
and defiled, Tit. 1. And therefore can have no such power to work sanctity in
the subject whence they come.

2. If true sanctification may be in one that is under the Covenant of works,
then must we of necessity change the articles or promises of the Covenant of
Grace, and make the promise of sanctification no part of it; we must blot out
those promises of writing the law in our hearts, and putting a new spirit
within us, and all other promises of the like nature, must be rased out of the
covenant of grace, if one under the Covenant of works may attain to this
sanctification by his own works.

3. This opinion is directly cross and contrary to the Apostle in Gal. 3.2.
where he tells us, that we receive the spirit of Sanctification, not by the
works of the law, but by hearing of faith preached. It is the doctrine of
grace, not of works, which makes us partakers of this spirit. And hence it is
that in 2 Cor. 3.6. he tells us, that it is the new Testament which is the
ministration of the Spirit, by which the Spirit is ministered and conveyed uto
us. The law, or the works of the law do not.

4. Our being sanctified, and our being Saints, is in effect all one, but we
are Saints by calling, and our calling is by the Gospel of Grace, 2 These. 2.14.
and therefore our sanctification is from Grace also.

5. We are sanctified by being in Christ, whence are those expressions frequent
in Scripture, Saints in Christ Jesus, sanctified in Christ, and such like. Now
our implanting into Christ is only from Grace, and therefore, so is our
Sanctification also.

6. Our sanctification is called a new Creation, Create in me a clean hear^, O
God, (says David) Psalm. 51. Psalm. 51.
And in Ephesians. 2.10. Ephesians. 2.10.
We are created unto good works. And in 2 Cor. 5. We become new Creatures in
Christ Jesus. And in Ephesians. 4.24. Ephesians. 4.24.
The new man is created after God in holiness etc. All which imply, that there
must be a creating power put forth to the working of this new man in us. We
must therefore deifie the works of the Law, and make a God of them, induing
them with a creating power, if we will ascribe such efficacy unto them, as to
work true sanctification in us.

7. We receive the Spirit by faith, Gal. 3.14. therefore not by the works of
the law.

8. Christ tells us plainly, the world of unbelieve^s that are under the Law,
cannot receive the Spirit, Ioh. 14.17. John 14.17.
whom the world cannot rece^ve.

9. Sanctification is purchased for us by the blood of Christ. He gave himself
for us, to purge us, etc. Tit. 2.14. Tit 2.14.
And so in Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. He gave himself for his Church, that he night
sanctify it.

The third Part. THE BENEFITS and BLESSINGS this Covenant brings.
THE Covenant of Works presupposes our sanctification, but it promises it
not: It presupposes it I say, because there could have bin no place for a
Covenant of Works if God had not first given Adam a spirit of holiness to
enable him thereunto. First therefore God creates man holy, and then makes a
Covenant with him, requiring of him to work according to that holiness of his
nature which he was endued with; but if he violated and brake this Covenant,
this Covenant does not promise to renew him to holiness again; this promise
belongs to another Covenant. But especially consider the proper and immediate
worker of our sanctication, which is the Holy Ghost. Romans 15.16. for which
cause the spirit is called the spirit of Grace, Zach. 12.10. and the spirit of
holiness, Romans 1. Election is the immediate work of the Father, Redemption the
work of the Son, Sanctification the work of the Holy Ghost. All the whole
Trinity working together in the work of our salvation; yet every one in his
own order. First, the Father elects; then the Son redeems; and lastly the
Spirit sanctifies.

Concerning these several works of the three Persons, we are to consider,

1. That they are all of equal extent.

2. That they do all issue from the same spring and fountain of Grace.

First, they are of the same extent, none larger nor narrower then another:
Those that the Father has chosen, those does the Son redeem; Those that the
Son has redeemed, those does the Spirit sanctify. The Father chooses none,
but whom he gives to the Son to be redeemed by him; the Son redeems none
but those that were so given him by the Father; and so it holds also in the
third place, that the Holy Ghost sanctifies none but whom the Father had
chosen, and the Son redeemed.

Secondly, as it is thus in the extent, so it is also in respect of the ground
and cause from which they issue and spring: Look then, as our Election is of
Grace and not of works, Romans 11.6. and our Redemption is of Grace, Romans 3.24.
so is our Sanctification also, Tit. 3.4, 5. Not according to the works which we
had done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of the new
birth, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost: so that the same grace, favor, and
good will which moved the Father to set his love upon us in our Election, and
caused the Son to give himself for our Redemption, the same Grace sends or
brings the Spirit into our hearts to renew us unto holiness. And thence it is,
that sometimes we are said to be chosen that we might be holy, as in Ephesians. 1.4.
sometimes said to be redeemed that we might be holy, Luke 1.74, 75. to the end
that we might know that our sanctification and renewing unto holiness does
come from the same grace, as do our election and redemption; and therefore as
our election is not of works, but of grace; and our redemption is not of works,
but of grace; so it is also concerning our sanctification. I conclude therefore
that by the works of the Law, no man being under the Law or Covenant of works,
can attain to true sanctification and holiness. And if sanctification be not
by the Law or Covenant of works, then it necessarily and invincibly follows,
that for a man to try his estate in Grace by his sanctification, is no turning
aside to a Covenant of works.

Thus much we do not unwillingly assent unto, namely that there is a kind of
outward sanctification (improperly so called) or rather an outward reformation,
which a man under the Covenant of Works may attayn unto. The Law has a power
not only to irritate and provoke the lust that is within, by its contrariety
thereunto, Romans 7.11. but also to curb and restrayn the breaking of it forth
into outward acts, by the terror of it, Gal. 3.19. Exodus 20. And by this
reformation thus wrought by the work of restraynt, the unclean Spirit may seem
to be cast forth, Math. 12. but whatsoever reformation is thus wrought, is as
far from true sanctification, as earth is from heaven: For though this
reformation does and may come from some inward work of the Spirit of God upon
the spirit and soul of man, as namely to convince and terrify the conscience,
to stir the affections, and to awe the will also, so that a man dares not
commit the things he would, yet the mind and will is still unrenewed, the
frame and disposition of the heart is still the same as it was before; and
therefore this reformation is not true sanctification. That may be by the Law,
this is only by the Gospel and from Grace.

Object. But in Hebr. 10.29. it is said of some, who in respect of their inward
estate never went beyond a Covenant of works; yet of them it is said that they
were sanctified by the blood of the Covenant, which is the blood of Christ;
therefore such as are under a Covenant of works may be sanctified.

Answ. There is a twofold sanctification, one real, another in profession
only. As some men are said to believe when the work of faith is really wrought
in the heart, who are therefore said to be found in the faith, Tit. 1.13. and
2.2. so others are said to believe, only because they make a profession of
faith, as John 2.23. Acts 8.13. Simon himself believed also etc. i.e. he
professed to believe. And as it is in faith, so it is in sanctification also.
There is an holiness of truth really wrought, Ephesians. 4.24. and there is an
holiness of profession, when we profess to carry the lamp of holiness in our
hands, but want the oil of grace in the vessel of our heart, Mat. 25. 2 There
is a sanctification external reaching to the purifying of the flesh, standing
in the observance of the outward ordinances of the Church; and there is another
sanctification internal, standing in the inward purging of the conscience from
dead works, by which we are enabled to serve the living God, Heb. 9.13, 14. 3
There is a sanctification to men, making us so to be esteemed by men; and there
is also a sanctification to God, when we are so indeed in the sight of God. Now
this sanctification here spoken of was in profession, external, in respect of
men, and in esteem of men, but not real, inward, and in respect of God, so as
to make them holy and blameless in his sight.

Object. But they had real gifts, as illumination, some delight in the word,
and such like, Hebr. 6. therefore they were really sanctified.

Answ. It follows not, because there may be some real work wrought in the
soul, which yet may not reach so far as to real and true sanctification.
There may be some moral dispositions wrought in a man, which are real in
their kind, and yet may come far short of true sanctification. Object. As
where there is the substance and being of a man, there is a true man; so where
there is such a being of real gifts, there must needs be real and true
sanctification. Answ. Where there is the substance of a man there is a true
man, if true be taken for verum natural, which has a true natural existence
and being, and is not a mere spectrum, a phantasm, an image or shadow of a
thing. And thus taking true in this sense, a rank thief is a true man. But take
true for verum morale, for that moral truth which is required in the word,
then may there be the substance of a man, head, arms, feet, etc. and yet this
man may not be a true man considered thus morally: bring this man to the rule
of the word, try his actions by the truth which the word requires, and then he
which was found a true man in the former consideration, will here be found a
man false and deceitful. So here, gifts may be really wrought in a man by a
physical work of the spirit, and yet bring these same gifts and the actions
produced by them to the rule of the word, and try whether they will answer to
the pattern of true sanctification which the word lays down, and then their
sanctification will be found false, coming short of that holiness of truth
which is in the true Saints.

Object. But these here mentioned are said to be sanctified by the blood of the
Covenant, that is the blood of Christ; but the blood of Christ does not
sanctify only outwardly, as touching the purifying of the flesh; but it purges
the conscience also within, to serve the living God; and therefore these here
mentioned were inwardly and truly sanctified.

Answ. The blood of Christ is taken either Properly, or Sacramentally:
Properly, as in 1 John 1.7. where he says, the blood of Jesus Christ his Son
cleanses us from all sin: the blood in the spiritual efficacy of it being
applied unto us, does indeed inwardly cleanse us from all sin. But sometimes
the blood of Christ is taken Sacramentally, and it is received Sacramentally
only; and thus the Water in Baptism, and the Wine in the Supper, is the blood
of Christ, Math. 26. 1 Cor. 10. and 11. Now this Sacramental blood was
sprinkled upon them, they were washed with the Sacramental blood of Christ in
Baptism; but the spiritual efficacy of the blood it self never touched their
conscience, though the sign of it might be sprinkled on the outward man. And
thus Paraeus, Erat eorum sanctificatio non interna sed externa, in professione
fidei and participatione sacramentorum externa consistens. They were
sanctified, that is, (says he) they were by profession segregated from the
Jews and Pagans, and were accounted for true Christians or for Saints. To
conclude, the answer to the place alleged, the allusion is to that of Moses
in Exodus 24.3. to 9. where Moses makes up the Covenant betwixt God and the
people: there Moses first rehearses unto them the words of the Covenant, to
which they show themselves willing to assent, verse 3; then having taken order
for the killing of the Sacrifice, the blood whereof was to ratify and confirm
the Covenant, verse 4, 5. next he takes part of the blood and sprinkles it upon
the people, verse 8. using these words, behold the blood of the Covenant which
the Lord has made with you, concerning all these things. And now the people
having thus far accepted the terms and conditions of the Covenant, and
accepted the blood of the Covenant, being willing to be sprinkled with it: now
(I say) this people was a sanctified and holy people, a people in Covenant with
God, separated from the profane people of the world, and were now esteemed a
peculiar and holy people, though yet many of them were not inwardly sanctified,
but only thus far in respect of external confederation and profession; so it
is with these here spoken of, they were content to accept the sprinkling of the
sacramental blood upon them, and outwardly professed themselves willing (as
Israel did) to become the people of God; but yet all this while they were never
in truth inwardly sanctified, never washed with the washing of the new birth,
Tit. 3. This allusion I gather by the words of the Apostle, calling the blood
here mentioned the blood of the Covenant; just the same expression as Moses
used before, Behold the blood of the Covenant, Exodus 24.8. And look how the one
blood was sprinkled, so was the other; and what sanctification was wrought by
the one, the same was also by the other, namely an external federall
holiness; they having (both one and other) accepted the blood of the Covenant
to be sprinkled upon them, whereby they were sanctified thus far, as to
become a separate people unto God. So that (notwithstanding all that which has
been objected, or can be) this stands good, that sanctification is a blessing
of the Covenant of Grace only: And being so, therefore to prove our
justification by our sanctification, is not to go aside to a Covenant of works.

Use 2. Is our sanctification a benefit of the Covenant of grace, and springs
it from Grace? what then can our works of sanctification merit for us at the
hands of God? what have we herein which we have not received? 1 Cor. 4. of his
own hand do we give unto him, as David spoke in another case, 1 Chronicles. 29. but
of this there will be fitter place to speak elsewhere.

Use 3. To teach us hereby to try our selves, whether we have any part in that
salvation which God promises in his Covenant: when we hear the Lord say as he
does herein my Text, As for thee also, thou shall be saved by the blood of thy
Covenant; we should search and see whether we have been made partakers of this
salvation promised. But how shall we know that? even by our sanctification, if
the Lord has renewed and sanctified our natures, and made us new creatures in
Christ. At what time God saves his people, at the same time he sanctifies
them. And thus he tells the Israelites, Ezekiel. 36. when he promises them to
bring them back into the Land which their Fathers dwelt in (which was unto them
a type of heaven, and was therefore called the Lords Land, Hos. 9.3. 2 Chronicles.
7.20.) he tells them withal, that when and at what time he would perform this
unto them, at the same time he would pour out his spirit upon them, and would
cleanse them from their iniquities, verse. 33. suitable to that of the Apostle,
Tit. 3.4, 5. he has saved us by the washing of the new birth, and by the
renewing of the Holy Ghost. At what time God sanctifies us, at the same time
he saves us; he gives us the one as a pledge of the other. And therefore it
is, that when the Lord had converted and sanctified the heart of Zacheus, and
made him a new creature, he did withal thus testify unto him, This day is
salvation come to thy soul, etc. Luke 19.9. Some do deny this way of trial,
as if no evidence could be had from our sanctification, till we first know our
election and justification by immediate revelation of the Spirit: This mediate
witness of the spirit which is by habitual and inherent graces, is not to be
harkned unto, until the immediate witness has spoken. But if there be no
trial and knowledge of our estate to be had by habitual grace; then

1 What did Christ mean when he told his Disciples, that hereby should all men
know them to be his Disciples, if they love one another? John 13. What did Paul
mean, when he bids us prove our selves whether we be in the faith or no? 2 Cor.
13. David surely was deceived, when he said, hereby I know that I shall not be
confounded, when I have respect unto all thy Commandments; if so be no
knowledge of our good estate may be gathered hereby? Yea, to what end did John
lay down all those signs and tokens of a blessed estate, which are scattered
here and there through the whole first Epistle? his scope in that Epistle being
this, even to give unto the faithful some certain evidence of their
salvation, as is manifest by Chap. 5.13. And this being his scope, mark then
how frequent and plentiful he is in bringing in evidences of this nature, as
now we speak of, as we may see Chap. 1.7. If we walk in the light (of
holiness) as he is in the light, then have we fellowship one with another
(that is) God with us, and we with him; so Chap. 2.3, 4. hereby we are sure
that we know him (so as to have eternal life by the knowledge of him, John
17.3.) if we keep his Commandments; and in verse 29. Know ye that he which
does righteousness is borne of him; and in Chap. 3.7. he that does
righteousness (walking in the righteousness of a good conscience, and upright
conversation) is righteous (namely by imputation) even as Christ is righteous;
and in verse 9.10. he that is borne of God sins not: In this are the
children of God known from the children of the Devil, even by righteousness,
and loving of our brethren; and verse 14. hereby we know that we are
translated from death to life, because we love the brethren; so also verse 18,
19. and 24; and Chap. 4. verse 7, 12, 13, 16. Surely these are no lying
Testimonies, these witnesses are true: If in taking evidence from these things,
we be deceived, we may herein say as Jeremiah said in another case, O Lord I am
deceived, and thou have deceived me, Ier. 20.7.

2. If there were no evidence to be taken hereby, this were to leave the work
of the Spirit in as much darkness and obscurity, as is the work of the Father
and the Son: But the work of the Spirit is to make known and manifest unto us
the things that are given us of God, 1 Cor. 2. So long as the Fathers work of
election stands alone, and is not accompanied with the work of redemption and
sanctification, his electing of us is so hidden in his own bosom, that none
can tell what he will do with any of the sons of men, whether he will save
any or destroy all: But when the son comes and lays down his life for man's
redemption, he does thereby bring to light the Fathers intention thus far,
that it is now known that certainly there be some whom the Lord will save: But
yet who these (some) be, that is counsel still, that is unknown; therefore in
the third place the Spirit comes, and sanctifies those that are so chosen and
redeemed. And now by this work of the Spirit, it is known not only that there
be some that God will save, but the very persons themselves are thereby singled
out and marked; these have the seal and mark of God upon them, whereby they
are known to be the sheep for which Christ laid down his life, according to
the counsel and will of the Father; Even as in Matthew. 3.17. when the Spirit
came down upon Christ, then God witnessed, This is my beloved Son: So it is
here concerning our selves, hereby we have Gods witness, testifying of us that
we are his children, even by his Spirit of sanctification which he has sent
down into our hearts: By this we know that we are children redeemed and chosen;
If we be sanctified we are saved; Our salvation is begun, and shall be
perfected in due time.

Object. But when the Apostle says we know that we are translated from death
etc. his meaning is, as if he should say, we which have first received the
seal and immediate witness of the Spirit, we know etc. but others cannot know
it.

Answ. This is not the meaning of the Apostle, as is evident to any one that
with attention does observe the scope and manner of the Apostles writing: The
matter stands thus; There were a number in the Apostles time, such as James
elsewhere speaks of, which professed to know and believe in Christ, and would
say, they had faith, as it is in Iam. 2.14 and yet they had no works: They
would say they had fellowship with the Father, 1 Ioh. 1.6. and yet they would
walk in darkness: They would say they knew God, 1 Ioh. 2.3. and yet would not
keep his Commandments. They would say they did abide in Christ, and yet did
not walk after the steps of Christ, ver. 6. They would say they were in the
light, and yet would live in hatred of their brother, ver. 9. They would say
they loved God, and yet loved not their brethren, 1 Ioh. 4.20. Now against
these Sayers (as I may call them) that were all in profession, and in word,
saying, Lord, Lord, but not doing his will, against these I say, the Apostle
opposes these others which had the true work of sanctification in their heart,
and tells us that hereby we know etc. Namely, if we do not only say we love
the brethren, but do indeed love them, etc. hereby we know that we are passed
from death to life. Thus by these expressions taken out of the Apostles own
mouth, we see clearly who they are whom the Apostle means by this (we)
namely, not we only who have received that immediate witness of the Spirit,
assuring us of our election and justification, but we also which have this work
of sanctification wrought in our hearts by the holy Ghost.

Quest. But some may say, why should we go about to evidence our justification
by our sanctification, rather then our sanctification by our justification?

Ans. Because though they go both together in time, yet they are not both
alike in respect of manifestation: Our sanctification is more manifest to us
then is our justification. Its easier discerned: First, because our
sanctification is the work of the Spirit, whose part it is (as was said before)
to make known unto us the hid things of God; for which cause he is called the
Spirit of Revelation, etc. Ephesians. 1.17. Secondly, because our sanctification is a
work within us, wrought in out own hearts; Our justification is an act of God
without us, God not imputing to us our iniquities; but our sanctification is an
inward work wrought in a man's own bowels, of which he has (and cannot but
have) a sensible feeling in himself.

Obj. But by this reason (may some say) a man may as well know his
justification as his sanctification, because we are justified by faith, and
faith is an inward Grace planted in the heart, as well as any other sanctifying
Grace which springs therefrom. And therefore we may know our justification by
our faith, as well as by our sanctification.

Answ. True, so far as we discern our faith, we may thereby discern our
justification also: But this makes for us, not against us, Though this withal
is to be considered, that faith being as the root of all other Graces, is more
hidden then they are, as the root of the tree is more hidden in the earth then
the body or branches; but this we stand not upon: This therefore we would grant
that a man may know his justification by his faith; but this touches not the
point in hand. For when we go about to try our justification by our
sanctification, and by qualifications inherent in us, in this way of trial,
faith is excluded, as much as any other sanctifying Graces be. And the meaning
of those that do oppose this way of evidencing by our sanctification, is to
remove all evidence by any thing in our selves, whether by faith or by any
other Grace, and to urge only the immediate revelation of the Spirit; The sum
is, that this is a safe way of trial, being laid down unto us by the Lord
himself in the Word: And it is a possible way, in as much as our
sanctification is more evident then our justification, this being an act of God
without us as was said before, and that a work within us, which we feel and
find in our own souls. Would we then know whether we be of the number of
those that are saved by the blood of the Covenant? we need not for this ascend
up into heaven, to search the book of Gods election, nor need we to go down
into the lower parts of the earth, for any there to tell us that we are
delive^ed thence; but go down into our own hearts, and if we find this work
of sanctification there wrought, then what Moses said of Israel, Blessed art
thou O Israel, a people saved by the Lord, the same may be truly said of us;
Our salvation is begun, we have the seal of it, the earnest, the first fruits,
which shall at length bring the full possession of the whole harvest: Blessed
therefore are they which are undefiled in their way (says David) which walk in
the Law of the Lord, Psalm. 119.1. Blessed are the pure in heart, Matthew. 5.8.
Those that have innocent hands, and a pure heart, shall surely ascend into the
mountain of the Lord and stand in his holy place, Psalm. 24.3, 4. Such as these
shall never be moved or confounded, Psalm. 15. end. But if in our hearts we do
still nourish impurity, if we be fleshly, carnal, such as have not the Spirit,
then have we no part nor portion in that salvation which the Covenant brings
unto Gods people; without holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. No
unrighteous person, no unclean thing shall enter into Gods Kingdom, 1 Cor. 6.

Quest. But how shall we discern our sanctification to be right, sincere, and
sound?

Answ. 1. By the extent of it: It goes over the whole man, soul body and
spirit, 1 These. 5.23. and therefore compared to leaven: Matthew. 13.33. which
runs through the dough till all be leavened. As corruption had defiled all,
so Grace sanctifies all: The mind which was darkness before is now light in
the Lord, to know and understand the will of God, and to discern things that
differ: The judgment made to approve the good which is known, the will to
desire and endeavor after the doing of it: The conscience is made watchful,
and tender, fearful to offend: The affections ordered aright to love the
things which God loves, and to hate the things which he hates: The body is
made an instrument to execute and do that which is holy and good: Both body
and spirit are Gods, set to do the things that please him, by which he may be
glorified: 1 Cor. 6. all that is within us and without, us is employed to
praise God.

2. True Sanctification as it does sanctify the whole man, so it does form
the heart to a closing with the whole will of God without exception or
reservation: when God writes his Law in our hearts, he writes all his
Commandments there, as he wrote all of them before in the Tables of stone; and
they being all written in the heart, now we love all the Commandments of it,
saying, as Paul, The Law is holy, and just, and good; now his Commandments are
not burthenous or grievous, all are equal and right, we love all, embrace all,
and labor to practice all; duties of holiness toward God, duties of love and
righteousness toward men, go hand in hand in the life of a sanctified
Christian: He makes account he has done but half his duty, if either of these
be omitted: He counts himself as debtor to God and man to glorify God, and
procure the good of men; and desires to keep a clear conscience toward both,
Acts 24.16. It is but false sanctification which neglects either of these
duties, or any part of them; when we put on a form of Religion, and yet deal
unrighteously with men, this is cursed hypocrisy: And when we deal squarely
with men, but are careless Gallio's in the things of God, this is but a kind
of civil profanesse: there is no true sanctification in one or other of them:
True sanctification cleaves to the whole law, and to all the Commandments of
it, seeking to do and fulfill all: such an heart the Lord requires, Deuteronomy.
5.29. and such he works, where he works Grace in truth, 2 King. 23.25.

3. True sanctification will never suffer the soul to find rest and peace,
but only in the way which is called holy: A sanctified soul may step aside
into the way which is not good, but it can find no rest there; Holiness
stands in a conformity with God: It will not agree with any thing which is
contrary to God, or to his will; a godly heart can find no peace there. As on
the one side a sinful heart may do the thing that is good, but it takes no
pleasure in such things; so contra the sanctified heart, may by occasion and by
strength of temptation, and prevailing power of inward corruption, be drawn to
act amiss; but when he has done so, he finds no rest in his spirit, till he
be returned again into the way of holiness which he had turned from. Thus
David stepped aside, but what peace found he? Peter fell into shameful denial,
but how grieved was he afterward? Thus Paul he confessed he did the evil that
he would not; but how was he pained at the very heart, till he was rid of that
body of sin? It was his continual vexation. As the needle in the compass
may by shaking be turned from the right point, and from the pole, but it will
find no rest till it be turned to it again: So here. When therefore the heart
sins and finds rest in it, and is not laboring to work out the corruption
which is within, this is an evil sign and dangerous; this argues a carnal
disposition, and an unsanctified Spirit. But when we are grieved for the evil
which is in us, when our sin is counted our misery, making us lament with
Paul and say O miserable man that I am etc. and that not only as it troubles
the conscience, but as it cloggs the Spirit hindering us in well doing; this is
a sign of a sanctified estate, and springs from a Spirit of grace.

4. True sanctification will make us most wary and watchful against those
sins which do most stain our holy profession and blemish the glory of
Christ, and make us most studious of those things in which God is most
glorified: As Paul said of himself, I can do nothing against the truth, but
for the truth; so indeed a sanctified soul can do nothing against Gods glory,
but all things for his glory. Sanctity devotes a man unto God, he is for God,
not for himself, not for the world, he accounts himself that he is Gods. If
we live we live for God; whether we eat or drink or labor or rest, we do them
for God, 1 Cor. 10.31. If we get riches, we grow rich for God, to honor God
with our riches, Prove. 3.9. Our whole life is for God, Romans 14.6. This is a
sanctified disposition, when it is thus with us: And when otherwise we eat for
our selves as Zachary speaks, chap. 7.6. we labor for our selves, get riches
for our selves, not caring how our profession is blemished, and God dishonored
by our worldly and coveteous conversation; this is from the flesh, which loves
its own, and minds its own things, and not the things of Christ.

5. True sanctification makes a man affect society with those that are holy:
Its a good sign when the heart does inwardly cleave to those that excel in
grace; especially, when it is for Grace sake and because of the Grace that is
in them. There may be an outward complying with them, and some external
society had with them also, when yet the heart is not with them; there may be
some sutablenesse of disposition, some moral qualifications, in a godly soul,
which may give content unto a carnal heart; but to love them inwardly, and
that not for any other respect but for the grace which is in them, this is from
a suitable Spirit of grace working in our selves: Thus it was with David, Psalm.
16.3. and Psalm. 119. Come unto me all ye that fear God etc. and away from me
ye wicked, etc.

6. True sanctification makes us aspire after communion and fellowship with God
himself; it loves fellowship with the Saints, but rests not in them, but
aspires higher; nothing will satisfy a sanctified soul, but God; yea, it is
God which he loves and seeks in his Saints. So it is also in the use of
Ordinances, they are all empty things without God, unless the Lord be there;
The Word, Prayer, Sacraments, are but lean and empty things, unless he enjoy
God in them; He is the fat, the marrow, and sweetness of them all: when God
meets the soul in any of these, it is then satisfied as with marrow and
fatness; but when he withdrawes and absents himself, it finds no satiety, no
relish in any thing: The soul is empty still, till he fill it, who is the
fullness of all things: God only does fill and satisfy the soul that is
sanctified; See Ier. 50.4. There you shall see the children of Israel and
children of Judah together coming to Jerusalem the place of Gods worship; but
is that all they go for? No, says the Prophet, they go seeking the Lord
their God; they go to Jerusalem to worship there; but there is a further thing
they seek for, even God himself; without whom, Jerusalem, and Temple, and all
would be but as a solitary cave in a wilderness, if God were not found there;
This Gods servants find in frequent experience: Sometimes they find God
sweetly present with them in prayer, Sacrament, or the like, and then they go
away as a man refreshed with new wine: Sometimes they seek him but find him
not, as Cant. 5. and then they are like men that feign would eat to the
satisfying of their hungry soul, but they want their appointed food: or like
those in the Prophet, they do eat, but they are not satisfied, they have not
enough: Whom have I in heaven but thee? says David, Psalm. 73.25. Whom? there
are Angels, there are Saints, the Spirits of just and perfect men, Hebr. 12.
Are all these nothing with David? These were in heaven, and are also in earth:
yet says David, Whom have I in heaven or earth but thee? These are good with
God; but not able to satisfy a sanctified soul without God: If it were
possible for such a soul to be in heaven it self, there to enjoy all the
glory of it, and communion with all the company of Saints and Angels there, yet
if it should not there enjoy God, it would say, I find not him whom my soul
loves and longs for; where is he? I must find him ere my joy can be full.
Thus a sanctified heart aspires to fellowship with, and enjoyment of God
himself; It stays not till it come to the top of the ladder where God is;
Ordinances are as so many steps to ascend up unto him, be only is the end which
the godly heart seeks in them; when we rest in them, not seeking or not finding
God in them, this is but formality, not true sanctity: True sanctity stays not
till we can say as 1 ^oh. 1.3. Verily our fellowship is with the Father and
with his Son Jesus Christ.

7. True sanctification makes us exceeding sensible of our own wants and
weaknesses in Grace; making us to see how far short we come of that
perfection which should be in us: Thus it was with Paul, he strove unto a
conformity wi^h Christ; but (says he) I have not yet attained unto it: And so
it was with David, Psalm. 119.5. Oh that my ways were directed to keep thy
statutes! q.d. but alas, how short do I come of such a course? when men are so
full, and so perfect, that they lack nothing, its a sign that pride, and
self-conceit, and hypocrisy has filled their heart, rather then true
sanctity; These are proud Pharisees, Hypocrites, Laodiceans, who are indeed
poor, and blind, and naked and miserable, having no truth of Grace in them.
Its a true saying, He that wants nothing in Grace, has nothing; others there
are which are ever wanting, ever craving and begging, as men that are made up
of wants, seeing such abundance of corruption in themselves, that it makes them
to abhor themselves when they come before God; only this they do, they are
still purging themselves in that fountain of Grace, Zach. 13. seeking to grow
up to full holiness in his fear, 2 Cor. 7.1. These are sanctified souls,
such Christ pronounces blessed; Blessed are the poor in Spirit, Blessed are
these that thus hunger and thirst after righteousness. Matthew. 5.

8. There be sundry sanctified affections and dispositions, which do show
forth true sanctification were it is: As

First, holy mourning for sin, when our sin is our chiefest sorrow, as it
was in David, Psalm. 51.4.

Secondly, a choosing of the way of Grace; when godliness and Grace with loss
accompanying them, are chosen and preferred before riches and treasures of the
world, doing as Moses who chose affliction, rather then the treasures of
Egypt, Heb. 11. and David who said of himself, I have chosen the way of thy
precepts, etc. What ever befall us, this is our resolution, in this way I will
live, in this I will die.

Thirdly, a caring and taking thought for the things of Christ; Paul that
chiefest of Saints, had his head full of these cares, even cumbred with them
every day: This was from the abundant Grace of God which was in him; those that
are after the flesh, they take thought for the flesh to fulfill the lusts of
it, Romans 13. but those that are after the spirit, they take thought for the
things of Christ, Phil. 2.

Fourthly, an holy zeal and earnestness for good, to be active and working
for Christ, with an holy emulation and contention of Spirit, being provoked
thereto not only by the zeal of others, as 2 Cor. 9. but even by their
lukewarmnesse; the less they do we will do the more, and seek to draw on
others by our example; loath that any should be more forward in evil then we
for good.

By these things try we our selves, try we our sanctification; where these
things are, there is the Spirit of holiness; and where they are not in some
degree more or less, there the Spirit of Grace is not, nor have those (that
do wholly want these things before named) any part or portion in any saving
blessing of the Covenant.

Use 4. For direction unto all Gods people which have given up themselves by
Covenant unto God; These do many times complain of the power of their
corruptions prevailing against them; They see so much sinful uncleanesse in
themselves, that it makes them to doubt whether the Spirit of Grace ever had
any abiding in them. Now for these, here is direction how to get help, that
they may become pure, holy, undefiled, and clean from their sin; Let them look
unto the promises of this Covenant, which God has made with his people: Here
is a fountain of Grace opened unto them to wash in; God has promised, That he
will pour clean water upon them, and will cleanse them from all their
filthiness, Ezekiel. 3.25. He has said, he will wash away the filthiness of the
daughters of Zion, that they may be clean. Are you then Ieprous and unclean in
your own eyes? Go then and wash seven times in these waters of Jordan, and so
your leprosy shall depart from you: Go to God and plead his Covenant and
promise, and say unto God, Lord, thou have made promises unto thy servants,
that thou will not only forgive the sins of thy people, but that thou will
sanctify them, and make them an holy people unto thee; why then am I still
thus corrupt, sinful and unclean? Lord, wash me, wash me thoroughly till I be
clean from all my sin. This is our way to get help against our corruptions;
we think (for the most part) that if we have sinned, we must indeed go to God
for pardon and forgiveness; but we think we must work out our sanctification
of our selves, by our own watchfulness, resolutions, vows and promises made
unto God: But herein we wrong our selves; were there not more help in Gods
promises which he makes to us, then in our promises to him, we might lie in our
pollutions for ever; we must therefore go to God for help against all our
corruptions, seeking to him by faith in his Covenant and promise, saying as
Iehoshaphat, Lord, I am so borne down by the power of my sin, that I know
not what to do; only mine eyes are unto thee; do thou subdue mine iniquities,
do thou help me. The whole life of a Christian is a life of faith; the life of
justification, the life of sanctification; we live both these lives by the
faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.20. and therefore we are said to be
sanctified by faith, because by faith we seek for, and receive the Spirit of
sanctification which is promised unto us. Herein then lies our help. What is
the reason that after so many resolutions, against such or such a sin, yet we
are overcome again and again? It is (in a great part) because we look at the
victory against them to come as from our selves; we think this or that shall
do it: but the Apostle tells us, that the victory by which we must overcome,
is our faith, 1 Ioh. 5.4 Rest upon Gods faithfulness for help and strength
against sin, as well as for forgiveness of sin: And then though there be
no help on earth, yet we shall see that there is help in heaven; though none in
our selves, yet there is in God and in his faithful Covenant.

Use 5. To stir up those that do yet find themselves destitute of all Grace
not able to discern the least spark of goodness in themselves; let them
(notwithstanding) consider what God has promised in his Covenant: He has
therein promised a new heart, a new spirit, to create us anew in Christ Jesus:
He has promised to pour out waters upon the dry ground, Esaias 44.3. where
there is no sap, no moisture, no goodness, but their moisture is turned into
the drought of Summer: yet upon such dry grounds, on such dry trees, the waters
of the Spirit shall be poured out, and they shall be made to bring forth fruit.
The wild forest of Lebanon shall become as Carmell, the Desert a fruitfill
Field; go therefore thou poor lost creature, thou sinful soul, who never
yet to this day had one drop of Grace wrought in thy heart; go thou to the
Throne of Grace, lament thy sinful and wicked heart before God, beg this
mercy of him, say unto him, Lord, thou have promised to give thy Spirit unto
such as ask him of thee. Now Lord give it unto me a poor sinful creature;
make me, even me also a partaker of this bless^ng.

Object. But here perhaps you will say, these promises are made only unto those
that are in Covenant with God; but alas, thou art a stranger and an alien, and
have ever so been unto this day, thou have no part in these promises.

Answ. They belong to all that either are in Covenant with God or ever shall
be; though they be not as yet fulfilled in thee; yet they may be intended unto
thee: these promises may be thine in respect of Gods purpose of grace and
intention, though not as yet in respect of actual performance and execution.
To encourage all to seek after this blessing: Consider with your selves three
things.

1. The extent of these promises; I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh,
Joel. 2.28. Whosoever is thirsty, come, and drink of the waters of life freely;
yea, turn you (says Christ to scornful sinners) at my correction; and then
behold, I will pour out my Spirit upon you: And in Ezekiel. 36. compare verse 20.
with 25, 26. There you may see that those upon whom he promises to pour his
Spirit, they were such as had polluted Gods name among the Heathen and made it
to be blasphemed; and yet even to those the Lord promises that (when the time
of Grace was come, for mercy to manifest it self in them) upon them he would
pour out his Spirit and cleanse them from all their uncleanness.

2. Consider the freeness of these promises; come and buy without money or
money-worth, Isai. 55.2. drink of the waters of life freely, Apoc. 22.17.

3. Consider Christ forwardness and readiness to give to every one that
asks; had thou but asked (says Christ to the woman in Ioh. 4.20.) I would
have given thee the water of life: Mark the place and occasion of Christ's
words: Christ being then weary and thirsty by reason of his journey, he asks
of the woman a cup of water to drink; no great matter to give, bring but a cup
of water; and being by the well side, where was water enough and ready at hand
yet she gives it not but stands wondering that he being a Jew should ask water
of her that was a Samaritane; well says Christ, thou denyest me a cup of cold
water to drink, being weary and thirsty; but had thou asked of me, I would
have given thee the water of life: Nay, and did give it unto her, though she
denied him a cup of water out of the well, yet Christ gave her the water of
life. What would the Lord Jesus have us to take notice of in this his speech
unto her, and her dealing toward him, but that he is more forward to give that
water of life (his holy Spirit) to a poor sinner, then we are to give a cup of
common water to a thirsty soul? O blessed redeemer, who would not come unto
thee? Go therefore thou that have denied the least mercy and kindness to
Christ in any of his members, though thou have thought a cup of water too much
for them, yet seek grace from him; Ask his Spirit, entreat him to make thy
heart new within thee, do but ask and seek, and he will do more then thou
can hope or think; plead the promise of his Covenant and wait in hope. Thus
much for the third benefit.

4. The fourth benefit which God promises unto his in his Covenant is our
preservation in the state of Grace to which we are called: This is a part of
his Covenant with us, that he once taking us to be a people unto him in Christ,
he will never forsake us any more, but keep us in that estate for ever: And by
this promise the Lord takes away that last great scruple which the soul is apt
to make in this manner; although (may one think) the Lord has showed mercy
unto me thus far, that he has given me hope of the forgiveness of my sins
past, and has changed my heart in some measure, so as it is my desire to do
his will; yet for all this I find still such strong opposition against me by
enemies within and without, so many corruptions within, and temptations from
without, that I shall never be able to hold out unto the end; but as David
said, I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul; so thinks the soul here in
mids of many pursuits by the enemy; I shall one day perish by the hand of
Satan; I shall not be able to withstand him. Now to this fear of our heart,
the Lord answers by this promise and benefit, which he has Covenanted to make
good unto us; he undertakes to keep us in the same estate of Grace to which he
has brought us; he tells us, no, ye shall never perish, fear it not; he
which has begun the work will perfect it in us and for us; And as God said
unto Jacob, in Genesis 28.15. I am with thee, I will keep thee (says the Lord) I
will not forsake thee, till I have performed unto thee all that I have promised
thee; So he says unto us, I will keep you, till I have perfected toward you
all the good pleasure of my goodness, 2 These. 1.11. I will keep you in my own
hand, I will guide you by my council, and afterward will bring you to glory,
Psalm. 73. This blessing we have promised to us, in Ier. 32.39.40. They shall
fear me for ever, and I will make an everlasting Covenant with them that I will
never turn away from them to do them good, but I will put my fear into their
hearts, that they shall not depart from me: and in Isai. 54.8. With everlasting
mercy have I had compassion on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer; For this is
unto me as the waters of Noah; for as I have sworn, that the waters of Noah
shall no more go over the earth: so have I sworr, that I would not be angry
with thee. The mountains shall remove, and the hills shall fall down, but my
mercy shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my peace fall
away, says the Lord that has compassion on thee. Plentiful is the Scripture
in such promises as these, In Hos. 2.19, 20. I will marry thee unto my self,
etc: when the Lord marries us to himself, he does it with a purpose to be
ours for ever; whom God loves once with this conjugall love, he loves them for
ever unto the end, Ioh. 13.2. And thence it is that those that are truly
regenerate and sanctified, are compared to Mount Sion, which cannot be removed,
Psalm. 125.1. And to a tree planted by the river of water, which continually
flourishes, and withers not, etc. Psalm. 1.3. and to an house built upon a
Rock, Matthew. 7. And hence is that glorious triumph of the Apostle, setting all
contrary power at a defiance; Who shall separate us from the love of God? etc.
Romans 8.33. Neither height, nor depth, nor things present, nor things to come
shall ever separate us from the love of God, wherewith he has loved us in
Christ Jesus; and in 2 Timothy 4.8. Hence forth is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness: And thence was that confident speech of the Prophet in Psalm. 73.
Thou will guide me by thy counsel, and afterward bring me to glory. This
benefit the Lord will fulfill unto his people; when he has begun the work of
his Grace, he will finish it unto the day of Christ, Phil. 1.6. he will show
himself to be both the author and finisher of our salvation, H^b. 12.

Arminians and Papists which reach a falling away from Grace, know not the
difference between the Covenant of Works and the Covenant of Grace. Their
Doctrine of the Apostasy of the Saints, that those that are adopted,
sanctified, and planted into Christ, may fall away and perish, is a doctrine
contrary to the whole tenor of the Covenant of Grace, injurious unto God, and
uncomfortable unto the Saints. It is true that there is a kind of seeming
holiness which may be lost, a form of godliness which may vanish and come to
naught, Heb. 6.4, 6. and 10.29. Its true also that Gods own people called and
chosen may much damp and quench the Grace of God which is in them, and may show
much infirmity in particular falls, which they are subject unto, being
sometimes so far left unto themselves, as we see in David and Solomon, Peter,
etc. Acts of grace may be interrupted in them for a season, sense of it may be
much lessened, power of it weakened, the degree of it abated: but the habit
cannot be utterly lost, the life of it never goes out; a man may be in a swoun,
and yet his life be in him still. The certainty of the Saints perseverance is
built upon these foundations.

1. God is able to stablish them, and therefore they shall be established He is
able to keep us Jude 24. He is able to make us stand, Romans 16.25. and therefore
we shall never be removed nor overthrown.

Object. But this is a weak argument to reason from Gods power to his will.

Answ. Then the Apostle himself argues weakly, in Romans 14.4. where speaking of
the weak believer, he says that such an one shall be established; and how
proves he that? because God is able to make him stand. This is the Apostles
Argument: Indeed its true, God will not do all things which he can do; he can
out of the stones and rocks raise up children unto Abraham, but he neither does
it nor will do it: But though God will not do all things which he can, yet he
will do all things which he has promised to do. Now this is Gods promise (as
we have seen before) that he will preserve his people; and therefore if he can
do it, surely, he will do it, because he has promised it. And hence it is
that in Ioh. 10.28, 29. Christ argues from the power of God, and does by that
argument prove the undoubted salvation of those that believe, namely because
God is in power greater then all, and none is able to pull them out of his
hand: Indeed till we have a promise, there is no arguing from Gods power; no
man can groundedly argue that God will out of stones raise up children to
Abraham, because he never promised it; but when we have the promise, then we
may reason from his power: And thus did Abraham reason, I shall have a Son
(says Abraham) because (though my body be as good as dead, yet) God is able
to do it. The argument was good, because God had before promised to do it. So
in the case in hand; God has said that he will keep us to his heavenly
Kingdom; and therefore if he can do it, he will do it; he has engaged all
his power and goodness to be for our salvation; God is ours, his power is ours
to stablish and strengthen us that we fall not; yea, here are two immutable
things to support us; the power and will of God. These two are as the two
pillars before Salomons Temple; Jachin and Boaz: Boaz signifying (in him is
strength) and Iachim (he will stablish:) these two pillars stand together to
establish all those that are ready to fall; if there be strength in him, he
would have us to know that he will put it forth for our establishment, that we
might be supported by his power; his power and will stand together to support
us.

2. All the gifts of God which accompany salvation, are given without
repentance, Romans 11.29. Hos. 13.14. God never repents him of the Grace he has
showed to his people that he knew before: Hence is that in 2 Samuel 7.14. when
God promises to David, that he would take of his seed, and set upon his Throne
after him, and then says the Lord, I will be his Father, and he shall be my
Son, and my mercy will I not take away from him, as I took a from Saul; to
teach us when he has once brought us into the state of Adoption, to be his
sons, he will never cease to follow us with Fatherly love, he will never take
away his Fatherly mercy from us: add hereto that in Isai. 46.3.4. and Mal. 3.6.

3. It would shake the foundation of Gods election, if those that are once
sanctified should fall away and perish; for those only whom he knew before,
those only does he sanctify: If he has in mercy drawn us unto himself, its
a sign he has loved us from everlasting, Ier. 31.3. our calling and
sanctification is according, to his purpose, Romans 8.28.30. 2 Timothy 1.9. Those
that are sanctified, justified and called, are all first chosen: And thence
faith is called the faith of Gods elect, Tit. 1. and those that are sanctified
are said to be chosen unto it, Ephesians. 1.3, 4. And why are these things said to
flow from Gods election, but that we knowing that that foundation of Gods
election remains sure, we might know that our state in Grace is sure also, as
being built on that foundation which cannot be moved? And this does our blessed
Savior make good in that speech of his in Matthew. 24. where speaking of the
strong delusions and deceits which many should be deceived with, he says, that
those deceivers shall show forth such signs and wonders as if it were
possible, should deceive the very Elect: If it were possible, but that they
cannot do, the Elect cannot perish.

4. It would frustrate the virtue and efficacy of the mediation and
intercession of the Lord Jesus, who not only once offered up himself, as a
sacrifice for us, but appears for ever at the right hand of the Father to make
intercession for us, Romans 8.34. That prayer of his Ioh. 17. which he made for
us when he was here upon earth, was and is a testification of the care he has
of us now in heaven: He then prayed, Father keep them in thy name; and the same
does he for us now: He is not changed, he is yesterday and to day and the same
for ever; he is our faithful High Priest, who bears our names upon his breast
in the holy place he is now entered into, Exodus 28.29. presenting us with his
heartiest affection unto his Father, he having set us a seal upon his heart,
and carrying us in his bosom, and loving us with his bosom love. This comfort
Christ gave unto Peter; I have prayed for thee (says Christ) that thy faith
fail not, Luke 22.32. And look what Christ prayed for in the behalf of Peter
and the rest of his Disciples, the same prayer he makes for all those that
believe in him through their word, Joh. 17.20. And if Christ make such
intercession for us, we know that he is always heard and accepted by the
Father, Joh. 11. It is not possible that those for whom he intercedes, should
perish.

5. If there were falling away from Grace, then it must come either by Gods
departing from us, or by our departing from him: But neither of these shall do
it; neither will God depart from us, not shall we (when once effectually
called) depart any more from him Jer. 32.40. He will not forsake his people, 1 Samuel 12.22. Nor will they go away from him, Joh. 6.68. Lord whether shall we
go? thou have the fountain of life and blessedness in thee; whether should
we go to forsake thee?

Object. But Adam who had perfect holiness in him, and had more grace then we
have, did fall; therefore we which have less grace then he, may fall much more.

Answ. It follows not; because Adam and we are to be considered under
different Covenants: Adam was under the Covenant of works; those that are
regenerate, are under a Covenant of Grace; He was therefore left to himself to
work either in one kind or other, well or ill, as he would himself; but now
we are under a Covenant of Grace, and are kept by the power of God through
faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. he had no promise of being kept as we have;
He had that which we have not, Posse si vellet, he had power to have stood, but
abused his will; we have that which he had not, we have will, but we want
power; but though we want power of our own, yet we are kept by the power of God.

Object. But we have no promise of being kept in the state of Grace, but only
so far as we are not wanting to our selves, etc.

Answ. 1. If so, no flesh should be saved; for who is not wanting to himself
more or less? Are those that plead thus, so watchful and diligent never to be
wanting to themselves? I suppose they dare not for shame once affirm it; and
yet I believe, they will not therefore say, that because of such want, they are
fallen from Grace.

2. If this were all that God promised unto us now under Grace, then I demand,
what have we promised to us more then was promised to Adam? for surely if Adam
had not been wanting to himself, he should have continued still in that holy
estate; And if the Lord should now promise us no more, what grace is showed to
us more then to him? where is the Grace of the second Covenant above the first?

3. The Lord has promised this also, that we shall never be so far wanting
to our selves, as wholly to turn away from him, Ier. 32.40. He puts into the
hearts of his people an holy fear of departing away from him; they fear to be
deprived, Heb. 4.1. This fear makes them pray, knit my heart unto thee, and to
resolve with David, It is good for me to draw nigh unto God, Psalm. 73. And thus
in Ier. 32.39. I will give them one heart that they shall fear me for ever.
This fearing him for ever makes Gods children for ever to cleave to him, so as
though they may have their particular slips and failings, yet they can no more
cease to fear God, and to cleave unto him, then this promise of God can fail,
wherein he has said, I will give them an heart to fear me for ever. At what
time they cease to fear God, at the same time, this promise of God fails and
comes to naught.

Object. But these promises which do sound as if they were absolute, are to be
expounded by other promises which are expressed conditionally, if ye continue,
Colos. 1. if ye faint not, Galat. 6.

Answ. 1. These conditional expressions are added, not to weaken the force of
those absolute promises before named, as if one sort of promises did cross
another, and were to weaken our confidence in them: but there are two other
causes of adding these conditions. One is this: Namely, because the Apostle in
writing to visible Churches, he knew that in all such Churches there were
some, that though they made as fair profession as the rest, yet they would in
time discover some unsoundnesse at heart; for their sakes therefore the Apostle
adds these (Ifs) as if he should say, if ye be truly grounded on Christ and
so continue, then shall ye be presented blameless, etc. Col. 1.22, 23. but
this does nothing at all tend to weaken the assurance of those that are truly
called and sanctified. The other is this; These conditional expressions have
in them the force of a secret warning and quickening exhortation for every one
that stands or thinks that he stands to take heed lest he fall; and so in
stead of weakening our confidence, they make us to stand more cautelously and
sure.

2. It is a sweet and useful consideration observed by that learned Lawyer,
and active. Instrument in the Cause of Gods truth, that in the comparing and
compounding of these conditional promises with the absolute, we must place
conditional in the first rank, and then absolute in the second: Set the former
as the major Proposition, the later as the minor; as thus. If ye continue, ye
shall be saved: here is the conditional promise in the major; then follows;
But ye shall continue, ye shall never depart from me; Here is the absolute
promise in the Minor; whence follows the conclusion of assurance in the
conscience of the believer, I shall be saved. The inverting of this order,
breeds the disturbance and confusion, when they set the conditional after the
absolute.

Object. We grant (says the Jesuit) we may be assured, that God will hold his
promise; but no man can assure himself of the use of his particular will.

Answ. Then belike the Grace of God and efficacy of it must depend wholly upon
the will of man: So that where the Apostle says, It is not in him that
wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy; we must now
change the Text, and say, It is in man that wills, and not in God that
shows mercy.

Object. But to what end are those caveats and warnings given, to take heed of
falling away from the Grace of God, if so be that those which are under Grace
cannot fall from Grace?

Answ. They serve to keep the Saints more watchful, by which watchfulness
they are helped to stand more firmly: They are thereby admonished of their
own infirmity, and made more careful to rest on Christ, by whom they are
preserved: 2. They serve also to leave all Hypocrites and Apostates without
excuse, they being warned of the danger, but they would not take heed.

Object. But this Doctrine of Perseverance is a Doctrine of security, tending
to make men careless, when they know they cannot fall nor perish.

Answ. It does indeed breed an holy security, that knowing these promises which
the Lord has made unto us, thus to keep us for ever unto himself, now we may
say as the holy Prophet, I will even lay me down and sleep in peace, for the
Lord sustaineth me: And though Legions of Devils beset me round about, yet I
will trust in this, The Lord is my life and salvation; of whom should I be
afraid? he will deliver me from every evil work, and preserve me blameless to
his heavenly Kingdom. This holy peace and blessed security does indeed flow
from the doctrine delivered, but not that sinful and carnal security which
these men mean: Look into the Saints who have felt most assurance hereof in
themselves, and see whether it wrought any such effect in them; David says,
Thou will guide me by thy counsel, and afterward wilt bring me to glory, Psalm.
73. But did this his assurance make him carnally secure? did he now conclude
with himself, I may now take mine own liberty, and live as I list? No such
thought entered into his heart, but the contrary; it is good for me to draw nigh
unto God: It made him to love God more, and to cleave unto him in his inward
affection, and to make God the portion of his soul for ever. And so the
Apostle; who more assured then Paul? Romans 8. yet who ever more watchful and
more zealous for Christ? Certainly, they know not what this assurance is, which
think this to be the fruit of it, to make us carnally secure and careless of
well doing.

Quest. If the Lord will thus stablish and keep his Saints from falling, how
and by what means does he effect it, and bring it to pass?

Answ. Here are two things concurring: First, an inward principle and work of
faith wrought in us, inherent and abiding within us: Secondly, an external
assisting power of God upholding and strengthening that weak faith which is in
us, and treading down our enemies under our feet: Both these are joined
together in that one saying of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1.5. We are kept by the
power of God through faith unto salvation: Here is says within us, and the
power of God without us, both united and working together to keep us unto
salvation. Faith makes us see wherein our strength lies, not in our selves,
but in God through Christ; being then sensible of our own infirmity and
weakness, faith flies unto this power of God to be kept by him: Faith speaks
in the heart of a Christian as Jehoshaphat did 2 Chronicles. 20. Lord I know not
what to do, I am not able to stand against all this multitude of enemies which
beset my soul on evey side, but mine eyes are toward thee, I rest on thee, 2 Chronicles. 14. And then the soul thus looking unto God by the eye of faith, and
resting upon his power; now the power of God comes in for our help, so as faith
stands still to see and behold the salvation of God; And hereto agrees that of
the Prophet Isai. 26.3. The Lord keeps in perfect peace the mind which is
staid on him: We stay upon him by faith, and he keeps us in peace and safety by
his power; And to the same purpose is that in Ephesians. 6. where we are exhorted
to stand fast in the power of his might; we must have recourse unto the power
of his might by faith, and then we shall stand fast, and never be moved; Now as
we have seen that the Lord will preserve his people in the state of Grace to
which he has called them, so let us consider what grace is herein showed unto
us from God, and what benefit comes thereby unto our selves.

Here is Grace from God; For by Grace we stand; were we left unto our selves,
we should soon do as our first Father did; There is naturally the same
revoking Spirit in us, as was in him; an aptness and inclination of heart,
ready to depart away, Jer. 5.23. Heb. 3.12. loving to wander, Jer. 14.10. we
have also the same Enemy, the same Tempter to draw us, with like temptations
from our communion with God, Luke 22.41. And in those that are not preserved by
Grace, these things (corruption within, and temptation without) do prevail so
far, as to turn back many who seemed to begin in the Spirit, to cause them to
make an end in the flesh: They turning back again after their washing, to the
wallowing in the mire. 2 Pet. 2.19.
Its Grace therefore whereby we stand, else we should fall as well as they.

And a singular benefit it is, considering that without this one, all the
former blessings, to have God to be a God in Covenant with us, to have our
sins forgiven, to have our natures renewed and sanctified, all these (I say)
were evacuated and made as nothing, if this one blessing of perseverance were
wanting; for then we might lose our interest in God again, we might come
again under the guilt of sin, etc. and what benefit then of all this, that
sometime we had God for our God? we had our sin forgiven, but now all this is
disanulled; we have lost God again, and are now ensnared again in the snare
of our sins: It is therefore no less blessing to be kept in a state of
Grace, then to be brought into it. And then, consider also the danger of
Apostasy that the end of such is worse then was their beginning, 2 Pet. 2.
though their beginning was naught, sinful, and miserable, yet their end is
worse: And it had been better for them never to have known the way of
righteousness, then when they have known it, to turn from it: Such shall
receive the sorer vengeance, Heb. 10.29. The greater the danger is of falling
back, the greater is the blessing in being preserved in the grace in which we
stand.

Use 1. This serves for endless comfort unto all the Saints of God. Temporary
blessings yield temporary refreshings; but this benefit of perseverance assures
us of good things more abiding and eternal, in the consideration whereof we
should be comforted with endless comfort, everlasting joy should be upon our
heads, Esaias 35.10. Be our enemies, never so strong and mighty, our infirmities
never so many, yet shall neither their strength, nor our weaknesses expose us
to their will, but we shall be kept safe unto salvation by a divine power which
is above all and over all; The Lions may roar at us, but they shall not tear
us in pieces; Pharaoh may pursue us with his Chariots and horsemen; but wait
awhile and we shall see the Lord fight for Israel against the Egyptians; we
shall see the salvation of God. In Joh. 17.13. when Christ was there praying to
his Father in the behalf of his Disciples (which prayer he uttered before them
in their presence and audience) mark what he did aim at in it, which was that
they might have his joy fulfilled in themselves: He was commending them by
prayer unto his Father, that he would keep them in his name, and preserve them
from evil; that none of them might be lost. And this he did, that they knowing
how Christ the beloved Son interceded with the Father for them, might be
filled with comfort, as knowing that his petitions put up for them could not
possibly return in vain. This makes our joy a full joy, that we are not only
brought into a state of Grace, to have God for our God, and to have our sins
forgiven etc. but we shall be ^ept in this estate for ever. Though we be not
yet exempted from falling into sin through manifold infirmities, yet we are
sure we have a God which will pardon our sins: Though we be weak, yet when we
are ready to fall, the Lord will either put under his hand and prevent us that
we fall not; or if he suffer us to fall, yet he will raise us up again; we
shall not so fall as to rise no more: In the midst of all our infirmities, we
may say with the Church, in Micah 7.8. Rejoice not against me O mine enemy,
though I fall I shall rise again. Let not Gods people be dejected over much,
to walk uncomfortably because of their infirmities. Be comforted against them
by this consolation of God; he has made a Covenant with you, that he will
never forsake you: If it has pleased him once to make you his people, he will
cast you off no more, 1 Samuel 12. Thou that complainest and walk heavily
because of thy sinful corruptions which burden thee and press thee down,
tell me, Let me ask and let thy heart make answer within thee, do thy
corruptions and failings make thee less to esteem of Christ, or do they make
Christ more precious unto thee? If thy corruptions get within thy heart, and
make any thing more dear and precious to thee then Christ is, this is
dangerous; but if by the sense of thy corruption, thou art made to draw nearer
unto Christ, to esteem more of him, to cling faster unto him, such infirmity
may serve to humble thee, but it shall never destroy thee: Though thou be weak,
yet his Grace is sufficient for thee, sufficient to pardon thy failings,
sufficient also to keep thee that neither gates of hell, nor sin, nor death
shall ever prevail against thee: Commit thy soul therefore in well-doing to
thy faithful Creator, who has created thee anew in Christ Jesus, and know
that as he is able to keep, so he will keep that which is committed unto him
against that day.

Use 2. This may serve also for council and direction unto all Gods faithful
ones, to take heed of self confidence and thinking to stand by their own
strength: know wherein your strength lies; it is not in your selves; In his
own might shall no man be strong, 1 Samuel 2.9. but your strength and safety lies
in this Covenant of peace, which the Lord has made with you; he keeps the feet
of his Saints, 1 Samuel 2.9. he preserves the souls of his Saints, Psalm. 97. and
34. So as none that trust in him shall perish. It is with us as it was with
Sampson, all men wondered wherein his great strength should lie; but it was
neither in his hair, nor in his limbs, but in the Covenant of his God; whiles
he kept his Covenant with God, God was with him, and by his power assisting,
and strengthening, he made heaps upon heaps, and slew thousands of the
Philistimes; but when he had broken the Covenant of his Nazar^ship and so had
caused the Lord to depart from him, then Sampson became weak as another man;
whiles we cleave to our Covenant and keep the Lord with us, then are we strong
and do valiantly; but when we trust in our selves and withdraw our selves from
God who is our strength, then we are weak and are overcome. There is nothing
which makes a readier way for the falls of Gods children, then this, that they
grow to confidence in themselves and in that Grace which they have received:
They think as Samson, they will rouse up and shake themselves, and then they
think to do as at other times; but when the Lord sees this distemper growing
upon us, then he lets us take a knock or two, to heal this evil in us, and to
make us know that our way to be strong is to be weak; weak in our selves, that
we may be strong in the power of his might. And indeed when we are thus weak,
then are we strong, 2 Cor. 12.9. And contra, when we are strong, then are we
weak, bereft of the power of God, which is our stay and strength. And therefore
let us learn of the Prophet to say, In the Lord I have righteousness and
strength, Isai. 45. know how unable we are of our selves to do any thing, so
much as to think a good thought 2 Cor. 3. but are made able to do all things by
the power Christ strengthening us, Phil. 4.13. And therefore whatsoever we have
to do, look we up unto his help, to work all our works for us, whether we be
to meditate, to speak or to do any thing, which might be pleasing unto him,
rely upon him for help, make him our strength, as well as our redeemer, Psalm.
19. verse. last.

Use 3. For exhortation unto all, to labor for a state in Grace, to get within
this Covenant of Grace, get our souls endued with such truth of Grace as may
assure us of our abiding in it for ever. True Grace is of an abiding nature: It
is a treasure that will never fail; Its that part which can never be taken
from us, Luke 10. All the things of the world are fading and perishing. Riches
take their wings as an Eagle and fly away, Prove. 23. or else they are made a
prey and spoil by the enemy, as the Sabaeans and Caldaeans did of the goods of
Job. Had we Solomon's Treasures, who made silver as stones in Jerusalem; yet we
must go naked out of the world, and take nothing away with us. But Grace is a
durable and an everlasting possession; It never fails, if we live, it lives
with us; if we die, it will not leave us nor forsake us. One grain of true
sanctifying Grace, though it be but as a grain of mustard seed, is more worth
then the riches and treasures of a Kingdom; you that want it, ^eek it as your
life; you that have it, keep it as you would keep your soul; Let both take
heed of being deceived with shows and shadows of Grace in stead of truth: All
is not gold that glisters; every one which makes a show, and carries out in his
profession a form of godliness, has not the truth and power of it in his
heart: These shadows will vanish and come to nothing; it is the substance only
which remains. Let us take heed we be not deceived; in nothing is a mistake so
dangerous, as in this matter in hand. Seeming shows and shadows of Grace, will
end in real misery; whereas truth and soundness of Grace will bring to a
weight of glory.

We here in these parts, where Religion has a name, and profanesse is
discountenanced by all, we (I say) had most need to look to our selves: It is
to be feared that many an one, which now makes a good profession before men,
yet if the state of things and times should change, would quickly be turned
into other men. Those that now seem to live, and to be for Christ, for
Religion, for Gospel, and for Ordinances, would then turn to be either enemies
or Neuters, and show themselves to be hollow-hearted and double-minded,
unstable in the way which now they walk in: And there be diverse sorts of these.
As

1. Some rest in outward Reformation of gross sins, they make clean the
outside of the cup, that they may seem clean before men; but they harbor
many corrupt lusts within, which they do not seek to cast forth: Into such the
unclean Spirit, though he seem to be dispossed, will return again.

2. Some take up a profession of Religion for carnal ends, following Christ
for loaves, Joh. 6.26. becoming Disciples because they look to rise and come
to preferment by Christ: Judas would never have cleaved to Christ but that he
hoped for some advantage by him; and what came of it in the end? when he saw
that his hope failed him, then he falls off, and takes part with the
High Priest against Christ. When men do thus take up a profession of Religion
for gain, for credit, for outward respects in the world; a cross day will
come which will blast their hopes in these things; God will on purpose cross
the hopes of such men that they might thereby be discovered and made known. He
will have both approved and not approved to be known, 1 Cor. 11. and when this
unlooked-for-event falls out, then as they see their hopes to fail them, so
other men shall see their Religion and profession to fail with them. This
assumed body of Religion not being animated and quickened with life, and vigor
of Spirit within, will at length be laid down when they have made use of it for
a season to serve their turn.

3. Some profess the fear of God, and yet carry in them an heart estranged
from such as are most faithful and upright in their walking before God, like
Cain that would come and sacrifice as well as Abel, and yet nourish grudge in
heart against Abel; one Altar shall serve them both to sacrifice on, but they
have not one heart in them, nor one way to walk in. There will be a day which
will declare and make manifest what is in them.

4. Some will do as those in Isai. 58.2. and in Ezekiel. 33. They will come as
Gods people use to come, as if they would seek after Ordinances of
righteousness, and would know the way of truth; but yet when the Word touches
their sore, and comes to the quick to meddle with that which they have hid
under their tongue, then they begin to mislike and to murmr against Moses and
to find fault with him that rebukes them: So long as the word speaks pleasing
things, they like it well, but when (like salt) it begins to bite, then they
put it from them: Such as these often have the word in their ears (they will
hear it) and in their tongue (they will talk of it) and in their foreheads,
(make a profession of it) and it shall be written on the posts of their doors
(they keeping a course of family duties) that all men may think the best of
them; but it is not in their heart to love it, it is not written in the inward
parts; and not being there, there is nothing within to maintain the life of
Grace. The oil that should feed the lamp is wanting, and therefore the light
of such will at length go out, and end in darkness.

5. Some attain unto great gifts in knowledge, utterance, ability in prayer,
(etc.) but withal they grow high-minded and conceited by means of them, and
are pufft up, thinking themselves more excellent then their neighbors, that
they are not as other men. These swelling walls will not stand long; these that
are so pufft up with a fleshly mind; the Apostle says of them, that they hold
not the head Christ, Colos. 2.18, 19. And if they hold not the head, they are
but unsound members of the body; if they receive not life and quickening from
the head, they will die and wither. Let us look to our selves, that we be none
of these. These may be written in Jerusalem, Isai. 4.3. they may subscribe with
their hand and name themselves by the name of Israel, Isai. 44.5. but they are
not written in heaven, nor shall they enter into the land of Israel, Ezeck.
13.9. These want that Grace which accompanies salvation: Rest we not in these
things, but seek after truth of heart, labor for that Grace which will last
and hold out. Get an humble, meek, upright frame of Spirit; Let our hearts be
knit unto Christ more then the rewards of Christ. Instead of that fullness with
our own gifts, get a sense and feeling of our own wants and weaknesses, and
come to him that has all fullness dwelling in him, that out of his fullness we
may receive. Such an humble, thirsting and impotent creature, sensible of its
own unsufficiency, yet lying daily at the beautiful gate of mercy to receive
some gift of Grace from him whose glory fills his temple, shall stand and
continue to the end, till they receive the end of their faith and hope, the
salvation of their soul; when thousands fall at their side, and ten thousands
at their right hand, yet shall they stand upright, they shall never fall, 2
Pet. 1. This abiding Grace let us every one labor for; seek it as silver;
call, cry for it, dig deep, and search for it as for Treasures, Prove. 2.
Blessed is he that finds it, blessed now and blessed for ever.

Thus much of the fourth benefit, and so also of all the spiritual blessings
of the Covenant.

2. It follows now to speak of the temporary, which concern the good things of
this present life. Concerning which kind of promises, the Lord is not wanting
in making his goodness known toward his people in full measure. The Lord
knowing how apt we are to have our minds taken up with careful thoughts about
them, and knowing also that we cannot (in ordinary course) be without them he
has therefore made known unto us his care which he has over us, that he will
provide for us whatsoever is needful and convenient for us, to the end that we
knowing his promises concerning these things, we might by faith rest upon his
faithfulness, and might be free in our minds from all vexing distracting
cares, serving him chearefully in our places according to his will, looking to
him for supply of all such things as we stand in need of. And concerning these
kind of blessings, we may observe how the Lord has made us some general
promises of all good things, so as we shall want nothing that is good, Psalm.
34.10. and 84.11. The want of some one thing needful, might more disquiet us,
then the possession of many things could cheer us. And therefore he has
promised to give us all things: And besides these general promises, he has
also given us promises of many particular blessings; as of length of days,
Deuteronomy. 5.3. and 25.15. and 30.20. Prove. 3.16. of protection, Genesis 15. Prove. 6.1.
ult. Psalm. 84.11. Zach. 2. of health and freedom from the diseases of Egypt,
Exodus 15.26. and 23.25. Deuteronomy. 7.15. and many other of like kind which I pass
by; Only one kind or sort of them I mean to insist upon a little; those I
mean, which concern our sustenance and comfortable provision of necessaries
for life; as food convenient and clothing convenient, etc. bread to eat, and
clothes to put on, as Jacob speaks Genesis 28. These the Lord has promised that
he will minister unto his Covenanted people; These promises we have laid down,
Levit. 26.3. to 14. Deuteronomy. 28.2. to 15. Psalm. 112.2.3. and 132.15. Isai. 33.15,
16. Jerem. 31.12. Ezekiel. 36.30. Matthew. 6.33. 2 Cor. 9.8. 1 Timothy 4.8.

I mention the more of these, that we seeing so many and large promises made
unto us, we might be encouraged the rather to believe and rest upon the
faithfulness of him that has promised. If the Lord should have spoken but
once unto us in the whole Scripture, concerning these things, we should not
have needed to doubt of his word. But when he is pleased so often to repeat
his promises over and over, again and again, so often telling us that he will
not be wanting to us in these things, it is too much incredulity in us, if
after all these we believe him not, and cast not our care upon him. Especially
considering how the Lord himself reckons these promises a part of his
Covenant which he has made with his people. Note that in Deuteronomy. 8.8. the Lord
thy God gives thee power to get substance, to establish his Covenant which he
made with thy Fathers, etc. God does herein fulfill his Covenant with us, when
he gives us such sustance as pertaines to the comfort of this life; and so in
Levit. 26.5, 6. etc. I will cause the land to yield her increase, and your
threshing shall reach unto the vintage, etc. And why will the Lord do this
unto them? He tells them in the ninth verse following, sc. I will establish my
Covenant with you, that is, I will therein perform and make good my Covenant,
etc. Psalm. 111.5. He has given meat (or a portion) to his people; what moves
him thereto? Even his Covenant: He is ever mindful of his Covenant; the like
we have in Ezekiel. 34.25, 27. In all which we see how the Lord reckons this as
apart of his Covenant in which he has bound himself unto his people, even to
give unto them such things as they stand in need of for this present life.

And because it is the duty of Gods people to live by faith, as well concerning
those things that pertain to this present life, as those which concern the
life to come, to the end therefore that we may with more assured confidence
rest upon the faithfulness of God in these things, Let us help our faith by
these considerations following.

1. Look at the fullness and bounty of our God, he has a full hand a rich
treasure, full of all good things; there is no end of his riches; he is able to
make us abound unto all sufficiency, 2 Cor. 9. and is most liberal and
free-hearted, abundant in goodness, bountiful, not sparing and close-handed,
but ready to communicate to every one that stands in need.

2. As he is bountiful, so he is also kind and loving to his people; he loves
the prosperity and welfare of his servants: It delights him to see it go well
with them; he is tenderhearted toward them, pitying their wants, sensible of
their sorrows and necessities.

3. He has already given us greater things then these, he has given to us his
Son, his Spirit, himself; how shall he not then give unto us these lesser
things? Romans 8.32.

4. Christ has purchased them for us, he has given a full price for them; he
emptyed himself, and became poor to make us rich.

5. Our bodies are the members of Christ, and temples for the Spirit to dwell
in, and therefore not only the love which he bears unto us, but that love
which he bears unto Christ, may assure us that he will for his sake give us
that which is convenient, because we are members of his body.

6. It is not for the honor of Christ's Kingdom that those which are his
subjects should be exposed to wants in needful things. If he should leave them
destitute, the sorrow might lie upon them, but the dishonor would redound unto
Christ, as if he sought not or cared not for the welfare of his people. And
thence it is that in Ezekiel. 24.29. and 36.30. when he promises unto them the
increase of the field and such other outward blessings, he tells them that he
will thereby take away from them the reproach of the Heathen, they should
henceforth bear the reproach of the Heathen no more, and in Deuteronomy. 28.12, 13.
It is an honor which God puts upon his people in the sight of other Nations,
that he makes them able to lend unto others, makes them the head, and others
the tail etc. sets up his own above, and the other beneath.

7. God is in Covenant with our whole man; he is the God of our body, as well
as soul and spirit; we are wholly his, he has taken us wholly to be his own;
and therefore even as our Savior Christ in Matthew. 22. does hereby prove the
resurrection of Abraham's body, because God was in Covenant with Abraham, he was
the God of Abraham, of whole Abraham, body as well as soul, and therefore God
being the God of the living and not of the dead, Abraham's body must live and
rise again; so by the same argument, we may gather assurance that God will
provide for our outward man, because he is the God of the whole man, he is a
God to us, not only to pardon our sins, to sanctify and save our souls, but
he is the God of our bodies also, to feed and to cloth them, to minister to
them such things as are convenient for them. And hence is that in 1 Cor. 6.13.
as our body is for the Lord to serve and glorify him, so is the Lord also for
the body to redeem it, to nourish it, to glorify it.

8. The Lord knows how many discouragements we meet with here to dishearten us
in his service: And therefore he casts in these outward blessings as
encouragements to provoke us to serve him with more willingness, and
cheerfulness of Spirit: As Hezekiah caused the Levites to have provision
brought in unto them that they might be encouraged in the service of the Lord,
2 Chronicles. 31.4. so will the Lord do much more, he will have his servants to
know, that they shall not serve him for naught, Job 1. not so much as to shut a
door in his house in vain, Mal. 1.

9. The Lord has commanded such duties unto his servants as they cannot
perform without a supply in these outward things, works of love, mercy,
kindness, helpfulnesse one to another; yea, he would have us to abound in
these things, and (as examples) to go before all other people. And therefore
he will also furnish us with sufficiency, that we may be complete unto every
good work. He will not send on a message and cut off the feet of him whom he
sends, Prove. 26.6.

10. The Lord looks for service from our outward man, give up your body as an
holy living Sacrifice unto God, Romans 12.1. Glorify God in your bodies and
spirits, for they are God's, says Paul, 1 Cor. 6. but he will not reap where
he has not sown, nor look to gather where he has not scattered; he will
sustain us, if he look for service from us.

11. We are Gods household and family, and therefore he will provide for his
own: If he have charged us to provide for our own, 1 Timothy 5.8. he will not he
cannot be wanting to his: If he feed the Ravens, Job. 39.3. and cloth the
Lilies, Matthew. 6.26. he will not suffer his children to want bread.

12. By giving us these outward things, the Lord would nourish our faith in the
hope of things spiritual and heavenly; for when we see his care over us in
these lesser things, it may assure us, that he will not neglect us in those
that are of greater moment. The outward blessings which God gave unto Israel,
were not outward blessings alone, but pledges and tokens of better things; he
gave them bread from heaven, and it was an outward bodily food, but not that
only; but it was a pledge to them of the true bread from heaven; he gave them
water out of the Rock, which did quench their bodily thirst, but not that only,
but was a sign and pledge of Christ the true Rock, out of whom springs the
water of life; he gave them a good and fat land to dwell in, where they had
vine-yards, orchards, gardens, and lived in pleasure therein through his great
goodness, Neh. 9. but not as an outward blessing only, but as a pledge of a
better inheritance: And thus does he unto us; though every thing is not now
typical to us, as to them, yet thus far we may go, to say that these outward
blessings are made pledges unto us of Gods love toward us in better things, so
as we may argue from the less to the greater, that if he be so mindful of us
in these smaller things of this life, then doubtless he will not neglect us in
those greater things which concern the eternal salvation of our souls.

13. He knows we have need of these things Matthew. 6.32. and therefore he
having commanded us to give unto him that needs, Ephesians. 4.28. and open our
hand wide unto the poor, Deuteronomy. 15.11. surely he will not shut up the bowels of
his compassion from his own needy servants, but will open his good treasure
unto them, to satisfy them with good things, Deuteronomy. 28.12.

Quest. But sometimes we see Gods faithful servants to be kept short in
these outward blessings; how comes this to pass, the Lord having made such
ample promises unto them? and how far forth may any be assured to have a
sufficiency in these things?

Answ. To the first I conceive thus: First, all the promises of things
pertaining to this life are subordinate and subservient to the promises which
concern our inward man, and our eternal salvation: God does not promise us
these outward things, so as to make against our spiritual good, but so as to
further and help it forward: he promises them with Christ, not against Christ,
nor to hinder his Kingdom in our hearts, Romans 8.32. If it so fall out, that
sufficiency in these may better us in the inward man, we shall not want them;
but because the Lord sees us sometimes to abuse them to the fulfilling of our
wanton desires, to pride, security, confidence, and trusting in them; here the
Lord is free from his promise, least by filling us with those things that are
outward, he should empty us of that little grace that is in us.

Secondly, there are times of trial, in which the Lord will try all his
children, The Lord will try the righteous, says the Prophet, Psalm. 11.5. thus
he tried them in Heb. 11.36, 37. they were tried with mockings and scourgings,
being destitute, afflicted and tormented: Thus also he tried Israel in the
wilderness, Deuteronomy. 8.2, 16. and thus he tried holy Job; God will know what is
in us; he will see whether we serve him for wages, yea, or no; or whether we
would continue to serve him out of love, though he should give us nothing. He
will see whether we follow him for loaves, or whether we can be content to
cleave to him in wants and necessities, having nothing. But though the Lord
will thus try us, yet these times of trial last not always, these are not the
ways of Gods ordinary dispensation toward his people: During these times of
trial, the Lord does sometimes cut short his servants in outward things, but
it is to do them good in the later end, Deuteronomy. 8.16. The hardships which Israel
suffered for awhile in the wilderness, was recompensed with a Land flowing
with milk and honey.

Thirdly, sometimes God withholds good things from us for a chastisement of our
sin; according to that in Jer. 5.25. your iniquities have hindered good things
from you; when we go out of the way in which the blessing falls, its no
marvel if it fall beside us; In these cases when either by sin we turn aside
from the path of righteousness, or if the Lord will take a time to try our
uprightness before him, or if he see our enjoying of these outward blessings
would be an hinderance to our spiritual good, in these cases (I say) Gods
children may be exercised with wants and necessities, and yet the promise of
God fails not; not in the first case, because the promise of outward things in
the making of it, is subservient to the spiritual good of our inward man; nor
in the second case, because the Lord has put an exception of trial, by which
he will try all his: Nor in the third case, because these outward good things
are promised as rewards of Grace, whereby the Lord does recompense the love and
obedience of his people.

But to the third part of the demand, if it be further questioned how far
forth a child of God (out of these cases forenamed) may assure himself of the
fulfilling of these promises unto him: hereunto I answer thus: We must
consider two things; first, what is promised; secondly, how and in what manner.

First, consider what is promised; for here may be a mistake, in taking the
promise to contain more then indeed it does; when the Lord promises, that
riches and treasure shall be in the house of the righteous, what does he mean
by riches and treasure? not the riches of a Kingdom; or that which shall be
sufficient for a man of high degree; but such a sufficiency as is suitable to
every ones estate and condition which God has set them in: That which is want
and poverty to one, may be fullness and abundance to another: That then is
riches to any man, when God gives him so much as is sufficiently enough for him
in his estate and condition, though he may still come short of many others of
higher rank; this is that which is promised.

Secondly, consider in what manner God promises these things, and that is (as
was said before) as rewards and as fruits of that faith and obedience which he
requires of his people; Dwell in the land and do good, and thou shall be fed
assuredly, says the Prophet, Psalm. 37.3. But what is this good that we must
do? Answ. 1. In general. Be upright with God in our conversation before him;
2. Walk diligently and faithfully in our particular callings, be not slothful
and unprofitable unto our selves: It is the diligent hand that has the promise
of abundance, The talk of the lips brings nothing but want, Prove. 10. 3. And
then we must depend upon God by faith in the use of means, not trusting either
to our own uprightness, or to the means used, but rest by faith on the grace
of the promise, as knowing that when we have done all that we can, both in our
general and particular calling, yet the Lord might justly blast all our
endeavors, so as all our labor and strength might be spent in vain: Here
therefore our confidence must be pitched, not upon our selves, nor means, but
look by faith to the blessing promised, which blessing is all in all. Believe
and ye shall prosper, said Iehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20.20. and contra, if ye
believe not, ye shall not be established, said Isaiah, Isai. 7.9. There is
much in the faith of Gods people: Its a special means to obtain the
blessing: It was usual with Christ, when any came unto him for help in outward
things, to ask them whether they believed or no; and then he would tell them,
according to your faith be it unto you; All Gods blessings are wrapped within his
promises: And faith is the hand to receive all, whether they be spiritual
blessings, or outward concerning this life: whatsoever the blessings be, if
they spring from Grace, they must be received by faith. The hand of Grace gives
them, and the hand of faith receives them: And sometimes the want of faith
only, cuts us short of the blessing we might enjoy; we prosper not, because we
believe not: The sum is this: Let a man walk uprightly before God in his
general calling; Let him be provident and diligent in his particular calling;
Let him withal in both these look by faith to the faithfulness of the promise
of God, believing that in this way he will give that which is sufficient for
him, Then I say, that in the ordinary course of Gods dealing, he may be sure
the Lord will not be wanting to him, in such things as his state and condition
does require.

Use 1. For confutation.

Are these outward blessings pertaining to this life, blessings of Grace
promised in the Covenant of Grace? then first eternal life cannot come by
merit, when less blessings then that must come from Grace.

2. Hence also falls down Popish satisfactions, which they think are made by
almsdeeds and such like works. What satisfaction can we make to justice, from
that which we receive of mere grace? of his own hand give we unto him, 1 Chronicles. 29.

3. It makes against placing perfection in a state of voluntary poverty, as if
perfection could stand in renouncing the blessings of Gods Covenant.

Use 2. For information.

1. Concerning wicked men, this may let us see that they have no true right
before God, unto the good things of this life: I speak not of right before men,
but before God; for if they have, I ask by what Covenant? Is it by the Covenant
of works? then they must fulfill it, which they do not, nor can do; is it
then by the Covenant of Grace? but they are not within that Covenant: They are
within the Covenant of works, but cannot fulfill it; they are without the
Covenant of Grace, and therefore they can claim nothing by it. But they say,
there is debitum naturae; nature may claim so much as tends to the upholding
of natural life and being. But I say again, what claim can they have to life,
or to any thing which concerns life, which have deserved to be destroyed and
brought to nothing? for ought I can see the old opinion herein must stand as
truth, that wicked men are but usurpers of the things they do enjoy. And if
Christ be the Heir of all things, and we come to our right to them only by
Christ, then those that are not Christ's have no right unto them.

2. Whereas some weak ones do think they should pray only for spiritual
blessings and not for outward things of this life, they may hence see their
error: They may lawfully pray for outward things; look what God does promise,
we may lawfully pray for; but God does promise to us these outward things,
therefore we may pray for them; Christ also has taught us the same, Matthew. 6.
and its our duty to do it, thereby to testify our dependence upon God our
heavenly Father, for the supply of all our necessities, and in so doing we
give glory to God, as acknowledging that every good gift must come from him,
James 1.17.

3. Whereas some of Gods servants are possessed with doubts concerning their
estate before God, as fearing that they are not the Lords people, because they
are suffered to prosper so much in outward things, this point may serve to
remove that scruple, because these outward blessings are blessings of grace to
the people of God, and therefore may well stand with a gracious estate. If we
endeavor to walk before God in truth and uprightness, striving to keep a pure
conscience in all things toward God and man, then for any one to say, I fear
I am none of Gods people because I prosper in the world, is all one as if he
should say, I fear the Lord intends me no good, because he makes good unto me
the blessings which he has promised in his Covenant.

Use 3. For direction.

1. In the want of these outward blessings. 2. In the enjoyment of them.
First, In the want of them, and here consider: 1. The cause whence it is that
we are deprived of them: 2. What to do to get them supplied.

I. As for the cause of our wants, what shall we say? is God unfaithful? does
his promise fail? is he unmindfull of his Covenant? if not, then think what is
the cause of these wants which lie upon us; etc. In Josh. 7. when Joshua saw
the people fly before their enemies (which seemed contrary to the promise of
God, the Lord having before promised to Joshuah that not a man should stand
before him all the days of his life) Joshuah falls on his face before God, and
begins to expostulate with him why he had brought them thither to destroy them;
But mark the Lords Answer, Get thee up says the Lord to Ioshuah, why lie
thou upon thy face? Israel has sinned, and therefore they cannot stand before
their enemies: Ioshuah not knowing, nor considering the sin of the people;
he wonders at their overthrow as if the Lord had not been mindful of his
promise, he having promised that not a man should be able to stand before them:
But the Lord tells Ioshuah, Nay (says the Lord) It is not I that have failed
in my Covenant toward you, but you have bro^en Covenant with me; Israel has
sinned and transgressed my Covenant, and therefore it is that they cannot stand
before their enemies. So we, when we feel our selves pressed with wants and
necessities, we are apt to think that Gods falls short of his promise toward
us. He has promised sufficiency of all good things to his servants, but we see
not his promise made good unto us, we suffer wants: And now we are ready to
ask, why has the Lord brought us hither into this wilderness, to destroy us?
But let us know, it is not the Lord which has broken promise with us, but we
have sinned and broken Covenant with him. There is amongst us an accursed
thing, which till it be cast out of the camp of Israel, we shall not stand
before our necessities, but they will prevail against us, as an armed man.
They are our iniquities which have turned away these things, and our sins have
hindered good things from us, Jer. 5.25. Our own ways and doings have procured
these things unto us; we may thank our selves, if we be cut short in the things
we would have: Let God be true, and every man a liar; Let him be acknowledged
faithful in his promise, but we have dealt treacherously against him; we have
sinned, and there is the true cause of our misery.

1. We have amongst us Achans sin; I saw, and coveted, says he; we have
amongst us worldliness and coveteousnesse, which has seized upon us and has
eaten up our hearts. The rust hereof has consumed the good that was in us; we
pretended to come hither for ordinances, but now ordinances are light matters
with us, and we are turned after the prey. Had any other people that professed
themselves to be of the world, and for the world, had they thus walked, the
Lord would have said of them, they are gone thither for the worlds goods, and
let them take their fill of it, let them have what they go for: But as for us,
the Lord will not suffer us so: If he see us forsaking the substance, the true
treasure, to run after these shadows, they shall fly from us the more that
we pursue them, till we turn again unto the Lord, and then though we follow
not them, yet they shall follow us, and shall pursue us and overtake us, as
Moses speaks, Deuteronomy. 28.2. As now we are pressed with wants, so then we shall be
laden with benefits, Psalm. 68.

2. We have amongst us excess and pride of life; pride in apparel, daintiness
in diet, and that in those who in times past would have been glad to have been
satisfied with bread; this is the sin of the lowest of our people.

3. Another sort are idle and walk inordinately, not laboring at all, but live
unprofitably, going from house to house: They cannot put their hand to works.

4. We have abundance of oppression and injustice in our dealings, with breach
of Covenants and promises; there is want of truth and justice, it is almost
departed from our streets. The Lord may now complain of us, as sometimes he
did before of Israel, I looked for judgment, but behold oppression; for
righteousness, but behold a crying, Isai. 5.7. and this sin will make a fire
which is not blown (by man) to kindle of it self to consume us, Job 20.19, 26.

5. By these our sins, we have brought a reproach upon the Gospel, the
glorious Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, which should have been glorified by
us. So long as the Gospel held its credit amongst us, so long the Lord also
manifested his mavelous goodness toward us, upholding us also and keeping
us from those wants which now we feel; But when the credit of the Gospel began
to suffer by us, we began to suffer with it also; receiving therein a just
recompense of our evil as was meet.

6. There is amongst us a straight-heartednesse, and close-handednesse toward
the Lord; in not ministering to the things which concern his worship; the least
portion is enough, and the worst is good enough, for those things that concern
his honor: This is a sin which the Lord has ever been wont to punish with
scarcity, as we may see in Hag. 1. Mal. 3.9, 10. Prove. 20.25.

These are the Achans which have robbed us of our silver and gold, these sins
have spoiled us of our substance; and where the e things are found, it is no
marvel though we complain of wants; yet not through breach of Covenant on the
Lords part, but through our sinful breaking with him; Israel has sinned, we
have sinned, and therefore it is that we are fallen, and come down so low.

Secondly, Are we in want and do we desire to enjoy a sufficiency of these
outward blessings? would we be set in a way in which we may be sure to be
provided for? we have the way here set before us; we hear that these blessings
are promised in Gods Covenant: The promising of them is one branch of that
Covenant which the Lord makes with his people: The way then is this: First, to
enter into a Covenant with God, and then to walk in Covenant with him, as
becomes his people: 1. Enter into Covenant with him. Art thou in hunger,
nakedness, or (if not in such extremities, yet) want thou those things
which thy condition stands in need of? It may be thou art a stranger to the
Covenant betwixt God and his people, and have lived an alien from God. Thou
have with the Prodigal forsaken thy Fathers house, departed away from God,
living viciously and sinfully, and therefore the Lord has brought thee to the
same condition as the Prodigal was brought unto in these thy necessities; do
thou then as the Prodigal did, when he was in necessity, and knew not what to
do, he then bethinks himself; In my Fathers house (says he) there is bread
enough, but I am ready to perish for hunger; I will therefore arise and go to
my Father and humble my self unto him, desiring to be as one of his hired
servants. Think with thy self what provision the Lord makes for those that are
of his household; his children and servants have bread enough. Arise therefore
out of thy sin by repentance, go unto him and sue to be taken into his family,
and to be one of his servants; and then will the Father call for roabs to cover
thy nakedness, and bring out the fatted calfe to satisfy thy hunger, thou
shall be fed with food convenient for thee: Thy bread shall not fail, and thy
water shall be sure: Though he suffer aliens to want, yet his family shall be
provided for; but then remember this withal, to walk in Covenant with God;
walk as becomes one of the family of heaven, and of the household of God; be
faithful and diligent in his service, have a care of his honor; do nothing
to blemish his name, be careful to please him in all things; be zealous for
his glory: Be thankful that he has taken thee to be one of his: Be faithful
in thy particular calling, as therein serving the Lord, and not to serve thine
own turn. Study to be useful and serviceable to others of Gods servants,
which are of the same household of faith with thee, and in this way of the
Covenant, look for, and expect the blessing of it; Do good (says the Prophet)
and thou shall be fed assuredly, Psalm. 37.3. If ye be willing and obedient, ye
shall eat the good things of the land, Isai. 1.19. and if at any time thou be
put to straights and wants, do as Jacob did, put God in mind of his Covenant
and promise: Lord thou said (says Jacob) that thou would do me good:
Lord (say thou) thou have said thou will care for me, and provide things
needful for thy servants, and therefore though I be not worthy of the least of
all thy mercies, not worthy to be fed with the crumbs which fall from thy
childrens table, yet because thou have said that thou will satiate thy people
with thy goodness, make good thy word which thou have spoken; Let thy mercy
come, unto me, as I trust in thee. Thus do and then lay thy life upon it, thou
shall not want: Bread shall be given thee, and thy waters shall not fail; thou
shall have thy daily portion provided for thee. Though thou have not much laid
up in store for many years or days, yet thou shall have thine Omer day by
day. And as those in Nehem. 11.23. and 12.47. they had by the Kings appointment
every day a set portion, so shall thou have thy daily allowance, daily bread,
with all such other things as concern this present life.

II. As in the want, so in the enjoyment of outward good things, the former
consideration gives us direction also; do we enjoy them? has God made good
his promise unto us? have we a portion convenient for us? Then

1. Learn hereby to acknowledge God in these gifts of his goodness and grace
toward us; see his hand in them, and know that it is he that gives us all
things to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6.18. say not it is our own hand that has done this.
Though these outward things be but the blessings of the left hand, the lesser
blessings of the Covenant, yet the Lord would be acknowledged even in these.
This is one reason why the Lord promises these things to us in his Covenant,
that we might learn thereby to acknowledge that they come not unto us by chance
or fortune as Heathens thought, calling them therefore Bona Fortunae, nor yet
as carnal Christians think, by our own providence or wisdom, but look at
them as blessings coming from the Lord himself. This lesson the Lord teaches
us Deuteronomy. 8.17, 18. Say not it is mine own hand which has prepared me this
abundance, but it is the Lord which gives thee power to get substance, etc. and
when we are wanting in acknowledging his hand in them, the Lord complains of
our neglect, as we may see in Hos. 2.8. she did not know that I gave her her
corn, and wine, and oil, and multiplied her silver and gold, etc. And thence
it is (as I think, though others interpret the place otherwise) that in Job
31.27. where Job speaks of his great substance and riches; he says his mouth
did not kiss his hand: That is, he did not applaud himself, nor did he
ascribe it to his own handy works. Some other would have said, this hand has
done it, as Isai. 10.13. which had been a kissing of his hand and an honoring
of himself, and not a giving glory to God. But Job abhorred this; so should
we; let us in our heart acknowledge that it is not our own hand, but the Lord
which has given us all our abundance of good things: In them see his bounty
toward us. As he has let the stream of his bounty run forth toward us, so
should we run back, and acknowledge the bountifulness of the Lord for the
wheat and for the wine which he has given us, Ier. 31.12. Should God withhold
his hand, we might labor long enough, and put all our gettings into a broken
bag, Hag. 1. The race is not always to the swift, nor the battle to the
strong, nor riches to men of understanding, and of strength, but the Lord gives
to every one as pleases him. And as we should see Gods bounty toward us in
these, so we should see his Grace also in them. Look at them as blessings of
Grace; which are communicated to us by the Covenant of Grace which he has made
with us in Christ. They are not so unto the wicked, who are not in Covenant
with the Lord, but to the Saints they are, in Genesis 33.5. when Jacob speaks of
his children, these (says he) are the children which God of his Grace has
given thy servant: Jacob saw Grace in this; so should we see Grace in every
outward blessing we enjoy.

Object. But these outward blessings are common to good and bad, and no man can
know love or hatred by these things which are before him; how then may I know
that God gives me these things out of Grace and love?

Answ. 1. If we come by them in the way of the Covenant, we walking before God
in the way of holy obedience and dependence upon him, Its certain they do then
come to us as blessings, and are given us by virtue of his Covenant: And
therefore it is that in Deuteronomy. 28.1, 2, 8, 12. If thou shall diligently observe
the Commandments of the Lord thy God, (says Moses) then shall he command the
blessing to come upon thee, and all these blessings shall overtake thee, etc.
he does not say, thus shall thou be enriched, thus shall thou increase in
goods, etc. but thus shall the Lord bless thee, and these blessings shall come
upon thee, to note unto us, that when we walk with God in this way of obedience
conscionably, then what ever good things come unto us, they come as a blessing:
The Lord not only gives the blessing it self, but he gives it as a blessing,
and a blessing of Grace coming through his Covenant.

2. If they be as bands and cords of love betwixt God and us; as bands to draw
us nearer unto him, and as cords to tie us faster unto him, causing us to love
him more, and to honor him in the use of those good things which we have
received from him, doubtless they do then come from his Grace toward us, and
are blessings of the Covenant. I have loved thee (says the Lord) in Jer. 31.3.
and with mercy have I drawn thee; If God draw us unto him by any means, there
is mercy in it, and there is a blessing in it. Take this as a rule for ever,
what ever brings us to God is a blessing; as contrariwise whatever separates us
from God is a curse. And that which causes love, comes from love. If these
things work love in our hearts toward God, then do they come from his love
toward us. Consider then, are our hearts carried away from God by the things
we enjoy? this is dangerous: But are our hearts thereby more drawn and knit
unto him? then own them as blessings of the Covenant, as springing from the
fountain of Grace which God has opened to us in Christ.

2. Seeing these outward good things are given to Gods people by Covenant, as
blessings, and as springing from Grace, this must teach us to be content with
such a measure of them as our Father sees meetest for us; though we have less
in outward things, yet there is the same grace in that little, as if we had an
hundred fold. Sometimes there is much love seen in a little thing; and so it is
in these gifts which God gives to his children: The gift may be small, but the
love is great from which it comes: This love should satisfy, whether the gift
we receive from it, be less or more: As a younger child which his Father
loves tenderly, though he have not so large allowance, and liberal
maintenance, as his elder brother that is grown to years, yet he comforts
himself in this, he says in his heart, I know my Father loves me as well as
any child he has, and thus satisfies himself in his Fathers love, though his
yearly allowance be not equal with some other; so should we: Though we have
not so much wheat and wine and oil, etc. yet we may satiate our soul with the
Lords goodness, Ier. 31.12, 14. that goodness of his being the same toward
us in our little, as if our portion were much more abundant. And this
contentation we should the rather labor for, because if we be not satisfied
with that lesser portion which the Lord bestows upon us, until we abound, it
is suspicious, and we have cause to doubt, whether our contentment be not more
in the gift then in the grace and love of the Giver; For if it be his love that
satisfies us, why are we not satisfied when we have less, as if we had more?
if we have food and raiment (having them from the gift of his Grace) let us
therewith be content. Satisfy us with thy mercy says Moses, Psalm. 90.14.
Moses could be satisfied with mercy, though he had but little else; there is a
satisfying sufficiency in it, if we can but see it, and relish it in the
things we enjoy: Let us make sure of this, that what we have, it may come from
the hand of Grace, and then let us be contented with it, be it less or more.

3. Does the Lord thus provide for his servants in these outward things? let us
then serve him with our outward man. He blesses us with all kind of
blessings, in spiritual things pertaining to our inward man, and in outward
things pertaining to our outward man to the end that we might serve him and
glorify him in both; he feeds and clothes our bodies, he maintains the health
and strength of them; therefore give them up as a living sacrifice unto him,
R^m. 12.1. Let him be magnified in our body, Phil. 1.20. Our body must be for
the Lord, as the Lord is for the body, 1 Cor. 6.13. And it is the Apostles
exhortation, Let us glorify him both in body and Spirit, for they are God's.

4. This same consideration before named, may teach us how to use the good
things of this life which we do enjoy: For

1. Do we receive them from Grace? do not then abuse them unto sin, to
pride, wantonness, excess, etc. This is to turn the Grace of God (showed in
giving of them to us) into licentiousness. In Hosea 2.8. the Lord complains
there, that when he had given them corn and wine, silver and gold, they
bestowed them upon Baal, abusing them to Idolatry and to sin: And its noted
as the sin of wicked Athaliah, that the dedicate things which should have
been to the honoring of God, these she bestowed upon Baalim; 2 Chronicles. 24.7.
When we thus abuse his blessings unto sin, we turn that against God, which
we have received from him for good. And in so doing we may justly fear, least
they become testimonies against us, in the day of our account: Therefore do not
so requite the Lord, Deuteronomy. 32. Remember from what hand we have received them,
and take heed we abuse them not.

2. Hence learn to return part of our substance unto God; Give up that unto
him, which we have received from him. The Lord gives us leave to eat and to
drink, and to cheer our hearts by partaking in the portion we enjoy under the
same; we may take the comfort of what he has given us and make use of it for
our own good: But he never allowed us to keep all unto our selves, but commands
us to distribute them as good Stewards, one part to the relief of his poor
Saints, another part for the benefit of the Commonwealth, either in peace or
war, as occasions require, and part also for the upholding of his worship and
service, and the good of his Church. Thus Prove. 3.9. honor God with thy
riches, and with the first fruit of all thine increase. He does not say honor
thy self with thy riches, but honor God with them; as they come from his
Grace, so they should be used to his glory. All things are of him and for him:
when we are in any need, the Lord fulfils all our necessities, Phil. 4. So when
the Lord stands in need of any thing, we must let go that which he stands in
need of, according to that of our blessed Savior, in Matthew. 21.3. Tell them
the Lord has need of him, and then straight way they will let him go; we do
willingly receive from God, and we should as willingly give back unto God; we
are ready to say with Abraham Lo^^ w^^^ w^lt thou give me? Genesis 15.2. but we
should be as ready to ^^y with David, What shall I render unto the Lord? Psalm.
116.12. And if any shall say the Lord needs not any thing, Acts 1^.25. Its
true, he needs not for himself, but in his Saints, in his servants, these
may stand in need: And this know that what we have done to them for his names
sake, the same will he acknowledge as done to himself; he will say, In as much
as ye have done it to these, ye have done it to me.

5. Lastly, whether we want or whether we abound, let this teach us to depend
upon the faithfulness of Gods Covenant, either for the supply of these outward
things if we want them, or for the continuance and maintenance of that portion
which he has given us; we have his promise; believe it, rest upon it, and
though all things may seem to make against us, yet his promise will hold, it
cannot fail. The Lord now calls for this exercise of faith, to live by faith
in his promises; we are here in a wilderness, and we may think as they, Psalm.
7^.19, 20. Can God prepare a table in the wilderness? etc. but though they
were in a wilderness then, as we are now, yet God was not a wilderness to
them nor will be to us, if we trust upon his merciful and faithful promise:
The Lord will not fors^ke his people, 1 Samuel 12.22. His name would suffer in
our sufferings and wants, if he should then forsake us, when we walk before him
in faith and obedience, according to his will; yea, though we for our parts
have deserved to be forsaken by reason of our great departings away from him,
yet if we return unto him with all our soul, he will not forsake us, for his
own great names sake, because it has pleased him to make us his people, 1 Samuel
12. Therefore cast we our care upon the Lord and he will care for us; and
though we see our wants increasing upon us, yet remember the earth is the Lords
and the fullness of it; he has an hid treasure that we know not of; he fed
Israel with Manna, which neither they nor their Fathers knew, Deuteronomy. 8.3. And he
will find out such ways for our supply, as neitheir we nor our Fathers before
us ever knew of; only believe and be obedient to his word, and then let not our
hearts be troubled nor fear, the Lord will rather make the Rocks to flow
forth with honey, and the clouds to drop down milk, and the grass of the
wilderness to become as wool to provide us clothing, rather then we shall
want those things which we stand in need of. This word is a sure word, a
faithful saying, The Lord will not forsake his people; and what he has spoken
concerning all in general, he speaks to every one in particular, I will not
fail Thee, nor forsake Thee.

Thus we see what promises the Lord makes unto us, what benefits he conveyes by
his Covenant both spiritual and temporary; for the inward and outward man; all
which are communicated unto us in this life. But besides these forenamed
benefits, there are greater things to come, which the Lord has promised, and
will make good to his Covenanted people. And these things which are to come,
are the great benefits of the Covenant; these which we now enjoy in this life
present, are sweet and precious, yea, and great also if compared with the
things of this world: But if we compare them with the things to come, then are
they but as the first fruits to the rich harvest, the whole crop. The best part
of that which God has promised us in his Covenant, it is to be waited for by
hope, it is laid up, it is reserved for us, to be revealed in the last times, 1
Pet. 1. They are within the veil, whither our eye cannot pierce, to see and
say what they are; they are things which (in the fullness of them) can neither
be uttered by tongue, nor can heart conceive them. Neither does the world know,
no nor Gods people themselves do not know the things which are prepared for
them. Its a sweet gradation which the Apostle has in that speech of his, 1
Cor. 2.9. where he says, That neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor did
they enter into the heart of man, etc. Did never eye see such things? Many men
have seen strange things; A man may see all the excellency and glory the world
has, though he possess it not. But though a man may see much, yet he may
hear more by the hearing of the ear, then ever his eye saw; And yet more,
when he has seen and heard all that can be seen or uttered, yet his heart may
conceive greater things then all these; But here is the surpassing excellency
of the things to come, which God has prepared for his people, that neither eye
has seen them, no nor yet did ever ear hear of them, no nor can they be
conceived by the heart of man; they are above all that ever was seen, heard or
thought; we are now sons, heirs, but it is only in hope Tit. 3.7. but though
our portion be by hope to be waited for, yet it is a blessed hope, Tit. 2.1^.
which when it comes to be enjoyed in present possession, will be sound to be
above all that we heard, conceived, or could have hoped for. There is life (to
die no more) there is glory (no more shame nor contempt) there is pleasure (no
more sighing or sorrowing) there is life, and that in abundance, Joh. 10. Glory
and that surpassing the glory of the Sun, Matthew. 13.43. pleasure and that in
all fullness. And all these not for a little season, but for evermore, Psalm.
16. ult. Whiles we are here we enjoy life, here is glory also in a degree, and
here are pleasures too, but here they are not full; there is some death mixed
with our life, some baseness with our glory, some sorrows with our pleasures.
And though they were full, which they are not; yet they last but for a time.
But there, and then, they shall be full and for evermore; I cannot pass by
that admirable expression of the Apostle, in 2 Cor. 4.17. where speaking of the
blessed estate of Gods people in the life to come, he calls it a far more
excellent eternal weight of glory: 1. There is glory: 2. A weight of glory, as
much as we are able to bear: 3. There is an excellency in it, and excellent
weight of glory: 4. There is one excellency added to another, (...), a most
excellent glory: 5. and lastly, all this eternal, a most excellent eternal
weight of glory; here is a large expression in few words. This is the hope of
Gods people which they wait for; And for this they have Gods faithful word and
promise, his Covenant and Testament; and for our assurance he has already
given us the earnest of it in our hearts, even the Spirit of Grace and the
Spirit of glory, which by guiding of us in the ways of Grace here, leads us on
day by day, to come nearer to our salvation then when we first believed, till
at last he bring us to glory, even to the full end of our faith and hope, the
salvation of our souls.

And thus much of the benefits of the Covenant.

The fourth Part. THE CONDITION OF THIS COVENANT.
IT remains now that we come to consider the condition of the Covenant, in
which we must walk that the Lord may perform unto us the mercy which he has
promised us. There is a way of the Covenant in which the Lord conveyes his
blessings, as we may see in that expression used by the Lord himself
concerning Abraham, Genesis 18.19. I know Abraham (says the Lord) that he will
teach his household, etc. that I may bring upon Abraham that which I have spoken
unto him: The Lord fully intended to do to Abraham as he had promised, but yet
the Lord will have Abraham to walk so, and so, before him; and then God will
bring upon Abraham the blessing which he had promised; the like we have in Ier.
11.5, 6.

Great are the blessings which God has promised to those which are the
faithful seed of Abraham: and therefore as we desire to enjoy the blessing
promised, so we must see also what he requires of us, that he may perform unto
us what he has promised, and this is called the stipulation or condition of
the Covenant.

And concerning this I will show these four things.

1. That there is a condition required.

2. Why the Lord has put a condition to the promise of life.

3. What the condition is.

4. Whether the putting of such a condition does or can stand with the free
Grace of the Covenant, yea or no.

First, That there is a condition of the Covenant: The Lord does not absolutely
promise life unto any; he does not say to any soul, I will save you and bring
you to life, though you continue impenitent and unbelieving, but commands and
works us to repent and believe, and then promises that in the way of faith and
repentance, he will save us. He prescribes a way of life for us to walk in,
that so we may obtain the salvation which he has promised; he brings us
first through the door of faith, Act. 14. And then carries us on in the way of
faith, till he bring us to the end of our faith the salvation of our souls.

There are indeed some promises which seem so absolute as to exclude all
condition on our part, as that promise in Esaias 43.25. For mine own sake will I
put away thy transgressions, etc. and so Ezekiel. 36.22. Where there is no mention
made either of faith or any other Grace in us, as a condition required on our
part. But if any shall hence argue that the promise of life is so absolute as
to exclude all respect unto faith in those to whom the promise is made, and
because there is no mention made of faith in such promises, therefore there is
no intendment of it, as if it were not understood, but wholly excluded, I may
as well argue against the merits of Christ also, and exclude them by the like
reason, because there is no mention of them, no more then of faith in those
absolute promises. But as there is no remission without the blood of Christ,
Heb. 9.22. So neither is there without faith in that blood, Romans 3.25. as God
never promised to forgive us our sins without respect to Christ, though Christ
be not always mentioned in every such promise, so neither does he promise to
save without faith, though it be not always mentioned particularly.

To prove that there is a condition in the Covenant of Grace, it may be made
evident sundry ways.

1. From the nature of a Covenant, which is an agreement between several
parties Covenanting together upon mutual conditions required on both parties:
Foedus (says Rollock) is promissio sub certa condition, Roll. de vocatione
efficaci: A man may make a promise alone without any condition: But a Covenant
properly binds both parties, and has a condition annexed; Abraham and
Abimeleck promise one to another in their Covenant made betwixt them, they
mutually bind themselves, Genesis 20. And so it is betwixt God and Abraham, Genesis
17.27.

I grant that the word Covenant is sometimes used concerning such promises as
are without condition, as in Genesis 9.9. Where the Lord speaking of his purpose
and promise never to destroy the earth any more, he calls that promise his
Covenant, though there be no condition there annexed: But the Question is not
how a word may be used upon some special occasion; but what is the proper
nature of a Covenant, which does require mutual stipulation or condition on
both parties; This is but one place where the word Covenant is taken for a
promise without a condition; more such places I know not any in Scripture; and
besides there was special reason of calling it a Covenant; namely, to show the
unchangeablenesse of his purpose touching the mercy promised, that it is as
sure as if we had tied him thereunto by Covenant, upon some condition performed
by us before hand: But this is not properly a Covenant, where there is not a
mutual obligation and binding of the parties one to another by condition:
Hereto agrees that saying of Beza, in 2 Timothy 1.12. Mutua est (inquit) depositi
obligatio inter Deum and Sanctos ipsius; Though on Gods part this obligation is
prorsus gratuita, wholly free, as he there speaks; though Gods binding of
himself to us be free, yet ours is not so to God: But concerning the
freeness of the Covenant, we shall speak hereafter; thus much only for the
present he affirms that there is mutua obligatio, a mutual bond or tie, by
which God binds us to himself, as well as he binds himself to us, etc.

2. But for further confirmation hereof, consider the different kinds of
expressions which the Scripture uses in speaking of the Covenant betwixt God
and us: There is mention made of a Covenant promised; And there is mention also
of a Covenant commanded, not to imply two Covenants, but two parts of the same
Covenant; one part of it standing in the promise from God to us, the other, in
duty from us to God: Thus Deuteronomy. 7.12. there is the Covenant which God promised
and by oath swore unto his people; and then in Josh. 7.11. there is the
Covenant commanded, which is the condition on our part required; take away the
condition, you must also take away the Covenant commanded; and if there be a
Covenant commanded, there must of necessity be a condition.

3. Consider that expression used in Ezekiel. 20.37. I will bring you into the
bond of the Covenant (says the Lord;) why does the Lord speak of a bond of the
Covenant? If the Lord had bound himself only, and put no condition upon the
Covenant for us, he could not have said that he would bring us into the bond of
it; But hereby he would teach us, that when he makes with us a Covenant of
Grace and mercy, he does not then leave us at liberty to live as we list; but
he binds us by Covenant to himself; he does not only bind himself to us, but
us to himself, as in Jer. 13.11. He is said to have tied to himself the whole
house of Israel, binding them to himself as with a girdle, in the bond of the
Covenant; we were sometimes free from God, and free from righteousness, Romans
6.20. But now we are by Covenant become the Lords servants, 1 Cor. 7.22. being
bound unto him by the bond of the Covenant.

4. Consider how we are said sometimes to keep Covenant, sometimes to break
Covenant with God; In Psalm. 25.10. and Psalm. 103.18. Here we are said to keep
Covenant; but in Psalm. 44.17. and Esaias 24.5. There is mention made of breaking
Covenant with God; and in Deuteronomy. 29.25. they have forsaken the Covenant of the
Lord their God. This keeping of Covenant, and b^eaking or forsaking of it,
cannot be conceived to be done otherwise then by observing or violating the
condition of the Covenant required on our part. Such as are most profane and wa
k most loosely, they will be forward enough to claim Gods promise; but they
are faulty in performing their own part of the Covenant: Thus the Jews they
would hold to the promise, that God was their God, Joh. 8. and yet they brake
the Covenant, by failing in the condition required of them.

5. Consider how the name of Covenant is given not only to the promise which
God makes unto us, but to that duty which he requires on our part, to be done
by us, in Genesis 17.7. There the name of Covenant is given to Gods promise which
he makes to us; but afterward in verse. 9. the same name of Covenant is also
given to the duty required of us, I will (says the Lord to Abraham) establish
my Covenant with thee, and what is that? I will be a God unto thee, etc. and
thou also shall keep my Covenant, that is, there is the duty I require of thee,
by which thou shall testify thy observance of the Covenant; namely, in
circumcising thy seed. This use of the word (Covenant) being applied to that
which is required of us, shows plainly that there is a stipulalation or
condition in the Covenant required on our part.

6. We read express mention made of the condition, upon which the promise of
life and salvation is made; as in Act. 16.31. Believe on the Lord Jesus, and
thou shall be saved, Romans 10.9. If thou believe, thou shall be saved, etc.

7. Gods dealing with the Israelites when he made his Covenant with them at
Mount Sinai, shows plainly that there is a condition in the Covenant, Exodus
24.3. to 9. when the Lord was about to make up his Covenant betwixt him and
them, you see how Moses rehearses before them the words of the Covenant, that
they might know what it was which the Lord required of them; and to the end it
might be done more seriously, he repeats the terms of the Covenant to be
observed by them, twice over, and they do twice promise to observe the words
of the Covenant, before the blood of the Covenant, by which it was confirmed,
was sprinkled upon them, showing unto us thereby, that we must for our part
assent unto the Covenant, not only accepting the promise of it, but also submit
to the duty required in it; or else there is no Covenant established betwixt
God and us; we must as well accept of the condition as of the promise, if we
will be in Covenant with God.

Object. But the Covenant is otherwise called a Testament, Heb. 7.8, 9.

Answ. This term or name of Testament, is given to the Covenant; not to
exclude the condition but to show the firmness, and inviolable and
unchangeable nature of it, being confirmed by the death of Christ the Testator,
and therefore never to be altered nor changed: Whiles men live, they may alter
their Wills or Testaments, as often as they please; but when they are dead it is
unalterable, Gal. 3. Christ has dyed to confirm his Testament, its therefore
now unchangeable, being ratified by his death, as a Testament is by the death
of the Testator. And that this is the true reason why the Apostle calls it a
Testament, is evident by Heb. 9.16, 17. Where a Testament is (says the
Apostle) there must be the death of the Testator; and he gives the reason, even
now alleged, because the Testament is confirmed when men are dead, and not
before; And that the Apostle had no intent (in so calling it) to exclude the
condition, is evident by verse 15. where he says, That Christ is made the
Mediator of a better Testament, that through his death those which were called
might receive the promise of eternal inheritance; These words (those which
were called) do plainly and fully imply the condition required in the
Covenant of life, our calling being finished in the working of faith, which is
the condition of the Covenant; no man is effectually called so as to have part
in that eternal inheritance, until he believe, so that the Legacies of the
Testament being to those that are called, that is, to those that do believe; it
is most manifest that the intent of the Apostle in calling the Covenant by the
name of a Testament, was not to exclude the condition, but only (as was said)
to show the stability and immutability of the Covenant; It being now like a
Testament, confirmed by the death of him that made it: The form of the former
Covenant which God made with Israel in the Wilderness, was changed in respect
of the manner of Administration of it, because it was not confirmed by the
death of the Testator; but this is confirmed by death, and therefore herein
neither matter nor form can be changed any more; in Joh. 17.24. We have Christ
there making his last Will and Testament, to be executed by his Father; and
what his Will is, we have it expressed in his own words, Father I will those
whom thou have given me may be where I am, etc. And who those be that he
means by them that are given him, is plainly expressed, verse 20. Even those
that believe in his name; Christ does not bequeath the Legacy of his Testament
unto all in general, but to such as do believe; as for the rest he bequeathes
nothing unto them. Joh. 17.9.

Object. But there be same absolute promises of the Covenant, which are without
any condition at all on our part, as the promises of the first grace etc. in
which God promises to his Elect, as yet uncalled, that he will give them a new
heart, and take away the stony heart from them, Ezekiel. 11. and 36.

Answ. 1. We must consider the Covenant not only as consummate and made up with
our selves in our own persons, but as it was begun, and first made with us and
for us in Christ, in which regard it is said to be made with us before the
world began, Tit. 1.2. a promise of grace being made to Christ for us, and to
us in him: Now if we thus consider the Covenant, as made with us in Christ, so
the first grace it self is conditional, as well as the last; Christ receives
the promises of grace for us, but he receives not the least of them but upon
condition that he must lay down his life for them, that he may perform them
unto us as we see in Esaias 55.5. Where God the Father makes a promise to Christ,
that he shall call a Nation or People to the knowledge of himself; which is a
promise of the first grace given us in our first conversion and calling: but in
respect of Christ, this is not absolute, but conditional, as appears in verse
4. for he must be a witness unto the people, to testify unto them the will of
the Father, which he performed in his Prophetical and Priestly Office; yea, he
must make his soul an offering for sin, Esaias 53.10. and upon this condition
he must have power to call a Nation, to bring them home by effectual calling
unto God; and thus in respect of Christ the very first Grace is conditional,
though without condition on our part.

2. Consider the Covenant in respect of the end of it, which it leads unto,
which is life and salvation, in which respect it is called a Covenant of life
and peace, Ma^th. 2.5. and if we thus consider it, it is conditional in
respect of our selves; for these promises of life and peace are not made but
upon condition of faith and obedience, not to the unbelieving and profane, Romans
10.9.10, 13. Romans 8.13. Mat. 5.3. to 10. and thus whether we look to the first
Grace as the beginning of the Covenant, or to the last Grace as the end of it,
the one is conditional in respect of Christ, the other in respect of our
selves; there is a condition of both.

3. The giving of the first Grace in our calling, goes before our pesonall
Covenant betwixt God and us, by which we bind our selves unto him to take him
for our God, to depend upon him, and to submit our selves unto his will; first
the Lord does dispose us and fit us to a walking in Covenant with him, by
putting into us his own spirit, as it is in Ezekiel. 36. and then he requires an
actual performance of Covenant on our part, to walk according to the Grace
received; Look how it was in that Covenant made with Adam, so it is in this
Covenant of Grace, in respect of the point in hand, though otherwise there be
wide differences betwixt them, as we have seen before; first God indues Adam
with an habitual righteousness, thereby enabling him for that obedience which
he was to walk in, and then having thus qualified him, the Lord enters into a
Covenant with him, requiring of him to walk according to all that Law which was
set before him, and in that way of working righteousness, to look for the life
which was promised him; so it is here in the Covenant of Grace; first, the Lord
comes and takes away from us the heart of stone, that evil heart of unbelief,
and gives us a spirit of faith, and renewing Grace, and then draws the soul
into a Covenant with him, to walk with him in a way of faith, depending upon
him by faith, and obeying him by faith: so looking for the promise of eternal
life; Thus it was with Abraham; first God gives unto Abraham a believing heart,
then he comes to him and tells him, Abraham, I am come to enter into a Covenant
with thee: and withal tells him what are the articles and conditions of the
Covenant both on Gods part, and on Abraham's; on Gods part, That he will be to
Abraham and to his seed a God to bless him, and to be an alsufficient good
unto him; and on Abraham's part, Requiring, That he walk before him and be
upright, and keep his Covenant which was commanded him; and so it is with all
the Adult Children of Abraham, first, God gives us a spirit of Grace, beginning
to renew us, then propounds to us the great things of his Covenant which he
will bestow upon us, and commands us to depend by faith upon him for the
performance of them; and if we thus consider of the giving of the first Grace,
this does no whit cross the condition of the Covenant, but makes way for it,
enabling us to walk in Covenant with God; that so he may bring upon us the good
which he has promised us.

Object. But this putting of a condition to the Covenant of grace may seem to
confound it and to make it the same with the Covenant of works.

Answ. It is not the having of a condition, but the identity or samenesse of
the condition which makes them the same Covenant; all Covenants have a
condition, but all Covenants are not therefore one and the same, but do differ
according to the difference of the conditions which are made; there being then
one condition in the Covenant of works, and another in the Covenant of grace,
they are therefore distinct Covenants, though there be a condition in both.

Thus then we see there is a condition of the Covenant.

But (to come to the second point before propounded) why (may some say) does
the Lord require any condition of us, and not bring us to life and glory
without requiring any thing at our hand?

Answ. 1. It is meet we should glorify God and his grace toward us, before he
exalt us and bring us unto glory; in this way it was that Christ himself went
into glory, according to that Prayer of his in John 17.4. I have glorified thee
here on earth, now therefore glorify me with thy self, with that glory which
I had with thee, etc. so must we do, we must walk by the same way, we must
here glorify that grace, by which we look for glory and honor and eternal
life.

2. The Lord would hereby justify the way of his grace, and stop the mouths
of all such as ate ready to murmr against him, herein showing his
righteousness in saving those that do believe; the wicked are forward to
complain against the Lord himself; they had wont to say, The ways of the Lord
are not equal, Ezekiel. 18. and in Mat. 20.11. there are that murmr against
him, as if he dealt not equally with them; they are complainers Jude 16. ready
to challenge God righteousness, that they themselves are not saved as well as
others; These mouths must be stopped; and when the Lord has carried on his
people, in a way of grace, through faith, patience, submission and obedience to
his will, others continuing still in their ca^nall licentiousness, this will
stop the mouths of all such compla^nours and murmurers. It will show forth the
righteousness and equity of the Lords proceeding in judgment against them, in
condemning them, and saving those that do believe, 1 These. 1.6.

3. Its also for the greater consolation of the Saints, that we seeing the
condition to be wrought in us, and finding our selves to be guided by his
Spirit, and enabled in any gracious measure to keep the way of his Covenant
which he has appointed for us to walk in, we might thereby have the more
strong consolation, assuring our selves of the fulfilling of his gracious
promise toward us; that his loving kindness shall be for ever and ever on
them that fear him, and keep his covenant thinking upon his Commandments to
do them, Psalm. 103.17, 18. And thus both in respect of glorifying of God, the
stopping of the mouths of the wicked, and for the comfort of the Saints, it
was meet there should be a condition annexed to the Covenant.

Before we proceed to the third point, let us make a little use of that already
delivered.

If there be a condition of the Covenant, then hence it follows, That for the
trial of our interest in the Salvation which the Covenant promises, there can
be no more direct, evident, and certain way taken, then by examining our selves
concerning the condition of the Covenant, expressed in the conditional
promises. The promise of life is made only to believers, who are described by
other graces accompanying their faith, and therefore termed sometimes such as
love God, sometimes merciful, poor in heart upright, and such other, all these
flowing from faith, faith showing it self by them. Now then, faith being the
condition of the Covenant, (as we shall show afterward) and being known by
these other graces accompanying it, here is the way for us to try our selves
before God, whether the promise of salvation do belong unto us even by looking
to the condition of Faith, and such other graces, as do accompany it in them
that do believe: This is so sure away of trial, that the Apostle himself
directs us thereunto, 2 Cor. 13.15. Prove your selves whether ye be in the
faith or no: If we would know our selves to be such as are not (...) to be
disallowed or rejected, there is no better way to know it then by our faith.
And John tells us that in this way we shall assure our hearts, 1 John 3.14, 18,
19. In Romans 10. The Apostle does propound the doubt of a weak believer,
inquiring how he may know that he shall be saved; and the Apostle himself
answers his doubt, telling him that it is not by ascending or descending hither
or thither, but by looking to his faith, For if thou beleevest with thine heart
in the Lord Jesus, thou shall be saved, v. 9. This way of trial shows the
true use of those promises which we call conditional; we do not make the graces
expressed in them as the matter of our righteousness, and yet neither do we
cast them aside as if they were Legal promises, and not Evangelicall; but the
use of them is thereby to try our selves by the graces expressed in them; and
this is the chiefest way of trial which the Word does direct us unto; Yea I
doubt not to affirm that if we will in ordinary course, have any trial of our
estates by the Word, we must have it in this way, by the conditional promises;
The absolute promises do not describe the persons to whom the blessings of the
Covenant do belong; only the conditional promises do point out the persons
to be saved, as the absolute do show the cause of our salvation; if therefore
we will try, and in a way of trial have any knowledge of our personal
interest in the salvation promised, we must either come to know it by the
conditional promises, or not have it from the word at all, etc.

Yet neither would I make the absolute promises useless, as some have gone
about to do with those that are conditional; I acknowledge they are of
singular use; First, in that they show unto us the only cause of our
salvation, even free grace, and no other; Secondly, they are a foundation for
the faith of adherence or dependence to stay upon; they yield a singular
encouragement to a poor dejected soul that finds nothing in it self but sin and
misery, with hope to cast it self upon the free grace of God, seeing he looks
at nothing in us for which he should save us, but only to glorify his own
grace in us. But still though in these regards there be great use of these
absolute promises, yet the trial of our estates is not by them, because they
do not note out the persons to whom the salvation is promised, but this is
done (as was said) by the conditional.

There be two acts of faith, one of adherence or dependence, another of
assurance; There be also two kinds of promises, absolute and conditional;
mark now how these do fit and answer one to the other, the absolute promises
to the faith of adherence, the conditional to the faith of assurance; For
example, God comes and says; For mine own sake will I do thus and thus unto
you in an absolute promise; here is a ground for the faith of adherence to
cleave unto; though I be most unworthy, yet I will hang upon this promise
because it is for his own sake that the Lord will perform this mercy, that he
may be glorified. There be also conditional promises, (He that believes shall
be saved) by means of which (we having the experience and feeling of such
grace in our selves) we grow to an assurance that we are of those that he will
show that free grace upon. And thus the absolute promises are laid before us as
the foundation of our salvation which is wrought in the adhering to the
promise) and the conditional as the foundation of our assurance.

But may not (will some say) and does not the Lord sometimes give comfort to
his servants by an absolute promise? and if so, then what need we look to
those that are conditional?

Ans. I doubt not but the Lord does give refreshings to the souls of his
beloved by such absolute promises; for there being a sum of grace contained in
every promise, whether absolute or conditional, the Lord may let the soul
raste of the comfort of that grace by what promise he will when the soul is
taken up with some deep and serious meditation of that abundant grace and free
goodness of God toward us, and the mind is fastened upon some expression of
such a promise setting forth that grace unto us, the Spirit sends down that
sweetness of grace into our hearts, letting us taste and feel the comfort of
it. This none will deny. But 1. the question is not, whether we may taste of
comfort by an absolute promise; but by what kind of promise we are to try our
selves; the Spirit may give refreshing by an absolute promise, but our way of
trial is by the conditional, examining our selves by the graces expressed in
them, and thereupon making application to our selves of the mercy promised,
which we cannot do by the absolute, there being nothing expressed in them to
help us in this way, 2. Though comfort may he had by an absolute promise, yet
it is never given (if it be true and not a delusion) but where the condition of
Faith and other graces are in being, and are first wrought; otherwise it is
lying, false comfort, not true and saving, 3. Though we may have comfort by an
absolute promise, yet when times of temptation do return, when scruples and
doubts do afterward arise in our heart, we must then turn to the conditional
promises, trying whether the graces expressed in them be wrought in us; and
then finding in our selves that faith and love which is in Christ Jesus, we do
thereby grow up in assurance that the former consolation was no other but the
consolation of Gods own Spirit. So that upon the point, here is the usual and
ordinary way of trial of our estates, even to try our selves by the graces
expressed in the conditional promises. And though the comfort so tasted as was
before expressed, be the more sweet and delightful whiles it is felt, yet the
assurance which we have by the trial of our graces, is the more constant and
durable. If upon pretense of the seal and witness of the Spirit in an
absolute promise, any shall despise this way of trial by the graces that are
in them, let them take heed, least Satan (who knows how to transform himself
into an Angel of light) do deceive them with false flashes of comfort, which
in the end will cause them to lie down in sorrow.

It is but an unpleasing business to separate and oppose the things which God
has so nearely joined together, to oppose the absolute promises against the
conditional, or the conditional against the absolute; the Lord has made no
such separation or opposition betwixt them; The absolute and conditional
promises are both one in substance, though they differ in manner of expression;
For when the Lord says, he will forgive our sins for his own sake, Esaias 43.
(which is an absolute promise) this promise intends faith in those in whom it
shall be fulfilled; though he do forgive our sins for his own sake, yet he
does it only to such as do believe; faith therefore is employed in that
promise, though not expressed; And on the other side, when God promises life
to such as do believe (which is a conditional promise) this promise implies
the former freeness of Grace, as was before expressed in the absolute promise
to do it for his own sake; the expressing of faith the condition, does not
exclude the freeness of Grace, nor does the expressing of freeness of Grace
exclude the condition; these two kind of promises, help to explain one
another, not to contradict or overthrow the truth of either; When we hear a
conditional promise, (believe and be saved) if any shall now ask, Why will
the Lord save such as believe without works? To this the Lord answers in the
absolute promise, for mine own sake will I do it; On the otherside, when
hearing an absolute promise, (As, for mine own sake will I do this:) If any
shall here ask, To whom will the Lord perform this mercy promised? To this he
answers in the conditional promise, I will do it to them which do believe;
so sweetly do these promises agree betwixt themselves, helping to explain and
expound one another. Let us not then dash them on against another, and betwixt
themselves they will not jarre. The Apostle found no disagreement betwixt Grace
and Faith, or betwixt being saved by Grace, and being saved by Faith, Ezekiel.
2.8. and if Grace and Faith agree so well, then must the absolute and
conditional promises agree also; the one expressing the Grace of God as the
cause of our salvation; the other expressing the condition (Faith) by which it
is received, and our interest in it discerned; this way of trial by
conditional promises, Let none count a legal course, as not agreeable to the
spirit of the Gospel, This is that way of trial which Paul (who was no legal
Preacher) directed the Saints unto: So does Peter also, 2 Pet. 5. to 11. v.
Some that love to be wise above that which is written, and not according to
sobriety, despise this way as fit for novices, but not for such as are perfect
as they are: They have their assurance by revelation, seeing the very book of
life unsealed and opened unto them, so that they may see and read their own
names written in it; it is too low a work for them to descend into themselves,
and to examine how it is with them within, whether they be in the faith or no.
But if this people have any ear to hear, Let them take heed of speaking evil
of the way of the Lord, which is so clearly laid down in the Word; or if they
be already hardened in their own way, and being wise in their own eyes, will
count this way legal, and contrary to the free Grace of the Covenant, I doubt
not to tell them, that an humble soul which is able to prove his estate in
life by his faith, and other Graces accompanying it, as holy mourning for sin
(which they set so light by) love of God, and of the brethren, care to please
God, and such like, shall find more settled and sure comfort, in the truth of
these, then they shall do in their fancyed revelations, and absolute way,
neglecting the state of the inward man.

That wretched Jezabell (whom the Devil sent over hither to poison these
American Churches, with her depths of Satan which she had learned in the
School of the Familists, who made her self a Prophetess, as understanding
all secrets of the counsel of God,) she counted all such but legal
Christians, and legal Preachers, as allowed this way: All her assurance was
from revelation, it was revealed unto her that she was one of the Elect of
God; and she knew all things by immediate revelation from above; but I fear
she knows not that her glorious revelations were but Satanicall delusions: Let
her damned heresies she fell into, (denying the resurrection, etc.) and the
just vengeance of God, by which she perished, terrify all her seduced
followers from having any more to do with her leaven, which she spread among
them. Beware of her sin, least ye perish in her plague.

Use 2. Is there a condition of the Covenant? Then let this provoke us all, who
look for the blessing which it brings, to be faith^ull with God in keeping our
Covenant with him; take heed we fall not short of the condition, least we be
deprived of the blessing; this is that which the Apostle teaches us, Heb. 4.1.
Seeing we have a promise left us of entering into his rest, (there is the
blessing promised) let us fear least (through unbelief) any of us should be
deprived (there is the condition required:) The words (through unbelief) are
not in the Text expressed, but they are evidently employed, as appears both by
the coherence with the third Chapter, and by that which follows, Chap. 4.2. To
be deprived of such a blessing is a heavy loss, such as can never be
recompensed, and the preventing of this loss, (so far as concerns us) is by
keeping of our Covenant, which the Lord commands us to walk in. If we forsake
the condition, we forsake the promise; and therefore it is also that when God
took Abraham into a Covenant with him, he did not only tell Abraham what he
would be unto him, a God to bless him; but he brings Abraham to walk in
Covenant with him; Thou also shall keep my Covenant, (says the Lord,) Genesis
17.9. Thou shall walk before me and be upright, Genesis 17 1. When God takes us
into Covenant with him, we are said to be brought into the bond of the
Covenant, Ezekiel. 20. to teach us that now we must look at our selves as tied and
bound unto God, in a Covenant never to be broken; we are not now any longer at
our own liberty, to walk as we list, but must observe our Covenant to walk
therein; when we walk so, that we may truly say before the Lord, our heart is
not turned back from thee, neither have we dealt falsely with thee in thy
Covenant, as it in Psalm. 44.17, 18 this keeps the heart in a comfortable
expectation of the blessed hope which is set before us, Thus Paul, I have kept
the faith, I have finished my course, and now henceforth there is laid up for
me a crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. Let us carefully walk in the
condition, and then the promise will be sure; not only sure in it self, but
su^e to us, 2 Pet. 1.10. These bonds of the Covenant are not like the fetters
of a prison; they are like the pleasing bonds of wedlock; (vincula nuptiarum)
which every one gladly enters into; Oh let us love these bonds; give up both
our hands unto the Lord; yea, and our hearts also, to be bound in them for
ever; these are sweet bonds, they work no grief; seek not therefore to break
them, Psalm. 2. nor cast them from you; say not we will be our own, and walk by
our will; such lawless and licentious spirits as will be at liberty, they
shall be at liberty to their woe: they shall have such a liberty as Jeremy
threatened to the rebellious Jews, a liberty to the sword, to the famine, and
to the pestilence, Jer. 34. a liberty to go to hell to their eternal
destruction; a liberty with a curse; granted unto them in wrath, which shall
end in chains of everlasting darkness, and bring them into that prison from
whence there is no going out: Therefore let all such as look for the blessing
and life promised in the Covenant, Let them walk faithfully in the condition of
it, and in this way expect the mercy which is promised.

Thus we have showed; First, That there is a condition of the Covenant;
Secondly, Why the Lord has put a condition unto it.

3. The third point follows to show what the condition is, which though it has
been obiter mentioned before, yet is now to be spoken of more particularly.

The condition then of the Covenant of Grace is faith, Romans 4.16. and Romans
10.9, 10. If thou believe in the Lord Jesus, thou shall be saved; so Acts
18.31. and Joh. 3.16. hence in Romans 3.27. The Gospel is called the Law of
Faith, because as the Law of works does put works as the condition of that
Covenant; so the Gospel puts faith as the condition of the new Covenant.

Quest. But why is faith made the condition of the Covenant.

Answ. 1. The blessing of life promised, is not in our selves, but in Christ;
Christ is life, and he which has the Son has has life, and he which has
not the Son has not life, 1 John 5.12. We are dead, Colos. 3.3. and our Works
are dead, Heb. 9.14. there is no life in them, they cannot bring life unto them
that do them; nor can we quicken our own souls, but Christ is the life of
men, Joh. 1.4. Colos. 3.4. and the way to receive Christ, and the life which is
in him, is only by faith, Ioh. 1.12. unbelief rejects Christ and puts him
away; But faith as an hand puts forth it self to receive him in whom our life
is: If we had life in our selves, and could have found it in our own works, it
had then been needless to appoint faith as the condition of the Covenant; but
being that both we our selves are dead in sin, and our works are dead works,
nothing but death to be found in either; therefore its required that we
believe in Christ, that we may receive life from him.

2. The condition of the law is now become impossible unto us, through the
infirmity of our flesh, Romans 8.3. and therefore the Apostle says, that the Law
cannot possibly give life, Gal. 3.21. Therefore the Lord would go that way with
us no more; the Lord saw by Adam, what would be the fruit of that condition; if
we had been put upon the same as Adam was, we should have done as he did; we
should have showed our selves men, like men transgressing the Covenant, as
Hoseah speaks, Hos. 6.7. This condition being above our ability to perform,
the Lord has in goodness appointed another, which is possible through grace
to be fulfilled by us, having now received a spirit of faith, (2 Cor. 4.13.) It
is now given us to believe, Phil. 1.29. this is possible.

3. It is by faith that it might be by grace, Romans 4.16. The Covenant is
stablished upon the condition of faith, that it might appear to be by grace
that we obtain the blessing: the condition must answer the nature of the
Covenant; therefore being a Covenant of grace, the condition must be such as
may stand with grace; but if works had been the condition, this could not have
stood with grace, Romans 11.6. Gods maine end in this Covenant, is the
mani^estation of his grace toward his chosen, that his grace may be glorified
in them, Ephesians. 1.6. 2 These. 1.10. that nothing might be left unto man to glory
in; but that he which glories might glory in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1. ult. etc.

4. It is faith, that the blessing might be sure to those to whom it is
promised, Romans 4.16. Adam had a promise of life, but being made upon condition
of working, he never got the blessing by that Covenant; when Adam first entered
into Covenant with God, it was uncertain whether he should live by it or no,
in regard that it was uncertain whether he would fulfill the condition, and
thereupon it was that he had one Sacrament of death, as well as another of
life, to assure him of death in case he sinned, as well as to assure him of
life in case he obeyed: but now the promise of life being made to us upon
condition of faith, it is thereby made sure to those that do believe; Christ
is a sure foundation for them to rest upon, Esaias 28.16. the promise also is
sure and faithful, 2 Samuel 23.5. and faith is as an anchor sure and steadfast,
Heb. 6.19. and, Christ being so sure a foundation, the promise sure, and faith
taking such sure hold upon both, these three together are as a three^old cord
not easily broken, so that the blessing in the Covenant of grace now is not so
uncertain and doubtful as in the Covenant of works, but is sure to those that
believe. And hence it is that in this Covenant though we have two seals added
unto it, as well as in the Covenant of works; yet there is no Sacrament or
seal of death: but they are both seals of life and salvation, assuring us
that if we believe in the name of the Lord Jesus, we shall surely have
everlasting life.

5. Faith is sufficient to make us partakers of all the blessings of the
Covenant; Look back unto all those blessings before named, and you shall see
how faith does possess us of them all. God promises to be a God unto us, Jer.
31. but how comes he to be our God? It is by faith, Romans 3.29, 30. He promises
forgiveness of sins, and to remember our iniquities no more, and it is faith
which makes us partakers of this blessing also, Acts 10.43. Romans 3.24, 25.

By faith we are made partakers of the Spirit of holiness, Gal. 3.14. faith
purifies the heart, Acts 15.9. and 26.18. By faith we are kept in the estate of
grace unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. Romans 11.20. we stand by faith, 2 Cor. 1.24.

By faith we are made heirs and owners of all the good things of this life; We
are sons by faith, Gal. 3.21. and being sons we are also heirs, Romans 8.17.
even heirs of the world, as Abraham was, Romans 4.13. and if by faich we be
partakers of Christ, then are we with him interested in all other things also,
Romans 8.32. yea, all things are ours, whether things present or things to come,
all are ours, we being Christ's, 1 Cor. 3.

Lasty, by faith we obtain that great and last blessing of the Covenant even
the blessing of eternal life, Joh. 3.16, 36. So that faith alone makes us
possessors of all the blessings of the Covenant, and therefore there needs no
other condition but faith alone.

Object. But (may some say) if faith alone be the condition of the Covenant,
and do make us partakers of life, and forgiveness of sin, then what need is
there of any obedience, or works of holiness? faith alone is sufficient in
stead of all.

Answ. This was the old plea of loose Libertines in the Apostles times; I have
faith says one, and though I have no works, yet my faith will save me; But
understand, O thou vain man (says the Apostle James, chap. 3.) that if thy
faith be without works, such faith is vain, but like a dead carcass without
soul or spirit, it is dead in it self, and leaves the soul in death, wanting
life in it self, and yielding no living fruit, it cannot bring life unto the
soul. A good tree says Christ, is known by its fruit, and so a right and
sound faith. Let a man believe in truth, he cannot but love; and if he love, he
cannot but seek to please God in well doing; faith is as a tree of life which
abounds with good fruit; as therefore when a man desires to have good fruit in
his orchard, he does not set the fruits themselves in it, but plants the trees
which use to bear the fruit, as knowing that if the trees be good and kindly,
the trees will yield the fruit; so God delights to see the fruits of
righteousness in the lives of his Saints, and for this end plants in their
hearts the tree of faith, as knowing where this tree is planted, and takes
root, the fruit will and cannot but follow; faith and holiness can no more be
separated, then light can be separated from the Sun; such as say they have
faith, and hope to partake in the blessing of the Covenant, and yet live
loosely, carnally, unconscionably, they do but deceive themselves; they may be
in Covenant with hell and death, but have no part of the Covenant of life and
peace.

Quest. 2. But whereas in speaking of faith, we speak sometimes of the habit,
sometimes of the act of it; It may be demanded which of these is the condition
of the Covenant? whether is it the habit or the act of faith which is required
of us?

Answ. It is the latter, that is, the act, faith acting and working toward the
promise, and from the promise, and causing us to live by faith in the promise,
according to that in Gal. 2.20. the life which I now live, I live by the faith
of the Son of God; the habit is freely given us, and wrought in us by the
Lord himself, to enable us to act by it, and to live the life of faith; and
then we having received the gift, the habit, then (I say) the Lord requires of
us that we should put forth acts of faith, both by waiting upon him, to receive
from him all the good which he has promised, and by walking in all obedience
of faith, in an humble submission to his will; this work of faith the Apostle
shows fully to have been in those Saints, in Heb. 11. both in expecting the
promise, with patient suffering under the hope of it, and in obedient
submission to any Commandment of God; and these acts of faith are employed in
that expression of walking by faith, 2 Cor. 5. and the work of faith, 1 These.
1.3. and in that faith is said to work by love, Gal. 5. all tending to show
that it is the act and work of of faith which is required on our part.

Reas. 1. It is the act of faith which receives the promise, and Christ in the
promise, Joh. 1.12. Heb. 11.13. A man may have an hand and yet not have the
gift which is offered him unless he put forth his hand to receive it; faith
is the hand of the soul, and the putting of it forth is the act by which we
receive Christ offered.

2. Look as it was with Adam in that Covenant made with him, he had an
habitual righteousness within him; but that was not the condition of the
Covenant betwixt God and him, but the acting of that inward habit in acts of
obedience, was the condition of the Covenant; so here in the Covenant of grace,
first, God puts into us the habit of faith, and then requires of us act of
faith; to lay hold of the promise, and to receive the grace which i^ offered in
the Covenant.

3. It is not an habit of faith, but a life of faith which is required of the
Saints that are in Covenant with God; it is the habit which enables and fits us
to live by faith; but the life of faith consists in the acts of faith, put
forth according to the several occasions we meet withal, Gal. 2.20. 2 Cor.
5.8. Heb. 11.

4. There must needs be a difference betwixt that which God promises as a part
of the Covenant on his part, and that which he requires of us on our part; now
the habit is that which God promises to us: when he says, I will give you a
new heart, etc. and this he works in us in our effectual calling; and then
the acting of that faith received, is that which is required on our part.

Quest. But what is that act or acts of faith, by which we perform the
condition of the Covenant?

Answ. 1. First, there is an act of faith by which we do (as it were) first
close with the Covenant revealed and offered unto us.

2. There is also another act of it, by which we are carried on to an
answerable walking before God according to the Covenant made with him.

1. For the former before we give a direct answer, we must lay down these two
grounds.

First, That in the making up of the Covenant betwixt God and us, God is first
with us, he is the first mover, he begins with us, before we begin with him; we
should never seek to be in Covenant with him, if he did not allure us, and draw
us unto him, Thus in Ezekiel. 20.37. I will bring them (says the Lord) into the
bond of the Covenant; It is the Lord which brings them; they do not first
offer themselves.

And first God prepares his own way for entering into Covenant with us, and
then he finisheth the work; and in this preparation he does these three things.

1. He breaks us off from our Covenant with Hell and Death, makes us sensible
of our undone estate, makes us see that we are without God, without Christ,
without hope, Ephesians. 2. that we are not under mercy, that we are not of his
people, 1 Pet. 2.

2. He opens unto us his mind and will, showing himself willing to receive us
to grace, and to enter into a new Covenant with us, yet again to take us to be
his people, and he to be our God; he goes into the streets and open places as
it is in Prove. 1.20, 21. and there makes public proclamation, Ho, ho, every
one that will, Come ye unto me, and I will make an everlasting Covenant with
you, Esaias 55.3. Esaias 65.1. yea more, he comes and beseeches us to be reconciled
unto him, 2 Cor. 5.20. and speaks to us as pitying us; Jer. 3.12. and
lamenting over us, Ezekiel. 33.11. thereby to persuade us to come into a Covenant
with him.

3. By the hearing of these promises and offers of grace, the Lord usually
scatters some little seeds of faith in the hearts of those that he will bring
unto himself; which seed being sown, does sometimes quickly put forth, and
acts toward the Covenant propounded, and lays hold of it, as we see in Lydia,
the Jailer, Zacheus, and such others; but sometimes (and that most usually)
before that faith has done any great thing in seeking after God, to make a
Covenant with him, the Lord does again withdraw himself, and goes away as,
Hoseah 5. end: hiding himself, as if he would regard us and look after us no
more; so that now if we will get into Covenant with him, we must seek after
him, as he before sought after us, and must sue unto him for grace, to take us
into Covenant with himself; and herein faith begins to show it self,
beginning to work and move toward the Covenant which the Lord offers to make
with us.

For though the Lord has withdrawn himself, yet he has left such a touch of
his Spirit upon the heart as makes the soul affectionate toward him, so as
now it cannot rest, but feeling its own woe, being without God, and without
Covenant, and having heard of the Lords willingness to enter into a Covenant
with us, it now begins to seek after the Lord, to be in Covenant wirh him; This
is the first ground, that God is first, he begins with us.

Secondly, The second is, that whatsoever faith does in seeking to enter into
Covenant with God, it does it always in that way, and according to that order
in which the Lord has gone before us, in the offer of his Covenant unto us;
faith does always follow the Word, and does nothing but as it has a word of
Faith to guide its way, it goes step by step as it has the light of the word
directing and going before; faith does not prescribe unto God, it will not
presume to appoint the conditions of the Covenant, only it answers and applies
it self to Gods offer, taking conditions of peace, but giving none. It does
not seek to wind about the promise of grace to our own mind and will. It does
not say I will have it thus, thus it shall be, or else I will admit of no
conditions of peace; but the soul now finding that the everlasting estate of it
for weal or woe, life or death, stands at the mere good pleasure and mercy of
God; and knowing that either it must submit to that way of the Covenant, and to
those conditions which the Lord is pleased to set down, or it must perish for
ever; it gladly comes in humbly accepting the offer of grace, in the same way
as it is tendered and offered unto us of God.

Here then (that we may see how faith closes with the Covenant propounded) we
must see first how God offers himself in his Covenant unto us. Now in that
main promise of the Covenant (which is indeed the sum of all) I will be thy
God, God offers himself unto us two ways, (as has been before showed in the
opening of that promise,) First, he offers himself unto us as a God of mercy
to pardon us; as a God of blessing to bless us with all sufficient blessings.
2. As a God over us, and above us, to order us and to rule us in all our ways,
to govern us according to his own will that he may be glorified in us; Thus
God offers himself unto us in his Covenant, etc.

Now the answer is ready to the question propounded, how faith does act in
closing with the Covenant; the work of faith herein is to carry the soul
toward the Covenant in the same order and way as it is propounded; First
accepting the grace offered, resting upon God for all the mercy which he has
promised. 2. Taking God to be a God over us submitting to his government and
authority, to command us and to rule us in all things according to his own
will; these two things faith does, and so takes hold of the Covenant in the
same way and order as God offers it. 1. God makes himself known to us as a God
of mercy, gracious, long-suffering, pardoning iniquity, transgression, and sin,
he offers himself to be reconciled unto us, though we have rebelled against
him, promising to be a Father unto us, and to accept of us as his sons and
daughters in his beloved.

Now the work of Faith in respect of this offer of grace is only to accept the
grace offered, to lay hold on it and take it unto our selves being so freely
offered; Faith brings nothing to God of our own, it offers nothing to stand in
exchange for the mercy offered; it receives a gift, but gives no price. The
Lord holds out and offers the free grace of the Covenant; faith receives it,
and makes it our own. Hence is that expression used by the Prophet in Esaias 56.
where we are said to lay hold of the Covenant; God holds it forth, and we take
hold of it, the hand of grace offers it, and the hand of faith receives it and
makes it our own, and this it does by such steps and degrees as these that
follow, wherein though I should not limit the Lords dealing with all his, yet I
will show what I conceive is the most usual and ordinary course of Gods
dispensation toward those whom he brings into Covenant with himself: Here
then faith closes with the Covenant in this manner.

1. By hearing the great things proposed in the Covenant, it stirs up in the
heart a deep and serious consideration of the blessed condition of those people
that are in Covenant with God; Oh what a blessed estate is it (thinks such a
one,) to be in favor with God, to be one of his covenanted people? It makes
him say with Moses, Blessed art thou O Israel, a people saved by the Lord,
Deuteronomy. 33. It says with David, No people O Lord, is like thy people Israel,
whom thou have redeemed unto thy self, 2 Samuel 7.23. Time was when we counted
the proud blessed, and placed our felicity in other things, as in riches,
preferments, favor, and credit with men, etc. but now these are become vile
and things of no value; faith makes us change our voice, and to speak with a
new tongue, and to say, not, Blessed are the people that be so, but, Blessed
are the people whose God is the Lord, Psalm. 144. ult.

This high esteem of grace being accompanied with a sense of the want of it,
we seem unto our selves as undone men, lost, wretched, miserable. The poor
soul thinks with it self, no sin like my sin, no misery like my misery: I am
separated from the Lord, an alien from his people; Oh blessed are they that are
are at peace, and in covenant with him! this is now the only pearl of price;
the rich treasure in the field, for which such a one is content to give all the
substance of his house. In the prodigal when he began to think of returning
to his father, these two things were found in him.

First, a deep sense of his own misery, (I die for hunger.)

Secondly, a consideration of the welfare of those that were in his Fathers
house (they have bread enough.) So it is with those poor souls in which faith
begins to work, to draw them back into Covenant with God; sensible are they of
their own woe, highly also do they prize the excellency of grace, if by any
means they might attain to have a part in it.

2. This high esteem of grace, and being in Covenant with God, begets a longing
desire of it; good being believed, cannot but be desired, and longed for, and
therefore faith now believing the benefit of being in favor and Covenant with
God, it cannot but work desires after it; desire naturally springs from the
apprehension of any good made known. Faith is both in the understanding and in
the will; as it is in the understanding, it opens the eye to see, and clearly
to discern the blessing of the Covenant, and then stirs up the will to pursue
and desire the attaining of the grace revealed: Never did David more long for
the waters of the well of Bethlehem, then such a soul touched with the sense of
sin, does desire to be at peace with God and in covenant with him, and
therefore it is that they are said to thirst after the the Lord, Psalm. 42.2. to
pant after him, Psalm. 42.1. to gasp after him, Psalm. 119. longing for
communion and peace with him. Thus in Esaias 26.9. with their souls they desire
him in the night, and with their spirit in the morning; the desire of their
soul is set upon him, and cannot be satisfied by any thing without him; peace
with him is their life; and to be separated from him, is unto them as the
shadow of death.

3. Faith being yet weak, and but as in the bud, or in the seed, and being yet
unacquainted with the Lords dealing with his people, not knowing how he uses
by terrors of death to bring them to life and peace; hence it comes to pass
that the soul being pressed with sense of sin, therefore though its desires be
strong, yet hope of obtaining is but feeble and vveak, we seeming to our
selves utterly unworthy (as indeed we are) and incapable (which we are not) of
so high a privilege as this is, to be in favor and Covenant with the most
high God. Here therefore faith is taken up with many thoughts, thereby to
support and keep up the heart in hope, carrying the eye of the soul toward
God, though as beholding him afar off; feign would the poor soul be joined to
the Lord, Isai. 56. but being as yet dismayed with the sense of sin, he stands
like the poor Publican afar off, as one afraid to come near into the presence
of the holy God; as yet faith can scarce speak a word to God, it cannot come
near to call upon him, only it can with Jonah look toward his holy Temple, as
being like the poor weak babe which lies in the cradle, being both sick, and
weak and speechless, and can only look toward the mother for help, the cast
of the eye (after a sort) expressing and signifying what it would say: Thus
does faith being yet weak, it would speak unto God but cannot, only it has
its eye toward heaven, looking for grace and mercy according to Iehoshaphats
speech, Our eyes are toward thee, 2 Chronicles. 20. It hungers and thirsts after
grace, but fears it shall never be satisfied; it feels a need and feign would
have; but sense of unworthiness, consciousnesse of manifold sins, the
sentence of the Law like the thundering and lightning at Mount Sinai, all of
them being sharpened by Satan's working in them and with them, do strike such a
fear into the heart, (as was in Israel then,) that though desires be stirring
and working, yet hope is very feeble, causing us to do as Israel did there,
who though they heard the Lord say, I am the Lord your God, yet the terror of
the thunder made them to stand afar off; and so we, we hear the Lord offering
to be our God in covenant with us, but such are the discouragements that we
dare not come near to seek after the grace which is revealed; Hitherto
therefore the mind of the poor sinner desiring to be in Covenant with God, is
unquiet within it self, hurried too and fro finding no rest; it hears of
peace with God, but feels it not; but in stead of peace, finds trouble, fear,
doubtings, discouragements to keep it off from the way of peace; faith being
yet young and faint, has much ado to sustain the heart in any hope that it
sink not down in discouragement. But yet though it be weak, it will be doing
what it is able; setting the mind to consider the promises, and encouragements
which God has given us in his word; how he invites all to come unto him, even
every one that thirsts, Esaias 55. telling us, That whosoever comes unto him, he
will not cast away, Joh. 6.37.

And hence, while the mind is possessed with these things, because so great a
business as making a Covenant of peace with the high God, and about so great
an affair as the life and salvation of our soul, cannot be transacted in a
tumult, Therefore

4. In the fourth place, faith takes the soul aside, and carries it into some
solitary place; that there it may be alone with it self, and with God, with
whom it has to do. This business, and multitude of other occasions, cannot
be done together, and therefore the soul must be alone, that it may the more
fully commune with it self, and utter it self fully before the Lord; Thus the
poor Church in the time of her affliction, when the Lord seemed to hide
himself from her, she sat alone, as she speaks, Lament. 3.28, 29. and Jer.
15.17. I sat alone, because of thy plague: The way of the Lord is prepared in
the Desert, Esaias 40.3. when the Lord will come to the soul, and draw it into
communion with himself; he will have his way hereto prepared in the Desert;
not in the throng of a City, but in a solitary Desert place, he will allure us,
and draw us into the Wilderness, from the company of men, when he will speak
to our heart, and when he prepares our heart to speak unto him, Hoseah 2. Not
that such a one does despise or neglect the fellowship of Gods people, but he
now sees and knows full well, that his help is not in man, and therefore waits
not upon the sons of Adam, Mich. 5.7. He is glad to hear of any hope, and how
others have been succored and pulled out of the like distress, etc. but
though he has an ear open unto these and the like helps, yet the soul cannot
rest in them, but must retire it self, and get alone, where it may think its
full, and satisfy it self;e in thoughts of its own estate, and of the offers
and promises of Grace, which God has made to such lost sinners: And whiles the
soul is thus alone, with it self and with God, sometimes thinking of its own
misery and sin, sometimes of the Lords mercy now presented in such and such
promises; sometimes calling to mind how others have found favor with God,
notwithstanding their sins, sometimes thinking what should move the Lord thus
to invite us, and call us unto him, and to give us these desires after him; why
(thinks the soul) should the Lord do thus, if there were no hope that he
would receive me? whiles I say, the soul being alone, is thus exercised in
these thoughts, at length the fire kindles, so as the soul can now rest no
longer, but a spirit of faith being within, like fire in the bones, the heart
hitherto having been as a Wine-vessell, which has had no vent, yet now the
spirit within, compels him to open his lips, and to utter before the Lord the
meditations of his heart: And therefore

5. In the fifth place, the soul resolves now to go to the throne of Grace,
suing for Grace, proving whether the Lord will be gracious and merciful, to
accept of a reconciliation; faith speaks within, as they did in Jonah 3.9. who
can tell whether the Lord will return etc. and as Amos 5.15. It may be the Lord
may yet be merciful; such an one cannot yet say that he will, yet knows not
but he may be gracious, and therefore does as those lepers in 2 King. 7.3. who
knowing that they were sure to perish if they sat still, resolved to try what
might befall them in going into the Camp of the Aramites; and as Esther who
would try whether the King would hold out his golden Sceper toward her, yea or
no; so the poor sinner, knowing how it is with him, and thinking he must
perish if he thus continue, and hearing also such gracious invitations, etc.
thereupon resolves to go and seek the Lord begging Grace and acceptance before
him. (Does the Lord say, seek ye my face? the heart answers within, Lord I
will seek thy face; Does the Lord say, Come unto me? the heart answers,
Behold we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God, Ier. 3.22.) And now
the soul betakes it self unto God, sending up complaints against it self,
with lamentations for its own sinful rebellions, accompanied with strong cries
to heaven, with sighs and groans of Spirit which cannot be expressed; it
confesses with grief and bitter mourning, all former iniquities, smites upon
the thigh with repenting Epharim, lies down at Gods footstool, putting its
mouth in the dust, acknowledging Gods righteousness if he should condemn and
cast off for ever, and yet withal pleads for Grace, that it may be accepted as
one of his; It says unto God, Lord, I have nothing to plead why thou may not
condemn me; but if thou will receive me, thy mercy shall appear in me, thou
may show forth all thy goodness; take away therefore all mine iniquities,
and receive me graciously, Hoseah 14.3. It pleads Gods promise, Lord, thou
have said thou will be gracious; Lord make good this word to the soul of thy
servant, be my God, my merciful God, and make me thy servant; thus the soul
lies at the throne of Grace and pleads for Grace.

6. As faith is thus earnest in suing to God for Grace and acceptance with him,
so it is no less vigilant, and watchful in observing and taking notice what
answer comes from the Lord, how he answers the desires we have presented before
him. As the prisoner at the bar, not only cries for mercy, but marks every
word which falls from the Judges mouth, if any thing may give him hope, and as
Benhadads servants lay at catch with the King of Israel, to see if they could
take occasion by any thing which fell from him, to plead for the life of
Benhadad; so does the poor soul that is now pleading for life and grace, it
watches narrowly to see if any thing may come from God, any intimation of
favor, any word of comfort that may tend to peace; thence it is that the
Saints have so often called upon God for answer of their prayers; they thought
it not enough to pray, but they would see how the Lord answered them, Psalm.
102.1, 2. Thus Psalm. 51.8. O let me hear joy and gladness, etc. David did not
only pray for mercy, but desires to hear from heaven a word spoken to his
conscience, by which he might know he was accepted; though David was not in the
beginning of that work we now speak of, yet the case is alike, he was now in
his own sense as if he had been to begin anew, and thus in Psalm. 85.8. I will
hear what the Lord will say, for he will speak peace unto his people, etc.

7. As faith does thus wait for an answer from God, so likewise according as
the Lord does either answer or not answer, so does faith demean it self.

First, Sometimes he answers not, to our sense (I mean) and discerning, as we
see in David's case; he felt himself as one forsaken, and prayed unto God, but
found no audience, Psalm. 22. What does faith in this case? it follows God
still, and cries after him with more strength and earnestness, as resolving
never to give over, till the Lord either save or destroy; if the Lord will
destroy, yet the soul chooses to die at Gods foot, as Joab did at the horns
of the Altar, when he was bidden to come forth from thence, to take his death
in another place; Nay (says Ioab) but I will die here; Here the humbled soul
does as that woman did in Mat. 15. she sues to Christ, but Christ seems to
have no regard of her, gives her not one word, but she seeks still; still she
cries after him, and though still repulsed, yet she comes a third time, and
cries, Lord help me; and though still the Lord gives her another repulse, yet
still she hangs upon him, and follows him for mercy, and would never give over
till she he had gotten even what she desired. Even as Christ in his agony,
when he saw deliverance came not, he prayed more earnestly, Luke 22.44. so does
the poor sinner in the time of his agony, when he is striving, as for life,
and death; if help come not at first call, he prays again, and that more
earnestly; faith will be urgent with God, with an humble importunity; and the
more slack the Lord seems to be in answering, the more instant is faith in
plying God with prayers. It will be wrestling with God, as Jacob did with the
Angel; it will not rest without a blessing, it will take no denial, but will
crave still, as he did, bless me, even me also, send me not away without a
blessing; it resolves to wait, and look up, until the Lord show mercy, Psalm.
123.2. Lament. 3.49, 50.

Secondly, Sometimes again the Lord does answer, but yet he speaks but as out
of the dark cloud giving some little ease, but not speaking full peace; much
like as he spoke to the woman, Ioh. 8.11. Go thy way and sin no more, says
Christ; he does not say, go in peace, thy sin is forgiven thee (that had
been a word of full comfort) but go thy way and sin no more; a middle kind
of expression, neither assuring her that her sin was pardoned, nor yet
putting her out of hope, but it might be forgiven. And hereby faith gets a
little strength, and looks after the Lord with more hope, and begins to plead
with God, as Moses did, Lord thou have begun to show grace unto thy servant;
go on Lord to manifest in me all thy goodness; here faith takes a little hold
on the Covenant, though with a feeble hand, as yet shaking and trembling for
want of strength, and yet now it begins to follow the Lord with more
encouragement, as finding that its former seeking has not been wholly in vain.

Thirdly, Sometimes again the Lord speaks more fully and satisfactorily to the
souls of his people; applying some promise of Grace to the conscience by his
own spirit, letting the soul feel and taste the comfort of such a promise,
more effectually then ever it could before; it has often heard and thought on
such a promise, but could never feel any peace in it, because it could never
apply it to its own particular; but now being applied by the help of the
Spirit, it finds and feels peace.

Here then the Lord does not any longer hold the soul in suspense and
doubting, by propounding unto it such promises of hope, (as I may so call them)
It may be ye shall be hid in the day of wrath, Zeph. 2.3. but he speaks full
peace, as Esaias 41.10. Fear not, for I am thy God; I will subdue your
iniquities, and cast all your sins behind my back, and I will remember them
against you no more; I have received a reconciliation, Job 33. Go in peace.
Here ^aith waxes bold, and with a glad heart entertaineth the promise thus
brought home unto it; the Apostle expresses this with a word very significant,
calling it an embracing of the promise, Heb. 11.13. embracing implies an
affectionate receiving, with both arms opened, to show an heart enlarged to
those that come unto us; and now the soul having thus embraced the promise,
and the Lord Jesus Christ in the promise, and having him (like Simeon) in our
arms, it lays him in the bosom, and having before gone forth to meet him,
he being now come, it brings him into the chamber of the heart, there to rest,
and abide for ever; now the soul possesses him as her own, rests in him, and
is satisfied with him, lays it self down in a holy rest, after all its former
troubles, praising God for his mercy as Simeon did when he had Christ in his
arms, and committing it self for ever to that mercy and goodness which has
been thus revealed unto it.

And thus the poor soul which has been at emnity with God, comes by little and
little to touch the top of the golden Scepter, and to enter into a Covenant of
peace with the high God; now the hand is given to the Lord; as Hezekiah spoke 2 Chronicles. 30. As God reaches out to us the hand of Grace and of saving help; so
do we give unto him the hand of faith, yiedling up our selves unto him,
committing our selves unto him to be kept by him unto salvation according to
his Covenant and promise.

And thus is this part of the Covenant made up betwixt God and us, and the
soul now says within it self, I that was sometimes an enemy, he has now
reconciled unto himself; I that was in times past without God, without Christ,
without promise, without Covenant, without hope, none of Gods people, not under
mercy; yet now I have God for my God, Christ is my peace, in him I have
obtained mercy, and am now become one of Gods people; the Covenant of his peace
now belongs unto me, the Lord also is become my salvation; and here the soul
rests, and is satisfied, as with marrow and fatness; saying as Jacob, The Lord
has had mercy on me; therefore I have enough, I have all that my heart has
desired, Genesis 33.11.

Thus we see how faith closes with the first part of the Covenant, that God
will be a God of mercy unto us, to bless us with blessings of peace, etc.

2. Concerning the other part of it; wherein God offers himself unto us to be
a God over us, to rule us and govern us in obedience to his will, faith works
the soul to a closing with this also.

The converting sinner, having tasted the fruit of his own former ways, and
finding how bitter and evil it is that he has sinned, does now desire to
resign up himself to the Lords government, being willing to deny his own will,
and to take up the Lords yoke, and to be subject thereunto; he now says no
more, who is Lord over me, Psa. 12. He does no longer look at himself as his
own, to live to himself, after his own mind and will; but being weary of his
own ways, and finding it sufficient (and too much) that he has spent the time
past in the lusts of the flesh, now he commits himself to the Lords
government, taking him to be a God over him; to rule and order him in all his
ways: The Covenant which passes betwixt God and us, is like that which
passes between a King and his people; the King promises to rule and govern in
mercy and in righteousness; and they again promise to obey in loyalty and in
faithfulness; faith sets up God upon his throne, and says; Let the Lord
reign for ever and ever, reign thou over me, (O Lord) and lead me in the way
which leads unto thee. And this does faith work in us by these or the like
means.

1. Faith looks at the manner of Gods invitation and call, when he invites us
to come and enter into Covenant with him; he does not offer himself to be a
God to us to bless us, without being a God over us, to order and govern us,
but links these two both together; If we will have his blessing, his peace, we
must be under his Dominion: Look as in a Commonwealth or Kingdom, none has
the benefit of the Law, but those that subject themselves to the Law: none have
the protection of authority, but those that obey it; so here; God does not
promise to pardon our sins, leaving us still at our own liberty to live as we
list, but if he do at all make a Covenant with us, he will be a God to us, as
well to rule us, as to save us; To say, live as ye will, sin as ye will,
and yet you shall be saved, is the Devils Covenant, not Gods; and therefore it
is that when the Lord calls us into a Covenant with himself, he bids us come
out from among the wicked, separate your selves, and touch no unclean thing
says the Lord, 2 Cor. 6.17. and in this way he promises to receive us, and to
be a God unto us; How vile soever we have been before time, it hinders us not
from entering into Covenant with God, but if we will now become his people, we
must henceforth walk no more as we had wont to do; we must henceforth be
separate from our uncleanness, Ephesians. 4.17. Esaias 1. ver. 6.7, 8. Come let us
reason together, let us make an agreement, but withal wash you, make you
clean, etc. This is the Lords manner of invitation, so that faith sees a
necessity of submitting to Gods authority, because it may not take hold of one
part of the Covenant without the other: If we will have God to be our God to
pardon us, and to bless us, we must have him a God over us to govern us after
his own will.

2. Faith opens the understanding, convincing us by arguments, how just, how
equal and reasonable it is, that God should rule and we obey; by faith we see
the invisible things of God, that is, his eternal power and Godhead, which
before we saw not; by faith we see him in his Excellency and Majesty, clothed
with glory and honor, riding upon the Heavens, attended upon with thousand
thousands of Angels ministering unto him: By faith we see him moderating the
whole world by his wisdom and power, Psalm. 103. We look at him as King of
Kings, as Prince of all the Rulers of the earth; Neither do we by faith thus
see God, as he is in himself, but as he is to us, as having power in his hand
either to save or destroy; so that there is no resisting; we know now that if
we fall upon that stone, by our rebellion, it will grind us to powder; now
there is no more question made, who shall have the dominion, though in times
past we had said, this man shall not reign over us, Luke 19. yet now it is our
chief desire, that his Kindome may come into us and bear sway in us; Faith
sets before us also the benefits and kindness of God toward us, and so
persuades us by those mercies of God to give up our selves as a sacrifice in
humble obedience unto his will, Romans 12.1. Faith reasons in the heart as
David did, I will praise thee O Lord with my whole heart; yea, I will glorify
thy name for ever, for great is thy mercy toward me, thou have delivered my
soul from the lowest grave, Psalm. 86.12, 13. Faith makes us speak to God as
the Israelites did to Gideon, when he had delivered them out of the hand of the
Midianites, Come (say they) unto him, and reign over us, both thou and thy son,
for thou have delivered us out of the hand of Midian, Judge. 8.22. Now God is
counted worthy of all honor and service, Apoc. 4.7. and 5.12.13. Worthy to be
exalted and glorified; thus faith urges it as a thing most reasonable, that
God so glorious in himself, having power over us, to save or destroy, and when
he might have destroyed us, yet has saved us from so great a death, and
prepared for us so great salvation, should be glorified by us, we submitting
our selves unto the obedience of his will.

3. Faith makes us look at the Lords government as a merciful government,
bringing peace and blessing unto those that are under it; it looks at this King
of Israel as a merciful King, 1 King. 20. It counts those subjects happy that
are free of this Kingdom, and those servants happy that stand before this
King, 1 King. 10. It makes the soul lament its bondage under other Lords; as
in Esaias 26.13. Lord (says the Church there) other Lords besides thee, have
ruled over us, but in thee is our only hope; having felt the misery of those
former slaveries in which it has been holden, having been in the Iron Furnace
of Egypt, and sat by the waters of Babel, and wept there, having been under
such cruel Lords, now they are weary of the yoke of the oppressor; and now the
blessing of the Lords government, the Laws of God which were before counted as
cords and bands, fitter for bondslaves then for freemen, are now esteemed
holy, and just, and good Rom 7. Faith believes that which the Lord has said,
that he has given us his Commandments for our good, that it may go well with
us for ever, Deuteronomy. 12.

4. Faith reconciles the heart unto God, it does not only believe that he is
reconciled unto us, but also reconciles us unto God, whereas before we hated
him, and would none of him, and thrust him away from us, as the Israelites did
Moses, Acts 7.27. Yet now the soul having by faith believed his goodness
toward us, is thereby reconciled unto him, it lays down all weapons of
defiance, and submits in love. Like as a Traitor having found the gracious
favor of his Prince, in pardoning his treacherous practices, his naughty heart
which was before so full of treachery, is now overcome with this undeserved
favor; so we also, having been in times past rebels against God, haters of
him, enemies unto him, having had our minds set upon evil things, Col. 1. are
now overcome by his goodness toward us, our heart is turned to him, our
hatred is turned into love, faith working love causing us to love him, for that
great love wherewith he has loved us in Christ, 1 John 4. So that now we come
to God, as they did to David, in 1 Chronicles. 12.18. Thine are we, we are wholly
thine: And thus faith slayes the hatred, and pulls down the partition wall which
was betwixt God us, reconciles the enmity, and makes of two one, working peace
and love; so that now the believing soul desires nothing more then to be
subject to his government; and grieves when it is hindered, that it cannot do
that which he has commanded: And thus the Covenant is made up in both parts of
it, offered unto us by God, and received of us by faith, 1 King. 20.34.

2. As faith closes with the Covenant, and brings us into Covenant with God;
so it does also act and work in us, to enable us to walk with God according to
the Covenant which we have made with him; there is a keeping of Covenant
required of us, as well as a making of Covenant with God, Genesis 17 7, 9. in
Psalm. 50.5. the Saints are said to make a Covenant with God; but in Psalm.
103.18. they are said to keep his Covenant; so there is both a making, and a
keeping of Covenant; and both these are done by faith; faith does first enter
us into Covenant with God (as we have seen above) and then by the same faith we
are carried on to a keeping of the Covenant made; and that according to both
parts of the Covenant, before laid down.

1. Whereas God enters into Covenant with us, to heal our backslidings, to
bless us with all kinds of blessings convenient for us; Now the work of faith
is to carry on the soul in a continual dependence upon God for all the good
which he has promised; If we be in danger, faith looks unto God for safety and
deliverance, 2 Chronicles. 14.11. Acts 27.25. It believes the promises of
deliverance, and depends upon them; If we have sinned, and done the things we
should not, faith brings the soul back unto God again, in a way of
repentance; and looks to the faithfulness and stability of his Covenant;
hoping still to find mercy, and forgiveness with him, albeit we have sinned
against him; and so in all other occasions which befall us in this life,
according as any evil presses upon us, or any blessing is wanting unto us,
faith has recourse to the promise and Covenant of God; waiting upon him for
all that mercy which we stand in need of in every kind: And when we do thus
put forth our faith in the exercise and acts of it, depending by it upon God in
all our occasions, this is the life of faith, which the Scripture speaks of,
this is to live by faith, Hab. 2. and to walk by faith, 2 Cor. 5.

And this life of faith is then especially seen, when the course of Gods
providence and dealing with us seems to make against his promise; herein the
life of Abraham's faith was seen; that though his body grew more impotent, and
dead every year, yet God having promised him a Son, Abraham believes even
above hope; notwithstanding the deadness of his body, and of Sarahs womb. And
so Moses, God having promised good to Israel, though for the present he saw
nothing but wants and necessities and mortality among the people, so many
thousands dying in the Wilderness; yet was he so confident of Gods goodness
toward that people, that he was bold to promise good to Jethro his
Father-in-Law, in case he would join himself unto them, and be one of them,
Come with us (says Moses unto him) and we will do thee good, for God has
promised good unto Israel, Number. 10.29. When Moses promised to do him good, he
might have said, You may bring me to sorrow, and misery enough, here you are in
a miserable Wilderness where you sometimes want water and have nothing to eat;
and here you die, and your carkases fall in the Wilderness; what good can I
expect that you can do for me? and yet Moses by the power of faith, is
confident to promise him good. God (says he) has promised good unto Israel.
Moses looks beyond the present works of Gods providence, and considers the
stability of Gods promise, and that does he rest upon; God not being as man
that he should lie or repent, 1 Samuel 16. therefore Moses concludes. Let the
Lord for the present do as he will; let all things seem to cross his promise
never so much, yet this I am sure of, God has promised good to Israel, and
therefore good shall come; and thus does faith enable the soul to walk in
Covenant with God, depending upon him for that mercy and goodness which he
has promised. God says, I will be a God unto thee to bless thee, and to do
thee good; and this I require of thee, that thou trust to me, and depend upon
me for all the good thou stand in need of; and faith does so, it rests upon
Gods promise. And thus faith fulfills this part of the Covenant.

2. As for the other part of the Covenant, (I will be a God over thee, and thou
shall glorify me,) to this faith assents also, and carries us on in an
answerable conversation, thereby testifying before all the world, that we have
set up the Lord to be our God, to command us, and to rule us, and that we have
given up our selves to be his people; And here are sundry acts of faith by
which it inables us so to walk. As

1. Faith has always an eye to the rule and command of God which he has set
before us to walk by, it attends constantly to the Tables of the Covenant; in
things to be believed it looks to the promise; and in things to be practiced it
looks to the Commandment. As in matters of faith it will believe nothing
without a word of faith to rest it self upon; so in matters of fact, it will
do nothing without a word to command or warrant that which is done, because
without a word it cannot be done in faith, and it is no act of faith which is
not done in faith, Romans 14.23. Faith will present no strange fire before the
Lord, Levit. 10. It is inquisitive to understand what the will of the Lord is,
as knowing that he accepts nothing but what is according to his own will and
word; therefore it is that David prays, Teach me good judgment and knowl^dge,
for I have believed thy Commandments, Psalm. 119.66. as if he should say, I
beleve and know that what thou command is good, teach me to judge aright and
know thy Commandments; faith will be circumspect and fearful, till it see a
word to direct and warrant its way; but when it sees a plain word, then it
grows bold and confident as knowing that this way is right. This then is the
work of faith, to attend to the word of faith in every thing; if we be to
perform any act of worship unto God, it will worship him not after the
traditions and precepts of men, but after the will of God; if we be to perform
any office of love, mercy, or justice toward men, it has an eye to the word
in all these, to do every thing according to the pattern set down in the word;
to walk without a word to direct us by, is the work of unbelief not of Faith.

2. As Faith takes direction from the true rule, so it directs us to the right
end, it lifts us up above our selves, and above our own ends and aims, making
God our highest and chiefest end, for which we live and work, as we are of him,
and live in him and by him, so by faith we live to him and for him, Romans 14.7,
8. 1 Cor. 10.31. 1 Pet. 4.11. 2 Cor. 5.15.

Reason tells us we must be for our selves, but faith tells us we must be for
God; this God claims as his right and due, and faith also assents unto; God
faith, Thou shall glorify me, Psalm. 50.15. Faith says, I will glorify thee
for ever, Psalm. 66.12.

3 Faith shields us against the hindrances and temptations which we daily meet
withal in our Christian course; sometimes we are tempted on the right hand by
the baits and allurements of the world, as Christ was Mat. 4. All this will I
give thee, says the World if thou will be mine; but here Faith overcomes the
world, (1 John 5.4.) by setting before us better things then these; even a
better and more enduring substance, Heb. 10. those earthly pleasures which seem
so pleasing to the eye of sense, are but empty and vain shadows in the eye of
faith, which looks at things afar off, at things to come, at things within the
veil, where Christ the forerunner is gone before to prepare a place for us,
Hebr. 6. Sometimes again we are tempted on the left hand with crosses,
persecutions, afflictions, and sufferings for the Name of Christ, by which
Sat^n seeks to turn us out of the way, and to make us falsify our Covenant
with God; but here also our faith helps us to overcome, and makes us
conquerors through Christ that has loved us, by setting before us the end of
our patience and faith, telling us that these short sufferings of this present
time, will bring unto us an eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. and that all
the sufferings of this present life are not worthy of the glory to be revealed,
Romans 8.18. and thus faith makes us to despise the shame and the sorrow which we
now suffer, looking to the joy which is set before us, Heb. 12.2. and thus
faith is our victory by which we overcome the world, and do continue faithful
and steadfast in our Covenant unto the end.

4. Faith incourages us unto well doing, by persuading us that our services are
accepted of God in Christ; and by propounding unto us the promises of reward.

First it persuades us of acceptance that the Lord will have a gracious respect
unto our services which we present before him, Genesis 4. The Lord has promised
to accept our services which are done in faith, Isai. 56.7. and thereby faith
encourages us to every good work: The believer knows all his works as they
come from him to be full of imperfection, yet considering withal that it is
Gods good and acceptable will, which he conformes himself unto, and offering
up his service in Christ's name, hence faith looks for acceptance according to
that witness of the Apostle, Acts 10.35. And this is no small encouragement to
well doing, when we believe what we do shall be accepted graciously. What will
not a subject do, if he know his King will take in good part the service which
is tendered unto him? sometimes they run themselves out of all to humor them:
Now faith assures us that there is not one prayer, one holy desire, one good
thought, or word, or good purpose which is thought or spoken or done to the
glory of God, but God takes notice of it and accepts it in good part, Mal. 3.16.

Secondly, faith assures us of a reward which shall be given us, faith sees a
recompense in the hand of God, Heb. 11.2^. as knowing that he will not forget
our labor of love which we have showed unto his name; Heb. 6. but will one day
say unto us, come hither, Well done good and faithful servant, enter into thy
masters joy.

5. Faith does not only encourage us unto well doing, but it does furnish us
with strength and ability by which we may perfome; Faith is a strengthening
grace, renewing our strength as the Eagles, increasing power in our inward man,
Ephesians. 3.16, 17. unbeleefe weakens the heart, and makes the hands to hang down,
Heb. 12.12. and does not only discourage, but also disable unto that which is
good; but faith makes us full of power and strength by the Spirit of the Lord,
Micah 3.8. to go through the work which is committed unto us; so as if we
want strength, it is because we want faith, or at least do not make use of our
faith as we should do.

Now there is a twofold strength and power which we get by faith.

First, a power inherent and dwelling in us.

Secondly, a power assisting and being with us.

By faith we get a power of grace inherent and abiding in us, and that is in
this manner, and by these means.

1. By faith we look at Christ as having all fullness of grace in himself,
Joh. 1.16. Col. 1.19. All others (Angels or Saints) have but their measure,
some more, some less, according to the measure of the gift of Christ, Ephesians.
4.7. but Christ has received the spirit not by measure but in the fullness of
it, John 3.34. Faith looks at this fullness of Christ.

2. By faith we know that what ever fullness of grace is in Christ, he has
received it not for himself only, but for us, that he might communicate unto
us, and we might receive from him; In Psalm. 68.18. it is said, He received
gifts for men; not for himself, but for men, that we might receive from him;
and thence it is that in John 1.16. Of his fullness we receive grace for grace;
his wisdom is to make us wise; his meekness and patience, to make us meek
and patient, and so in the rest, etc.

3. By faith we look at Christ as faithful to distribute unto us all such
grace as he has received for us; he is faithful in all the house of God, Heb.
3. faithful in dispensing all the treasure of grace committed unto him for his
Churches good; he keeps nothing back, his faithfulness will not suffer him to
keep that to himself which he has received for us; but as he has received
all for us, so in faithfulness he will communicate the same unto us according
to our need; and therefore it is that as in Psalm. 68. he is said to receive
gifts for men, so in Ephesians. 4. The Apostle alleging the same place of the
Psalm, he changes the word received into giving, and says, He gave gifts
unto men; as he receives, so he gives, being faithful in all that is
committed to him; and this faithfulness of Christ, does faith look at, that we
may receive grace from him.

4. Faith looks at the promise of Christ, promising to give us his spirit,
Ezekiel. 36. Prove. 1.23. upon him rests a spirit of strength, Esaias 11.2. and he
has promised, that the holy Ghost shall take of his, and shall give unto us,
Ioh. 16. and that the father shall give the holy Ghost unto those that desire
him, Luke 11. these promses faith feeds upon, and sucks life and spirit out of
them, begging performance of them according to our need. Do we want wisdom,
meekness, patience, or any other grace? faith carries us by prayer to this
fountain, and in this way waits for, and expects to receive the grace we want;
as the child by sucking the breast, draws forth milk for its own nourishment,
and thereby grows in strength, so do we by the prayer of faith suck from the
promise of grace, and do thereby derive strength to our inward man to enable
us unto all well-doing: And thus it is, that in Gal. 3.14. we are said to
receive the promise of the spirit by faith, which spirit being a spirit of
power, 2 Timothy 1.7. and being thus received by faith, we see how faith enables
us with all power to fulfill the Covenant which we have made with God, etc.

2. Faith gets an assisting strength from Christ; Besides that which is
inherent, dwelling within us, there is an assisting power of Christ, by which
he helps his servants that cast themselves upon his help; In those great works
which were done by the Apostles, it was not any indwelling power within
themselves, by which they did them, but a power of God without them, assisting
and working with them; and so it is (after a sort) in the ordinary duties we
take in hand. 1 Chronicles. 15.26. In carrying the Ark God helped the Levites which
were to bear it, the Lord assisted them; and this does the Apostle also seem
to point unto, in 1 Cor. 15.10. speaking of his abundant labor in the Gospel,
he says, yet it is not I, but the grace of God which is with me; he does not
say, which is in me, though there was such grace within him also; but which is
with me, ((...)) as implying an assisting grace, strengthening him to do above
that which any thing in himself could have reached unto; Compare together, 1
Pet. 5.9. with Romans 16.20. in the one of these places, the Apostle bids us to
resist Satan by faith; but in the other place, Paul tells us that it is God
which treads Satan under our feet; both these Scriptures together imply thus
much, that the faith within us, must be working in resistng of Sa^han; but yet
the power by which we overcome him, is not by the power of faith or any grace
in us alone; but the assisting power of God without us, is that which subdues
Satan to us, and treads him under our feet. This assisting power the Lord has
promised to his people, Judge. 6.14, 15, 16. 2 Chro. 15.2. Act. 18.9, 10. And
faith rests upon these promises, 2 Chronicles. 14.11. and this makes all things
possible to a believer, Mark. 9.23. because faith sets Gods own power awork, to
work that by us which of our selves we could never do; he works all our works
for us, while we rest upon him for help, Esaias 26.12. Thus faith furnishes us
with all strength, enabling us to walk with God in a holy conversation,
according to the tenor of the Covenant which the Lord has made with us.

6. As faith does thus strengthen us, etc. so if at any time we be by occasion
over taken with any fault; faith recovers us out of our falls, and restores us
again to our former estate; the true believer though he does not deal falsely
with God in his Covenant, Psalm. 44.17. yet he may and sometimes does walk
weakly in the keeping of it, because he does not stir up his faith, in which
his strength lies; though his heart is not turned back, yet his foot may
sometimes go out of the path; many slips Gods own covenanted people are
subject unto: But though they fall and fall often, yet they do not so fall, but
they rise again; they turn aside, but yet they return again into the way of
the Covenant; faith brings us back to God in exercises of humiliation, and
renewing of our repentance before him; It casts shame upon our faces, that
after all the grace which has been showed unto us, we should so requite the
Lord, with such undutifull carriages, Deuteronomy. 32. Ezrah 9.6. But yet it does
withal encourage us with hope, speaking thus in the heart of a believer, yet
there is hope in Israel for all this, Ezrah 10.3. It remindes us of those
promises, Return unto me, and I will return unto you, Zach. 1. Ye have indeed
sinned a great sin, ye have done all this wickedness; but yet depart not
from following the Lord; for the Lord will not forsake his people, whom he has
pleased to make his people, 1 Samuel 12.20, 21, 22. By these and such other
promises, faith encourages us to return unto our God, taking words unto our
selves and pleading the Covenant of his grace toward us, entreating him to
receive us graciously, Hoseah 14. This work of faith brought Peter back to
Christ, after his shameful denial of him, it made him to lament his sin,
and to look up unto him for grace and forgiveness, whereas Judas wanting this
faith, lies down in desperate sorrow, never able to rise up nor recover
himself any more.

And thus we see how faith does act, both in bringing us into Covenant with
God, and helps us also to walk in Covenant with him.

And thus we have showed; first, That faith is the condition of the Covenant;
secondly, Why faith is appointed to be the condition rather then works;
thirdly, It is the act, not the habit which is the condition on our parts;
fourthly, What those acts of faith be, by which it brings us into Covenant, and
inables us to walk in it.

Quest. But here a further question is made by some, what manner of condition
faith is; It Is granted (will some say) that faith is a condition, but it is a
condition only consequent to our Justification, and so to our being in Covenant
with God; but its no antecedent condition; we are (as they conceive) in a
state of Grace and salvation before faith and then faith comes and believes
that Justification and salvation which was before given.

Answ. This is some of that new light which the old age of the Church has
brought forth; which what it tends unto, I know not, unless it be to this that
a man should not look at any habitual grace in himself, whether
sanctification or faith, or any other, in as much as these avail nothing
(according to them) to a man's Justification, seeing we are Justified before
faith: They would have a man to see nothing in himself, because (as they
think) the Grace which is seen is temporal; the Grace which is not seen is
eternal; though a man knows that he has faith, yet (say they) he is not
thereby justified, nor brought into the estate of grace, but is justified
before faith; therefore never look at this or that in your selves, all these
are nothing to your Justification, or salvation: This (as I think) is the end
of this opinion.

In opposition whereunto, I lay down this conclusion, according to the
Scripture, That we are not actually justified, nor in a state of grace and
salvation, before faith, before we believe; This I hope to prove by evidence of
the word; only before I come to the proof of it, to prevent mistake, observe
how I speak of actual Justification, whereas our Justification may be
considered either, First, as purposed and determnied in the mind and will of
God; Or secondly, as impetrated and obtained for us by the obedience of Christ;
Or thirdly, as actually applied unto us, so as we may be truly said to be
actually just in the sight of God; in the two former respects it is not denied;
God purposed to justify us before the world was, and therefore much more
before our faith; And that atonement and obedience which Christ has performed
for us, is also before our faith, and before we were born.

But the question is whether this Righteousness wrought for us by Christ, be
actually applied to a sinner before he believe; whether one, as yet not
believing, be actually acquitted of his sin and accounted just and righteous
before God.

And this is that which I am now to prove, against the Patrons of the former
opinion; sc. that we are not actually justified before faith; Its not a
condition only consequent, but antecedent to our actual justification, and
being in state of grace before God.

Reas. 1. To make our justification go before faith, is to place our
justification before our vocation and calling, and so inverts the order
observed by the Apostle, Romans 8.30. who places our calling before our
justification, and if our calling be before our justification, then is our
faith also before it; because we are not called effectually (of which kind of
calling we now speak, as the Apostle does) until we believe; faith therefore
being comprehended in our calling, and calling being before justification,
faith also of necessity must go before our justification.

Reas. 2. Consider the words of the Apostle, in Romans 3.22. where he says, That
the righteousness of God, is by the faith of Jesus Christ, unto all and upon
all that believe; In which words are three things; first, What is that
righteousnsse by which we are justified: namely, not our own righteousness,
but the righteousness of Christ, here called the righteousness of God;
secondly, The persons upon whom this righteousness comes, that they may be
justified by it, and that is, upon those that do believe; thirdly, The means
by which it comes to be upon them, and that is by faith, the righteousness of
God is by faith on them that do believe; justification is here limited to them
that do believe, not extended to them that believe not; and least any should
evade by saying that they are called believers in regard of Gods prescience and
foreknowledge; not in respect of any present habit of faith, actually dwelling
in them, (in which sense some are called sheep, Joh. 10.16.) therefore to
prevent this evasion, the Apostle adds the means by which they come to have
this righteousness of God upon them, which is by faith; though it had been
enough to have said that it was upon them that believe; yet to put this matter
out of doubt, he adds those words, that it is by faith; And if it be by
faith, then not before faith; but if it is by faith, as the Apostle affirms,
therefore not before faith; If faith were a condition consequent to our
justification, not antecedent, it could not be said to be by faith. In Psalm.
50.15. The Lord puts a double condition concerning our deliverance out of
trouble, one antecedent (call upon me) another consequent (and thou shall
glorify me,) in the midst of which two, stands the deliverance promised; so as
the order is; first, we must call; secondly, then God delivers; and then
thirdly, we must glorify him; now if our faith were a condition only
consequent to our justification, then it stands in no other place in respect of
justification, then does our glorifying of God, which follows our deliverance
out of trouble; and it so, then we may as well be said to be delivered by our
glorifying of God, which follows our deliverance, as to be justified by faith,
which follows our justification.

Reas. 3. From Number. 21.7, 8, 9. compared with Ioh. 3.14, 15. I reason thus,
faith has the same place and use in our justification, as the Israelites
looking had in their healing; when they were stung with the fiery Serpents; but
they were not first healed and then to look and see what it was that had healed
them; but they were first to look upon the Brazen Serpent, and then by looking
were healed; so it is here with us, Christ is lift up on high for us to look
unto, this looking is by faith, Ioh. 3.14, 15. and by this looking we are
healed, and saved, Isai. 45.22.

Reas. 4. Look what place works had for our justification to life in the
Covenant of works, the same place has faith in the Covenant of grace; but
works were to go before our justification in the Covenant of works, and
therefore so must faith in the Covenant of grace; Though Adam was by nature
just, by an habitual justice yet he was not thereby actually justified unto
life; but besides his native or habitual righteousness, he must also perform
an actual righteousness; and without this he was not to be justified unto
life; and if he was not to be justified without or before works, then are not
we justified without or before faith, because faith is to us in stead of works,
and has the same place now in the Covenant of grace, as works had then in the
Covenant of works.

Reas 5. To make faith a condition consequent to our justification, is to place
faith in the same rank with works, as works are considered in the Covenant of
grace; for even works also have a place in the Covenant of grace; though they
are not a condition antecedent, yet are they a condition consequent to our
justification, so as every justified person must walk in good works, Tit.
3.7.8. And therefore if faith be placed after justification, then it stands but
in the same rank with works having no propriety or pre-eminence above works, in
respect of our justification: For though it shall be granted that faith goes
before works as the cause before the effect, faith producing works, as the tree
does the fruit; yet they are both alike in respect of justification; they are
one before another, when they are compared betwixt themselves; but compare them
both with justification, and then (according to this opinion) they go both
together; no more is ascribed to faith in our justification then to works, if
faith follow our justification.

Reas. 6. We are not actually justified till Christ be actually ours, Christ
being our righteousness before God; but Christ is not actually ours till he be
received by us; nor is he received but only by faith, Ioh. 1.12. Christ must be
received by us, or we have no benefit by him unto salvation; Christ is
righteousness for us before our faith; but he is not righteousness unto us,
till he be received of us by faith; our garments are prepared for us, before
we be clothed with them, but that they may actually cloth and cover us, we
must take them by the hand, and put them on, so must we receive Christ, Ioh.
1.12. which is done by faith, Gal. 3. though he be fit to justify us before
faith, yet he does not actually justify us, or cover our sinful nakedness,
till by the hand of faith, we take him, and put him on.

Reas. 7. That righteousness which is by imputation, cannot be before that
which is imputed to us as our righteousness; but the righteousness which the
Covenant of grace sets forth, is a righteousness by imputation, and it is
faith which is imputed for righteousness, Romans 4.3. Ga^. 3.6. and therefore
our righteousness cannot be before our faith.

Reas 8. If we were justified before faith, then the witness of the Spirit of
bondage, witnessing our bondage under sin and death, could not be true; for
till faith come, he testifies unto us that we are under wrath, unjust,
sinners; and this witness of the Spirit is true; and therefore till we
believe, we are not justified.

Reas. 9. Lastly, (to omit other reasons, which might be produced,) if
justification were before faith, we might then ask as the Apostle does in Romans
3.1. What is the preferment of faith? what profit has the believer above the
unbeliever? they are both alike in respect of justification before God; when a
man comes to believe, he is not a pin the better then he was before he
believed, but was justified before, as well as after; and thus faith, which is
called precious faith, is made vile, and of little worth, seeing a man may be
justified without it, as well as with it.

And thus much concerning the third thing propounded about the condition of the
Covenant; namely, what the condition of it is, sc. Faith.

4. The fourth point follows, which is, whether the putting of a condition,
does or can stand with the free grace of the Covenant, yea or no? for it may
seem that if there be any condition required on our part, then the grace of
the Covenant is not free; and if not free, then its no grace at all, and how
then is it called a Covenant of grace?

Ans. The putting of a condition does not hinder or lesson the free grace of
the Covenant, so long as the condition is Evangelicall and not Legal.

Some have been of mind, that the promises which we call conditional are not
free promises, or promises of free grace, and therefore they make an opposition
betwixt the promises which are called absolute and the conditional, as if only
the absolute promises were free promises, excluding the conditional; but the
condition annexed (being a condition of the Gospel, not of the Law) does no
more derogate from the freeness of grace, then a Princes offering a royal
reward to a Subject upon condition that he do thankfully accept of it, and
acknowledge his Princely bounty toward him, does any whit derogate from the
freeness of the gift; no more does the condition of faith, by which we receive
the grace given unto us of God, derogate from the freeness of his grace
toward us; a legal condition does indeed exclude free grace; but an
Evangelicall condition does not; When the Lord says, Believe and thou shall
be saved, Act. 16.31. and says also, by grace ye are saved, Ephesians. 2.8. There
is the like free grace in both; Believe and be saved, though conditional, is
as free grace, as if said, Thou shall be saved by grace freely loving thee, and
pardoning thy sin. That these conditional promises are of free grace, as
well as the absolute, I prove; because,

First, They all flow from the same purpose of grace toward us; all Gods
purposes toward his Elect, are purposes of grace, 2 Timothy 1.9. and so are all
his promises also Tit. 1.2. for these flow from that eternal purpose of his:
The promise is but the manifestation of his purpose toward the Elect; whether
the promise be absolute or conditional, all is one: That which was first hid
within God himself, as only purposed by him, is afterward made manifest by
his promise. And look in what series and order God did purpose to communicate
the blessings of grace to his Elect, so as one shall succeed and follow the
other, the same does he make known in his promise, and so does also execute and
fulfill; first calling, then justifying, then glorifying etc. Romans 8.28, 29 30.
he does not save till he call and justify; but first he calls to faith, and
justifies, and then glorifieth him that believes: And here though the giving
of life to him that believes, be conditional and follows the giving of
faith: yet is the giving of life as free grace as the giving of faith, both one
and other springing from the same fountain, even from the purpose of his
grace, by which he purposed first to call unto faith, and then by faith, to
bring unto life and salvation: so that the adding of a condition does not
abrograte the freeness of grace promised, but only shows in what order and way
we must expect the blessing, one blessing of the Covenant of life going before,
another following; the former being conditions to the latter, faith a condition
of salvation; but both faith and salvation springing from the same purpose of
Grace.

Secondly, These conditional promises are promises of the Gopel, and therefore
also promises of free grace; either these promises are promises of free grace,
or else the Gospel is not a Doctrine of free grace: It is the Gospel only, and
not the Law, which says, Believe and be saved: The Law never made promise of
salvation, upon such a condition; If then these conditional promises, be
promises of the Gospel, then they are promises of free Grace, or else the
Gospel is not a Doctrine of free Grace.

Object. But some stick not to affirm that in such sayings or promises as
these (Believe and thou shall be saved) the command^ment requiring Faith, is
legal, Faith being (as they say) commanded in the Law: Though they will
acknowledge that the promise of giving faith, is a promise of the Gospel, not
of the Law, yet the Commandments which commands us to believe, is a
Commandment of the Law, not of the Gospel, as they teach.

Answ. It is confessed that there is a Faith commanded in the Law, as has been
showed before; but now when we speak of faith in Christ, unto justification and
salvation, the Commandment enjoining this faith, is no Commandment of the
Law, but of the Gospel, which I prove by these ensuing Arguments.

1. The Apostle in Gal. ^.12. is express for this which I say, when he says,
the Law is not of faith, that is, the Law is not a Doctrine or Commandment
teaching or commanding faith; which to be the meaning, is evident, by the
opposition which the Apostle makes presently, showing what it is which the Law
commands; Namely this, the man that does these things shall live in them,
verse. 12. and so before in verse. 10. Cursed is every man which continues not
to do, etc. That which the Law requires, is expressed under the word doing,
not believing: And let us mark the manner of the Apostles arguing; In the 11th
verse. (besides other Arguments before laid down) the Apostle proves by
testimony of Scripture the point he had in hand, sc. That a man is justified
by faith, and therefore not by works of the Law.

2. Now whereas some Galathian (that mixed faith and the works of the Law
together, in point of justification) might object and say, that a man might be
justified by faith, and yet be justified by the Law also, because the Law
commands faith, and therefore justification by faith, and justification by the
Law commanding faith may stand together; Hereto the Apostle answers, by denying
that which is supposed; Namely, that the Law commands faith, affirming the
plain contrary, the Law is not of faith; Its not a Doctrine teaching or
commanding faith. Hereto also agrees these words of the Apostle, in Romans 3.27.
Where the Apostle distinguishes between the Law of works and the Law of faith;
by the Law of works, understanding the moral Law: by the Law of faith,
understanding the Gospel; the moral Law is called the Law of works, because it
commands works; the Gospel is called the Law of faith, because it commands
faith; Here are two distinct Laws, having two distinct commandments, as two
distinct conditions of the two Covenants; each of these several commandments,
must be referred to their own Law commanding them; not works to the Law of
faith, nor faith to the Law of works: but works to the Law of works, and faith
to Law of faith, that is, the Gospel.

Object. But by this means, if we make the Gospel a law to command, we shall
perhaps seem to join hands with the Papists, making Christ another Moses,
another Lawgiver, to give us a new Law as they use to speak.

Answ. That Popish dung of making Christ a Lawgiver, in that sense, as they
mean, sc. to give us a Law of greater perfection then Moses Law was, thereby
to justify our selves by a more perfect righteousness, etc. we detest and
abhor; and yet neither must we deny Christ to be a Lawgiver, unless we will
both deny plain Scripture (which gives him that title, Isai. 33.22. James
4.12.) and deprive him of his Kingly Office, making him no King; though
therefore Christ be not a Lawgiver to give a Law of works to justify our
selves by it, yet he is a Lawgiver to give us a law of Faith, commanding us to
believe, and giving us also a law of obedience and subjection, in doing whereof
we must testify our love and thankfulness unto God. Thus then the Gospel
being a law of faith, distinguished against the law of works, the commandment
to believe cannot belong to the law of works, but to the Gospel, which is the
law of Grace: And hereto agrees that also, Romans 1.1. with verse 5. where Paul
speaking of his Apostleship, and being put apart to preach (not the law, but)
the Gospel of God, he shows the end of his preaching was, that obedience might
be given unto the faith, that is, that the Doctrine of Faith being made known,
and the commandment of Faith published, men might be brought to submit to that
Doctrine of Faith revealed. It is the Gospel then which calls for this
obedience of Faith, as the Apostles own words import.

2. Out of the same place, in Romans 3.27. compared with Romans 4.1, 2. I argue
thus, That which does exclude glorying or boasting, cannot be commanded in that
Law which does not exclude boasting: But faith does exclude boasting, Romans
3.27. The Law of works does not exclude boasting, Romans 4.1, 2. and therefore
faith cannot be commanded in that Law.

3. Faith stands in reference and relation unto Christ, looking to him, and
resting upon him for salvation, therefore called the faith of Christ, and faith
in his name, etc. Christ is the proper object of Faith, as it justifies and
saves whence it follows, that if the law do command faith, it must of
necessity set forth Christ also, as the object or foundation on which it is to
rest: The act cannot be without the object; nor Faith, without Christ might
be, though there were no Faith in men to believe on him. But Faith cannot be,
but it must have Christ to rest on: There is no believing to salvation without
Christ; nor can the law therefore command us to believe unto life, but it must
show us Christ on whom we must pitch our Faith; But this the law does not.
Christ is only revealed by the Gospel, not by the law; the Law knows him not;
Adam in his best estate knew not Christ, and yet Adam had then the knowledge of
the whole law, and of all that the law required: The law then not revealing
Christ, cannot command faith, because faith cannot be without Christ, who is
the object which it is carried unto.

Object. If it be said that the law is a Schoolmasters to lead us unto
Christ, and therefore the Law reveals Christ.

Answ. I answer, if we take the law for the moral law, then its bringing of us
to Christ, is only occasional, in as much as it drives us from it self, as
making us to see that by it there is no hope of life; it curses all, it gives
hope of life to none; but the Gospel showing us a salvation to be had in
Christ, now the Law by the severity of it, is an occasion unto us of seeking
life where it is to be found: But to bring us to Christ, is no proper work of
the law. It is no otherwise then as if a child knowing the tenderness of his
Fathers love, and finding his Schoolmasters to be very severe, and sharp,
runs from the severity of his Master, to hide himself under his Fathers
wing, yet not by the teaching or bidding of his Master, but his severity is the
occasion of it; so it is in the point in hand.

But if we take the Law for the Law Ceremonial, Its true, that the Ceremonial
law points out Christ unto us, but the, Ceremonial law was Gospel in the
substance of it, though veiled over with types and shadows, which were to
continue till the body was come; How the carnal minded Jews misunderstood
those ceremonies, it matters not: Its certain that in the primitive
institution of them, they were ordained for Evangelicall ends, and therefore
this infringeth not the truth before laid down; namely, that the law, sc. the
law of works properly so called, does not reveal Christ; and therefore cannot
command faith in Christ.

4. If faith be commanded not in the Gospel, but in the law, then unbelief is
no sin against the Gospel, but only against the law; for where there is no
commandment or law to bind, there is no transgression, Romans 4. so that if the
Gospel have no commandment to command us to believe, then not to believe, is
no sin against the Gospel; and if so, then those that have had the Gospel
preached unto them all their life long, shall lie under no more guilt of sin,
then those that never had any more then the law only.

5. If our calling be by the Gospel, not by the law, then the commandment
which commands faith, is a commandment of the Gospel, not of the law; our
faith is wrought by our calling, our calling is by the Gospel, Gal. 1.15. 2
These. 2.14. and therefore the commandment of faith, is a commandment of the
Gospel.

Object. Our calling and Faith also, is wrought by the Gospel, yet not by the
commandment, but by the promise.

Answ. It is by the commandment, though we exclude not the promise; the
commandment is indeed made more alluring, more drawing by the promise annexed;
but the very name, and term of calling, imports that it is not wrought without
the commandment; and therefore it is that we have these and the like voices
and commandments of Gods calling unto us, Come unto me, Return unto me, Come
out from among them Separate your selves, and I will receive you: Are not these
so many commandments of God? and by these the Lord inclines and draws the
heart to come unto him. In Esaias 55.5. there are the words of God the Father
unto Christ, Thou shall call a Nation (says the Father unto him) and they
shall run unto thee: But what voice is that by which Christ shall call the
Nation that comes unto him? The Prophet tells us, in verse. 1.3. Come to the
waters ye that thirst, says Christ, Come unto me and I will make a Covenant
with you: These commandments backed with promises do draw, and make the
Nation so called to come to Christ, and run after him; so Jer. 3.22. Return O
backsliding I^rael: Here Is a commandment, and what follows? Behold we come
unto thee for thou art the Lord our God; See therefore how the Lord makes use
of the commandment joined with the promise to draw men unto him. Thus it was
with those Brethren, Mat. 4.19, 21. and with Matthew the Publican, whom Christ
called from the receipt of Custom, Matt. 9. Follow me, says Christ to him; he
said no more, but presently he rises up, and follows him, Matthew. 9.9. And
thus usually, Come unto me, says Christ, follow me, believe on me, etc. which
commandedements being accompanied with a Spirit of grace going with them, the
soul follows Christ, to apprehend that grace to which it is called: The sum
of this argument, is this, that if there be a commandment concurring to our
calling, then there is a commandment concurring to the working of our faith;
and if our calling be by the Gospel, then the commandment by which we are
called to faith, is a commandment of the Gospel, and not of the Law.

6. In 1 Ioh. 3.23. This (says the Apostle) is his commandment that we
believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ; Here is a direct commandment to
believe; Is this a legal commandment? the whole Epistle breathes nothing but
a spirit of grace, and of the Gospel; many passages in the Epistle might be
noted for the confirmation thereof; but I am loath to spend time in a thing so
clear.

7. The commandments of the law, wound and kill as it is in 2 Cor. 3.6. they
do not heal, nor give life; but the commandment of believing does heal and
give life to those that are wounded. How many dying souls have been raised to
life? how many wounded consciences have bin eased and healed by that sweet
invitation, and drawing commandment of our blessed Savior, Come unto me all
ye, etc? Matthew. 11.28. This coming is all one with believing, Joh. 6.35. and
the commandment to come, is a commandment to believe; and will any say, this
is a legal commandment? then could it never have healed and given life, as it
has done; for the law wounds, but heals not; The comfort and sweetness
which is in this invitation, shows of what nature it is; not legal, but
Evangelicall. In Mark. 10.49. when Jesus had called Bartimeus To come unto him,
those about him speak encouragingly unto him Be of good comfort (say they) for
he calls thee; there is comfort in the very call, invitation, or command of
Christ To come unto him; It encourages us to come; it shows us that it is his
will we should come unto him, and that he is willing to receive such as come,
and will not cast them away, Ioh. 6. But the Law makes us to fly from God, and
to stand afar off, Exodus 20. The Gospel only draws us and brings us unto God.
This commandment therefore, Come unto me, that is, believe in me, being so
alluring and drawing as it is, must needs be a commandment not of the law, but
of the Gospel.

8. If the law do command faith in Christ, then it commands things contrary; as
namely, to look for life by our own personal working, and to look for life not
by our own working, but by another; That law which binds us to personal
fulfilling of it; does not also send us to another to have it fulfilled in him;
but the law commands us personal obedience, to fulfill the commandments in
our own persons; It urges us thus, Thou shall love, Thou shall not lust, Thou
thy self must fulfill all these things, and no other for thee; but faith looks
for these things to be done for us by another, and therefore cannot be
commanded in the Law: By the law the righteousness of the righteous shall be
upon himself, and the man that does these things shall live in them; but by
faith the righteousness of Christ is upon others, even upon those that do
believe, faith therefore is not commanded in the Law.

9. That which confounds the two Covenants, is not to be admitted; but that
the commandment commanding faith is a commandment of the law, does confound
the two Covenants, Law, and Gospel; and therefore is not to be admitted as
true. If the commandment commanding faith be a commandment of the law, this
must needs make a confusion betwixt Law and Gospel, so as these two say^ngs,
Do and live, and Believe and live, shall be in effect all one, both of them
legal, one as well as the other; which to affirm, is to confound things as
different as heaven and earth. Now that by this opinion this confusion must of
necess^ty follow, I show thus,

When a promise is annexed to a commandment, the commandment and promise are
ever of the same kind, either both Legal, or both Evangelicall; The nature and
kind of the promise does depend upon and follow the nature and kind of the
commandment which goes before it; The quality of the commandment, does
qualify, and distinguish the promise annexed, to make it either Legal or
Evangelicall For when the Lord says, do this and live, and when he says,
believe in Christ and live; the life promised is for substance one and the
same, in both promises; yet these promises do differ, because the commandment
which goes before as the condition of the promise, is different in the one and
in the other, Doing, being a Legal commandment, Believing, being
Evangelicall; the ground therefore of difference in the promises is from the
diff^rence of the command^ment; which is the condition of the promise; so that
when its said, Do this and live, Here the promise of life is legal, because
the commandment of doing is legal; on the other side, when its said, Believe
and live; here the promise of life is Evangelicall, because the commandment of
believing is Evangelicall: But if we make the commandment of believing to be
legal, then the promise of life upon condition of believing, must be legal
also, and then there is no difference left betwixt these two, do and live, and
believe and live; which confounds Law and Gospel, heaven and earth, and makes
the two Covenants all one.

Papists turn the Covenant of grace into a Covenant of works: This does the
contrary, turning the Covenant of works into a Covenant of grace; Chemnitius
speaking of the point of justification, brings in Andradius his conceit, which
is this, That utraque justitia, and Legis and Fidei, etc. both righteousnesses,
both the righteousness of the Law, and the righteousness of Faith, does
consist in observatione Legis, in the observation of the Law; only with this
difference, that when the Law is fulfilled by the unregenerate, then it is
justitia Legis, the righteousness of the Law; when by the regenerate, then it
is justitia Fidei, the righteousness of Faith. Like hereto is this Doctrine,
that the commandment of faith is a commandment of the Law, for then both
Covenants, both Law and Gospel, must stand in observatione fidei, in the duty
of believing; only perhaps the maintainers of this opinion will make a
difference thus, That that faith which is wrought by the commandment, is the
faith of the law or Covenant of works, and that faith which is wrought by the
promise, is the faith of the Covenant of grace: But as he, notwithstanding his
distinction of men regenerate and unregenerate, does in effect confound both
Covenants, changing the Covenant of grace into a Covenant of works: So do
these, notwithstanding their distinction of commandment and promise; they
confound both Covenants, changing the Covenant of works (which stands in doing)
into a Covenant of grace, (which stands in believing) and so by this Doctrine
one of the principal differences betwixt the two Covenants, is taken away, the
one requiring works, the other faith, the one doing, the other believing.

10. This is confirmed further by that which is spoken of our Savior Christ in
Mark. 1.14, 15. where it is said of him, that he came preaching the Gospel,
(not the Law, but the Gospel) and saying, Repent and believe the Gospel; here
the commandment to believe, is directly called a preaching of the Gospel, and
therefore it is a commandment of the Gospel, and not of the Law.

Other Reasons might be added, as namely, if faith be commanded in the law,
then a man may be saved by a work of the Law, and cannot be saved without it;
Secondly, That this opinion makes the righteousness of the law, and the
righteousness of faith to be all one, if faith be a duty of the law, etc.
Thirdly, What the law commands it commands it as a work; but faith is not
requird as a work, being everywhere in the Gospel opposed to working; But these
I pass by, the other may suffice.

Thus far then we are come, that the putting of faith as a condition of life
in the Covenant of grace, does no whit derogate from the freeness of grace.

First, Because the gift of faith flows from the same purpose of grace toward
us, as life it self does.

Secondly, Because faith is an Evangelicall grace of the Gospel, not of the Law.

Thirdly, I add this also, that it derogates nothing from grace, because faith
receives all the blessings of salvation promised, only from the hand of grace
alone; we acknowledge no such condition as by which we might receive life from
the hand of justice, as putting a price into our hand to be a meritorious cause
of life; such a condition could not indeed stand with grace; but the condition
we put, is both received by grace, is by grace wrought in us, and does also
receive all from grace, and therefore does nothing derogate from the grace of
the Covenant: The Apostle cleares this, in that one short speech of his in Ephesians.
2.8, 9. ye are saved by grace through faith: There is first the maine blessing
of the Covenant, ye are saved; There is secondly, the fountain or cause of
it, (by grace) ye are saved by grace; Then thirdly, there is the condition
(through faith:) And if any should now ask how it could be by grace, and yet
depend upon the condition of faith, the Apostle goes on and shows how that may
be; namely, 1. Because faith is not of our selves, but it is the gift of God;
and 2. Because faith does not come to God boastingly, to claim life by the
works of righteousness, which we have done; but comes to him with an empty
hand to receive what grace and mercy is willing to give; such a condition as
this, does no more derogate from the freeness of grace, then does the beggars
receiving of the alms given him, derogate from the kindness of him that gave
it.

4. The grace of the Covenant is free notwithstanding the condition, because we
do not put any condition as antecedent to the Covenant on Gods part, whereby
to induce and move the Lord to enter into Covenant with us, as if there were
any thing supposed in us, which might invite and draw him to take us into
Covenant with himself; only we suppose a condition antecedent to the promise
of life, which condition we are to observe and walk in; and in the observation
thereof to expect the blessing of life which the Covenant promises: If God had
not purposed to have dealt with us after his rich grace, he might have said to
us (when he saw us polluted in our blood,) I will no more have mercy, as it is
in Hoseah 1.6, 9. ye shall no more be my people, neither will I be yours: But
yet he is pleased to overlook all our sinful pollutions, and to sprinkle
clean water upon us, and then to take us by the hand and to enter into Covenant
with us: here is grace free, notwithstanding the condition of faith to which
the promise is made.

In a word, The Lord out of his free grace purposing life and salvation to his
chosen, then to make way for the accomplishment of his purpose in bringing us
to life, first, he works in us renewing grace, and puts within us a spirit of
faith, and so leads us on in the way of faith, to the obtaining of that great
blessing, the salvation promised; the one of these being antecedent, and as a
condition to the other.

5. Its a good consideration which Doctor Ames has ( in Coron. Ar^ic. 5. cap.
3.) That eadem res and absolute promittitur, quia certo efficietur; and cum
condition, quia non alias efficietur nisi per media; and in illis mediis
hominis ipsius exigitur cura; thus forgiveness of sin is absolutely
promised, Esaias 43. For mine own sake will I put away thy transgressions; and
yet it is promised also with condition, 1 John 1. If we confess our sins, he
is faithful and just to forgive us our sins: These promises are both of them
promises of free grace; the annexing therefore of a condition does not impair
the free grace of the Covenant.

Uses. And first from this, that faith is the condition of the Covenant; from
whence, first, we may conceive how it is that even in the Covenant of grace,
life is promised unto good works, and to well-doing; as it is in John 5.29.
Luke 14.14. Gal. 6.9 1 Timothy 6.18, 19. Hebr. 6. by all which it might seem that
works have the same place in the Covenant of grace, as in the Covenant of
works, even to be proper causes of salvation; but where we find the promise of
life made unto good works, we must not look at them as works of the Law, but as
works and fruits of faith wrought by a believer, wrought forth by the power and
by the life of faith, which being a living grace, cannot be idle and
fruitless, but will be working, and fruitful in well doing. These kind of
promises (which promise life unto works) are (if I may so call them) not
casual, but declarative, making manifest who be those true beleivers to whom
the life promised in the Covenant does belong: In these promises works are not
set as the causes of our salvation, but as evidences and signs of those that
do believe unto life; distinguishing betwixt believers and unbeleevers between
those that are sincerely faithful, and seeming professors, which profess and
say they believe, but indeed their faith is but a dead faith, and therefore
vain; the promise is made to works not as the cause of our salvation, but to
note out the nature and quality of that faith which is the condition of life;
seeing faith is a grace more inward, and that act of it by which it saves, is
secret and cannot be seen, (for who knows our resting on or adhering unto
Christ?) therefore this saving faith shows it self by some other acts of it,
setting love a work, which discovers it self by obedience in all
righteousness and true holiness; and these fruits being seen do make known
the tree from whence they come; although therefore the promise of life is made
sometimes to faith, sometimes to works, yet this is not to note out a twofold
condition of the Covenant, as if the condition were partly faith, and partly
works; but to note out the property and nature of that faith, which has the
promise of life belonging to it; not an idle but a working faith, not a dead
faith but living; not ineffectual, in word or tongue only, but operative and
effectual, making us careful to show forth good works, Tit. 3.8. Otherwise if
we look at works by themselves as separated from faith, to such works there is
no promise of life made in the Covenant of grace; The same work done by a
believer has a promise of reward, and the same work being done by an
unbeleever has no promise; which shows that the promise is made rather to the
worker, or to the believer thus working, then to the work it self; and by
this means the promise of life being made to this kind of faith which does
thus work; hereby the faithful are enabled the better to see their own estate
in the promise of life, as having a good foundation (of assurance) thereby,
that they shall obtain eternal life, 1 Timothy 6.19. hereby also carnal
professors who talk of says, but have no works, walking unholily, are
convinced to have no part and right thereunto.

2. This may let us see the kindness and love of God toward us, in that he
has appointed such a condition of life unto us, as through his grace is
possible for us to fulfill; To fulfill the righteousness of the Law is now
become impossible, through the infirmity of our flesh; but it is not impossible
to believe on him who has fulfilled all righteousness for us. Here is grace
in appointing such a possible condition; for though the Lord should have fully
pardoned all our former breaches of Covenant with him, and should have said
unto us, you have once broken my Covenant, and yet if you will at last fulfill
my Law which I gave unto you, I will yet accept you as just unto life: yet we
could not have done it, the condition was too hard for us to perform; If we had
been held close to this condition of fulfilling the Law, we should have missed
of life for ever: The Lord therefore seeing and pitying of our infirmity, was
pleased to propound unto us another condition, saying unto us, only believe;
Believe on my son, trust on my grace, and thou shall be saved; herein the Lord
has condescended to our weakness, taking compassion of our infirmities,
laying upon us no other burden but this; Believe my promise, accept my grace,
and rest upon it, and this thy faith shall save thee, Thou shall never perish.

3. It serves for comfort to all Gods faithful ones, that have believed
through grace; if you have received this first gift, if it be given you to
believe, you shall not fail of a second gift, even the gift of eternal life
through Jesus Christ our Lord; Though your repentance be less then to equal
the measure of your sins, though your obedience be imperfect, yea, though your
faith it self be weak also, yet if it be (...) unfeigned, sincere and sound,
this your faith is accepted of God, and is imputed to you for righteousness;
Those that are of faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham (says the
Apostle,) Gal. 3.9. Blessed is she that believes, says the Angel, Luke
1.45. and the Son of God comes in as a third witness, testifying that
whosoever believes in him shall not perish, but is passed from death to life,
John 3. Here are three witnesses from heaven and earth, all witnessing the
blessed estate of such as do believe.

Faith is well termed precious faith, 1 Pet. 1.2 Pet. 1.1. because it makes us
partakers of all the precious blessings of grace, which are contained in the
Covenant; The faithful are inheritours of all the privileges which God has
promised to his chosen, and therefore it is that they are called heirs of
promise, Heb. 6.17: and heirs of blessing, 1 Pet. 3.9.

You believers, be exhorted to see and own your blessedness, take notice of
the great things the Lord has done for you, he has made a covenant with you,
even a Covenant of peace, and blessing, and life for ever; God is become your
God, he will be all things unto you; and when all helps under heaven fail you,
yet from himself he will do you good; all your sins are forgiven you, his
spirit is yours to lead you, to sanctify you, and to heal the evils that be in
you; he will uphold you in that state wherein you stand, and will keep you that
you shall never perish, and will at last bring you to a full enjoyment of
himself in his heavenly Kingdom, where you shall for ever bless him, and be
made blessed by him, and shall rejoice before him with joy unspeakable and
glorious; pluck up your hearts therefore and be glad, lift up your heads,
strengthen the weak hands, and the feeble knees, serve the Lord with gladness
and joyfulnesse of spirit, considering the day of our salvation draws near;
though now for a time you may be in heaviness, through manifold temptations
and afflictions in this evil world, yet faint not, you being partakers of that
precious faith, you have the holy and faithful God in Covenant with you, to
love you, to bless you, and to save you; and yet a little while and he that
shall come will come, and receive you to himself, and then you shall fully
know what it is to have believed, and to have been in Covenant with God, what
it is to have God to be your God, when you shall see him and enjoy him as he
is; Only nourish your faith, and live by faith, make much of this precious
grace; cherish it by thinking often on the promises, and of that grace which
has been showed upon you from on high; study to walk worthy of that mercy
received, and in so doing, wait for the end of your faith, the salvation of
your soul.

4. If faith be the condition of the Covenant, then woe to all unbeleevers,
that go on in their impenitency and unbeleife: Their unbeleife deprives them of
that good which the Lord has by his Covenant promised to his people; they have
no part nor portion in God; they are without God, without Christ, without
Covenant, without promise, without mercy, their sins are unpardoned, they are
under the curse, the wrath of God abides upon them, there is nothing to take it
away from them, but if they abide in unbeleif, wrath abides upon them for ever.
There is a wrath whereby God is angry with his own people, but that anger lasts
but for a little season, it is but for a moment, Isai. 4.7, 8. it passes away
and abides not upon them; but the unbeleiver has wrath abiding on him for
ever; John 3.36. In Jude 5. it is said that God afterward destroyed those
Israelites that believed not; when once they had had the means of grace made
known, then not beleiving, God afterward destroyed them; you that tread in the
steps of their unbeleif, you are little troubled to think what misery is
coming upon you, as not knowing that you are in danger; but you are under
wrath, your judgment hastneth, and your damnation sleeps not; be awakened
therefore, be think your selves, and consider what your end will be; by your
unbeleif you put a bar to exclude your selves from the blessing of life
promised to Gods people; you thus continuing, the Lord neither will, nor can
save you. You will think this an hard saying, but you will find it too true,
God cannot lie, Titus 1.2. much less can he forswear; but God has sworn
this, that such shall never enter into his rest, Psalm. 95. and Hebr. 3. ult. In
Mat. 13. ult. Its said Christ did not many great works in his own country, for
their unbeleifes sake: But in Mark 6.5. its said he could not do them, he
neither did them nor could do them; unbeleif stops the course and diverts the
stream of Gods goodness from coming unto us; Christ's usual speech to those
that expected any blessing from him was this, According to your faith be it
unto you; faith makes all things possible, Mark 6.23. It will reverse the
sentence of death which is passed upon us, and bring us back unto life; but
unbeleife makes it impossible so that we cannot be saved; The Lord can do
nothing against his own counsel and will, and he has concluded this with
himself, to save none but such as believe, and that whosoever believes not
shall perish; all you unbeleevers consider this, your unbeleefe will be your
destruction.

Secondly, Is there such a work of faith in bringing us into Covenant with God,
and in enabling us to walk in Covenant with him?

1. This serves to direct all the people of God, how to live and walk before
God; look at your selves as such as have God in Covenant with you to bless you
with all blessings meet and expedi^nt for you, whether they be blessings of
this life or that which is to come; you are no more strangers and forreiners,
you are not aliens from the Covenant or commonwealth of Israel; All the good
which God has promised to his Israel belongs to you; Live therefore a life of
faith, resting upon the Covenant which the Lord has made with you. Natural
men live by sense and reason; live you by faith in Gods Covenant and promise;
and there is much use to be made of this consideration.

1. In case we have sinned, and done things that we should not, and thereby
have grieved the Lord as David did, of whom it is said, that the thing that
David had done displeased the Lord; yet herein make use of our faith, trusting
still to his grace and mercy for forgiveness according to his Covenant; we
must not now fly away from God and stand afar off, or cast away our hope, as if
we had lost our God, and had no more part or portion in him, but still believe
that we renewing our Repentance before him, he will still be our God, and love
us still, and will be merciful to our iniquities. Now is a time to put forth
faith in Gods promise, we must remember we are not under that hard condition of
works, but under the condition of Faith; Its the weakness and sinful
infirmity of many of Gods people who walk in much discouragement of spirit
because of some failings which they see in themselves, by which they become
uncomfortable to themselves and to others, when yet their conscientious walking
and tenderness is manifest to all; such a discouraged spirit might well become a
child of the Law, that is under the condition of Works; but it becomes not
such as are under the condition of Faith; Has the Lord said that if his people
sin against him, after he has taken them into Covenant with himself, he will
cast them off and acknowledge them no more? See what Samuel speaks to the
children of Israel in 1 Samuel 12.19, 20. Ye have indeed sinned a great sin, and
done all this wickedness, yet fear not, depart not from following the Lord,
for the Lord will not forsake his people; The Lord know^^ our frailty, and
remembers we are but dust; and therefore has told us, that he will spare us as
a father spares his son that s^rveth him, Mal. 3.17. and will be merciful to
our sins. If we were or could be without sin, we should not have needed such
promises of forgiveness; but when the Lord took us into Covenant with
himself, he knew we should still need daily mercy and compassion to heal our
backslidings; and foreseeing our need of such promises, he has made them
known unto us that we might live by them, looking up unto him by faith in the
fence of our daily infirmities, for a gracious acceptance of us, and
forgiveness of our sins.

2. In case we want any blessing, (suppose some special grace to enable us to
walk more fruitfully in our particular places and callings,) look herein at
the Covenant as a storehouse full of all rich blessings, and make use of faith
which is the condition of the Covenant; set that aworke, and draw out of this
fountain as much as we need; if we want wisdom, boldness, meekness,
temperance, remember by what means we must receive them; we receive the spirit
by faith, Gal. 3.14. believe this promise therefore, wherein the Lord has said
he will give the Holy Ghost to them that desire him, Luke 11.13. This is the
way the Saints have taken; David when he found his heart defiled with those
lusts, what course took he to get it cleansed from these impurities? he flies
to God by the prayer of faith, desiring to have a clean heart created in him;
when the Church found her self shut up under deadness and hardness of heart,
they fly for help to Gods Covenant, Thou art our father, and we are thy people,
Break not thy covenant with us, Isai. 63. and 64. Ier. 14.

3. In case we be troubled with fears of Apostasy and backsliding, as thinking
though we have begun well, yet we shall never be able to continue;
Persecutions, discouragements, temptations are so many, so violent, that we
think we shall never stand out against them; here also live by faith, God will
give an issue to all our temptations; in the mean time commit our souls to God
in well doing, and believe as Paul did, that he will deliver you from every
evil work, and preserve you blameless to his heavenly Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4. If
Satan annoy with his temptations, say as Jehoshua did, The Lord rebuke thee O
Satan, Zach. 3. and remember the promise, The Lord will shortly tread him under
our feet, Romans 16.

4, In case of any service or duty to be performed unto God, remember his
Covenant, I will make you able to keep my judgments, and to do them, Ezekiel.
36.27. In 1 Chronicles. 15.26. it is said, God helped the Levites in bearing the
Arc; so will he help us to undergo the burden of that work which is too
heavy for us, if we rest upon him by faith, if we have a word of faith to
assure us that the work to be done, is (for the general) Gods work, and that
it is particularly required of us as Our works, a work of our calling; we have
then good warrant to depend upon his help, he has called us, he has sent us
to the work, and therefore he will be with us according to that speech of his
to Gideon in Judges 6.14, 16. I have sent thee and therefore I will be with
thee; This is written not for him only, but for us also, that being called to
any ministration or service, we might by faith look for the same presence of
God with us, the same assistance as he had; Many other particulars might be
named, but these may suffice to give a short direction how to live by faith in
the promise and Covenant of God, according to the several occasions which
befall us.

2. As we must depend upon God by faith for all good things which the Covenant
promises, so we must remember the other part of the Covenant, That God will be
a God over us, as well as a God to bless us; and therefore here our care must
be to advance the Lord on high, that it may be seen by our subjection unto him,
that we do acknowledge him to be our God, above us and over us; he has
humbled himself to take such underlings as we are into Covenant with himself,
and has thereby advanced us above our selves; our duty is to set up him that
has abased himself for our sakes, and to humble our selves to walk, with our
God, Micah 6.8.

It is said of Abraham that by his faith he gave glory to God; if we be the
children of Abraham, let us herein imitate the work of Abraham, give honor to
him whom we believe to be our God.

We are all willing to be in Covenant with God thus far, that we may set up our
selves, and climb up into heaven that there we may sit upon Thrones, and to
possess a Kingdom; but we must think especially of setting up the Lord upon
his Throne, that he may rule in us, and reign over us, he having for this end
taken us to be a people unto himself. Ascribe greatness to our God, (says
Moses) Deuteronomy. 33, 3. make it a name and a praise unto him, that he has
vouchsafed to make us his people, and to take us into Covenant with him.

Honor him as he is God, but honor him more abundantly as he is our God; we
owe this unto him, by the Covenant we have made with him; the world knows him
not, nor honors him not, the wicked contemn God, Psalm. 10. and shall God have
no honor? Shall he that stretched out the heavens, and laid the foundations of
the earth, and formed man upon it, shall he have no glory by all his works?
shall he in vain create all the children of men, having none to praise him? The
Lord himself answers in Isai. 43.21. This is a people whom I have formed for
mine own praise; God will have praise from his own people, whom he has taken
unto himself, he will be glorified in all those that come near unto him,
Levit. 10 3. He knows them ^bove all the people of the earth, Amos 3. and is
known of them, Psalm. 72.1, 2. he advances them as a select and peculiar
people, and will be honored by them, according to all the great things which
he has done for them.

Hence is that in Deuteronomy. 26.18. The Lord has set thee up this day to be a
precious people unto him, and in verse 17. Thou have set up the Lord thy God to
walk in his ways, and to keep his Commandments. The word which is there
translated (avouched) Pagnine in his great Thesaurus translates exaltasti, Thou
have set up, as does Arrius Montanus also; we must then set up our God on high;
Labor to advance him above the heavens; he has raised us above the earth, and
above the condition of the men of the earth, that we might fill the world with
his glory, and extol him above all; he has made it a name and a praise unto
us, that we are the people in Covenant with him; much more should it be a name
and a praise unto him, that he has showed such grace unto the sons of men,
Isai. 55.13. Ier. 13.11.

All such therefore as are the faithful people of God, that are entered into
Covenant with him, consider this duty; take heed of polluting the Name of your
God, let not his name and honor suffer by you, but lift up his Name on high,
that it may be magnified before all the world.

And for this end take these few directions

1. If we will honor God and exalt him in due manner, we must set him up as
our chief and highest in our esteem, far above every name that is named in
this world, or that which is to come; set none compar with him, none equal
unto him; Kings count themselves not to be honored with due honor, if they be
not set up above other men: Its not enough to honor God, but we must honor
him as God, and that is to set him highest in our hearts, and above all: Hence
it is that the Saints of God have used such expressions concerning him, as do
single him forth beyond the comparison of all creatures: Thus Moses, Who is
like unto thee amongst the Gods? who is like unto thee, so glorious in
holiness, etc. Exodus 15.11. So David, Thou art great, O Lord, there is none
like thee, 2 Samuel 7.22. So Solomon, O Lord God of Israel, there is none like
thee in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, 1 Kings 8.23. So Micah 7.18. Who
is a God like unto thee, which passest by the trangressions of the remnant of
thine heritage? Thus have the Saints advanced God, in their esteem of him,
making none like unto him in greatness, in glory, in holiness, in goodness,
and in mercy, etc. And thus we must rise up in our thoughts and apprehensions
of God, till we come to a holy exstacy and admiration of him, carried beyond
the limits of all created excellency, so as to esteem all things else as
nothing in comparison of him, Esaias 40. There be men that say they are gods, and
think they are equal with the most High, but they are but gods of the earth as
the Prophet calls them, ( Zeph. 2.11.) but our God is the God of heaven;
therefore set him on high above all gods; God counts himself debased when any
are made equal unto him, Esaias 46.5, 9.

2. Count it our blessedness, and highest dignity to be a people in Covenant
with God, that we have him near unto us in all that we call unto him for, and
may live in an holy fellowship and communion with; count it our honor that we
are his servants, and may stand before him, and minister unto him; David,
though great in name and dignity, who knew his pla^^ as well as other men, and
who could say (when occasion was) Do not I know that I am this day King over
Israel? yet took more felicity in being Gods servant, then in being King and
Ruler over that great people, and therefore he speaks to God in such manner, O
Lord I am thy servant, O God, thou art my God, etc. So then are we honorable as
David was? yet esteem we this as our greatest honor, that God is our God, and
we his servants.

Are we low and despised in the world? yet count this honor enough that God
has lifted us up to this excellency to be one of his people; And herein the
Lord counts himself to be honored by us, when being counted as things that
are not, as Paul's phrase is, even as things of naught, yet we can say with
Jacob, I have enough, because the Lord has had mercy on me, and has taken me
into Covenant with him to be my God: When in persecutions, in wants, in
distresses, we can quiet our selves in this, that God is our God, we do herein
bear witness of him, before heaven and earth, that he is better to us then
dignities, riches, and all worldly contentments, that he is enough to those
that enjoy him.

3. We must count the things of God the greatest things, his work to be the
greatest work, his service the greatest business of our whole life; yea, to be
preferred before life it self. When Nehemiah was in hand with that great work
of God, the re-edifying of Jerusalem, and the reformation of things amiss in
Church and State, he looked at this as a great work, Neh. 6.3. I have (says
he speaking to them that would have drawn him from it) a great work to do,
which I may not suffer to cease, whiles I come down unto you: Nay, he would not
cease this work to save his life, Neh. 6.11. When David was giving direction
concerning the building of the Temple, The work is great (says he); And why
great? because it is not for man, but for the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 29.1. and 22.5.

The men of the world look at their own things as the great things which they
must attend unto; the things of God, are with them, things of less value; they
prefer their own things before the things of Jesus Christ; But those that are
the Lords people must remember that they have given themselves unto the Lord, 2
Cor. 8.5. so as they are not their own any more, but the Lords, and to be for
themselves no further then may stand with his honor, no further to seek their
own things then may be for the Lord, and not against the Lord. Here then first
we must prefer his commandments before the commandments and wills of men,
resolving with the Apostles to obey God rather then men. Secondly, do his work
in the first ^^^e, not first for our selves, and then for God, as the manner
is, but see that God be first served, remembering the words of our blessed
Savior, that he which loves himself or any other thing (...) then Christ, is
not worthy of him. Thirdly, offer our best things to God, to be for his service
and honor; the best of our time, the best of our children, the best of our
substance; the fat of our wheat and of our wine, must be for the Lord. Prove.
3.9. Honor God with thy riches, and with the first of all thine increase; the
first are usually the best, and most desired, Mich. 7.1. And therefore when we
give the first and best unto God, God counts himself honored by us; when we
bring him the lean and the scabbie, the lame, and the blind, things of no
worth, the Lord is then despised in our eyes, Mal. 1.

4. If we will honor God as his people should do, we must stand for his
honor in times of general declining; when all seem to neglect him, and lay
his honor in the dust: When People, Nations, and Languages, shall fall down
and worship the golden Image which Nebuchadnezar the King sets up, then to
despise the Kings commandment, and to worship our God alone, this is indeed to
honor him: When we shall be forbidden to make prayer unto our God, Then with
Daniel to have our Window open toward Jerusalem, and to make our prayer before
him, is an honoring of him: When we serve him only in times of general
Reformation, living in a Land of uprightness, when it is an honor to our
selves to conform to those that are faithful with God, in these times its
more doubtful whether we seek to honor God, or to honor our selves; but in
corrupt times of general Apostasy, when the world turns their back upon God,
then to cleave to him, and stand for his worship, then to say with Joshuah, Let
all the world choose whom they will serve, but I and my house will serve the
Lord; this is to honor him indeed, and to give him glory before the face of
the whole world, see Ezekiel. 44.12, 13, 15.

5. If we will exalt God, we must rest upon his help at dead lifts, when all
other helps fail us, in greatest straits, when we know not which way to turn
us, when we see no help either in heaven or earth, but in him alone; Herein
Jehoshaphat gave glory to God, when he knew not what to do, then were his eyes
toward the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 20. Thus the three Children, when cast into the
fiery Furnace, and Daniel when thrown into the Lions Den, yet then they
believed that the God whom the served, was able to deliver them, Dan. 3. And
thus Moses honored God at the Red Sea, when all was desperate in the eye of
flesh and blood; yet Moses by the power of faith then believed a deliverance
should come, Stand still (says he) and see the salvation of God; God is
greatly honored by us, when we trust upon him in such desperate times.

6. If we will honor God, we must be exceeding careful to keep our vows and
promises, which we have made unto him; walk circumspectly according to the
Covenant we have entered into: We see how the Lord sometimes blames Israel for
despising his Covenant which they had made with him, Ezekiel. 16.59. we cannot
neglect our Covenant with him, but it will argue a neglect of God himself;
Thou have despised me, says the Lord to David, when he had despised the
Commandment which he had promised to observe, 2 Samuel 12, 9.10.

We commonly deal with our promises to God, as we do with those which we make
to our little children, we think to please them with promises for the present,
but neither mind greatly what we say unto them, nor take any care to perform,
as thinking they will never remember what we say unto them, any longer then
whiles we are speaking: But would we deal so with our Prince? would not he
count it a sleighting of him, if having bound our selves by promise to perform
such a service to him, we should have no care to perform? Be sure the Lord
will require the promises we have made unto him. Have thou then opened thy
mouth unto the Lord? know thou can not go back, Judge. 11. Thou can not
neglect thy promise to God, without a neglect of God himself.

7. If we will honor God, we must lie under the authority of every word of
his, and conform our selves to his example, laboring to become followers of
him, in imitating the virtues of God which he has set before us to walk by:
Its a part of that honor which children owe to their parents, to obey their
commands, and to imitate their godly example in well doing; we cannot honor
God more, then when we are humbled at his feet, to receive his word, Deuteronomy.
33.3. suffering his word to rule in our hearts, so as we dare not go against
it in any thing, trembling to sin against it, Esaias 66. and when we renounce
the manners of the world, seeking to become followers of God as dear children,
this is to set him up as honored by us, Ephesians. 5.

8. In a word, if we will honor God, we must contend in his cause with much
striving, being zealous for him, and for the defense of his Word, Truth,
Gospel, Kingdom, and whatsoever concerns his honor, not yielding or giving
place one hour, Gal. 2. not leaving an hoof behind us, Exodus 10.26. standing
out to the utmost, in the things of his Kingdom: And when we have done all
that we can do, still magnify his grace, that he will vouchsafe to admit such
as we be to minister unto him, even as David did, when as he had showed a great
deal of zeal in furnishing the house of God, having given of his own cost an
hundred thousand Talents of Gold, and an hundred thousand Talents of Silver, 1 Chronicles. 22.14, and had withal stirred up the Princes to be helpful in the same
work; yet what says he after all this, he does not go glorying before God, as
if he had done some great thing for God, but humbling himself, says, Who am I
(O Lord) and what is my people that we should offer in this sort unto thee? 1 Chronicles. 29.14. He thought himself unworthy to offer any thing to the great God,
and that it was an high dignity and favor done unto him, that God would accept
any thing at his hands.

Thus must we seek to honor our God, that has so highly honored us in taking
us into Covenant with himself. And thus much of the condition of the Covenant.

The Fifth Part. THE PROPERTIES OF THIS COVENANT.
IT follows in the fifth place to consider the Properties of the Covenant, and
these are four.

For it is: First, A free Covenant.

Secondly, A sure Covenant.

Thirdly, An everlasting Covenant.

Fourhly, An holy Covenant.

1. It is a free Covenant, a Covenant of free grace, freely made with us, and
freely communicating to us all the blessings promised in it: The blessings made
over to us in this Covenant, do spring from nothing in us, but only from grace
in God.

Gods Covenant is not like Covenants which are usually made among men, in which
each party expects some benefit from the other; Abimelech thought it good to
make a Covenant of peace with Isaac, because he saw God was with him; If Isaac
were against him, God would be against him too; he could not be an enemy to
Isaac, but he must be an enemy to God; he thinks therefore its best for him,
even for his own peace and safety, to be at peace with Isaac, and to make a
Covenant with him, Genesis 26.28. The like we see in the Shechemits that make a
Covenant with Jacob; but they allege the reason of it; shall not their flocks,
and their cattle, and substance be ours? Genesis 34.23. Thus it is in the
Covenants of men; but it is otherwise in the Covenant which he makes with his
people; he looks for no benefit by us in his Covenant with us, but only to
communicate good unto us; His Covenant is free, I will love them freely, says
the Lord, Hoseah 14.4. And it is so free in two respects.

1. In respect of his entering into Covenant with us.

2. In respect of his performance of it.

First, In respect of his entering into Covenant with us, there being nothing
in us moving the Lord to take us into Covenant with him, but only his own
grace, it is his good pleasure to love us, and do us good; though we come
without silver, without any thing of worth in us, yet we may come unto him, and
be taken into Covenant with him, Esaias 55.1, 3. Hence it is, that when God
enters into Covenant with his people, he is said to give them his Covenant,
Genesis 17.2. for so the word is in the original, I will give thee my Covenant:
In our translation it is, I will make my Covenant betwixt me and thee: but in
the original, I will give, etc. As in Numb. 25.12. God is said to give the
Covenant of the Priesthood unto Phineas as a gift; so God gives the Covenant of
his grace, unto all that he takes into Covenant with him: Hence also are those
expressions used in Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. The Lord set his love upon you to take you
into Covenant with him, not because ye were more in number then other people,
but because he loved you, and chose your Fathers; as noting out the freeness
of his love toward them, loving them because he loved them: and the constancy
of his love toward their Fathers, toward whom he would keep the oath which he
had sworn unto them; this was all the cause that moved the Lord to take them
into Covenant with him: And hereto agrees that of Samuel, It pleased the Lord
to make you his people, 1 Samuel 12.22. That they were become the people of God,
rather then Egyptians, Moabites, Ammonites, or others, was not for any thing
which the Lord saw in them more then in other people, but it pleased the Lord,
it was his good pleasure to choose them, and to make them his people.

This freeness of grace in entering into Covenant with us, may appear by
these particulas:

1. That God is first in seeking after us to draw us into Covenant with
himself; we seek not him, but he seeks us; we choose not him, but he chooses
us, he loves us first, Ioh. 15.16. 1 Ioh. 4.19. And in this respect he is said
to be found of those that seek not after him, because he first reveals and
offers himself in mercy unto us, Esaias 65.1.

2. But though he be first in seeking after us, may there not be something in
us to draw his eyes, and heart unto us? the man seeks first after the unmarried
virgin, but there is beauty or dowry which draws him: But there is no such
thing in us, there is no worth in us, he sees us polluted in our blood, Ezekiel.
16 6. he saw us contemptible and vile, so as none would regard us, verse. 5. and
yet then does the Lord take us up, and enters into a Covenant with us, verse. 8.
This unworthiness of ours made Abraham to wonder when he heard the Lord speak
of making a Covenant with him, Genesis 17.3. And this same made David to break out
into that affectionate and admiring demand, Lord, who am I, that thou should
speak thus unto thy servant? 2 Samuel 7.

3. There is desert in us to the contrary, to keep off the Lord from ever
owning such a people as we were; yea, though we should have sought after him: As

First, Our former vile unfaithfulness in that first Covenant he made with us,
wherein we dealt treacherously against him, forsaking him and lightly esteeming
the God of our salvation, as Moses speaks of Israel, Deuteronomy. 32.15. we brake the
Tables of the Covenant, and cast them away from us; yea, and cast away the Lord
from being our God; the more undeserved therefore, and more free was that grace
which moved the Lord to make a new Covenant with us, having been so false to
him in the other.

Secondly, The enmity that is in us against him, and against the things that
please him; we are as contrary unto him, as is darkness to light, and evil to
good, Romans 8.7. we are a crooked generation, that cannot abide the straight
ways of the Lord; our whole nature is sinful and corrupt before him.

4. Consider the time wherein the Lord takes us by the hand to bring us into
Covenant with him, and then we shall find that when we are most averse and
backward, and have least thought of ever seeking after him, then it is that he
seeks us to take us unto himself. Thus the Lord called Saul, when he was
persecuting, raging, breathing out slaughter, and threatenings against the Lord,
and against his Saints, then the Lord takes him by the hand, and enters into
Covenant with him, Act. 9 and so it was with those mockers, Act. 2.13, 37. here
were no dispositions and preparations before on their part, but tree and
unexpected grace from God.

5. Compare those that are taken into Covenant with other that are left out
(for all are not taken in, Ephesians. 2.12. there be that are without God, without
Covenant) and this will also make it manifest, it is free grace by which any
are taken in: For

1. If we look upon those that are taken into Covenant, and those that are
left, we shall find that there is no difference in themselves, betwixt one and
other; we have all sinned, and there is no difference, says the Apostle, Romans
3.22, 23. No reason therefore in us, why one is taken into Covenant, and not
another, but only free grace in God; for if it be not free grace toward them
that are taken in, then there is injustice and wrong done to those that are
left: If there were any worth in those that are taken, there was as much in
those that are left, and therefore either it must be free grace toward the
one, or there is injustice and wrong toward the other; but what blasphemous
mouth dare impute unrighteousness and wrong to the righteous God? he owes
nothing to any; he may truly say to all men, I do thee no wrong, Matthew. 20.13.
Thou have as much as I owe thee. Both sorts therefore being in themselves
alike, and no wrong done to those that are left, it must needs be free grace in
those that are taken in; apply Ioh. 14.22. Matthew. 11.25.

2. As sometimes there is no difference betwixt one and other; so sometimes God
chooses the worse, takes in the more unworthy, and leaves those that are better
then they, Paul a chief of sinners, 1 Timothy 1. Publicans and Harlots, Matthew.
21. Mary Magdalene possessed with seven Devils; these were taken in; and the
righteous generation (as they were reputed) which justified themselves, and
were justified by others, were left and passed by. In Ezekiel. 3.7, 8. The Lord
tells the Prophet, that if he would have sent him to another strange people (as
he sent Jonah to the Ninevites) they would have hearkened unto him and obeyed
him, but the house of Israel will not obey thee; and yet for all this God sent
his Prophet to them, and not to the other, to the worse and not to the better,
and so Matthew. 11.23. Thus it is in the communication of himself in the Covenant
of grace; he sometimes passes by such as seem better, and takes the worse, to
the end that it might appear that he respects none for any thing that is in
them, but that the freeness of his grace might be seen in those whom he takes
unto himself: This is that which the Apostle points at, 1 Cor. 1 27, 28, 29.
God chooses the foolish things of the world, the weak things, base and despised
things, things which are not, passing by the wise, the mighty, and things which
are in esteem, that all might see it is nothing in man, but the grace of God
by which we are taken into communion and Covenant with him, etc.

2. As the grace of the Covenant is thus free in the making of it, so it is
also in the accomplishment of it; the blessings of the Covenant are as free
grace in the bestowing, as they were in the promising: Not that God is now free
to perform or not to perform, for he cannot but perform that which he has
promised: but yet he owes the blessing to us in regard of his own promise,
faithfulness and goodness, not in regard of any worth that is in us; for
though there be our obedience of faith intervening and coming between Gods
promise, and between his performance, yet the performance is as free grace as
is the promise, because there is no such worth in any of our obedience, as to
which the blessing should be done in a way of justice: He cannot deny himself,
2 Timothy 2. nor can he alter the thing which is gone out of his lips, Psalm 89.34.
otherwise, the blessing of the Covenant is as well freely given, as it was
freely promised: And therefore it is that the Prophet speaking of the
performance of the Covenant which God made with Abraham (but was to be
performed to his seed) he speaks in this manner, Thou will perform truth unto
Jacob, and mercy unto Abraham, as thou have sworn unto our Fathers in old time,
Micah 7.20. Gods truth gives assurance that he will do it (thou will perform
truth unto Jacob) but yet its mercy when its performed (thou will perform
mercy unto Abraham, etc.) and thence it is that in Jude v. 21. the Apostle
speaking to the Saints, exhorts them to wait for the mercy of the Lord unto
eternal life; and in Rom 6.23. Life eternal is called a gift, freely given by
free grace: and in 1 Pet. 3.7. we are said to be heirs of the grace of life,
because grace is the cause, as well of our inheriting life, as of Gods
promising; for though we have received a Spirit of grace, to renew and
sanctify us; yet in many things we offend still, standing in need of
forgiveness from day to day; and where there is need of forgiveness, there
life must needs be of grace, and not of merit or works.

The Reasons why the Lord would have his Covenant to stand upon this foundation
of free grace; are these

1. To be a ground of hope to such as see themselves unworthy of acceptance
with God; If the grace of the Covenant were not free, such unworthy ones could
have no hope.

2. It is the glory of grace to be freely communicated, Esaias 55.1. Come and buy
without money: It darkens the glory of grace, when it is vouchsafed for any
benefit received, as Potiphar favored Joseph, because he saw God prosper the
things that were under his hand, Genesis 39.3.4. but where favor is wholly free,
there it shines forth in the glory of it: and thence it is that when the Lord
had made his promise to the dispersed Jews, concerning their gathering in
again, he tells them that it is not for their sakes, but for his own name
sake, thereby to maintain the glory of his free grace toward them.

3. The Lord would have his Covenant to be a Covenant of free grace, that the
blessing of it might be sure unto those to whom the promise is made: The Lord
saw the unstability of the former Covenant of works, the promise being made
with respect to that which was in us, or to be done by us, and so would this
new Covenant have been also, if it had been built upon the like foundation;
therefore that the blessing of it might be sure, the promise is made to depend
not upon any thing to be done by us, but upon the free grace of God, Romans 4.16.

Use 1. To inform us from what hand to expect the blessing of life promised to
us in this Covenant, even from mercy and from grace, not from justice; he that
will have life, and wring it out of the hand of justice, in stead of life shall
have the wages of death, as his deserved and just reward; See 2 Timothy 1.18. It
is mercy which the best must look for at that day.

Use 2. This may be a ground of encouragement to such as are (or at least seem
to themselves to be) afar off, aliens to God, strangers to his Covenant; let
them draw near, and seek to be partakers of this grace so freely offered, the
blessings whereof are great, of infinite value, yet are they as free as great;
in respect of greatness they might seem to be above hope, but in respect of the
freeness of them they are under hope; by this consideration the Lord
encourages his people, to seek unto him for acceptance, ( Receive us
graciously, Hos. 14.2.) and if any say but alas how can we which have forsaken
our God, and gone after our Idols, and done such abominations, be accepted by
him? hereto the Lord answers, I will love them freely; he looks for no worth in
us, for which he should show grace unto us, but only that we must accept that
which is so freely offered.

Its usual with such as most desire and long after grace, to be most fearful
and doubtful of obtaining; Oh, there is so much unworthiness in them, how can
they hope to find acceptance with God, they can see nothing in themselves for
which God should accept them, and it is true; but though you can see nothing in
your selves, yet you may see enough in God; Looking downward you see
unworthiness in your selves; but look upward and then behold riches of free
grace in God; Grace is never the further off because you can see no worthiness
in your selves, nay, the more you discern your selves unworthy, the more near
is the abundance of grace to be manifested in you, if ye trust unto it; say
not therefore you are unworthy, thereby nourishing distrust in your self; but
say rather, though I be unworthy, yet I will commit my self to that free grace
of God which is vouchsafed to unworthy ones; nay, I say more, such as are not
unworthy, shall never taste of this mercy and grace of God, its given to none
but to unworthy ones: The very thought and opinion of our own worthiness
dwelling in us, excludes us and cuts off from grace; here is then a prop to our
weak faith, this puts a plea into the mouths of all dejected souls; let them
look to this sweet name of grace, here take hold, here rest, here cast anchor,
in this harbor we shall be safe in the midst of all storms; and as the Church
in Lam. 3.8. considering the greatness of her affliction, she said, Her hope
was perished from the Lord; yet considering again how her heart was humbled
within her, she re-assumes her hope, which before was perished; my soul (says
she) is humbled within me, therefore have I hope; she hoped then even when her
hope was perished; so let us do, when our hope is perished in respect of any
goodness in our selves, yet considering the free kindness and grace of God,
let us stir up our hopes and say as she did, I have hope because the Lord is
gracious, freely offering grace to the unworthy; were it not for this Name of
grace, we should never tell how to open our mouths before the Lord; If he
should say unto us, what can you say for your selves why I should not condemn
you? We must answer, truly nothing, Lord, nothing in our selves; only thou art
gracious who freely pardonest the sins of thy people; I cannot desire to be
accepted of thee for any thing that is in me, but I commit my self to thy free
and rich grace, which is able to do for me abundantly above that I can ask or
think.

And here (to add a word more concerning the absolute promises, of which I
have spoken something before) we may by that which has been spoken, discern
the right use of those promises, they are to be encouragements or attractives
to draw us to rely upon free grace in such times when we are most discouraged
in our selves; there be several seasons in which both kinds of promises (both
absolute and conditional) are of special use; there is a time wherein the
soul is apt to slumber, being overtaken with a spirit of security, apt to
presume and to walk negligently; there is a time also of dismayednesse and
dejection of Spirit, every thing causing fear, though we walk in conscionable
care before God. Now when that security and carelessness prevails in us, then is
a time for us to look unto the conditional promises, and the qualifications
expressed in them, not giving rest unto our selves, until we find them in our
selves; contrariwise, when the soul lies under fear, pressed down with sense
of our own vile unworthiness, then is a time to look unto the absolute
promises, considering with our selves though we be poor, lost, wretched,
miserable, yet the Lord has promised for his own sake to succor us, and to do
us good. To apply absolute promises to one of a loose carnal and sensual
spirit, it is as if you should give him a cup of poison to drink; but to apply
the same to a poor dejected spirit, sensible of its own vileness, here it is
as new wine which glads the heart of man; Every thing is beautiful in its
season, as Solomon speaks; so are these promises in their several seasons; the
absolute promises to encourage the weak, and dejected; the conditional to
search, to waken and stir up the secure.

Use. 3. To exhort us to honor this free grace of God, by which we are taken
into Covenant with him; all that God does toward us, being done for the praise
of this glorious grace of his, Ephesians. 1.6. This is Gods end, and this was Paul's
practice, 1 Timothy 1.13, 14. ever seeking to magnify this grace, and Ephesians. 2.4.
and Isai. 63.7. where there is mention of rich mercy great love, exceeding
riches of grace, great goodness, tender love, great mercy, multitude of loving
kindnesses; Reserve we therefore the whole glory of our salvation entire unto
grace alone, mix nothing with it, add nothing to it; adding and mixing
debaseth it, as water mixed with wine, or copper with gold. It was David's
expression which he used, when he had received those ample promises from God,
for thy words sake, and according to thine own heart (says David) have thou
done all these great things unto thy servant, 2 Samuel 27.21. so think we, all
that mercy and goodness which the Lord has done for us, he has not done it
for our sakes, or according to our worthiness, but according to his own
heart, according to the purpose of his grace toward us; say therefore, Not
unto us O Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name be the praise; it is enough for us
that we have life, the blessing, the comfort; let grace alone have all the
glory.

Use 4. To stir us up to imitate this free grace of God, which is showed on us;
First loving the Lord not for his gifts and rewards, but with a free love as he
has loved us, and serving him with a free spirit and a willing mind.
Secondly, be free in doing good unto all men, even to such as have deserved
nothing, (or if any thing, only evil at our hand) though they be aliens and
strangers and such as we never hope to receive any good from, yet freely do
them good, even where we look for nothing again, Luke 14.12, 14. as God has
done unto us, so do we unto them; in this we shall show our selves the
children of our Father in heaven, Matthew. 5.

2. As it is a free Covenant, so it is a sure Covenant, certain to be
performed; It cannot fail, those that rest upon it shall find it will not be
as a lie unto them to deceive them; but the accomplishment will every way
answer their expectation and hope; Thus says David, 2 Samuel 23.5. God has made
with me a Covenant perfect in all points, and sure, and in Esaias 55.3. The
promises of the Covenant are called the sure mercies of David, not because they
are sure unto David alone, but because they are sure, and shall be sure unto
all the seed of David that are in Covenant with God as David was; The promises
of Gods Covenant are not yea, and nay, various and uncertain; but they are
Yea, and Amen, sure to be fulfilled 2 Cor. 1. There shall not fail so much as
one word of all that good which God has promised to do for his people, see
Josh. 21.45. and 23.14. 1 King. 8.56. The stability of Gods Covenant is
compared to the firmness and unmovablenesse of the mighty mountains, Esaias
54.19. and to the unvariable course of the day and night, Jer. 33.20. to imply
that it is as easy (yea, more easy, as the places quoted import) for the
mountains to remove out of their places, and the course of the day and night
to cease, as for the Covenant of God to fail.

Reas. 1. The Covenant and promises of grace are built upon the unchangeable
purpose of God, which is a foundation remaining sure, and cannot be shaken, 2 Timothy 2.19. and for this cause it is, that in Tit. 1.2. the Lord is said to have
promised eternal life, before the world began; not that any promise could then
be made to us in person; but because, first, God then purposed it in himself;
secondly, According to that his purpose, he promised life to Christ for us, and
in our behalf; and thirdly, because the promise of life which is in time made
unto us, in our own person, is according to that purpose of God in himself,
and that promise from everlasting made unto Christ; and hereto agrees that of
the Apostle, in Heb. 6.17. where he grounds the truth and certainty of the
promise, upon the stablenesse of Gods counsel; so that unless Gods Counsel
and purpose change, the promise cannot fail.

Reas. 2. The freeness of the Covenant proves the surenesse, and certainty of
it, as before we argued: It is free that it might be sure; so here, its sure
because its free; the former Covenant of works was not sure, because it was not
free, but depended upon some things in our selves, which were mutable and
changeable; and if the Covenant of grace did depend upon the mutability of our
will (as that did) the promise of life now made to this Covenant could be no
surer then it was before; but this Covenant is free and therefore sure; nothing
can hinder free grace from giving eternal life to whom it will; man's
unrighteousness coming between, may prevent a promise made upon condition of
righteousness, but it cannot prevent a promise of free grace.

Reas. 3. God has given us many pledges to assure us of the certainty of his
Covenant, and the blessing of it. First, his word is gone out of his mouth, and
he cannot alter it, Psalm. 89. Secondly, he has written it, to make it more
sure; and what he has written, is written never to be blotted out. Thirdly, He
has sealed it with his own seal, and so it is become as the Laws of the Medes
and Persians, which alter not. Fourthly, He has sworn it, Psalm. 89.3, ^5. Heb.
6.17. Fifthly, He has given us the earnest of his Spirit, 2 Cor. 1.22.
Sixthly, Christ the Mediator and Testator of it, has confirmed it by his own
blood, Heb. 9.16, 17, 18. What can then be more sure?

Object. But in Numb. 14.34. God tells the Israelites they shall feel his
breach of promise; and in Ezekiel. 16.59. he tells them that he would deal with
them as they had done with him, in breaking his Covenant; and so in Zach.
11.10. by all which it may seem Gods Covenant may fail.

Answ. Men may be said to be in Covenant with God two ways; First, In
appearance, by visible profession; Secondly, According to truth; the former
sort profess hope in the promise of life, but being hypocrites which never
gave themselves to the Lord in truth, they fall short of the promise, and are
deprived* Heb. 4. But those which are truly in Covenant with God, having given
up themselves unto him in simplicity and truth to be his people, toward these
Gods promise stands firm, never to be changed. There were in Israel a mixed
people, some believed, some believed not, and yet they all did in show accept
the conditions of the Covenant, and professed themselves to be a people in
Covenant with God: Those of them which in truth believed, had the promise of
God fully accomplished unto them; Those that believed not, they enjoyed it not,
because of their unbelief; they were in truth none of the children of the
Covenant, although they professed it; and therefore no marvel they missed of
the blessing promised: As in Exodus 32.32, 33. Some are said to be blotted out
of the book of life; not that those which are written in it, are ever indeed
blotted out; but because some which seemed to have their names written therein,
are at length declared and made manifest that they never were of those that
were written there; but were written in earth as Jeremy speaks, Jer. 17.13.
rather then in heaven; so it is here in the case in hand; God seems to break
his promise with some; but not with those which are truly in Covenant with him;
only he makes such hypocrites as profess and pretend hope of obtaining the
promise, to see and feel that all their expectation is in vain, when they
find themselves disappointed of the blessing they hoped for. The one sort
(namely, such as truly believe) they enjoy the promise, following faith to the
conservation of the soul; the other sort (namely seeming hypocrites, and
formal professors) deprive themselves through unbelief; but the Covenant and
promise of God stands firm and sure, to all that lay hold on it by a true
faith.

Use 1. This may shame us for our unbelief: When we hear of the great things
of the Covenant, which God has promised, we hear them as matters beyond
belief; Those that publish these things of our peace and salvation, may say
with the Prophet, Lord, who has believed our report? Esaias 53.1. We look at
these things as things of which there is no certainty; we hear of them, but we
believe them not: This is evident by our little seeking after them, our little
minding of them, that we do no more comfort our selves in the remembrance of
them, and rejoice in the hope of them: These things are plain evidences, that
either we believe them not, or our faith concerning them is very small.
Fullness of faith concerning these, would bring on fullness of joy, to rejoice
under the hope of the glory of God, and would cause us to press hard toward
the mark, so running that we might obtain; Let us shame our selves before the
Lord for this our unbelief; shall he promise and not perform? shall he speak
to us and write to us, and swear to us, and seal to all with his own seal,
and we not believe him? Let God be true, though every man be a liar; consider
how by our unbelief we do both cast dishonor upon the Lord, and weaken our
own comfort, which we might be filled with through believing.

Use 2. Is the Covenant and promises of it so sure? This then may minister a
ground of strong consolation unto all such as have given up themselves unto God
to be a people in Covenant with him: Let them know Gods Covenant is sure, and
cannot fail them; you that are such, lift up your heads, comfort your hearts,
strengthen the weak hands, and feeble knees; Look upwards and rejoice in the
expectation of those great things which are laid up for you: They are so great,
that you can hardly believe them, yet they are sure, as the promise, Covenant
and Oath of a faithful God can make them. When you see uncertainty and
unstability of all things, riches go away, friends forsake, strength fails;
Let your stay and comfort be, that yet Gods Covenant fails not; the riches of
the world may be consumed, but his grace is an abiding substance; other friends
may hide themselves, and stand afar off in the day of affliction, but the
Lord will not forsake his people; and though strength decay, and life be ready
to depart yet he will be the strength of our heart, and our portion for ever.
Heaven and earth shall sooner pass away, then on tittle of his Covenant shall
fall.

Could we in our meditations dwell more upon the certainty of this Covenant,
which is so perfect and sure in all points, it would much help to uphold us in
our greatest failings. Sometimes things are so cross and contrary to that
which God has promised, that his promise seems to be but wind, and vanity
and lies: his word speaks good to us, but his dealing is quite contrary: There
are great words, but little done; we see little but sin and misery, and
corruption in our selves, with chastisement and affliction from God, we enjoy
not the blessing promised: It is with us, as it was with Gideon, when the Angel
uttered those comfortable words unto him, The Lord is with thee thou valiant
man; Ah says Gideon, Is the Lord with us? why then is all this evil come upon
us? where are all his miracles our Fathers told us of? the Lord has now
forsaken us, Judges 6.13. So it was with David, he had the promise of the
Kingdom made unto him by Samuel, who also anointed him thereunto; but before
he came to the possession of it, he met with so many cross haps, and contrary
events, that David began to think all Samuels words to be but lies; he
concludes, All men are liars, and Samuel himself is no better. Thus it is with
us, we meet with many sad crosses, and hard events, which seem quite contrary
to the promise of God; These make us to fear and doubt of the promise, and not
only to say with David, All men are liars; but with Jeremy to say to God
himself, Be not thou as a liar unto me, Jer. 15.18. As if all the promises of
God were quasht, and come to naught: But consider, though your faith may be
thus exercised for a season, yet Gods promise is faithful and sure. These are
times in which God comes to us as he came to Abraham to prove him, God made
Abraham a promise, that of his seed Christ should come, in whom all Nations
should be blessed; this promise God never meant to reverse; yet he will try
Abraham's faith, he will see whether Abraham can believe this, and hold unto it,
when a sore shock and plunge comes which shall seem quite to overturn and dash
all: Here therefore to try Abraham, God bids him go and sacrifice his Son;
here reason says to Abraham, this is against the promise, for if Isaac be
sacrificed, how can the Messiah come out of his seed? but Abraham believes
though he cannot tell how; yet doubtless God will fulfill his promise; and so
he did: Thus God will try the faith of his servants; seeming to work clean
contrary to his promise, yet not as intending to break it, but intending to try
their faith, to see whether they can then believe the promise when all things
make against it: In such times our work is, to stir up our faith, believing
the firmness and stability of the Covenant of God, assuring our selves, that
heaven shall sooner be confounded with earth, and turn into a Chaos again, the
Sun shall sooner be turned into darkness, the fire shall sooner cease to burn,
the mighty Rocks and Mountains shall sooner be thrown out of their places,
then the promise of God shall fail, which is a sure foundation which cannot
be removed: Whatsoever therefore the work of God seems to pretend, yet judge
of Gods intent by his promise, whatsoever falls out in the way, Gods intent,
Gods end is to fulfill his Covenant, that's sure; eye this end, and hold fast to
the conclusion which God makes in his promise, and though you cannot answer the
argument which reason will frame out of those things, which sense suggests, yet
hold the conclusion, Gods promise is sure, his Covenant fails not, here rest,
and wait for it.

Helps hereunto.

1. Consider that all Gods people that have gone before us, which do now
inherit the promises, and have them in possession, have met with the same
discouragements as we do: They were tried in their faith and patience before
they came to enjoy the blessing, Heb. 6.11.12. etc and the same things are
fulfilled in the rest of our brethren, which are now in the world, 1 Pet. 5.
they have their shakings, doubts, and fears, as well as we. Be not therefore
discouraged.

2. See that the promises of God be precious unto you; so have the children of
God esteemed them, as of great and precious things, 2 Pet. 1.4. they are pearls
unto those that are owners of them, Matthew. 7.6. the more we prize them, the
more may we assure our selves of our part in them; and that they shall be
surely made good unto us.

3. Keep Christ near unto us, for it is he in whom all the promises are unto
us Yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. Lay him therefore in our hearts; Let him lie between
our breasts, Cant. 1.12. Let him be to us the dearly beloved of our soul;
make him our hope, as the Apostle calls him, 1 Timothy 1.1. even our hope of
glory, Col. 1.27. Keep him near to us, and hope through him, and we shall not
be disappointed of our hope.

4. Lastly, labor to keep in our selves a clear sight of those graces that
are expressed in the conditional promises, they being the companions of the
faith which saves us; take heed of suffering them to be wounded and darkened in
us, by worldliness, wrath, impatiency, but keep them shining, and bright; the
more evidently we can discern these, the more evidence we have of the blessing
of the Covenant, and the more assurance of full possession: These graces are
(as twere) our anointing, by which we are anointed before hand unto the
Kingdom; Look to our anointing then; If God have anointed us by the oil of
his spirit, it is not for nothing that he has done it: it is an assurance unto
us, that it is his pleasure to give us the Kingdom. David being anointed by
Samuel, got the Kingdom at last, though he went through many troubles first.

Use 3. This should teach us all to prefer the things of Gods Covenant, being
so sure and certain, before all the uncertain vanities of this deceitful
world. What the Apostle speaks of riches, calling them uncertain riches, 1 Timothy 6. the same may be truly affirmed of all worldly things, honor, favor of
men, etc. they are all uncertain things; The hope of them is uncertain, and
many times proves vain, as it did to Balaam, who had fair hopes before him of
rising to great honor, but all was quasht in a moment, when he was slain with
the sword, and sent down to the sides of the pit among the uncircumcised.

And as is the hope, so is the possession of them uncertain also, as it was to
Haman, who in the midst of all his honor, stood but in a slippery place; for
being in honor he continued not, but became like unto the beasts that perish.
What is there of any certainty under the Sun? The world (and all things in
it) is not unfitly compared to a wheel, Ezekiel. 1. and 10. which is of various
and uncertain motion, now up, now down, now going, anon returning; there is
nothing sure in this world, but only what we hold by the sure and faithful
Covenant of God; and therefore as Christ when he saw his Disciples admiring the
stately building of the Temple: Are these (says he) the things ye look upon?
so should we say unto our selves: rebuking these our foolish hearts, when we
see them taken with this worlds uncertain vanities; Are these the things ye
look for? ye walk in a shadow, and disquiet you selves in vain, ye graspe at
that which ye have no assurance to attain, or if ye do attain, yet cannot
long possess; such are all worldly things; But the things which God has
promised in his Covenant, are sure, certain, infallible, though the world be a
liar, yet God is faithful and true, he cannot deny himself; The holy Apostle
did well discern this difference betwixt the things of God, and the things of
this world; one of them he calls uncertain, 1 Timothy 6. but speaking of the
other, I fight not as uncertain, as one that beats the air, but as certain
to obtain, 1 Cor. 9.26. Truly while a man contends for the things of this
world, he does but beat the air, as if a man should spend his strength in
striking great blows at an airie shadow, whiles his enemy in the mean time
goes free away: But those which run for the crown which God has promised,
they shall in time find that they have not run in vain, neither have labored
in vain, they shall find a sure reward, Prove. 11.18. We love not to lose our
labor; we think, better sit still, then labor for nothing. But this
encourages to strive with our best strength, when we have the prize in our
eye, when we are sure to obtain: Here therefore, first by faith believe the
truth of Gods promise, and then put on in practice, to seek after the things
which God has promised, looking at the glory and joy which is set before us,
and then the sure mercies of David will be our own mercies also, as Jonah
speaks, Jonah 2.8. and will be as sure to us as to David or any of his seed:
How sure the Apostle esteemed them, see 2 Timothy 4.8, 18. Take we heed then, lest
by following lying vanities, we forsake our own mercies; that mercy and
blessing I mean, which if we diligently seek after, shall surely be our own.

3. The third property of the Covenant is, that it is an everlasting Covenant,
Genesis 17.7. I will stablish my Covenant betwixt me and thee, to be an
everlasting Covenant; so also verse 13. see also, Esaias 55.3. Ier. 32.40. Heb.
13.20.

This Covenant is said to be everlasting,

1. A part ante, as being from everlasting, in respect of the promise made to
Christ for us, which was done before the foundation of the world, Tit. 1.2.

2. A part post, as being to continue from everlasting to everlasting, as
Moses speaks, Psalm. 9.2. though the Covenant in respect of our own personal
entering into it, is made with us now in time, and has a beginning: yet for
continuance, it is everlasting and without end: Its never to be broken, if once
made in truth; men may seem to be in Covenant with God, and yet (it being but
seemingly, and not in truth) such a Covenant may break, and come to an end, in
which sense the Jews are said to have broke the everlasting Covenant, Esaias
24.5. But where we do truly give up our selves unto God, to be his people, and
take him to be our God, this Covenant is everlasting, its never broken more.

It is not denied but by reason of our unstablenesse of Spirit, we are apt to
make many a breach on our part: And it is true also, that the Lord might have
reserved such a liberty unto himsel^e, and a power of revocation, to disanull
the Covenant which he had made with us; But neither has the Lord put in any
such clause of reservation, nor does he take advantage of our infirmity, but
tells us that which we may trust unto; namely, that his Covenant with us is for
ever, and that from everlasting to everlasting he is our God: Hence is that in
Genesis 17.^. God is said to stablish his Covenant with us, as meaning to have it
stand and continue for ever, and in Psalm. 89.28. its said to stand fast, and in
2 Chronicles. 13 5. its called a Covenant of salt, because it corrupts not, it
fails not; as things that are salted, use to last and continue; and hereof it
is that all the blessings of the Covenant are said to be everlasting;
forgiveness of sins is everlasting, being once forgiven, they are never
remembered any more, Ier. 31.33. The peace and joy which comes thereby, is
everlasting also, your peace shall no man take from you, Ioh. 16. and our joy
is everlasting, Esaias 35.10. our salvation is an everlasting salvation, Esaias
45.17. our life is an everlasting life, Ioh. 3.16. All the blessings of the
Covenant are to continue, not only like Joseph's blessing, to the end of the
everlasting hills, Genesis 49.26. but for ever and for ever. This new Covenant of
grace, is like the new heavens, and new earth, which shall never wax old, nor
vanish away, Esaias 66.22. Hence it is that baptism is but once administered,
because the Covenant is but once made, the promise of it being given once and
for ever: The supper is often administered, because of the many breaches on our
part, and the manifold weaknesses of our faith which we are subject unto, the
Lord being pleased in that Sacrament to renew the seal of his Covenant toward
us, for the settling of our faith, and the stablishing of us in the assurance of
his grace, which has been so often witnessed to us, in the renewing of the
Seal of the Covenant; but baptism being the Seal of our entrance into
Covenant with God, is but once administered, because the Covenant is but once
made, and being once made stands fast for ever. The Reasons why this Covenant
is everlasting, are these,

Reas. 1. From Gods vnchangablenesse, he is a God that changes not, and
therefore whom he loves once, he loves for ever, and to the end, Joh. 13. his
gifts and calling by grace are without repentance, Romans 11.29. his love is
everlasting, Jer. 31.3. his kindness is everlasting, Esaias 54.8. and his
goodness shall be everlasting toward them that he takes in Covenant with him.

Object. If this reason hold that the Covenant of grace is therefore
everlasting, because God is unchangeable, then by the same argument, the
Covenant of works may be proved to be everlasting also, so that that Covenant
should not have been broken.

Answ. It follows not, because the Covenant of works (speaking of the
accomplishment of it by man, with whom it was made) was not built upon Gods
purpose within himself, but was left to the liberty and will of man, either to
fulfill it, or break it as himself would; but the Covenant of grace is built
upon Gods immutable purpose, which cannot change: The Apostle joins these two
together, purpose and Grace, 2 Timothy 1.9. to give us to understand, that all the
ways of his grace which he leads his people into (and therefore also this way
of his Covenant) is according to his eternal purpose within himself: Herein
that first Covenant was not as this latter is, and therefore though the one was
broken, yet the other cannot; Secondly, This may be added also, that that first
Covenant (in respect of the substance of it) is unchangeable and everlasting;
and it is the unchangeablenesse of it, which does condemn all the Sons of
Adam, and did bring Christ from heaven to fulfill it for those which should
believe; Gods unchangeable justice, will not suffer any unjust person to live;
in so much that either we must have Christ to fulfill the justice of that
Covenant for us, or else for the breach of it we must perish for ever: None but
righteous ones says justice, shall have life, the reward of righteousness:
This justice in God is unalterable, and changes not, and thus far there is
little or no difference between the one Covenant and the other, but both are
alike; but here is the difference that in the Covenant of works, God promised
life to Adam in case he obeyed, but did not promise to uphold him in a way of
obedience, to the end that he might not miss of the life promised; Whereas in
the Covenant of grace God does not only promise life to those that do believe,
but promises that their faith shall not fail, and that he will keep them by
faith unto salvation, and preserve them to his heavenly Kingdom; The promises
therefore of this Covenant are larger and better then of that other, this being
made with none but with those that the purpose of his grace does reach unto: He
makes this Covenant with his chosen, Psalm. 89.3. and with them only; It is
revealed to many, but made up with few, even with those that are vessels of
mercy prepared unto glory; thirdly, In the Covenant of works distinguish these
two: First, the term, substance, or heads of the Covenant propounded and
agreed upon betwixt God and man; secondly, The fulfilling or violation of it by
man with whom it was made. The substance of the Covenant is one, the fulfilling
of it is another; The substance of it (do this and live) is not changed,
though the fulfilling of it by Adam did fail, as well it might, because God
never promised him to cause him to fulfill it; but only to give him life in
case he did work therein: But in the Covenant of Grace both these are promised,
one as well as the other, the Lord not only promising life to those that do
believe, but that he will uphold us in the faith unto the end: And hereupon it
follows, that though in the Covenant of works, man failed in his duty, yet the
Covenant on Gods part remains inviolate; for if God give life upon obedience
performed, or inflict death upon disobedience, God does in so doing perform
this Covenant toward man, this being all that God promised in that Covenant;
but in the Covenant of Grace there can be no total breach on our part, so as
to dissolve the Covenant betwixt God and us, but it will import a failing of
the Covenant on Gods part also, because he has promised us to keep us with him
for ever, and gives this as the reason why his Covenant with us shall be
everlasting; namely, because he will put his fear unto our hearts, so that we
shall never depart away from him; so that if the Lord should now suffer his
Vovenant People wholly to depart, and to break Covenant with him; there must
follow some change of mind in God, as having thoughts of love toward us, when
he took us into Covenant with him, and of dislike when he suffers us to depart
from him; but there is no such change in God, therefore this his Covenant with
us is everlasting.

Reas. 2. From the everlasting mediation and intercession of Christ^, who for
ever stands betwixt God and us to make up all breaches which might be made by
our default: As he has obtained an eternal redemption for us, Heb. 9.12. and
has brought in an everlasting righteousness for us, Dan. 9.24. So does he sit
at the right hand of the Father, and lives for ever to make eternal
intercession for us, Romans 8.34. And by this intercession of his, we continue
for ever in favor with God, and the Covenant stands firm betwixt him and us;
he mediates with the Father for us when he sees him provoked by our sin; he
mediates with us also by his Spirit, bringing us back to God in a way of
repentance, so renewing our Covenant toward him, and helping us to take new
hold of his Covenant toward us; Christ is a Priest for ever, to be Mediator of
an everlasting Covenant.

Use 1. Here is a spring of everlasting consolation to those that are in
Covenant with God, this fountain of comfort will never be dried up; Let other
things end or change as they will, yet God is ours in an everlasting Covenant,
never to be broken off; death may put an end to other Covenants betwixt man and
man; but this Covenant betwixt God and us stands fast for ever; Though Abraham
be dead, yet God is Abraham's God still, and by virtue of this Covenant betwixt
God and him, Abraham shall be raised up, and live again: This may stay the
minds of weak ones, in time of desertion, when they seem to be dead, livelesse,
lost, and cast off, as if God would remember them no more; yet then consider
Gods Covenant is an everlasting Covenant, so that if ever you gave up your
selves to God by Covenant to be one of his, this Covenant shall continue and
abide for ever. If ever you found your selves infolded in the bands of this
Covenant, know for certain the Lord will not loose you, he will remember his
Covenant and promise, and will return and love you again, and that with an
everlasting love; what he has been unto you, the same he will be for ever and
ever: You will say perhaps you have sinned, and now he is angry with you for
your sin; suppose it be so, he may be angry with his dearest ones, as he was
with Moses, Deuteronomy. 1.37. but he will not always chide, Psalm. 103.9. nor will he
cast off for ever, Lament. 3.31. he will be pleased again, and will love you
with an everlasting love, see Psalm. 89.28, 29. to 38. Here is a ground of
everlasting consolation in this everlasting Covenant.

Use 2. For exhortation: First, Let this stir us up for ever to magnify that
riches of mercy, which has taken us into the bond of this everlasting
Covenant: There is no end of this mercy and goodness: Oh that there might be
endless praises sounding from us, with enlarged desires to publish this grace
showed on us! If this Covenant had been for a little season, it had been the
less mercy, but that we should have the High God, to enter into an everlasting
Covenant, to be our God for ever; who can sufficiently admire this goodness?
When God had made that large promise to David concerning his House and Kingdom
for ever (2 Samuel 7.16.) See how David was taken up with admiration, Lord (says
he) who am I, and what is my house, that thou have brought me hitherto; namely,
to the Kingdom; And yet this was but a small thing in thy sight O Lord God, and
therefore thou have spoken of thy servants house for a great while, verse. 19.
This enlargement of Gods love to David's house for a great while, even to
stablish it for ever; this enlarged David's heart and mouth toward God, as not
knowing how sufficiently to set forth the praise of his goodness: Truly such
is the mercy showed us in making this Covenant with us, that if we might live
unto eternity, we should think we never had day enough, or time enough to
magnify this everlasting mercy showed on us.

2. Let it admonish us to be constant in our Covenants, and in all duties of
love, according to what we have Covenanted, and promised; Its mentioned as one
of the sins of the Gentiles, that they were Covenant-breakers, Rom 1.30. Let
it rest with Gentiles, let it never be said that it is the sin of those that
profess themselves the children of an everlasting Covenant.

3. Let all those that are as yet without, and have no part in this Covenant of
God; Let them seek to partake in it, come within the bond of it; it brings an
everlasting blessing, which fails not. In the things of the world, the more
continuance any thing is of the more esteem it is of; Inheritances are
preferred before leases, etc. All the things of the world are but temporal, the
things of God which he passes over to his by his Covenant are eternal, ^ Cor.
4.1. the things which are temporal please us so long as they last, but when
they are past, the comfort of them is vanished with them, and many times it
irkes us that we had them, and now have them not; but the things of this
Covenant are everlasting; if we be once possessed of them, we shall never
grieve for the loss of them, they shall never be taken away, because they are
given to us by an everlasting Covenant. Come off therefore from the dying and
perishing things of the world, and seek the things of this everlasting
Covenant; in them is continuance, and we shall be saved, Esaias 64.

4. The fourth property is that it is a holy Covenant, Deuteronomy. 19.24. Luke 1.72.
And it is so called an holy Covenant in these respects.

1. In respect of the parties contracting, and entering Covenant one with
another, which are the holy God and his holy Saints: First, the holy God, that
God to whom the Seraphins cry, Holy, Holy, Holy, Esaias 6. he is one party that
is confederate in this Covenant: Secondly, his holy Saints are the other party
in it, Psalm. 50.5. For God does not take the wicked by the hand as Job speaks,
Job 8.20. to enter into Covenant with them; He does not allow them so much as
to take his Covenant into their mouths, Psalm. 50.17. He is the God of the just,
of the righteous and holy people, he is the King of Saints, Apoc. 15. he will
have no fellowship with the wicked.

2. In regard of the parts of the Covenant, whether we look at the promise on
Gods part, or at the condition on our part: First, the promise on Gods part, is
holy, Psalm. 105.42. he remembers his holy promise, he has spoken it in his
holiness, Psalm. 60.6. And the substance of his promise is holiness, which he
has promised to work in the souls of his people, he has promised to
sanctify us, to take away the stony heart, to pour clean water upon us, to
cleanse us from all our filthiness, and to make us holy, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26.
Zach. 3.3.4. Secondly, the condition on our part which i^ faith, by which we
lay hold of the Covenant, is holy also, therefore called by the Apostle holy
faith, Jude 20. It is a most holy grace of the Spirit, purifying both heart and
hand, not daring to touch or lay hold of the Covenant with unwashen hands.

3. In respect of the Commandment, it commands holiness, Be ye holy, says
the Lord, for I the Lord your God am holy, Levit. 11.44. and 19.2. and 20.7.
and therefore it is that Gods calling is termed an holy calling, 2 Timothy 1.9.
and we called unto holiness, 1 These. 4.7. and when God takes us into Covenant
with him, he charge us henceforth to touch no unclean thing, 2 Cor. 6.17.

4. In regard of the effect, it works holiness in those that are called; It
works effectually that which it promises and commands, The promises of the
Covenant have a sanctifying virtue in them, to sanctify those to whom they are
made, for God by them conveyes the Spirit of holiness into our hearts, as the
Apostle implies, in 2 Pet. 1.4. and we are thereby encouraged and quickened to
grow up ^n all holiness according to the will of God, as is evident by that in
2 Cor. 7.1. compared with chap. 6. end, where God having made that sweet
promise, Come out from among them, and touch no unclean thing, and I will
receive you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty;
from hence the Apostle inferres, Having then such promises, let us cleanse our
selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and grow up unto full
holiness in his fear, etc. And in regard of this effect of the Covenant thus
working holiness in those that are the people of God, they are called the holy
people, Dan. 12.7. and the people of Gods holiness, Esaias 63.18. So in all
these respects the Covenant may well be called an holy Covenant.

And it must needs be an holy Covenant: First, because the Lord himself is the
author and ordainer of this Covenant; the sum and substance of it was framed
and set down in heaven, in the counsels of eternity, coming forth from the
bosom of the Father, and concluded by the assent of the Son and holy Ghost:
All the articles of it were first decreed and concluded there; and therefore
must needs be holy: If they had been devised by men, they would have been of an
other quality, savouring of the sinful and licentious spirit that is in man;
but being a Covenant of the Lords own drawing, he setting down all the articles
and conditions of it, it must needs be as himself is, an holy Covenant
proceeding from so pure and holy a God: hence it is that in Psalm. 60.6. he has
spoken (the words of his Covenant) in his holiness: Look as grace and
holiness are united together in God, so they are in his Covenant; God can no
more cease to be holy, then he can to be gracious: he is both gracious and
holy, so that his Covenant of Grace is also an holy Covenant, as proceeding
from him which is both gracious and holy.

2. Because the end of this Covenant, is to make us partakers of all the holy
things of God, from which all unholy and unclean ones are excluded, Levit.
12.2, 3, 6. Psalm. 50.16. but those that are sanctified enjoy them, and use them
as their own; they are their portion, their inheritance, Deuteronomy. 33. their
pearls, Matthew. 7.6. The Lord would have all his Ordinances to be used holily,
he cannot abide to have them profaned, and therefore it is that in Ezra 6.21.
none but such as were separate from their uncleanesse might eat of the holy
things; and therefore the Lord will have his people to be an holy people, that
they may participate in all his holy things.

Nay more, we are called not only to participation of these holy things of God,
but to fellowship with God himself, 1 Ioh. 1.3. The Lord says unto them, ye
are my people; and they say unto him, thou art our God, Zach. 13. ult. But
without holiness no man can have fellowship with God, and therefore they must
be an holy people that are taken into Covenant with God, to enjoy followship
and communion with him.

Quest. But wherein stands that holiness which the Covenant requires of all
Gods covenanted people?

Answ. There is a twofold holiness, 1. Relative, 2. Positive.

First, Relative in two things: 1. In separation from common use. 2. In
dedication to God.


1. There must be a separation from common use; in this sense things holy, are
called separate things, Deuteronomy. 19 2. Things common in Scripture are opposed to
holy, to show that holy things must be separate from common use: Hence Solomon
speaking of Gods taking Israel to be his own, he uses that expression, Thou
have separated them unto thy self, from all the people of the earth, etc. and
thence was that exhortation of Ezra, Separate your selves from the people of
the lands, Ezrah 10.11. and that of the Apostle, Come out from among them, and
separate your selves, 2 Cor. 6.17. If then we will be holy, we must be separate
from the common conversation of the world, having no fellowship with the works
thereof.

2. There must be a dedication and devoting our selves unto God, we must be
offered up and given unto him; Thus the holy days were dedicated unto the
service of God, they were not only separated from common and ordinary use, but
were dedicated to the Lords service; thus were the first fruits called holy,
and thence the holy things, and the dedicated things, are taken for one and the
same, 1 Kings 15.15. as the Altar, Numb. 7. end, the Temple, 1 King. 8.63. and
thus must we be dedicate or given to the Lord, as is said of the Macedonians,
that they gave themselves to the Lord, 2 Cor. 8. we must resign up our selves
unto him, to be his and for him alone.

Secondly, Positive, and this is also twofold Habitual, Actual.


1. Habitual, qualifying and fitting us by graces infused for the service of
God, which we are devoted unto; as all the things that were appointed for the
service of God, were anointed with the holy oil, Exodus 30.26, 27. so must we be
anointed with the sweet ointments which are the graces of the spirit, 2 Cor.
1.21. 1 Ioh. 2.27. The ointment of the holy Ghost which was poured upon the
head of Christ, Acts 10.38. must run down upon us, that the savor of his
ointment may be found upon us, Cant. 1. we must be sanctified throughout, in
soul, in body, and in spirit, 1 These. 5.23.

2. Actual, its not enough to have grace in us, but there must be an holy use
and exercise of those graces that are in us; they are not given to us to be
idle, or that we should be slothful in the possessing of them, but that we
should put them forth in our practice, so as to be fruitful in the improvement
of them, 2 Pet. 1.8. and thence it is that the Apostle speaking of the
holiness which the Lord requires to be in his people; he does not only require
a holiness of disposition by inherent graces, but that we should be holy in
all manner of conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. and for this cause the way of
Saints is called holy, Esaias 35.8. they are sanctified, not only in their
vessels, as 1 Samuel 21. but their way is holy also, and they are said to be
undefiled in their way, Psalm 11 9. where the soul is sanctified by the spirit
of Christ, the life will be holy and sanctified also: Now this holiness of
conversation must be showed: first, in duties of Religion, which are acts
properly holy; holiness of disposition, will as naturally put a Christian upon
duties of holiness, prayer, meditation, and other spiritual exercises, as a
sinful disposition does put us upon acts that are sinful: Holiness will make
us mind the things that are holy, and to exercise our selves in them in a holy
manner, with holy reverence, holy sear, holy desires of enjoying the Lord in
them, with holy rejoicing in his presence, and an holy zeal for his glory: And
though holiness begins here, yet it does not end here; therefore, secondly,
holiness planted in the heart will cause holiness to shine forth in our
actions of common life, so that though the things we deal in be but outward
and civil; yet our manner of dealing in them, shall be spiritual and holy: As
those that are unholy, do by an unholy use of them pollute unto themselves the
holy things of God, which they take in hand, they dealing in those holy things
in an ordinary and common manner; so contrariwise, whom God has sanctified,
they do sanctify to themselves the common and ordinary actions of this life,
by using them not in an ordinary profane manner, but holily; to the one the
things that are holy, become as if they were profane, to the other the
profane and common, as if they were holy; If we eat, holiness causes us to
eat as before God, and to eat for God, Exodus 18.12. Zach. 7.5, 6. Romans 14.6. 1
Cor. 10.31. If we exercise our selves in our calling, holiness directs a
Christian to refer it to the glory of God. The man of war has holiness
written upon his horse bridles, Zach. 14.20. he goes to war before the Lord,
Numb. 31.6. and fights the battles of the Lord, as fighting not for men but for
God, 2 Samuel 25.28. when he handles the sword, he consecrates his hand unto the
Lord, Exodus 32.29. and therein does the work of the Lord of Hosts, Jer. 48.10.
The Merchant (in time of peace) turns his merchandising to be holiness to the
Lord, that there may be sufficient for them that minister before the Lord, to
eat sufficiently, and to have durable clothing, Esaias 23.18. Every one in their
several places and callings, walking holily before the Lord; so that whether
the things they deal about, be holy, or common; yet those which are holy, must
and do walk holily in both; the inward holiness of the inward man, manifesting
it self in all our outward conversation, whether toward God in the things of
God, or toward men in the things wherein we have to deal with men.

Use 1. This lets us see the true cause whence it is that so few among the
multitudes of men that are in the world, are willing to embrace this Covenant,
which the Lord offers to enter into with men; It might justly be wondered at,
that (it containing such admirable and high privileges as it does) it should
not draw all men unto it, that they might enjoy the benefit of it. But here is
the reason of it; It is a holy Covenant, though it offer much grace, yet it
has this property, it is holy, and requires holiness in all those that
claim any part in it, and this makes men to withdraw themselves from it,
because it calls for holiness in all that look to live by it; They are
fleshly, carnal, profane, unholy, loathing the way of holiness, and
therefore they forsake the holy Covenant, Dan. 11.30. They like well to hear
of the offers and blessings of the Covenant which it brings, and the salvation
which it promises; But when it comes to require holiness of them that lay
hold on it, telling them that they must be holy as God is holy; this makes all
to be unto them of a deadly favor, and proves to be unto them a stumbling
stone, at which they fall to their eternal ruin; This is that which makes the
breach betwixt God and man; men would willingly have God reconciled unto them,
But this holiness of the Covenant they cannot submit unto; the profane heart
of man is not subject to this law of holiness, nor indeed can be; That one
clause of the Covenant (Touch no unclean thing) is the bar which cannot be
broken through, which keeps the distance and maintains the enmity betwixt him
and them.

Use. 2. To teach us hereby to try our selves, whether we be in Covenant with
God or no, and have any share in the grace and blessing of the Covenant; If we
partake in the holiness of it, then do we also partake of the grace and
blessing; The way, and end, must not be separated; the holiness of the
Covenant is the way, eternal life is the end; we must have our way in
holiness, that our end may be eternal life, Romans 6.21. Let such then as are
pure and undefiled in their way, let them rejoice in their portion; all the
blessings of the Covenant are theirs; God is yours, life is yours, heaven is
yours; It is your Fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom, fear not though you
suffer affliction here for a season; yet having the anointing, the holy oil
being already poured upon you, you are in the way, and have a pleadge of the
everlasting inheritance: But as for all such as are unholy, unsanctified, they
may take Gods Covenant in their mouth, and may hope for the life and blessing
which it promises; but all their naming of it, will stand them in no more
stead, then did their naming of Christ, who had their mouths full of Lord,
Lord, but being workers of iniquity, were bidden to depart from him, Matthew.
7.22. It is strange that any such should flatter themselves with hope, as
looking to enjoy the blessing of the Covenant, neglecting the way of it, which
is holy; that men should promise themselves peace, whiles they walk after the
wicked imaginations of their own heart, seeing God never made Covenant with any
to bring any unto life, but only in a way of holiness; carnal Libertines
mistake the nature of this Covenant, and do indeed take hold on the Devils
covenant instead of Gods, as if Gods Covenant were thus, that he would forgive
us our sins and save us, and yet suffer us to walk in our own ways, fulfilling
the will of the flesh and of the mind; as if he that had been unjust might be
unjust still, and he that had been unholy might be unholy still, and yet might
hope for that undefiled inheritance of the Saints; This had been a pleas^ng
Covenant unto flesh and blood, but this is the Devils covenant not Gods: That
article (you shall be saved and yet live in your sins) is foysted in by that
false deceiver the Devil, who has thus interlined and falsified and changed
the Covenant of God, thereby to deceive the wicked and ungodly of the world,
making that which sounds forth nothing but holiness, to seem a carnal and
loose covenant, nourishing men up in all impurity; but this falsifying God will
not own, he knows the terms of his own Covenant, and will hold to that which
his own hand has written; he will acknowledge none of Satan's forgeries, his
Covenant is holy, and either we must take the Covenant as Gods offers it or we
can never partake o^ the blessing of it. Try we our selves therefore by the
Spirit of holiness, and thereby judge of our interest in the blessing of life
which the Covenant promises.

Signs. 1. True holiness is conformable to the first pattern of holiness,
which is the Lord himself, as it is written, Be ye holy, for I the Lord your
God am holy; True holiness stands not in conformity with this world, nor does
it rest in imitating the best examples that be in the world, but makes us
strive to a conformity with God, to be even as he is in this world, 1 Ioh. 4.
following the Lord till we come to be partakers of his own holiness, Heb. 12.

2. True holiness toward God, is ever accompanied with righteousness toward
men; Its but hypocritical holiness which is not attended with righteousness:
The new man which is created after God, is said to be created in righteousness
and true holiness, or holiness of truth: There is a true holiness, and there
is a false, lying and dessembling holiness; how is the one discerned from the
other; holiness of truth has righteousness going with it, but false
holiness thinks it enough to seem holy toward God, neglecting duties of
justice and righteousness toward men: It was not so with the holy Apostle,
who speaking of his own conversation among the Saints, appeals to their
consciences, how holily, how justly, how unblameably he had his conversation
among them, 1 These. 2.10. these two which God has so joined together, we must
not put asunder, if we will approve our selves to have attained that holiness
of truth.

3. True holiness works for holy ends; the glory of God, Pet. 4.11. the credit
of the Gospel, Tit. 2.10. and the salvation of men, 1 Cor. 10. ult. It abhors
those Pharisaicall ends of hypocrites, mentioned in Matthew. 6.

4. There is in a sanctified Christian, both light and life; light in his
mind, life in his will and affection: The light which is in him, makes him to
see both the loathsomeness of sin and the excellency of grace; and the life
that is in him, makes him to feel the burden of his own corruptions, and to
long after the grace which is still wanting in him, so that true holiness
makes us weary of the body of corruption that is in us, groaning under it as
under a misery not to be endured, as Paul did, Romans 7.24. and makes us thirst
after more grace, that we might be enabled in every thing to please God, Psalm.
119.5. Painted holiness puffes up with conceit of our own goodness, as Esaias
65.5. but true holiness humbles us by reason of the sight and sense we have of
the corruption that is in us. More such signs might be added, but I hasten to
an end; By these try we our selves, and see thereby what part we have in the
blessing of the Covenant.

Use 3. To stir up all that have taken hold of this Covenant, and do
profess themselves to be a people in Covenant with God; Let them labor to
express this holiness in their lives and ways, that they may thereby approve
themselves to be faithful in their Covenant with God; can two walk together,
except they be agreed? Amos 3.3. certainly unless we agree to walk in
holiness with our God, we cannot long walk together nor hold Covenant one with
another; let us then strive to be a holy people unto the Lord our God, separate
from the pollution of the world, devoted to his service and honor.

Motives 1. This is Gods end in taking us into Covenant with him, that he might
be glorified, Esaias 43.21. and 44.23. In 1 Pet. 2.9. the Apostle tells us we are
for this end taken to be a peculiar people unto God, that we might show forth
the virtues of him that has called us out of darkness into his mavelous
light; he took us to himself, when he saw us polluted in our blood, Ezekiel. 16.
yet then he clothed us with the beauty of his own virtues, that his name may
be glorified in us; but without holiness we pollute Gods name and make it
vile, we honor it not, Ezekiel. 36.^0.

2. Sanctity and holiness is the beauty and glory of any people, by which they
excel all other people of the world, Deuteronomy. 26. ult. In Exodus 15.11. God
himself is said to be glorious in holiness; and the same is the Churches
glory too, which is then glorious when it is holy and without blame, Ephesians.
5.27. we cannot honor our selves more then by growing up in true holiness,
nor can we make our selves vile any way so much as by sinful impiety, Psalm.
15.4.

3. Our holiness is that which must testify to the world, and to our own
consciences, that we are indeed the people of God, as Christ by the Spirit of
holiness, raising him up from the dead, wa^ declared to be the Son of God;
so we are declared to be Gods saved ones by the same spirit of holiness,
raising us up, and quickening us unto newness of life: This is Christ's mark
which he sets upon all his redeemed ones, they are holy; This is written in
their foreheads, Holiness to the Lord; and therefore they are said to be
sealed with the holy spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1.13. as men set on their seals
to note their propriety in that thing that is sealed; If then we will know or
have the world to know that we are God's, we must be sealed with the spirit of
holiness.

4. Holiness is the perfection of our Christian state; this is that which we
wish for, even your perfection says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 13.9. and what
perfection is that? even the same that he mentions, Chap 7.1. that they might
perfect their holiness in the fear o^ God: This was man's perfection in the
beginning, and the same shall be our perfection in heaven, Heb. 12.23.
Holiness adds perfection to all other gifts, and without this, they are all of
no worth; Wisdom without holiness, is but fox-like craftiness; courage
without holiness, is but lyon-like cruelty; humbleness without holiness, is
but baseness of spirit; justness in dealing without holiness, is but
heathenish harmlesnesse; but let holiness be added to each of these, and then
are they perfect as a color of a perfect die.

5. Holiness makes us live the life of God, which all other unsanctified ones
are strangers from, Ephesians. 4. by holiness the life of Christ is manifest to be
in us, 2 Cor. 4. so that we may say that now we live not our selves, but Christ
lives in us, Gal. 2.20. wickedness makes a man live the life of Devils,
holiness conformes us to the life of Christ.

6. All those that are in Covenant with God, are a people near unto him, and
being near unto him, he will be sanctified in them, Levit. 10.3. but without
holiness we pollute his name, Ezekiel. 36. it is not sanctified in us.

7. The seasons and times we live in call for holiness; these are days of
grace, wherein we enjoy all the holy things of God more abundantly then in
former times, to the end that we might abound in all the holy graces of the
spirit; The Lord gives us his holy ordinances, that we might be sanctified by
them, being changed into the similitude of the same holiness. This argument the
Apostle uses, Romans 13.11. And this reason should move us the more, because the
greater the light is in which we live, the more evident are the blots and
blemishes which are in us; moats in the Sun-beame being more conspicuous then
beams are in the dark; therefore as the days we live in be days of light, so
let us walk as children of light, shining forth as lights in the midst of a
perverse and corrupt generation, Phil. 2.

8. Consider a time of separation must come, wherein the Lord Jesus will divide
and separate the holy from the unholy, as a shepherd separates the sheep from
the goats, Matthew. 25. ^t will be good to be found among the Saints at that day,
and to stand in the assembly of the righteous. Woe then unto all those that are
secluded from them, to all those that must stand without, and be amongst dogs
and Devils, having no fellowship with Christ, nor with his Saints; Its good
therefore to be holy; it will be found so then; woe unto the profane and
ungodly at that day.

And for our selves here, the people of New England, we should in a special
manner labor to shine forth in holiness above other people; we have that
plenty and abundance of ordinances and means of grace as few people enjoy the
like; we are as a City set upon an hill, in the open view of all the earth, the
eyes of the world are upon us, because we profess our selves to be a people in
Covenant with God, and therefore not only the Lord our God, with whom we have
made Covenant, but heaven and earth, Angels and men, that are witnesses of our
profession, will cry shame upon us, if we walk contrary to the Covenant which
we have professed and promised to walk in; If we open the mouths of men
against our profession, by reason of the scandallousnes of our lives, we (of
all men) shall have the greater sin.

To conclude, Let us study so to walk, that this may be our excellency and
dignity among the Nations of the world, among which we live: That they may be
constrained to say of us, only this people is wise, an holy and blessed people;
that all that see us, may see and know that the name of the Lord is called upon
us; and that we are the seed which the Lord has blessed, Deuteronomy. 28.10. Esaias
61.9. There is no people but will strive to excel in some thing; what can we
excel in, if not in holiness? If we look to number, we are the fewest; If to
strength, we are the weakest; If to wealth and riches, we are the poorest of
all the people of God through the whole world, we can not excel (nor so much
as equal) other people in these things; and if we come short in grace and
holiness too, we are the most despicable people under heaven; our worldly
dignity is gone, if we lose the glory of grace too, then is the glory wholly
departed from our Israel, and we are become vile; strive we therefore herein to
excel, and suffer not this crown to be taken away from us: Be we an holy
people, so shall we be honorable before God, and precious in the eyes of his
Saints.

And thus also of the properties of the Covenant.

Now the God of peace, that brought again the Lord Jesus, the great shepherd
of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, make us perfect in
all good works to do his will; working in us that which is pleasing in his
sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise for ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A
ABsolute promises refresh the soul 290, the use of them 289, How they agree
with the conditional 292, both one in substance 291. Acts of faith two 289,
they enable to walk with God 315, seq. they only are the conditions of the
Covenant 298, why so, ibid. Actually, none in the state of salvation before he
believe 322 nor justified till Christ be Actually his 324. Actual holiness
what 378. Affections sanctified, signs of true sanctification 239. Agreement
in both Covenants 50, 51, in the condition and freeness of grace in the
Covenant 292. All Sufficiency in God to his people 130, the reasons of it, ib.
he is All-sufficient in two respects 132, how he is so 133, he is so from
himself 136, 137. Assurance works a holy security 250. Ark, the want thereof,
promised as a blessing under the Gospel 5.
B
Belief, none actually justified before he Believe 322. Binding, the Covenant
is so 282, 293, 294. Benefits that arise to the Saints from the Covenant, 147
seq. from the knowledge of the Conant 119, 120, the things which are to come,
are the great things promised in the Covenant 277, 278. Blessings, the Covenant
the fountain of them 342, pledges of better things 262, how God makes it
appear they are from himself 138, 139, why God does so 141, 142. Blood of
Christ taken two ways 229, of the Covenant what it signifies 229. Burden,
the Covenant of Grace under the Old Testament, so 106, we are free from that
Burden, ibid.
C
Calling wrought by the commandment 331. Captivity applied to three things 2,
3. the Jews at this day in Captivity 3. Christ, a Covenant between the Father
and him 29, 30. his name taken two ways 36. darkly revealed in the old
Testament 108, the righteousness of the Saints 324, vid. Mediator.
Circumcision considered two ways 59. Clean, how to become clean from sin
241. Condition, what it is in the Covenant of Grace 295, it excludes not
freeness of Grace 291, 336. that it is in the Covenant 280, proved from the
nature of it 281, 282. it hinders not the free grace of the Covenant 323.
Contempt of the Gospel what a great sin 10, 11. reasons of it, 12.
Commandment, our calling wrought by it 331, of the Law and Gospel how
different 332. Conversion, the obedience of the soul to God at its conversion
310, vid. Jews. Covenant between God and Christ 29, 30, between man and God,
proved 31, 32. the danger of breaking it 49, a comfort to believers 48, 49. the
Lord conveys life and blessedness by it to us 26, 28. why called a Testament
283, why called a Covenant of salt 368, why so few embrace it 376, the
certainty of it 364, it is a storehouse of blessings 342, it is sure 360, why
so, ibid. It is conditional 285, the necessity of entering into a Covenant with
God, 43 44. what we are to do to get into Covenant with God 44, 45, 46,
wherein both Covenants agree, 50, 51. wherein they differ 52, 56, 70, 73, 75.
how faith in both differ 53, 54. both Covenants considered two ways 97, the
Covenant of works requires faith 52, 53. why the Lord conveys life and
blessedness to us by the Covenant 26, 27, 28, the Covenant of Grace the same
in all ages 102, 103, more powerfully dispensed since then before the coming
of Christ 112.
D
Demeanor of Fath after prayer 307, 308. Differences, between the two
Covenants fifteen 52, between faith in both covenants 53, 54, between both in
requiring works 55, between the Commandment of Law and Gospel 332.
Discontent^, the causes of them, 134. Dispositions sanctified tokens of true
sanctification 239, 240. Draw, nothing in us to Draw God into Covenant with us
353.
E
Effects of the Spirit of Grace in the soul 88 of true sanctification 235, 236
237, of light in the soul 380, Effect of the Covenant is, to work holiness
373, seq. England, an admonition to it to receive the Grace offered 14.
Encouragement to faith 261. Enmity in our nature against God 353. When it is
that we make grace our Enemy 95, 96. Evangelicall condition excludes not free
grace 326. Everlasting the Covenant is 367, why so 368, the blessings of the
Covenant are so ibid. how the first Covenat is so 369. Exalted, God is to be
Exalted chiefly 346. how he is to be Exalted 348, when he is, ibid.
F
Faith, the condition of the Covenant of Grace 295, why it is, ibid. how
closes with the Covenant 302. encouragements to it 261, two acts of it 289,
290, not commanded in the Law 331, proved ibid. its workings 304, its weakness
303, its earnestness in prayer unto God 307. its demeanor after prayer as God
answers or not answers 308, 309. Looks on the Lords Government as a merciful
government 312, reconciles the heart unto God 313, enables to walk with God
ibid. when the life of faith is most seen 314, faith of Christ why so called
329, It is a strengthening grace 317, gets assisting strength from Christ 313,
We are not actually justified before it comes 322 the reasons of it, ibid.
Fall, why the Saints cannot fall away 248. Father, God the Father in Covenant
with us 124, with Christ 29 30. Forgiveness of sin, the benefit of it 164, why
the Lord does forgive sins 165 166, what a man is to do that he may be
forgiven 169, signs when a man's sins are forgiven 171, 172. Freeness of
Gods grace 81, how the condition and the freeness of grace agree in the
Covenant 292, The condition in the Covenant excludes not the freeness of grace
291, how it appears that the Covenant is free 354, why it is so 356, the
freeness of grace in the Covenant 353.
G
Gentiles believing are the seed of Abraham, 17. God alone satisfies a
sanctified soul ^38, his things great 346. Glorying twofold 87, what glorying
is ibid. the Covenant of grace teaches to glory in God alone 85, 88, holiness
the glory of a people 381. Gospel vayled in the Ceremonial Law 330, the
commandment of Faith a commandment of the Gospel. Government of the Lord,
when we are under it 153, 154, a merciful government 312. Grace habitual may
be a trial of our state 231, 232, it appears in cleansing us from filthiness
of sin 181, why the Lord would have his Covenant to be of free Grace 356,
the free grace of God in pardoning of sin 159, the infiniteness of it 160,
Faith a strengthening Grace 317, the Covenant at mount Sinai a Covenant of Grace
65, 66, the performance of the promise of Grace is Grace 355, the freeness of
Grace in entering into Covenant with us 353.
H
Habitual holiness 376, Habit of Faith not the condition of the Covenant 298,
reasons of it ibid. Heaven, Canaan a type of it 107. Heart sanctified finds no
peace but in the way that's holy 236. Holy Ghost in Covenant with us 124, the
Covenant a holy Covenant 373, why it is holy 374. Holiness what 375, a twofold
holiness ibid. signs of a true 379, its the glory of a people 381, the
perfection of our Christian state 381, its wrought by the Covenant 373.
I
Jews after their conversion shall continue faithful 7, shall inhabit their
own land again 16, their conversion 17, 18, reasons of it 19, two hindrances of
their conversion 20, why we should pray for their conversion 20. Justice
without mercy in the Covenant of Works 77. Justification considered three ways
322, sanctification an evidence of it 183, it goes not before faith 322, the
reasons of it, Ibid.
K
Knowledge of the Covenant what benefit 119, 120. Know, whether we be in
Covenant 378.
L
Law, considered two ways 58, Ceremonial a Gospel veiled 330, commands not
faith 333, the condition of it impossible to be fulfilled 295. Lawgiver who,
and how 328. Libertines mistake the Covenant 379. Light, the effects of it in
the soul 380. Life of Faith what it is 314, when it is most seen ibid. Love of
God to us should comfort us in the enjoyment of lesser blessings 273, 274.
M
Man in Covenant with God two ways 361, man seeks not God, but God man 353.
Mediator who 68, 69, the Covenant of Grace given by a Mediator 66, Chirst in
his Type a Mediator of that Covenant given at Mount Sinai 62, we are not to
go to God but by a Mediator 67, 68, Christ that Mediator 68, 69, Christ an
everlasting Mediator 370, the comfort the mediation of Christ affords the
Saints 69, 70. Moral Law how it leads to Christ, 330 Motives to holiness 330,
seq. Mover in making the Covenant, who first 299, 353.
N
Nature of man in enmity against God 353. New, why the Covenant of Grace is so
called 195, New England 14.
O
Obedience of the soul to God at its first conversion 310. Old, why the
Covenant of Grace is so called 105. Outward blessings pledges of better things
262, what the Outward blessings are that God promises his servants 264. why
the Lord keeps his servants sometimes short in Outward things 263, in what
manner God premiseth Outward blessings 165, they are part of the Covenant 267,
they may be prayed for 166, God is the giver of them 271, 272, the causes why
the Saints are often deprived of them 267, seq. when Outward things are
blessings, and tokens of Gods love 272, 273, Outward blessings should make us
serve God with the Outward man 274.
P
Peace cannot be wrought in the soul by the Covenant of works, 90, 91, a
sanctified soul can find no Peace but in that that's holy 236. People of God
are promised to have God himself 122, 123, reasons of it 126. Person, God
first acceps the Person, then the sacrifice 70, 71. Personally, God personally
in Covenant with us 1^4. Perseverance in grace the Certainty of it 245, 246,
the reasons of it 246, 247. Preservation in the state of grace part of the
Covenant 243, 244. Performance of the promise o^ grace is free grace 353.
Perfection of a Christian state what 281. Positive holiness what 376.
Possession of honor uncertain 366, true grace is an everlasting Possession
255. Professors, several sorts of them hollow-hearted 256, 257. Promises,
absolute the use of them 289, conditional are of free grace 326, proved ibid.
promises to encourage the people to return from Babylon 2.
Q
Qualifications may be tokens of Justification 234, Qualifications in the
promises, when we are to make use of them 358.
R
Reasonable it is that God should rule over his people 311. R^concilement of
the heart unto God is by faith 313. Relative holiness what 375. Righteousness
that justifies, what it is 322. Riches of grace opened 126, Riches uncertain
366.
S
Salt, why the Covenant is so called 368. Saints, who is their strength 254.
Sanctifi^a^ion twofold 227, its a blessing that will make those that receive it
blessed 177, why so 178, 179, it is an evidence of justification 183,
Sanctification more manifest to the soul then Justification 233, the reason of
it ibid. the effects of Sanctification 235, 236, 237. It makes wary against
staining sins 237, it makes us sensible of our weaknesses 23 some real work in
the soul proves not a real Sanctification 228. Security that is wrought by
assurance, what it is 241. Seed of Abraham double, 35, 36. Separation between
Jew and Gentile ended at Christ's Ascension 97. Sin a wrong done to God 160,
Sin turns good things into evil 164, Sin the greatest evil, why 163, God
chooses sometime the worst of sinners 354, why he does so 355, Sins cannot make
void the Covenant of Grace 84, 85. when it is that Sin makes void the
Covenant of Grace 95, 96. Son, the Son of God in Covenant with us 124. Spirit,
whether the Spirit of Law or Grace dwells within us 88, how to know when our
comfort is from the Spirit of grace 89. Storehouse of rich blessings what is
342. Streng^h of the Saints who is 254. Substance, the absolute and
conditional promises one in substance 29.
T
Temporary blessings of the Covenant 259. Testament, why the Covenant called a
Testament 283, 284. The old Testament revealed the Covenant of Grace darkly
107, why so 109, it revealed it only to the Jews 115, 116. Thankfulness 118.
Things of God great things 343. True, taken two ways 228. Truth of
sanctification, signs of it 235, seq. Truth of holiness, signs of it 379.
Trust, encouragements to Trust in God 261. Trials of our estate may be made by
the conditions of the Covenant 288, 289. Trial of our estate may be made by
habitual grace 231, 232.
V
Unbelief, the danger of it 340, unbelief dishonours God 363, it shames us
362, it weakens our comfort 363. Uncertain, riches are uncertain 366.
Unworthiness hinders not the freeness of Gods grace 357. Use of absolute
promises what 289.
W
Worst of sinners chosen of God 353. Work of Faith what 314, how Works are
considered in the Covenant of grace 3^4. The Covenant of grace requires Works
35, The Covenant at Mount Sinai not a Covenant of Works proved 58, A man that
is under the Covenant of Works cannot attain sanctification 184, the reasons
of it ibid. Our Works are dead works 295, good Works the fruit of the Tree of
faith 9, justification cannot be attained by the Works of the Law 226.
Z
Zeal for God is an honor to God 149.
FINIS.

