Balaams Ass, OR THE CITY-FAST FOR Cursing the KING: and Blessing OLIVER.

With the Peoples SPEECH to their Independent Drivers.

And the Asses Sacrifice, or good speed to OLIVER.

printer's or publisher's device

July 13th Printed in the Year 1649.

BALAAMS ASS: OR, The City-Fast, for Cursing the KING: And Blessing OLIVER.
WHether for gain, will our blind Prophets ride?
Whether will Lucre carry them, and Pride?
They Will ride over Angels, Curse, do any thing:
Curse not (says God) yes, they will curse the King;
Not in their heart, in that close corner, no,
They will begin to God, and Face him too.
As if they'nd Ormond Exorcize by Spells,
They Will raise his siege with Books, new Lights, and Bells
Goodwyn will preach down Batteries, and spout
Out his hold-forths, that Dublin may hold out.
Peter's has changed his Tub, and though much spent
Will show his gift for Pox, and parliament.
How lean the Saint looks with his Rogueries!
H' has been with Rahab entertaining Spies:
How he wheezes against Rupert! his blew lips
Show, that his straits do vex him more then ships.
The Prophet sure has sprung a Leak; good daughter
Help for to stop him shot, twixt wind, and water.
Hark how the Inchanters do conjure? It Is Spell:
The text is Gods the comment is from Hell.
So witches say the Pater Noster; ( Strong
Carill, and Bond do not, I do them wrong,)
They cannot say that prayer, that striks them dumb
To think of Gods, or any Kingdom come.
Look how they wrack the Scriptures as their faces,
Mount Rosse and Ormond are their Common-places
These two are called Jabin and Sisera,
And Lamberts wife the Jael of the day,
Crumwell must drive the Nail, It follows, (mark
Beloved Forresters of your New-Parke,)
The filthy Swedes, and Danes that against you sight,
They are the Hagarens and Moabite,
Oneal is Og, Clanrickard Sihon grimme,
Dillon and Tass the sons or Anakim,
Rupert is Hiram, who in Shittini wood
Plunders our Merchants for our Solomon's good,
Not to be too profain in verse, (as those
Who stand three hours prophaner far in prose)
This leventh of July's Most absurdly spent,
To Abuse Gods will in either Testament,
To drive an Ass, (These Prophets drive the Ass
The People) against the Angel in the Pass.
'T would make a Beast to speak: A word or tway
Suffer good Balaams from your Ass I pray.
Balaams Ass. Or, The Peoples speech to their Independent drivers.
HAve I not served you now these full seven years
Have I not pricked to all you said, these Ears,
These most attentive Luggs? and have not I
Drawn you the Dunces out of poverty,
The mire of Conventicles? that you dare,
Appear in public, with your Parlour ware,
Do you not eat by me, is not your Silk
Your stipend, diet, All of Asses milk?
How have you squees'd my teates, O covetous Brood
You draw not milk, now, but the very blood:
Was ever such an Ass (though well to pass,
Pembroke himself is not a hunger Ass,)
The Prophet rode this Ass, so do you me,
Now Jocky Saints, late for Presbytery.
But now since that the Angel of the Land
Stands with his Book, not sword in his just hand,
Showing my follies, and cries Ass return;
O how my angry Balaams furies burn!
How they do switch and goad the Tutord Beast!
Holding forth Swords and Muskets at my breast,
And drive me on, through that mild Angels word,
Upon another, with a flaming Sword.
I see thee (blessed Angel) and thy book,
And will not on, but on thy sufferings look!
When I was fat, I winch'd against thy power,
Now lean and lanck, I curse that wanton hour.
Impute not to the Ass, (unless it be
Before enlightened by thy Book, and Thee)
His bold adventures: But when Lion-like,
For those offenses, just Revenge shall strike.
Then let that Lion the false Prophets stay,
But let thy couzend Ass escape away.
The Asses Sacrifice, Or, Good speed to Oliver.
Whether by Land, or Sea, thy Army go,
Like Earth as Corah, Seas, as Pharo know;
And though our Albion shoars are white, we would
Have them made Rubicon with your own blood.
Such faith as to your King you showed, find ye:
Be all the Elements your Enemy.
May you be beat by shot, you scorn, your lot
Be it to fall by your late beaten Scot.
That in the blood of this high couzening Saint,
They may yet purge their cheating Covenant,
But if from Chester you for Ireland go,
let the divided waves your black graves show.
And foaming Rupert like a Mercury,
Drive your proud Souls to their just destiny.
Or, if you land in Ireland; Be it true,
Ireland all Vermin kills, and proved in you.
O for a clap of Thunder to applaud
The wish! Revenge for Charles, Strafford, and Laud
Revenge for Capel, Lucas, Lifle, and when
You Are shipd; let the Sea Roar a shrill
Amen.

FINIS.

