THE RESOLUTION OF THE Prince of WALES, concerning the landing of his Army in
the Isle of Loving-land, within the County of Suff^lk, And his Propositions to
all Eng^ishmen, concerning his Engagement for King, City, and Kingdom against
the Army, and to fight for their Liberties, Freedom and Privileges.

Likewise, the further proceedings of the Royal Navy, under his Highness the
D. o^ Yo^k, and the Declaration of the Seamen in the Isle of VVight and
Portsmouth, concerning the King Majesty and the Fleet Royal. 1648.

woodcut, title figure

Propositions from his Highness the Prince of Wales, agreed upon at a General
Council aboard the Royal Navy, by the Lord Culpepper, the Lord Ruthin, the
Lord Gerrard, and Sir John Bartley.
Honored Sir,

HAving received information of the Prince of Wales intentions and Resolu^ion
to land at Yarmouth, with his forces, The Ci^y of Norw^ch, the Town of
Attlebury, and other parts adjacent, re^olved to put themselves into a posture
to receive his High^esse, and to entertain him with loyalty and h^n^ur, i^ he
would be pleased to entrust his person in their hands, and to land only such a
party that did consist of English, bu^ would not assent to the coming in of any
Foreigners, conc^iving the cons^quences to be very dangerous; the^e ^o^esolved
not to admit of any invasi^n by str^ngers: Whereupon, his Highness distrusting
the event ^f his Design, called a general Council, aboard the Royal N^vie,
where was present, his Highn^sse the Duke of York, Prince Rup^rt, Prince
Maurice, the Lord Culpepper, the Lord Gerrard, the Lord Willoughby of Parham,
the Lord ^ermin, the Lord Ruthin, Sir ^ohn Bartley, and Col. Bainfield; and
after some consultation, in relation to their Landing, and serio^sly of
weighing, and considering several paticulars, which might prove very
prejudicial and dangerous, to the Kings Cause, they unanimously resolved to get
what Provisions they could aboard, and to hoyst sail to flote upon the Neptune
Seas toward the Downs, there to cast Anchor for the present, and to send an
Invit^tion to the Kentishmen, to invite them to their assistance.

But we fear, that they have still an Eagles eye upon this County, and in
regard Yarmouth lies so point blank for the Revolted Ships to come unto, it is
feared, That if they should possess themselves of the said, That some
whisperings, were amongst them, in Relation to the said Design, and we conceive
it probable, that had not Lovingland been secured by Col. Scroop, and a
Regiment of the County foot, they had possessed themselves of that place ere
this; for our Intelligencer says, That it was the Resolution, both of the
Prince, the Duke, the Lord Culpepper, the Lord Gerrard, and the rest of the
English Gallants, attending his Highness; to make a show at Yarmouth, and then
to use their endeavors for the securing of the Island of Lovingland, but by
providence, it is now prevented; That which is most prevalent, and does induce
us, to give credence to the said Report; is, Because the disposition and
affection of the Inhabitants, are weaned from the Parliament, and linked firm
to the Royalists; for I cannot hear, that since the beginning of these sad
times, of many Volunteers, that has been set forth of that Island for the
Parliaments service. And for your further satisfaction touching the description
of the said Isl^nd, I shall here give you a brief account thereof, viZ. The
Peninsula of Lovingland, in the County of Suffolk, in Longitude extends it
self 7. miles, in Latitude 4. It contains 16. Parishes, abou^ding with all
things requirable either by necessity or delight, by way of sustentation or
recreation: Its blessed with a healthful Air, situated for a general
accommodation of Trade, having the Sea bordering upon a fourth part of it; the
other parts being begirt with the great Rivers of Yare and Waurney, by which
the Country Commodities are brought into it, and from thence transported to all
transmarine parts: The whole Peninsula is ra^sed into one entire Hill, defended
tow^rds the Sea; with Cliffs and Sands, and on all parts by Land surrounded
with a specious level of low grounds, amidst which levels runs the forenamed
Rivers, discharging themselves into the Sea, through the said Island; So that
it is invinsible by land, four passages excepted, and one by Sea, called Newton
Gap; It has in former times been called by the name of Low-England; being as
considerable a place for health, fortility, strength, and pleasure, as any that
I know of within his Majesty's Realms and Dominions; And if it should be once
lost, it will not be vast sums and multitudes of lives that will regain it. It
is said that Prince Rupert had a great desire to l^nd there, and had he
^ffected it, it would have hazarded the loss of ^he whole Kingdom, For,

Sol does no sooner rise from's Bastern bed,
but by Aurora, is first welcomed.
In Lovinglands fair Isle, The only place
that Art and Nature by their soft embrace
Blessed have, with profit and delight: A soil
proud Forraigners, with bloodied soul would toil:
To master Englishmen, must thankful be,
to him that lets you Peace and peril see.
The Romans having formerly gained this place, and transported their Colonies,
bridled the whole East of England by it, and brought the people under
subjection. Thus having faithfully imparted, the proceedings of the Prince, and
their Resolution to have poss^ssed themselves of this Island, I remain,

Your most assured, and obliged Friend, JOHN BURDET.
Norwich July 29: 1648.
Propositions from his Highness the Princee of Wales, to be published to the
Kingdom of England.
1 That his Highness does declare that the Reformation of Religion, shall be
as it was agreed on with the Scots Dec. 26 last in the Isle of Wight.

2 To rescue his Maj. from His imprisonment, that he may fit with the Parl. and
enjoy his rights.

3 That the two Houses of Parl. may be restored to their freedom.

4 That the Kingdom may be eased of the Excise.

5 That the A^my of Sectaries may be disbanded.

6 That all taxes and cessements may be taken off.

7 That the narrow seas may be protected, for the carrying on of a free trade
in the passage of Merchants ships.

8 That the City of London may enjoy their Privileges and Rights.

From Dover Castle, July 29. 1648.
Sir

WE have received Intelligence, of the incredible news of the The Constant
Warwick; Could it h^ve been immagined, that two names most consistent with
change, should have revolted; but it was carried away by Captain Batten, that
something, he is able to draw away Mahomet, and his Iron Chest from the
Loadstone; The going away of this Ship seems ominous to many; who therefore
expect some notable business; but what will the Revolted Ships do? land an
Army, where is it? not the London March^nts, that is dangerous at this time,
Londoners effect nor to be hindered in Trade, touch their Copyhold, and they
will move otherways.

By our Intelligence from the West, it is advertised. That there are several
Ships lies in the Harbors at Portsmouth, and in the Isle of Wight, and that
some of the Seamen. begins to have revolting Language, and cries out, Hey for
King Charles and his Royal Ships, and some of the Saylors which lay in
Portsmouth Harbor, openly declared themselves in the Town, in the like
speeches; but some of them were soon silenced, and comm^tted to safe Custody.

The Earl of Warwick has 16. gallant Ships ready to put to Sea, victualled,
and provided with all necessaries whatsoever: The revolting and running away of
the Seamen, after they have been lifted, has much retarded the work in hand,
His Lordship leaves no means u^assayed, to advance and further the Cause, and
encourage the Marreigners in this honorable Engagement, for the reducing of
revolted Ships, whose designs may be v^ry destructive, both to King and
Kingdom, if not timely prevented.

Walmer Castle is ready to attend the motion of ^he Prince, Deal is exce^ding
insolent and stubborn, and does execu^ion upon our men, the walls are thick,
and Cannon-proofe, and have great advantage upon our men; but notwit^sta^ding,
their opportunities, and advantages, our men are resolute, and Col. Rich
deports himself with great gallantry, Major Husbands is likewise very forward
and active, and upon Fryd^y last, the besieged made a sallcy, where he charged
them with his own Troop, (who had then the Guard) disputed the business, put
them to a retreat, and pursued them to the very Castle Gates.

Dover July 29. 1648. 4. in the morning.
FINIS.

