11o. Junii, 1646.
We the President and Fellows of Sion College London, earnestly desire Master
Anthony Burgess to publish in print his elaborate and judicious Lectures upon
the Law and the Covenants against the Antinomian Errors of these times, which
at our entreaty he has preached (and for which we give him most hearty
thanks) that so as well the Kingdom, as this City, may have the benefit of
those his learned labors.

Dated at Sion College the 11th of June, 1646. at a general meeting of the
Ministers of London there. Arthur Jackson President, in the name and by the
appointment of the rest.

VINDICIAE LEGIS: OR, A Vindication of the MORAL LAW AND THE COVENANTS, From
the Errors of Papists, Arminians, Socinians, and more especially, Antinomians.

In XXIX. LECTURES, preached at Laurence-Jury, London.

By Anthony Burgess, Preacher of Gods Word.

LONDON, Printed by James Young, for Thomas Underhill, at the Sign of the
Bible in Wood-street. 1646.

TO THE Truly pious and worthily honored Lady, the Lady RUTH SCUDAMORE.
Honored Madam,
I Have observed your Ladyship careful in two things: to improve the duty
commanded in the Law, and to embrace the promise tendered in the Gospel; the
former has been a spur to holiness, the latter a curb to unbelief. The
consideration of this (together with the remembrance of those manifold favors
which your Ladyship has plentifully vouchsafed to me and mine) has provoked
me to dedicate this Treatise unto you, which although it has much
controversall matter in it, yet it is not without many practical directions
and consolations. It has been Gods goodness unto you, that although in these
times of calamities your portion has been one of the afflictions in Paul's
Catalogue, without settled abode; yet God has left your mind fixed and
immovable in the truth, being enabled to (...).
magnify grace in the highest manner, out of the real sense of your necessity
and unworthiness, yet to avoid Antinomianisme: and on the other side, to be
punctual and exact in the duties of mortification and holiness; yet to take
heed of Pharisaicall Popery. And indeed, this is the right sense, when we are
so diligent in working out our salvation with fear and trembling, as if there
were no grace to justify; and yet so resting and believing in the grace of
Christ, as if no good thing had been done by us.

Madam, go on with the assistance of God, and account the things of grace more
excellent then the things of parts; and while others rejoice in opinions, and
new notions about faith and holiness, do you delight in the things themselves.
The Lord keep his best wine for you in the later end of your age, and give you
to see the fruit of your prayers, a settled reformation in the Church, that so
(when your time shall come) you may depart in peace, feeling much of the power
and love of God living, and much more of them, dying.

September. 21. 1646. Madam, this is the prayer of your Ladyships humble servant
in the Lord, Anthony Burgess.

TO THE READER.
READER,
IF the Father said true, that Books were the fruit of the mind, as children
are of the (...). Clem. Alex.
body, natural affection must compel me, (as she did for Moses) to provide
some Ark for the safety of this Book, lest it perish: And I know no better way,
then to give thee some account of the matter and method of it, if thou
vouchsafe to peruse it.

For the matter of it, it is chiefly improved to maintain the dignity and use
of the Moral Law against late errors about it, and thereupon I have been
forced to consult more with those books that are filled with such poison, then
to peruse those Authors that have maintained the truth; and I found the looking
upon their Heterodoxies a special help to propagate and confirm the truth, as
that Roman Painter curiously drew the picture of an Horse, by constant looking
upon an Ass, avoiding whatsoever he saw ridiculous or deformed in him. I
acknowledge this work above my strength, it being a subject not much handled by
former writers, and so I could not be guilty of that fault, (...): but I say,
as Austin, Ego parvas vires habeo, sed Dei Verbum magnas habet; I have small
strength, but the Word and Truth of God has great power. None is more
unwilling then my self to come in print; but, because he that writes good
Books, does retia salutis expandere, spread the nets of salvation to catch some
men in; and the good works of such will last as long as their Books live; I
have hardened my self, and overcome mine own temper, to publish to the world
these conceptions of mine. I have not affected to appear in this Book (...),
about words and phrases, because it is controversall matter, and so fitter to be
represented to the understanding in naked unaffected explications, then
curiously adorned to please fancy: Yea, I have grudged at words, as being too
long and cumbersome, desiring (if possible) to conveigh my sense in as brief a
manner as may be, lest any that comes to look for fruit, should find the leaves
too broad, and so cover it from sight. And this endeavoring of brevity will
make the matter seem too obscure and abrupt, till there be a familiar
acquaintance with my way.

My method is after some general discourses about the usefulness of the Law,
more particularly to handle it as given to Adam, and afterward as promulgated
by Moses to the people of Israel; and herein I have taken in all the material
questions that Papists, Arminians, Socinians, and more especially, Antinomians
have started up. In all this I have endeavored to give the Law its due, and
the Gospel its due, remembering that of Luther, Qui scit inter Legem and
Evangelium distinguere, gratias agat Deo, and sciat se esse Theologum. It is
the allegorical interpretation of one Writer, that the great feasting and
music which was used at the reconciliation of the father to his prodigal son,
did signify the sweet harmony and agreement between Law and Gospel. If this
were so, then some do represent the elder brother, that grudge and murmr at
this excellent accord. If any adversary shall assault this Book, I shall not be
solicitous to answer it, because I endeavored so to state the question, that
at the same time truth might be maintained, and falsehood demolished; and he
that is so blind, that he cannot see by the light of one Sun, would not see any
more, if there were a thousand Suns.

THE CONTENTS.
1 IN what respects the Law may be said to be good. page 3. 2 Of what use the
Law is to the ungodly. p. 7. 3 Of what use the Law is to believers. p. 8. 4 How
many ways the Law may be abused. p. 16. 5 What are the consequences of
trusting in the Law. p. 20. 6 What is required to the essence of a godly man in
reference to obedience. p. 38. 7 Wherein are good works necessary. p. 39. 8
Whether the Law have a directive regulating and informing power over a godly
man. p. 53. 9 How the Law is said to be written in man's heart. p. 58. 10
Wherein the Law of Nature does consist. p. 60. 11 Of what use is the light of
Nature. p. 66. 12 Whether the light of Nature be sufficient to judge in matters
of faith, or to prescribe divine worship. p. 71. 13 Whether a man can by the
light of Nature, and by the consideration of the creatures come to know there
is a God. p. 74. 14 Whether the mystery of the Trinity, and of the incarnation
of Christ can be found out as a truth by the light of Nature. p. 77. 15 Whether
the light of Nature be sufficient to salvation. p. 77. 16 Whether that be true
of the Papists, which hold, that the sacrifices the Patriarchs offered to God
were by the mere light of Nature. p. 79. 17 Whether original sin can be found
out by the mere light of Nature, or whether it is only a mere matter of
faith, that we are thus polluted. p. 79. 18 What is the meaning of that grand
rule of Nature which our Savior repeateth, That which you would not have other
men do to you, do not you to them. p. 80. 19 Whether the practice of the
Apostles, making all their goods common, was according to the precept of
Nature, and so binding all to such a practice. p. 80. 20 What a man cannot do
by the power of Nature. p. 83, 84. 21 Whether there are any antecedaneous works
upon the heart before grace. p. 86. 22 Whether a man by the power of (...) be
able to work any good thing. page 84. 23 Why God would give a positive law to
Adam, beside the natural law in his heart. p. 103. 24 Whether the positive law
to Adam would have obliged all his posterity. p. 105. 25 How the threatening was
fulfilled upon him, when he did eat of the forbidden fruit. p. 106. 26 Whether
Adam was mortal before the eating of the forbidden fruit. p. 107. 27 Whether
upon this threatening, Thou shall die, can be fixed that cursed opinion of the
mortality of the whole man in soul as well as body. p. 108. 28 Whether Image
or Likeness do signify the same thing. p. 110. 29 Wherein does this Image
consist. p. 112. 30 What are the properties of that righteousness and
holiness that was fixed in Adams heart. p. 115. 31 Whether this righteousness
was natural to Adam, or no. p. 117. 32 Whether justifying faith was then in
Adam, or whether faith and repentance are now parts of that Image. p. 117. 33
Whether the Image of God shall be restored to us in this life. p. 118 34 Whether
God did enter into covenant with Adam. p. 119. 35 How God can be said to
covenant, or enter into a promise with man. p. 123. 36 Why God will deal with
man in a covenant may, rather th^n in a mere absolute supreme way. p. 124. 37
Whether there can be any such distinction made of Adam while innocent, so as to
be considered either in his naturalls or supernaturalls. p. 129. 38 Whether
Christ did intervens in his help to Adam, so that he needed Christ in that
estate. p. 129. 39 Whether the tree of Life was a sacrament of Christ to Adam,
or no. p. 132. 40 Whether there was any revelation unto Adam of a Christ. p.
133. 41 Whether the state of reparation be more excellent then that in
innocence. p. 133. 42 Whether we may be now by Christ said to be more righteous
then Adam. p. 134. 43 Whether that which God requires of us be greater then
that demanded of Adam in the state of innocence. p. 135. 44 Whether Adams
immortality in the estate of innocence be not different from that which shall
be in heaven. p. 136. 45 What Law this delivered in Mount Sinai is, and what
kind of laws there are, and why it is called the Moral Law. p. 140. 46 Whether
this Law repeated by Moses, be the same with the law of nature implanted in us.
p. 140. 47 Why God did then, and not sooner give this Law unto his people. p.
141. 48 Whether this Law was not before in the Church of God. p. 142. 49 Why
God gave the Moral Law. p. 143. 50 Whether the ten Commandments, as given by
Moses, do belong to, and bind us Christians, or no. p. 156. 51 Whether Christ
did add any thing unto the Law. p. 169. 52 Whether Christ did forbid all
swearing. p. 177. 53 Whether under the Gospel death or any capital punishment
may be inflicted for some offenses. p. 180. 54 Whether the Law be an instrument
of true sanctification. p. 187. 55 Whether Christ have abrogated the Moral
Law. p. 199. 56 Whether the Law was a Covenant that God made with his people of
Israel. p. 220. 57 Whether the Law be a Covenant of grace. p. 224. 58 Wherein
the Law and Gospel do oppose or differ from each other; under which is handled
the false differences between the Law and Gospel made by Anabaptists, Papists,
and Antinomians. p. 229. 59 Why God appointed such various and different
administrations. p. 246. 60 Whether the Gospel preach repentance, or no. p.
250. 61 Whether the Law command faith. p. 252. 62 How Christ is the end of the
Law. p. 256.


Errata.
PAge 6. line 12. read, and did not lead to Christ. p 14 l. 23. leave out, and
then thou shall live. p. 21. l. 26. r. divisions. p. 36. l. 31. r. overthrow
it. p. 40 l. 4. upward, leave out, of this speech. p. 41. l. 3. r. Translator
adds those word. p. 43. l. 7. r. Durand. p. 57. l. 28. r. found
Interpreters. p. 81. l 4. upward, r. were not ty^d by arguments. p. 92. l. 8.
r. which is in me. p. 121. l. 20. leave out, an hair. p. 1^1. l. 2, upward,
next to piece, r. as a total. p. 149. l. 7. r. absolutely. p. 177. l. 7.
upward, r. as infants. p 208. l. 18. r. Gods love. p. 224. l. 17. r. command.

VINDICIAE LEGIS: OR, The Vindication of the Law, called MORAL.
LECTURE I.
1 TIMOTHY 1. 8, 9. Knowing the Law is good, if a man use it lawfully.
THis Epistle to Timothy may be called, Paul's The Text opened.
Directory for the Church of God: and, in the first place, he enjoyneth
Timothy, to preserve the Truth against all false teachers, as he himself does
in all his Epistles. Though he derived much hatred upon his person thereby, yet
this was his comfort and glory, as Hierome wrote to Austin, when he had
vindicated the Truth against Pelagians, Quod signum majoris gloriae est, omnes
haeretici te detestantur. His injunction to Timothy begins ver. 3. Charge them,
not (...) Erasmus translates it, not to follow another doctrine, as if it did
belong to the followers: but the words afterward [Teachers of the Law] do
plainly refute that. Now the word may be extended both to the matter (as some)
to teach no other thing; or to the manner (as others) not to teach in another
way: Not to teach nova; no, nor yet nove. The rule is, Qui fingit nova verba,
nova gignit dogmata: And it was Melancthons wish, that men did not only teach
the same things, but in iisdem verbis, in iisdem syllabis.

The second part of injunction is higher then the former: Though they do not
teach other things, yet they must not spend their gifts in an useless way; as,
to give heed to fables: This they apply to the Jews, who had a world of
fictions. It is true, we find the Fathers, Gregory Nazianzen, and others, use
sometimes a fable in their Orations, to denote some moral matter; but such the
Jews did not use. As they must not give heed to fables, so neither to endless
genealogies. We see a good use made of genealogies in the Scriptures, but here
is reproved the sinful use of them; as those Grammarians among the Heathens,
that spent their time about Hecuba's mother, or Achilles pedigree, and what it
was that the Syren's sung: And these he calls endless, because vain curiosity
is more unruly then the waves of the sea; it has no limiting, Hitherto shall
thou go, and no further. Now mark, the Apostle condemns all these, because
they do not edify. The shellfish among the Jews was accounted unclean,
because it had but a little meat, and a great deal of labor to get it: and
this is true of all doctrines, which have no profit in them. The Apostle
therefore tells us, what is the true use of the Law, the end of the precept.
Scultetus, who has it out of Chrysostom, makes (...), not to be the law, but
the ministry, or preaching; and so the Apostle uses the word, ver. 3. But
grant it be so, yet they all agree, he speaks of the law strictly taken
afterward. The Apostle therefore, reproving these false teachers, that did
turn bread into stones, and fish into serpents, the good law into
unprofitablenesse, lest this should be thought to traduce the law, he adds,
We know (as if that were without question to all.) So that there is a position,
The Law is good, and a supposition, If a man use it lawfully; with a
correction, The Law is not made to the righteous. As Austin said, It was hard
to speak for free will, and not to deny free grace; or free grace, and not to
deny free will: so it is hard to give the Law its due, and not to seem to
prejudice the Gospel; or the Gospel, and not to prejudice the Law: For, take
but these two Verses, Videtur Apostolus pugnantia dicere, says Martyr: For,
seeing none can use the Law well, but a righteous man, how then is not the Law
given to him? But this knot shall be untyed in its proper place. I shall at
this time handle the first proposition, that is conditional; only I might
insist upon opening the word (...), or Law: For, I conceive, the neglect of the
different use of this, does breed many errors; for there is a law that we are
to be Antinomians, or contrary to; and there is a law, that we must submit to:
But of this I will speak in one particular caution.

Observe. 1. The Law of God is good, if a man use it lawfully. Observe. 2. (which
is employed) that the Law of God may be used unlawfully.
The Law is good, 1. In respect of the matter of it therein contained; 1. The
Law is good in respect of the matter.
for, if you take the spiritual interpretation of it, you will find all the
matter exceeding good: to love God, to trust in him, etc. how good are they?
Yea, there is no duty now required of us, but is contained there: Therefore
Peter Martyr did well resemble the Decalogue to the ten Predicaments, that, as
there is nothing has a being in nature, but what may be reduced to one of
those ten; so neither is there any Christian duty, but what is comprehended in
one of these. And, if Tully durst say, that the law of the twelve Tables did
exceed all the libraries of Philosophers, both in weight of authority, and
fruitfulness of matter, how much rather is this true of Gods Law? I know it is
disputed, Whether justifying faith be commanded in the Law: here are different
opinions; but when I handle this Question, Whether the Law of Moses, and that
which was ingraffed in Adams heart in innocence, be all one, it will be proper
to speak of that. Peter Martyr, handling the division of the ten Commandments,
how the number should be made up, makes that, which is commonly called the
Preface [I am the Lord thy God, which are words of a Covenant] to be the first
Commandment: and if so, then must justifying faith be enjoined there. And thus
did some of the Fathers, though those words are only enunciative, and not
preceptive.

2. In respect of the authority stamped upon it by God, whereby it becomes 2.
In respect of the authority of it.
a rule unto us. The former is agreed on by all: and I see few that dare openly
deny the other; for, seeing the matter is intrinsecally and eternally good, it
cannot but be commanded by God, though not to justify, for that is separable
from it. There are some things that are justa, because Deus vult; as in all
positive things: and then there are other things just, and therefore God wills
them, though even they are also just, because they are consonant to that
eternal justice and goodness in himself: so that, indeed, it is so far
from being true, that the Law, which has Gods authority stamped on it for a
rule, and so is mandatum, should be abrogated, that it is impossible, ne per
Deum quidem; for then God should deny his own justice and goodness: therefore
we do justly abhor those blasphemous Questions among the Schoolmen, An Deus
possit mandare odium sui, etc. for it is impossible. Therefore we see, Matthew. 5.
that our Savior is so far from abrogating it, that he shows the spiritual
extent of the mandatory power of the Law, far beyond Pharisees expectation;
and thus James urges the authority of the Lawgiver.

3. Its good instrumentally, as used by Gods Spirit for good. I know 3. It Is
instrumentally good.
it is disputed by some, Whether the Law, and the preaching of it, is used as an
instrument by the Spirit of God for conversion: But that will be an entire
Question in it self; only thus much at this time. The Spirit of God does use
the Law, to quicken up the heart of a believer unto his duty, Psalm. 119. Thou
have quickened me by thy precepts. And so Psalm. 19. The Law of the Lord
enlightneth the simple, and by them thy servant is fore-warned of sin. You
will say, The word Law is taken largely there for all precepts and testimonies.
It Is true, but it is not exclusive of the precepts of the moral Law; for they
were the chiefest, and indeed, the whole word of God is an organ and instrument
of Gods Spirit for instruction, reformation, and to make a man perfect to every
good work. It Is an unreasonable thing, to separate the Law from the Spirit of
God, and then compare it with the Gospel; for, if you do take the Gospel, even
that promise, Christ came to save sinners, without the Spirit, it works no
more, yea, it is a dead letter as well as the Law: Therefore Calvin well called
Lex corpus and the Spirit, anima; now, accedat anima ad corpus, and it is a
living reasonable man: But now, as when we say, A man discourses, A man
understands, this is ratione animae, not corporis; so when we say, A man is
quickened by the Law of God to obedience, this is not by reason of the Law, but
of the Spirit of God: But of this anon.

4. Its good in respect of the sanction of it: for it is accompanied 4. The Law
is good, in respect of its sanction.
with promises, and that not only temporal, as Command. 5. but also
spiritual, Command. 2. where God is said to pardon to many generations; and
therefore the Law does include Christ secondarily and occasionally, though not
primarily, as hereafter shall be showed. It Is true, the righteousness of the
Law, and that of the Gospel differ toto coelo; we must place one in suprema
part coeli, and the other in ima part terrae, as Luther speaks to that
effect: and it is one of the hardest taskes in all divinity, to give them their
bounds, and then to clear how the Apostle does oppose them, and how not. We
know it was the cursed error of the Manichees and Marcionites, that the Law
was only carnal, and had only carnal promises; whereas it is evident, that
the Fathers had the same faith for substance as we have. It Is true, if we take
Law and Gospel in this strict difference, as some Divines do, that all the
precepts, wheresoever they are, must be under the Law, and all the promises be
reduced to the Gospel, whether in Old or New Testament; in which sense Divines
then say, Lex jubet, and Gratia juvat; and, Lex imperat, and Fides impetrat:
then the Law can have no sanction by promise: But where can this be showed in
Scripture?

5. In respect of the acts of it. You may call them either acts 5. In respect
of the acts of it.
or ends, I shall, acts. And thus a law has diverse acts, 1. Declarative, to
lay down what is the will of God: 2. To command obedience to this will
declared: 3. Either to invite by promises, or compel by threatenings: 4. To
condemn the transgressors: and this use the Law is acknowledged by all to have
against ungodly and wicked men, and some of these cannot be denied even to the
godly. I wonder much at an Antinomian author, that says, Assert. of free
grace, page 31.
It cannot be a law, unless it also be a cursing law; for, besides that the
same author does acknowledge the moral Law to be a rule to the believer, (and
regula has vim praecepti, as well as doctrinae) what will he say to the law
given to Adam, who as yet was righteous and innocent, and therefore could not
be cursing or condemning of him? It Is true, if we take cursing or condemning
potentially, so a law is always condemning: but for the actual cursing, that
is not necessary for such a transgressour, that has a surety in his room.

6. In respect of the end of it. Romans 16. 4. Christ is the end of the 6. In
respect of the end.
Law. By reason of the different use of the word (...), there are different
conjectures; some make it no more then extremitas, or terminus; because the
ceremonial Law ended in Christ: Others make it finis complementi, the fullness
of the Law is Christ: Others add, finis intentionis, or scopi to it; so that
by these the meaning is, The Law did intend Christ in all its ceremonialls and
moralls, that, as there was not the least ceremony, which did lead to Christ;
so not the least iota or apex in the moral Law, but it did also aim at him.
Therefore says Calvin upon this place, Habemus insignem locum, quod Lex
omnibus suis partibu^ in Christum respiciat; Imo quicquid Lex docet, quicquid
praecipit, quicquid promittit, Christum pro scope habet. What had it been for a
Jew to pray to God, if Christ had not been in that prayer? to love God, if
Christ had not been in that love? yet here is as great a difference between the
Gospel, as is between direction and exhibition, between a schoolmaster and a
father: he is an unwise child, that will make a schoolmaster his father.
Whether this be a proper intention of the Law, you shall have hereafter.

7. In respect of the adjuncts of it, which the Scripture attributes 7. In
respect of the adjuncts.
to it: And it is observable, that even where the Apostle does most urge against
the Law, as if it were so far from bettering men, that it makes them the
worse; yet there he praises it, calling it good and spiritual. Now I see it
called spiritual in a twofold sense: 1. Effective, because it did, by Gods
Spirit, quicken to spiritual life; even as the Apostle in the opposition calls
himself carnal, because the power of corruption within, did work carnal and
sinful motions in him. But I shall expound it spiritual. 2. Formaliter,
formally, because the nature and extent of it is spiritual: for it forbids the
sins of the spirit, not only external sins; it forbids thy spirit pride, thy
spirit envy: Even as God is the father of spirits, so is the Law, the law of
spirits. Hence it is compared by James to a glass, which will show the least
spot in the face, and will not flatter, but if thou have wrinckles and
deformities there, they will be seen; so that there is no such way to bring
Pharisaicall and Moral men out of love with themselves, as to set this glass
before them.

8. In respect of the use of it: and that to the ungodly, and to the 8. In
respect of the use of it.
believer.

1. To the ungodly, it has this use:

1. To restrain and limit sin: And, certainly, though it should 1. Because it
restraines and limits sin in the ungodly.
not reach to renovation and changing of men's hearts, yet here is a great deal
of good, that it is an outward whip and scourge to men, whereby they are kept in
honest discipline: and this made the Apostle say, The Law was added, because of
transgressions. The people of Israel, by their being in the wilderness, having
forgotten God, and being prone to Idolatry, the Lord he added this Law, as a
restraint upon them. Even as you see upon madmen, and those that are possessed
with devils, we put heavy chains and fetters, that they may do no hurt; so
the Lord laid the Law upon the people of Israel, to keep them in from impiety.
The Apostle uses a word, shut up as in a dungeon, but that is to another
sense. It was Chrysostomes comparison: As a great man, suspecting his wife,
appoints Eunuchs to look to her and keep her; so did God, being jealous over
the Jews, appoint these laws.

2. To curse, and condemn: and in this respect, it pours all 2. Because it
condemns them.
its fury upon the ungodly. The Law to the godly by Christ, is like a Serpent
with a sting pulled out; but now to the wicked, the sting of sin is the Law,
and therefore the condition of that man, who is thus under it, is unspeakably
miserable. The curse of it is the sore displeasure of God, and that for every
breach of it; and, if men, that have broken only men's laws, be yet so much
afraid, that they hide themselves, and keep close, when yet no man or Judge can
damn them, or throw them into hell; what cause is there to fear that
Lawgiver, who is able to destroy soul and body? Therefore consider, thou
profane man, are not thy oaths, are not thy lusts against Gods Law? You had
better have all the men in the world your enemy, then the Law of God. It Is a
spiritual enemy; and therefore the terrors of it are spiritual, as well as
the duties. Let not your lives be Antinomians, no more then opinions. Oh that I
could confute this Antinomianisme also; such a man's life and conversation was
against GODS Law, but now it is not.

2. To Believers it has this use: 1. To excite and quicken them 1. It quickens
the godly against sin and corruption.
against all sin and corruption: for, howsoever the Scripture says, Against
such there is no law, and, The Law is not made to the righteous; yet, because
none of the godly are perfectly righteous, and there is none but may complain
of his dull love, and his faint delight in holy things, therefore the Law of
God, by commanding, does quicken him. How short is this of that which God
commands? not, that a man is to look for justification by this, or to make
these in stead of a Christ to him; but for other ends. Hence Psalm. 1. and Psalm.
19. and 119. who can deny, that they belong to the godly now, as well as
heretofore? Have not believers now, crookedness, hypocrisy, luke-warmnesse?
You know, not only the unruly colt, that is yet untamed; but the horse, that
is broken, has a bit and bridle also: and so, not only the ungodly, but even
the godly, whose hearts have been much broken and tamed, do yet need a bridle,
Ne Spiritum sessorem excutiant. And, if men should be so peremptory, as to
say, they do not need this; it is not because they do not need it (for they
need it most) but because they do not feel it.

2. To enlighten and discover unto them daily more and more heart-sinne, 2. It
discovers sin unto them.
and soule-sinne. This use the Apostle speaks of, Romans 7. per totum: for, how
should a man come to know the depth of original sin, all the sinful motions
flowing from it, but by the Law? and therefore that is observed by Divines, the
Apostle says, he had not known sin, but by the Law; intimating thereby,
that the Law of nature was so obliterated and darkened, that it could not show
a man the least part of his wickedness. Seneca, who had more light then
others, yet he says, Erras, si tecum vitia nasci putas; supervenerunt, ingesta
sunt. And so Pelagius his assertion was, that tam sine vitio, quam sine virtute
nascimur. And you see all Popery, to this day, holds those motions of heart,
not consented to, to be no sins, but necessary conditions, arising from our
constitution, and such as Adam had in innocence: Therefore the people of God
see and are humbled for that wickedness, which others take no notice of. This
will satisfy man, but not Gods Law.

3. To drive them out of all their own power and righteousness 3. It makes
them disclaim all their own righteousness.
And this is another good consequence: for, when they see all to come short of
the Law; that the earth is not more distant from heaven, then they from that
righteousness, this makes them to go out of all their prayers, and all their
duties, as you see Paul, Romans 7. he consented to the Law, and he delighted in
it, but he could not reach to the righteousness of it; and therefore cries
out, Oh wretched man that I am! How apt are the holiest to be proud and secure,
as David, and Peter? even as the worms and wasps eat the sweetest apples and
fruit; but this will keep thee low. How absurd then are they, that say, The
preaching of the Law is to make men trust in themselves, and to adhere to their
own righteousness? for, there is no such way to see a man's beggary and guilt,
as by showing the strictness of the Law: For, what makes a Papist so
selfe-confident, that his hope is partly in grace, and partly in merits, but
because they hold they are able to keep the Law? God forbid, says a Papist,
that we should enjoy heaven as of mere alms to us; no, we have it by
conquest: Whence is all this, but because they give not the Law its due?

4. Hereby to quicken them to an higher price and esteem of Christ, 4. It makes
them set an higher value of Christ and his benefits.
and the benefits by him: So Paul, in that great agony of his, striving with
his corruption (being like a living man tied to a dead carcass, his living
faith to dead unbelief, his humility to loathsome pride) see what a conclusion
he makes, I thank God, through Jesus Christ. It Is true, many times the people
of God, out of the sense of their sin, are driven off from Christ; but this
is not the Scriptures direction: That holds out riches in Christ for thy
poverty, righteousness in Christ for thy guilt, peace in Christ for thy
terror. And in this consideration it is, that many times Luther has such
hyperbolicall speeches about the Law, and about sin. All is spoken against a
Christians opposing the Law to the Gospel, so, as if the discovering of the
one, did quite drive from the other. And this is the reason, why Papists and
formal Christians never heartily and vehemently prize Christ, taking up every
crumb that falls from his table: they are Christ's to themselves, and
self-saviors. I deny not, but the preaching of Christ, and about grace, may
also make us prize grace and Christ; but such is our corruption, that all is
little enough. Let me add these cautions:

1. It Is of great consequence in what sense we use the word [Law.] 1. The Law,
according to the use of the word in the Scripture, is not only a strict rule
of things to be done by way of command; but denotes any heavenly doctrine,
whether it be promise, or precept.


He that distinguishes well, teaches well. Now I observe a great neglect of
this in the books written about these points; and, indeed, the reason why some
can so hardly endure the word [Law] is, because they attend to the use of the
word in English; or the Greek word (...), and Lex, as it is defined by Tully
and Aristotle, which understand it a strict rule only of things to be done,
and that by way of mere command. But now the Hebrew word (...) does comprehend
more; for that does not only signify strictly what is to be done, but it
denotes largely any heavenly doctrine, whether it be promise, or precept: and
hence it is, that the Apostle calls it, The law of faith (which in some sense
would be a contradiction, and in some places, where the word Law is used
absolutely, its much questioned, whether he mean the Law or the Gospel) and the
reason why he calls it a law of faith, is not (as Chrysostom would have it)
because hereby he would sweeten the Gospel, and, for the words sake, make it
more pleasing to them; but happily, in a mere Hebraisme, as signifying that in
general, which does declare and teach the will of God.

The Hebrews have a more strict word for precept, and that is (...), yet some
say this also sometimes signifies a promise, Psalm. 133. 3. There the Lord
commanded a blessing, i. e. promised; so John 12. 50. his commandment, i. e.
his promise, is life everlasting: So then, if we would attend to the Hebrew
words, it would not so trouble us, to hear that it is good. But yet the use of
the word [Law] is very general: sometimes it signifies any part of The
acceptions of the word Law in Scripture, are diverse.
the Old Testament, John 10. It is said in the Law, You are gods. And that is
in the Psalms: Sometimes the Law and the Prophets are made all the books of
the Old Testament; sometimes the Law and the Psalms are distinguished;
sometimes it is used for the ceremonial law only, Hebr. 10. 1. The Law having
a shadow of things to come; sometimes it is used synecdochically, for some acts
of the Law only; as Galat. 5. Against such there is no law: sometimes it is
used for that whole oiconomy, and peculiar dispensation of Gods worship unto
the Jews; in which sense it is said to be until John, but grace and truth by
Christ Jesus: sometimes it is used in the sense of the Jews, as without
Christ: And thus the Apostle generally in the Epistle to the Romans and
Galatians. Indeed, this is a dispute between Papists and us, In what sense the
Law is taken: for, the Papists would have it understood only of the
ceremonial law. But we answer, that the beginning of the dispute, was about
the observation of those legal ceremonies, as necessary to salvation: But the
Apostle goes from the hypothesis to the thesis; and shows, that not only
those ordinances, but no other works may be put in Christ's room: Therefore the
Antinomian, before he speaks any thing against, or about the Law, he must show
in what sense the Apostle uses it: Sometimes it is taken strictly, for the
five books of Moses; yea, it is thought of many, that book of the Law, so
often mentioned in Scripture, which was kept with so much diligence, was only
that book called Denteronomy: and commonly it is taken most strictly for the
ten Commandments. Now, the different use of this word breeds all this
obscurity, and the Apostle argues against it in one sense, and pleads for it
in another.

2. The Law must not be separated from the Spirit of God. This is 2. The Law
and the Spirit of God must not be separated.
a principle always to be carried along with you: for, the whole Word of God
is the instrument and organ of spiritual life, and the Law is part of this
Word of God: This I proved before; nay, should the Moral Law be quite
abolished, yet it would not be for this end, because the Spirit of God did not
use it as an instrument of life; for, we see all sides grant, that circumcision
and the sacraments are argued against by the Apostle, as being against our
salvation, and damnable in their own use now; yet in the Old Testament, those
sacraments of Circumcision, and the Paschall Lamb, were spiritual means of
faith, as truly as Baptism, and the Lords Supper are. It is true, there is a
difference in the degree of Gods grace by them; but not in the truth: and
therefore our Divines do well confute the Papists, who hold those sacraments
only typical of ours, and not to be really exhibitive of grace, as these are
in the New Testament. Therefore, if the Apostles, arguing against the Moral
Law, would prove it no instrument of Gods Spirit for our good, the same would
hold also in Circumcision, and all those sacraments; and therefore at least for
that time they must grant it a help to Christ and grace, as well as
Circumcision was. If you say, Why then does the Apostle argue against the works
of the Moral Law? I answer, Because the Jews rested in them without Christ:
and, it is the fault of our people, they turn the Gospel into the Law; and we
may say, Whosoever seeks to be saved by his Baptism, he falls off from Christ.

3. To do a thing out of obedience to the Law, and yet by love 3. Obedience
and love oppose not one another.
and delight, do not oppose one another. About this I see a perpetual
mistake. To lead a man by the Law is slavish, it is servile, say they; a
Believer is carried by love, he needs no law: and I shall show you, Chrysostom
has some such hyperbolicall expressions upon the words following, [The Law is
not put for the righteous.] But this is very weak, to oppose the efficient
cause and the rule together; for, the Spirit of God works the heart to love
and delight in that which he commands: Take an instance in Adam; While he
stood, he did obey out of love, and yet because of the command also: We may
illustrate it by Moses his mother; You know, she was hired, and commanded by
Pharaoh's daughter to nurse Moses, which was her own child: now she did this
out of love to Moses, her child; yet did obey Pharaoh's daughters commandment
upon her also: so concerning Christ, there was a commandment laid upon Christ,
to fulfill the Law for us, yet he did it out of love.

It is disputed, Whether Christ had a command laid upon him by the Father
strictly so called: and howsoever the Arrians, from the grant of this, did
infer Christ's absolute inferiority to the Father; yet our orthodox Divines
do conclude it, because of the many places of Scripture which prove it, Acts
7. 37. John 14. 31. As my Father has commanded me, so I you. John 15. 10. (If
you keep my commandments, and abide in love, etc.) And, indeed, if it were not
a commandment, it could not be called an obedience of Christ; for, that does
relate to a command: Now this I infer hence, that, to do a thing out of
obedience to a command, because a command, does not infer want of love;
although I grant, that the commandment was not laid upon Christ, as on us,
either to direct him, or quicken him. Besides, all the people of God have
diverse relations, upon which their obedience lies; they are Gods servants, and
that does imply obedientiam servi, though not obedientiam servilem.

Again, a Believer may look to the reward, and yet have a spirit of love; how
much rather look to the command of God? A godly man may have amorem mercedis,
though not amorem mercenarium. And, lastly, there is no godly man, but he has
in part some unwillingnesse to good things; and therefore needs the Law not
only to direct, but to exhort and goad forward: Even, as I said, the tamed
horse needs a spur, as well as the unbroken colt.

4. Though Christ has obeyed the Law fully, yet that does not exempt 4.
Christ's Obedience exempts not us from ours.
us from our obedience to it, for other ends then he did it. And, I think, that
if the Antinomian did fully inform himself in this thing, there were an
agreement: for, we all ought to be zealous against those Pharisaicall and
Popish practices of setting up any thing in us, though wrought by the grace of
God, as the matter of our justification. But herein they do not distinguish, or
well argue: The works of the Law do not justify, therefore they are needless,
or not requisite: for (say they) if Christ has fully obeyed the righteousness
of the Law, and that is made ours; therefore it is not what ours is, but what
Christ's is. And I have heard some doubt, whether the maintaining of Christ's
active obedience imputed to us, does not necessarily imply Antinomianisme: but
of that more hereafter; only let them lay a parallel with Christ's passive
obedience. He satisfied the curse and threatening of the Law, and thereby has
freed us from all punishment; yet the Believers have afflictions for other
ends: so do we the works of Gods Law, for other ends then Christ did them.

A fifth caution or limitation shall be this, to distinguish between 5.
Believers sins condemned, though not their persons.
a Believer, and his personal acts: For, howsoever the Law does not curse or
condemn him, in regard of his state; yet those particular sins he commits, it
condemns them, and they are guilty of Gods wrath, though this guilt does not
redound upon the person: Therefore it is a very wide comparison of Dr. Crisp.
one, that a man under grace has no more to do with the Law, then an
Englishman has with the laws of Spain or Turkey: For, howsoever every
Believer be in a state of grace, so that his person is justified; yet, being
but in part regenerated, so far as his sins are committed, they are
threatened and condemned in him, as well as in another: for there is a simple
guilt of sin, and a guilt redundant upon the person.

6. That the Law is not therefore to be decryed, because we have no 6.
Inability to keep the Law exempts not from obedience to it.
power to keep the Law: For, so we have no power to obey the Gospel. It is an
expression an Antinomian Dr. Crisp.
uses, The Law (says he) speaks to thee, if troubled for sin, Do this, and
live; Now this is, as if a Judge should bid a malefactor, If you will not be
hanged, take all England, and carry it upon your shoulders into the West
Indies. What comfort were this? Now, does not the Gospel, when it bids a man
believe, speak as impossible a thing to a man's power? It Is true, God does not
give such a measure of grace as is able to fulfill the Law, but we have faith
enough evangelically to justify us. But that is extraneous to this matter in
hand. It follows therefore, that the Law, taken most strictly, and the Gospel,
differ in other considerations then in this.

7. They do not distinguish between that which is primarily and per 7. The Law.
though primarily it requires perfect holiness, yet it excludes not a
Mediator.
se in the Law, and that which is occasionally. It cannot be denied, but the
Decalogue requires primarily a perfect holiness, as all laws require
exactness; but yet it does not exclude a Mediator. The Law says, Do this
and live; and it does not say, None else shall do this for thee, and then thou
shall live: For, if so, then it had been injustice in God, to have given us a
Christ. I therefore much wonder at one, who, in his book, speaks thus, The Law
does not only deprive us of comfort, but it will let no body else speak a word
of comfort, because it is a rigid keeper: and he confirms it by that place,
Galat. 3. 23. But how short this is, appears, 1. Because what the Apostle
calls the Law here, he called the Scripture in general before. 2. He
speaks it generally of all under that form of Moses his regiment, so that
the Fathers should have no comfort by that means.

Use 1. Of instruction. How dangerous an error it is, to deny The Law, though
it cannot justify us, is notwithstanding good, and not to be rejected.
the Law: for, is it good? and, may it be used well? then take we heed of
rejecting it. What? because it is not good for justification, is it in no sense
else good? Is not gold good, because you cannot eat on it, and feed on it, as
you do meat? Take the precept of the Gospel; yea, take the Gospel acts, as, To
believe: this, as it is a work, does not justify: (Therefore that opinion
which makes (...) credere, to justify, may as well take in other acts of
obedience) But, because faith, as it is a work, does not justify, do you
therefore reject believing? A man may abuse all the ordinances of the Gospel,
as well as the Law. The man that thinks the very outward work of baptism, the
very outward work of receiving a sacrament will justify him, does as much
dishonor God, as a Jew, that thought circumcision, or the sacrifices did
justify him. You may quickly turn all the Gospel into the Law in that sense;
you may as well say, What need I pray? what need I repent? it cannot justify
me, as to deny the Law, because it cannot.

Use. 2. How vain a thing it is, to advance grace and Christ Grace and Christ
not to be advanced oppositely to the Law.
oppositely to the Law: nay, they that destroy one, destroy also the other. Who
prizeth the city of refuge so much, as the malefactor that is pursued by
guilt? Who desires the brazen Serpent, but he that is stung? If Christ be the
end of the Law, how is he contrary to it? And, if Christ and the Law could be
under the Old Testament, why not under the new? It is true, to use the Law
otherwise then God has appointed, it is no marvel if it hurt us, if it poison
us; as those that kept the Manna otherwise then they should, it turned to
worms. But, if you use it so, as Christ is the dearer, and grace the more
welcome to thee, then thou do well. The Law bids thee love God withal thine
heart and soul; does not this bid thee go to Christ? Have thou any strength
to do it? And what thou do, being enabled by grace, is that perfect? Vae
etiam laudabili vitae ei, etc. said Austin, make therefore a right use of the
Law, and then thou will set up Christ and grace in thine heart, as well as in
thy mouth. Now thou holdst free grace as an opinion, it may be; but then all
within thee will acknowledge it.

LECTURE II.
1 TIMOTHY 1. 8, 9. Knowing the Law is good, if a man use it lawfully.
IN these words you have heard, 1. the position, [The Law is good:] 2. the
supposition, If a man use it lawfully.

Now, this know in the general, that this is no more derogative The abuse of
the Law no derogation to it.
to the Law, that it is such a bonum, quo aliquis male uti potest, then God, or
Christ, or the Gospel, or Free Grace are; for, all may turn this honey into
gall: yea, an Antinomian may set up his preaching of grace, as a work more
eminent, and so trust to that more then Christ. I do acknowledge that of
Chrysostom to be very good, speaking of the love of God in Christ, and raised
up in admiration of it, Oh (says he) I am like a man digging in a deep
spring: I stand here, and the water rises up upon me; and I stand there, and
still the water rises upon me: So it is in the love of Christ and the Gospel,
the poor broken heart may find unsearchable treasures there; but yet this must
not be used to the prejudice of the Law neither. And take this, as a Prologue
galeatus to all I shall say, That, because the Law may be used unlawfully, it
is no more derogation, then to the Gospel: Woe be to the whole Land, for the
abuse of the Gospel; is it not the matter of death to many? I shall show the
general ways of abusing the Law:

1. That in the Text, when men turn it unto unfruitful and unprofitable 1.
The Law is abused, when converted to unprofitable disputes.
disputes: and this the Apostle does here mainly intend Cui bono? must be the
question made of any dispute about the Law: and therefore, if I should, in this
exercise I have undertaken, handle any frivolous or unprofitable disputes, this
were to use the Law unlawfully; and therefore let Ministers take heed that be
not true of them, which one dreamed about the Schoolmen, that he thought them
all like a man eating an hard stone, when pure manchet was by. Besides, he
preaches the Law unprofitably, not only that darkeneth it with obscure
questions, but that does not teach Christ by it: and I see not but that
Ministers may be humbled, that they have pressed religious duties, but not so
as to set up Christ; and hereby people have been content with duties and
sacraments, though no Christ in them. But, as all the vessels were to be of
pure gold in the Temple, so ought all our duties to be of pure and mere Christ
for acceptance.

2. When men look to carnal and worldly respects, in the handling 2. When, in
the handling of it, respect is had to worldly ends.
of it. This is also to use the Law unlawfully. And thus the Priests and the
Jews did, as thereby to make a living, and to have temporal blessings: And it
is no wonder that the Law may be used so, seeing the doctrine of Christ is so
abused. There are, as Nazianzen says well, (...), and (...), Christmerchants,
and Christ-hucksters, that hope, as Judas did, for carnal ends by Christ;
Therefore so we are to handle Law and Gospel, not as thereby to make parties,
or to get applause; but of a godly love and zeal to truth. It was an honest
complaint of a Popish writer, We (says he) handle the Scripture (tantum ut
nos pascat, and vestiat) that we might only live, and be clothed by it. And
how do we all fall short of Paul, as, Acts 20. where he was preaching night
and day with great affections, and desired no man's gold or silver? how well
might Chrysostom call him, Angelus torrestris, and, Cor Pauli est cor Christi?

3. When men would quite overthrow it, or deny it. Thus the Marcionites 3. When
men deny it.
and Manichees of old, and others of late, though upon other grounds. Now the
ground of their error, are the many places of Scripture that seem to deny the
Law; and, I do acknowledge, it is hard to get the true sense of those places
without diligence: and therefore Austin said well (as to that purpose, if I
mistake not) They are not so much the simple, as the negligent, that are
deceived herein: and, as Chrysostom says, A friend that is acquainted with
his friend, will get out the meaning of a letter or phrase, which another could
not that is a stranger: so it is here in the Scripture. Now, two things let
such consider: 1. That as there are places that seem to overthrow it, so there
are also many places that do confirm it; yea, the Apostle makes objections
against himself, as if he did disanull it, and then answers with an absit, as
if it were an horrid thing to do so. 2. That they must take the Apostle in the
particular sense he intends it. It is a good rule, Quaelibet res ea capienda
est part, qua capi debet: You do not take a sword by the edge, but the
handle; nor a vessel by the body, but the ear: and so this doctrine of the
Law, not in every part, but where the Apostle would have you take it.

4. When they do ill interpret it. And herein all Popish Authors 4. When they
misinterpret it.
are in an high degree to be reproved; for, they limit exceedingly the
spiritual meaning thereof, even as the Pharisees understood it only of
external acts: and therefore our Savior, Matthew 5. did not make new commands
or counsels there (as Popish Expositors dream) but did throw away all that
earth, which the Philistims had tumbled into that spring. And this was so
general a mistake, that it was a great while ere Paul did understand the
strictness of it. This discovers a world of sin in a man, which he was
ignorant of before. The Papists, they also use it unlawfully in that corrupt
gloss, as if it might be kept so far forth as it is obligatory. In a great
part of it, they make it commonitory, and not obligatory; and the power of man
they make to be the rule of his duty, whereas it is plain by Scripture, that
that measure of grace, which God gives any man upon earth, is not answerable
to the duty commanded there. It is true, Hierome said, It was blasphemy to say,
God commanded any thing impossible: but in this sense impossible absolutely, so
that man could never have fulfilled it.

5. When they do oppose it to Christ. And this was the Jews 5. When they
oppose it to Christ.
fundamental error, and under this notion does the Apostle argue against it
in his Epistles to the Romans and Galatians. And, howsoever they would have
compounded Christ and the Law together, yet this composition was to make
opposition. There can be no more two Suns in the firmament, then two things to
justify: Therefore the reconciliation of the Law and Christ cannot be, in
matter of justification, by way of mixture; but yet one is antecedaneous and
subordinate to the other, and is no more to be opposed, then the end to the
means. Nor is it any wonder that the Law, through error, may be opposed to
Christ, seeing that Christ may be opposed to Christ; as, in Popery, Christ
sanctifying is opposed to Christ justifying: for, when we charge them with
derogating from Christ, in holding our graces do justify; Nay (say they) we
set him up more then you: for, we hold, He does make us holy, That this
holiness does justify. Thus, you see, Christ in his works is opposed to
Christ in his justifying. And here, by the way, you may see, that that only is
the best way of advancing Christ or grace, which is in a Scripture way, and not
what is possible for us to think, as the Papists do.

6. When they look for justification by it: and this is a dangerous 6. When
they expect justification by it.
and desperate error; this is that which reigns in Popery, this is that
inbred canker-worme, that eats in the hearts of all naturally. They know not
a Gospel-righteousnesse, and for this end they read the Law, they hear it
preached only, that they may be selfe-saviours: And, certainly, for this
twofold end, I may think, God suffers this Antinomian error to grow; first,
That Ministers may humble themselves, they have not set forth Christ and grace
in all the glory of it. If Bernard said, he did not love to read Tully,
because he could not read the Name of Christ there; how much rather may we
say, that in many Sermons, in many a man's ministry, the drift and end of all
his preaching is not, that Christ may be advanced. And in Christians, in
Protestants, it is a far greater sin then in Papists: for, it is well
observed by Peter Martyr, that the Apostle does deal more mildly in the
Epistle to the Romans, then in the Epistle to the Galatians; and the reason is,
because the Galatians were at first well instructed in the matter of
justification, but afterward did mix other things with Christ, therefore he
thunders against them. I desire to know nothing, says Paul, 1 Corinthians. 2. but
Jesus Christ, and him crucified. And secondly, another end may be, to have
these truths beaten out more: As, The deity of Christ, because of the Arrians;
and, Grace in predestination and conversion, by the Pelagians: so, The grace of
justification, because not only of Papists, but Antinomians. And, certainly,
these things were much pressed by Luther at first, as appears in his Epistle
to the Galatians: but, perceiving how this good doctrine was abused, he speaks
in his Commentary on Genesis (which was one of his last works) much against
Antinomists: But yet, because generally people are fallen into a formality of
truths, it is good to set up Christ. And the poison of this opinion will be
seen in these things:

1. It overthrows the nature of grace. And this holds against 1.
Justification by the Law overthrowes the nature of grace.
the works of the Gospel, as well as those of the Law. Take notice of this,
that justification by works does not only exclude the works of the Law, but
all works of the Gospel, yea and the works of grace also. Hence you see, the
opposition is of works, and of grace. Here the Apostle makes an immediate
opposition, whereas the Papist would say, Paul has a non sequitur; for, datur
tertium, works of and by grace. But works do therefore oppose grace, because
the frequent acception of it in the Scripture is for the favor of God without
us, not any thing in us. I will not deny but that the word [grace] is used for
the effects of it, inherent holiness wrought in us, as in that place, Grow in
grace and knowledge; but yet commonly grace is used for the favor of God. And
the ignorance of the use of the word in Scripture, makes them so extol
inherent holiness, as if that were the grace which should save us. As (says
the Papist) a bird cannot fly without wings, the fish swim without scales,
the Sculler without his oar cannot get to the haven: so, without this grace,
we cannot fly into heaven, and that as the meritorius cause. But this is
ignorance of the word [grace,] and so the troubles and unbelief of the godly
heart, because it is not so holy as it would be, comes from the mistake of the
word [grace.] I shall anticipate my self in another subject, if I should tell
you how comprehensive this word is, implying no merit or causality on our part
for acceptance, but the clean contrary; and therefore, for God to deal with
us in grace, is more then in love: for Adam, if he had continued righteous, he
had been partaker of life; this had been the gift of God, but not by the grace
of God, as it is strictly taken; for Adam was not in a contrary condition to
life. I will not trouble you with Pareus his apprehension, that thinks Adams
righteousness could not be called grace, therefore reproves Bellarmine for
his title, De gratia primi hominis: neither will he acknowledge those habits
of holiness in Christ to be called grace, because there was not a contrary
disposition in his nature to it, as it is in ours. And this also Cameron
presses, that, besides the indebitum which grace implies in every subject,
there is also a demeritum of the contrary. Thus then justification is of grace,
because thy holiness does not only not deserve this, but the clean contrary.
Now what a cordial may this be to the broken heart, exercised with its sins?
How may the sick say, There I find health? the poor say, There I find
riches? And as for the Papists, who say they set up grace, and they acknowledge
grace; yet first it must be set down in what sense we take grace. It is not
every man that talks of grace, does therefore set up Scripture-grace. Who
knows not that the Pelagians set up grace? They determined, that whosoever
did not acknowledge grace necessary to every good act all the day long, let him
be an anathema: and this fair color did deceive the Eastern Churches, that
they did acquit him: But Austine and others observed, that he did gratiae
vocabulo uti ad frangendam invidiam; even as the Papists do at this time:
therefore if they say, Thy patience is grace, Thy hope is grace, and therefore
by grace thou art saved; say, This is not the Gospel Grace, the
Scripture-grace, by which sins are pardoned, and we saved.

2. It opposes Christ in his fullness: It makes an halfe-Christ. 2. Opposes
the fullness of Christ.
Thus the false Apostles made Christ void, and fell off from him. Neither will
this serve, to say that the Apostle speaks of the ceremonial law: for (as we
told you) though the differences about the Jewish ceremonies, were the occasion
of those differences in the primitive times, yet the Apostle goes from the
hypothesis to the thesis, even to all works whatsoever, and therefore excludes
Abraham's and David's works from justification. Now Christ would be no Christ if
works were our righteousness; because the righteousness by the faith of
Christ is opposed to Paul's own righteousness, and this is called the
righteousness of God: Yea, this is said to be made righteousness unto us, and
he is called the Lord our righteousness; and howsoever Bellarmine would
understand these phrases causally, as when God is called the Lord our
salvation; yet we shall show you it cannot be so, therefore if thy works
justify thee, what needs a Christ? Can thy graces be a Christ?

3. It destroys the true doctrine of Justification. I shall not 3. Destroys
the true doctrine of Justification.
lanch into this Ocean at this time, only consider how the Scripture speaks of
it, as not infusing what is perfect, but forgiving what is imperfect; as in
David, Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no sin. I shall not at
this time dispute whether there be two parts of Justification, one positive, in
respect of the term to which, called Imputation of Christ's righteousness; the
other negative, in respect of the term from which, Not accounting sin. This
later I only press: Therefore, What is it to be justified? Not to have
holiness accepted of us, but our sins remitted: Justitia nostra, est
indulgentia tua, Domine. Now, what a comfortable plea is this for an humbled
soul, O Lord, it is not the question, what good I have, but what evil thou will forget: It is not to find righteous works in me, but to pass by the
unrighteousness in me? What can satisfy thy soul, if this will not do? Is not
this (as I told you) with Chrysostom, to stand upon a spring rising higher and
higher?

4. It quite overthrows justifying faith: for when Christ and 4. Overthrows
justifying faith.
grace is overthrown, this also must fall to the ground. There are these three
maine concurrent causes to our justification: The grace of God as the
efficient, Christ as the meritorious, and faith as the isntrumental; and
although one of these causes be more excellent then the other (the efficient
then the isntrumental) yet all are equally necessary to that effect of
justification. That faith does instrumentally justify, I here take it for
granted. As for the Antinomian, who holds it before faith, and thinks the
argument from Infants will plainly prove it, I shall show the contrary in its
due time: only this is enough, that an isntrumental particle is attributed to
it, By faith in his blood, and, By faith in his Name, and, justified By faith.
It is true, it is never said (...), for faith, as if there were dignity or merit
in it; but (...). Now to set up works is to oppose faith, as the Apostle
argues: therefore faith, as it is a work, is to be opposed to it self, as
its an instrument justifying.

5. It quite discourageth a brokenhearted sinner, taking away peace 5.
Discourageth the brokenhearted sinner.
with God, the effect of justification, and glorying in tribulations. If you
consider Chapt. 5. of Romans you will find, that peace only comes this way, yea
and to glory in tribulations; for, ver. 1. being justified by faith, we have
peace with God. Alas, what patience, what repentance, what pains and religious
duties can procure thee peace with God? Can that which would damn, save? Can
that which would work woe in thee, comfort thee? Vae etiam laudabili vitae
erit, says Austin, as you heard; Woe to the most worthy life that is, if it
should be judged strictly by God. And then mark the object of this peace, Peace
with God. Take a Pharisee, take a moral or a formal man, he may have a great
deal of peace, because of his duties and good heart; yet, this is not a peace
with God: so also for glorying in tribulations, how can this be? If all a man's
glory were for himself, would not every affliction rather break him, saying,
This is the fruit of my sin?

6. It brings men into themselves. And this is very dangerous: 6. Brings men
into themselves.
A man may not only exclude Christ from his soul by gross sins, but by
selfe-confidences; You are they which justify your selves. And so the Jews,
they would not submit to their own righteousness; see how afraid Paul is to
be found in his own righteousness. Beza puts an emphasis upon this word
Found, implying, that justice, and the Law, and so the wrath of God is pursuing
and seeking after man: Where is that man that offends God, and transgresses
his Law? Where is that man that does not pray, or hear as he should do? Now
(says Paul) I would not be found in mine own righteousness. And this made
Luther say, Take heed, not only of thy sins, but also of thy good duties. Now,
if this were all the wine that the Antinomian would drink in Christ's cellar, if
this were all the honey that he would have in Christ's hive, none would
contradict it: but we shall show you the dangerous inferences they make from
hence, turning that which would be a rod, into a serpent.

7. It overthrows the doctrine of imputation, and reckoning righteousness 7.
Overthrowes the doctrine of imputed righteousness.
to us: which is spoken of Romans 4. and in other places. I know how this point
is vexed diverse ways; but this is enough for us: If righteousness were in us,
and properly ours, what need a righteousness be reckoned and imputed to us?
The Papist makes imputative, and putative, and imaginary all one. Who can say,
A lame man (say they) goes right, because he has other men's shoes? Who can
say, A deformed Thersites is a fair Absalom, because of borrowed beauty? But
these are easily refuted by Scripture, and we shall show you Christ's
righteousness is as really ours, as if it were inherent. They differ not in
reality, but in the manner of being ours. Now, here the Antinomian and Papist
agree in the inferences they make from this doctrine; If Christ's righteousness
be ours, then there is no sin in us seen by God, then we are as righteous as
Christ, argues the Antinomian: and this absurdity the Papists would put on us.

8. It keeps a man in a slavish servile way in all his duties: For, 8 Keeps a
man slavish in all his duties.
how must that man be needs tossed up and down, which has no other ground of
peace, then the works of grace? How is the humble heart soon made proud? how is
the heavenly heart soon become earthly? Now, you may see the Scripture speaking
much against doubting and fears; and, James 1. it is made the canker-worme,
that devoureth all our duties: Therefore the Scripture does name some words
that do oppose this Evangelicall temper of sons; as, Be not afraid, but
believe; so, Why doubted ye? the word signifies to be in bivio, that a man
cannot tell which ways to take to, (...), to be carried up and down, as
meteors in the air. Now, how can a man be bold by any thing that is his? By
faith we have confidence and boldness: faith is confidence, and faith works
confidence; but faith, whose object is Christ, not any thing of ours: it is made
the first word also we can speak, when we are made sons, to cry, Abba, Father.

9. A man may as lawfully join Saints or Angels in his mediation 9. Joins a
man's own graces to Christ's mediation.
with Christ, as graces. Why is that doctrine of making Angels and Saints
mediators and intercessors so odious, but because it joyneth Christ and others
together in that great work? Do not thou the like, when thou joynest thy love
and grace with Christ's obedience? The Papist says, Let such and such an holy
Saint save me; and thou say, Let my holy love, let my holy repentance save
me. What advantage then have thou, if thou criest down Saints, and then make
thy self one in a Popish way? Could therefore thy graces speak, they would say
as the Angel to John that would worship him, Worship thou God, worship thou
Christ, put thy trust in Christ; he has only borne our sins, so as to take
them away: and therefore, as gross Idolatry makes the works of God a god; so
does more subtle Idolatry make the works of Christ, a Christ.

10. It overthrows the grace of hope. When faith is destroyed, 10.
Overthrowes hope.
then also hope is. This grace of hope is the great support of a Christian:
now, if it be placed in Christ, and the promises, it is as firm as faith;
therefore says the Apostle of hope, Romans 5. It makes not ashamed: but, if it
were an hope in our selves, how often should we be confounded? That is good of
Austine, Noli sperare de te, sed de Deo tuo; nam si speras de te, anima tua
conturbatur ad te, quia nondum invenit unde sit secura de te. It Is an ignorant
distinction among Papists, that they may have a certainty of hope, but not of
faith in matters of salvation: whereas they have both the like certainty, and
differ only thus: faith does for the present receive the things promised, and
hope keeps up the heart against all difficulties, till it come to enjoy them.
Now, to have such an hope as the Papists define, partim e gratia Dei, and
partim a meritis nostris proveniens, must needs be destructive.

11. It takes away the glory due to God in this great work of Justification.
11. Robs God of his glory.
If you have not meat or drink but by God, shall you have pardon of sin without
him? Abraham believed, and gave God glory: We are apt to account believing no
glory to God; but could we mortify our corruptions more and more, could we
exhaust and spend our selves, yet this is no more to give glory to God, then
when we believe. Now, it is good to possess Christians with this principle, To
believe in Christ, is to give glory to Christ: we naturally would think, to go
far on pilgrimages, to macerate our bodies, were likelier ways for our
salvation; but this would be man's glory more then Gods glory: Therefore how did
that wretched Monk, dying blasphemously, say, Read mihi aternam vitam, quam
debes.

12. It makes sin, and the first Adam more and greater for condemnation, 12.
Makes more in sin to damn, then in Christ to save.
then Christ for salvation. Now the Apostle, Romans 5. makes the opposition, and
shows, that the gift is far above the transgression: Therefore take thy sins
in all the aggravations of them, there is not more in them to damn, then in
Christ to save. Why should sin be an heavy sin, a great sin, and Christ not
also a wonderful saving Christ? When we say, The guilt of sin is infinite,
that is, only infinite objective; but now Christ's merits and obedience are
infinite meritorie: they have from the dignity of the person an infinite worth
in them; and therefore, as sin is exceeding sinful, so let Christ be an
exceeding Christ, and grace exceeding grace.

13. It overthrows the true doctrine of sanctification: which declares 13.
Overthrowes the doctrine of sanctification.
it to be inchoate, and imperfect; that our faith has much unbelief in it,
our best gold much dross, our wine much water. It is true, both the Papists
and the Antinomian agree in this error, that because sin is covered, therefore
there can be no sin seen in the godly; that the soul in this life is without
spot and wrinckle: but they do it upon different grounds; whereas Paul, Romans
7. does abundantly destroy that principle. How blasphemous is that direction of
the Papists to men dying, who are to pray thus: Conjunge (Domine) obsequium
meum cum omnibus qua Christus passus est pro me? And how absurd is that
doctrine, Si bona opera sunt magis bona, quam mala opera mala, fortius merentur
vitam aternam?

14. It takes away the true doctrine of the Law, as if that were 14. Takes
away the doctrine of the Law.
possible to be kept: For, works could not justify us, unless they were
answerable to that righteousness which God commands; but Romans 3. that which
was impossible for the Law, Christ has fulfilled in us.

15. It overthrows the consideration of a man, while he is justified: 15.
Overthrows the consideration of man while he is justified.
For, they look upon him as godly, but the Scripture as ungodly; Romans 4. who
justifies the ungodly. Some by [ungodly,] mean any profane man, whereas it
is rather one that is not perfectly godly; for Abraham is here made the ungodly
person: I know, it is explained otherwise; but, certainly this is most genuine.

Use 1. Of Instruction. How uncharitably and falsely many men charge it
generally upon our godly Ministers, that they are nothing but Justitiaries, and
Legal Preachers? For, do not all sound and godly Ministers hold forth this
Christ, this righteousness, this way of justification? Do not all our
Protestant authors maintain this truth, as that which discerns us from
Heathens, Jews, Papists, and others in the world? May not these things be
heard in our Sermons daily?

Use 2. It is not every kind of denying the Law, and setting up of Christ and
Grace, is presently Antinomianisme. Luther, writing upon Genesis, handling that
sin of Adam, in eating of the forbidden fruit, speaks of a Fanatique, as he
calls him, that denied Adam could sin, because the Law is not given to the
righteous. Now, says Bellarmine, this is an argument satis apt deductum ex
principiis Lutheranorum, because they deny the Law to a righteous man. Here you
see he charge Antinomianisme upon Luther; but of these things more hereafter.

Use 3. To take heed of using the Law for our justification. It Is an
unwarranted way; you cannot find comfort there: Therefore let Christ be made
the matter of your righteousness and comfort more then he has been. You know,
the posts that were not sprinkled with blood, were sure to be destroyed; and
so are all those persons and duties, that have not Christ upon them. Christ is
the propitiation, and the Hebrew word (...), used for covering, and
propitiating of sin, is Genes. 6. used of the pitch or plaster, whereby the
wood of the Arc was so fastened, that no water could get in: and it does well
resemble the atonement made by Christ, whereby we are so covered, that the
waters of Gods wrath cannot enter upon us. And do not think, to believe in
Christ, a contemptible and unlikely way; for, it is not, because of the dignity
of faith, but by Christ. You see the hyssop (or whatsoever it was) which did
sprinkle the blood, was a contemptible herb, yet the instrument of much
deliverance.

LECTURE III.
1 TIMOTHY 1. 8, 9. Knowing the Law is good, if a man use it lawfully.
IT is my intent, after the clear proof of Justification by the grace of God,
and not of works, to show how corrupt the Antinomian is in his inferences
hence from; and, this being done, I shall show you the necessity of holy and
good works notwithstanding.

But before I come to handle some of their dangerous errors in this point, let
me premise something, As,

1. How cautelous and wary the Ministers of God ought to be in this Ministers
ought so to set forth grace, and defend good works, as thereby to give the
Enemy neither cause of exception, nor insultation.
matter, so to set forth grace, as not to give just exception to the popish
caviller; and so to defend holy works, as not to give the Antinomian cause of
insultation. While our Protestant authors were diligent in digging out that
precious gold of justification by free grace, out of the mine of the Scripture;
see what Canons the Council of Trent made against them, as Antinomian: Can.
19. If any man shall say, December praecepta nihil ad Christianos pertinere,
anathema sit. Again, Can. 20. Si quis dixerit hominem justificatum non teneri
ad observantiam mandatorum, sed tantum ad credendum, anathema sit. Again, Can.
21. Si quis dixerit Christum Jesum datum fuisse hominibus ut redemptorem cui
fidant, non autem ut legislatorem cui obediant, anathema sit. You may gather by
these their Canons, that we hold such opinions as, indeed, the Antinomian
does: but our Writers answer, Here they grossly mistake us; and, if this were
all the controversy, we should quickly agree. It is no wonder then if it be so
hard to preach free grace, and not provoke the Papist; or, on the otherside, to
preach good works of the Law, and not offend the Antinomian.

2. There have been dangerous assertions about good works, even by those that
were no Antinomians, out of a great zeal for the grace of God against Papists.
These indeed, for ought I can learn, did no ways join with the Antinomians;
but in this point there is too much affinity. There were rigid Lutherans called
Flactans, who as they did go too far, at least in their expressions, about
original corruption (for there are those that do excuse them;) so also they
went too high against good works: Therefore instead of that position,
maintained by the orthodox, Bona opera sunt necessaria ad salutem; they held,
Bona opera sunt perniciosa ad salutem. The occasion of this division was the
book called, The Interim, which Charles the Emperor would have brought into
the Germane Churches. In that book was this passage, Good works are necessary
to salvation: to which Melancthon and others assented (not understanding a
necessity of merit, or efficiency, but of presence;) but Flacius Illyricus and
his followers would not, taking many high expressions out of Luther (even as
the Antinomians do) for their ground. Hence also Zanchy, because in his
writings he had such passages as these, No man grown up can be saved, unless
he give himself to good works, and walk in them. One Hinckellman, a Lutheran,
does endeavor, by a troop of nine Arguments, to tread down this assertion of
Zanchy, which he calls Calviniana (...), as a most manifest error. Now, if all
this were spoken to take men off from that general secret sin of putting
confidence in the good works we do, it were more tolerable: in which sense we
applaud that of Luther, Cave non tantum ab operibus malis, sed etiam a bonis;
and that of another man, who said, he got more good by his sins, then his
graces: But these speeches must be soundly understood. We also love that of
Austine, Omnia mandata tua facta deputantur, quando quicquid non fit,
ignoscitur.

3. That if the incommodious, yea and erroneous passages in Antinomian Authors,
were used for some reasons hereafter to be mentioned, it were the more
tolerable: but that seems not to be. There is more poison then can be
concocted in them. But if this were their ground of many unsavory assertions
among them, merely their want of clear judgment to express themselves, so
that they think more orthodoxly then they write; then they might be excused,
as being in a logomachy: but with this proviso, as Austine said of them that
used the word fatum in a good sense, Mentem teneant, sed linguam corrigant.
Now, that there may be injudiciousnesse in them, as a cause in part of some of
their erroneous passages, will appear in that they frequently speak
contradictions. This is a passage often, but very dangerous, that, Let a man be
a wicked man, even as high as enmity it self can make a man, yet while he is
thus wicked, and while he is no better, his sins are pardoned, and he
justified. Yet now in other passages, Though a man be never so wicked, yet if
he come to Christ, if he will take Christ, his sins are pardoned: now what a
contradiction is here, To be wicked, and, while he is wicked, and, while he is
no better, and yet to take Christ, unless they hold that, to take Christ, or,
to come to him, be no good thing at all? But happily more of their
contradictions hereafter. Their injudiciousnesse and weakness does also
appear, that when they have laid down such a truth as every godly Author
has, they have so many words about it, and do so commend it, as if they had
found a Philosophers Stone, or a Phoenix; as if the Reader should presently cry
out and say, Behold a greater then Solomon is here: and yet it is but that
which every Writer almost has. Again, their injudiciousnesse does appear, in
that they mind only the promissory part of the Scripture, and do stand very
little upon the mandatory part. There are five or six places, such as, Christ
came to save that which was lost, and, He has laid on him the iniquities of
us all, etc. these are over and over again: But you shall seldom or never
have these places urged, Make your calling and election sure. Work out your
salvation with fear and trembling; whereas all Scripture is given for our use.
Therefore, 1. If weakness were all the ground of this controversy, the danger
were not so great. Or, 2dly. If the end and aim they had, were only to put
men off from glorying in themselves, to deny the concurrence of works to the
act of justification. If their desire were that men should not (as Michal) put
an image in David's room, so neither that Christians should put their works in
Christ's stead, thus far it might be excusable: but then their books, and their
aims cannot be reconciled. Or, If, 3dly. their maine drift was only to show
that good works follow a justified person, and that they do not antecede; here
would be no opposition: but they deny the presence of them in time. Or, 4. If
the question were about preparatory works to justification and conversion;
though (for my part) I think there are such, with those limitations that
hereafter may be given to them: this also were not so heinous. Or fifthly, If
the dispute were only upon the space of time between a profane man's
profaneness, and his justification, or the quantity of his sorrow; these
things were of another debate. I do acknowledge, that the Christian Religion
was matter of offense to the Heathens, in that they taught, Though a man had
never been so wicked, yet, if he did receive Christ, he should be pardoned; and
how soon this may be done, it is as God pleases: but there is an alteration of
the man's nature at that time also; and Chrysostom, indeed, has such a passage
upon that Scripture, The righteous shall live by faith, Romans 1. by faith only
a man has remission of sins; Now (says he) this is a Paradox to humane
reason, that he who was an adulterer, a murderer, should presently be
accounted righteous, if he do believe in Christ: but this differs from the
Antinomian assertion, as much as heaven from hell. So it is related in
Ecclesiastical history of Constantine the Great, that when he had killed many
of his kindred, yea and was counseled also to murder his own son, repenting
of these heinous crimes, ask't S^pater the Philosopher, who succeeded Plotinus
in teaching him, Whether there could be any expiation for those sins? The
Philosopher said, No: afterward he asked the Christian Bishops, and they said,
I, if he would believe in Christ. This was feigned, to make our Religion
odious. Or sixthly, If it were to show, that there cannot be assurance before
justification, or that to rely upon Christ for pardon, it is not necessary I
should know whether I have truly repented, or no. This were also of another
nature.

Therefore let us see what prejudicial inferences they gather from this
doctrine of Justification. I know, the proper place of handling this will come,
when we speak of that point; but yet, to give some antidote against their
errors, I will name some few: as, 1. Denying them to be a way to heaven. Thus
one expressly 1. Antinomians deny works to be a way to heaven.
(Sect. 4. on Christ being a way, page 68.) It is a received conceit among many
persons, that our obedience is a way to heaven; though it be not causa, yet
it is via ad regnuns: Now this he labors to confute. As for the speech it
self, Divines have it out of Bernard, where, among other encomium's of good
works, calling them spei quaedam seminaria, charitatis incentiva, occultae
praedestinationis indicia, futurae felicitatis praesagia, he adds this, via
regni, non causa regnandi. Now it is true, that they are not a way in that sense
that Christ is called a Way, no more then the spiritual life of a Christian is
life in that sense Christ styles himself Life; for, here he understands it of
himself, as the causall and meritorious way: Therefore there are articles added
to every one, (...)* and that which follows makes it clear, No man can come
to the Father, but by me.

Object. Oh, but say they, our works are our business and employment, not our
way.

Sol. I answer, when we call them a way, it is a metaphor, and such a metaphor,
that the Scripture does often delight in: Thus the ways of God are said to be
perfect, Deuteronomy. 32. that is, the works of the Lord; and thus, when it is applied
to men, it signifies any religion, doctrine, manners, actions, or course of
life, 2 Pet. 2. 2, 15, 21. Thus Mat. 7. 17. Strait is the way that leads to
life: What is this, but the work of grace and godliness? for, as for that
exposition of the same author, to understand it of Christ, as if he were
strait, because men do account him so, and therefore would add works to him,
this is to compel Scripture to go two miles with us, that would not go one;
and then, by the opposition, not wickedness, but the Devil himself would be
the broad way: So that good works are both our way, and employment also.

2. Denying the presence of them in the person justified. And truly, 2. They
deny their presence in the person justified.
this is so dangerous, that I know not how charity can excuse it: It is such a
naevus, that ubera charitatis cannot tegere, cover it. For, thus says the
Author expressly, speaking of that of Paul, Therefore we conclude, a man is
justified without the deeds of the Law: Here (says he) the Apostle does not
only exclude works from having any power operative to concur in the laying
iniquities upon Christ, but excludes all manner of works men can do, to be
present and existent in persons, when God does justify them. And he instanceth
of a general pardon for thieves and traitors: New (says he) one may take the
pardon as well as another. And so speaking upon that place, [He has received
gifts for men, even for the rebellious,] he concludes, that therefore though a
man do rebel actually from time to time, and do practice this rebellion;
yet, though this person do thus, the hatefullnesse thereof is laid upon
Christ: Is not this such a doctrine that must needs please an ungodly heart?

3. In the denying of gaining any thing by them, even any peace of 3. They deny
any gain or loss to come by them.
heart, or losing it by them. Now this goes contrary to Scripture. Thus page
139. (the Antinomian says) The business we are to do is this, that though
there be sins committed, yet there is no peace broken, because the breach of
peace is satisfied in Christ; there is a reparation of the damage before the
damage it self be committed. And again, page 241. If God come to reckon with
believers for sin, either he must ask something of them, or not; If not, why
are they troubled? If so, then God cannot bring a new reckoning. And in other
places, If a man look to get any thing by his graces, he will have nothing but
knocks. To answer these, it is true, if a man should look by any repentance or
grace to have heaven and pardon, as a cause or merit, this were to be ignorant
of the imperfection of all our graces, and the glorious greatness of those
mercies: What proportion has our faith, or godly sorrow with the everlasting
favor and good pleasure of God? But first, the Scripture uses severe and
sharp threatenings even unto the godly, where they neglect to repent, or go on
in sin, Romans 8. 13. If ye live after the flesh, you shall die: especially
consider that place, Hebr. 12. two last verses; the Apostle alludeth to that
place, Deuteronomy. 4. and he says, Our God (as well as the God of the Jews, who
appeared in terror) is a consuming fire: Now then, if the Scripture threatens
thus to men living in sin, if they do not, they may find comfort. 2dly. Our
holy duties, they have a promise of pardon, and eternal life, though not
because of their worth, yet to their presence: and therefore may the godly
rejoice when they find them in themselves. Lastly, their ground is still upon
that false bottom, Because our sins are laid upon Christ. What then? they may
be laid upon us in other respects, to heal us, to know how bitter a thing it
is to sin against God. God does here, as Joseph with his brethren; he caused
them to be bound, and to be put in goales, as if now they were to smart for
their former impiety. 4. They deny them to be signs of grace.


4. In denying them to be signs and testimonies of grace, or Christ dwelling
in us. And here, indeed, one would wonder to see how laborious an Author is to
prove, that no inherent graces can be signs: and he selects three instances,
Of universality of obedience, Of sincerity, and love to the brethren;
concluding, that there are two evidences only; one revealing, which is the
Spirit of God immediately; the other receiving, and that is faith. Now, in
answering of this, we may show briefly how many weak props this discourse
leans upon:

1. In confounding the isntrumental evidencing with the efficient; Not holy
works (say they) but the Spirit: Here he does oppose subordinates; Subordinata
non sunt opponenda, sed componenda. As if a man should say, We see not by the
beams, or reflection of the Sun, but the Sun. Certainly, every man is in
darkness, and, like Hagar, sees not a fountain, though near her, till her
eyes be opened. Thus it is in grace.

2. We say, that a Christian, in time of darkness and temptation, is not to
go by signs and marks, but obedientially to trust in God, as David calls
upon his soul often; and the word is emphaticall, signifying such a relying or
holding, as a man does that is falling down into a pit irrecoverably.

3. His Arguments, against sincerity, and universality of obedience, go upon
two false grounds: 1. That a man cannot distinguish himself from hypocrites;
which is contrary to the Scriptures exhortation. 2. That there can be no
assurance, but upon a full and complete work of godliness. All which are
popish arguments.

4. All those arguments will hold as strongly against faith; for, Are there not
many believers for a season? Is there not a faith that indureth but for a
while? May not then a man as soon know the sincerity of his heart, as the
truth of his faith?

Now let us consider their grounds for this strange assertion, 1. Because,
Roman. 4. it is said, that God justifies the ungodly. How God may be said to
justify the ungodly.
Now this has a twofold answer; 1. That which our Divines do commonly give,
that these words are not to be understood in sensu composito, but diviso, and
antecedenter: he that was ungodly, is, being justified, made godly also, though
that godliness do not justify him. Therefore they compare these passages
with those of making the blind to see, and deaf to hear; not that they did
see while they were blind, but those that were blind do now see: and this is
true and good. But I shall, secondly, answer it, with some learned men, that
ungodly there is meant of such, who are so in their nature considered, having
not an absolute righteousness, yet at the same time believers, even as Abraham
was; and faith of the ungodly man is accounted to him for righteousness: So
then, the subject of justification is a sinner, yet a believer. Now it is
impossible that a man should be a believer, and his heart not purified, Acts
15. for whole Christ is the object of his faith, who is received not only to
justify, but to sanctify. Hence Romans 8. where the Apostle seems to make an
exact order, he begins with Prescience (that is approbative and complacentiall,
not in a Popish or Arminian sense) then Predestination, then Calling, then
Justification, then Glorification. I will not trouble you with the dispute, in
which place Sanctification is meant. Now the Antinomian, he goes upon that as
true, which the Papist would calumniate us with, That a profane ungodly man, if
believing, shall be justified: We say this proposition supposes an
impossibility, that faith in Christ, or closing with him, can stand with those
sins, because faith purifieth the heart; By faith Christ dwells in our hearts,
Ephesians. 3. Therefore those expressions of the Antinomians are very dangerous and
unfound, and do indeed confirm the Papists calumnies.

Another place they much stand upon is Romans 5. Christ dyed for us while we were
enemies, while we were sinners: But 1. if Christ dyed for us while we were
enemies, why do they say, That if a man be as great an enemy as enmity it
self can make a man, if he be willing to take Christ, and to close with
Christ, he shall be pardoned? (which, we say, is a contradiction.) For, how can
an enemy to Christ, close with Christ? So that this would prove more then in
some places they would seem to allow.

Besides, Christ dyed not only to justify, but save us: now will they hence
therefore infer, that profane men, living so, and dying so, shall be saved?
And indeed the grand principle, That Christ has purchased and obtained all
graces antecedently to us, in their sense, will as necessarily infer, that a
drunkard, abiding a drunkard, shall be saved, as well as justified.

But, thirdly, to answer that place, When it is said, that Christ dyed, and
rose again for sinners, you must know, that this is the meritorious cause of
our pardon and salvation; but, besides this cause, there are other causes
isntrumental, that go to the whole work of Justification: Therefore some
Divines, as they speak of a conversion passive and active, so also of a
justification active and passive; and passive they call, when not only the
meritorious cause, but the instrument applying is also present, then the person
is justified. Now these speak of Christ's death as an universal meritorious
cause, without any application of Christ's death unto this or that soul:
Therefore still you must carry this along with you, that, to that grand mercy
of justification, something is requisite as the efficient, viz. the grace of
God; something as meritorious, viz. Christ's suffering; something as
isntrumental, viz. faith; and one is as necessary as the other.

I will but mention one place more, and that is Psalm. 68. 18. Thou have
received gifts even for the rebellious also, that the Lord God may dwell among
them. Here they insist much upon this, yea for the rebellious; and says the
Author, page 411. Seeing God cannot dwell where iniquity is, Christ received
gifts for men, that the Lord God might dwell among the rebellious; and by this
means, God can dwell with those persons that do act the rebellion, because
all the hatefulness of it is transacted from those persons upon the back of
Christ. And, says the same Author, page 412. The holy Ghost does not say, that
the Lord takes rebellious persons and gifts, and prepares them, and then will
come and dwell with them; but even then, while they are rebellious, without any
stop, the Lord Christ has received gifts for them, that the Lord God may dwell
among them. Is not all this strange? Though the same Author press
sanctification never so much in other places, yet certainly such principles as
these overgrow it.

But as for this place, it will be the greatest adversary they have against
them, if you consider the scope of it; for, there the Psalmist speaks of the
fruit and power of Christ's ascension, as appears Ephesians. 3. whereby gifts were
given to men, that so even the most rebellious might be converted, and changed
by this ministry; so that this is clean contrary: And besides, those words,
with them, or, among them, are not in the Hebrew; therefore some refer them
to the rebellious, and make Jah in the Hebrew, and Elohim, in the Vocative
case, even for the rebellious (O Lord God) to inhabit; as that of Esaias, The
Wolf and the Lamb shall dwell together: Some refer it to Gods dwelling, yet
do not understand it of his dwelling with them, but of his dwelling, i. e.
fixing the Arc after the enemies are subdued. But take our Edition to be the
best (as it seems to be) yet it must be meant of rebels changed by his
Spirit; for the Scripture uses (...), and (...) of Gods dwelling in men, but
still converted, Romans 8. 11. Ephesians. 3. 12. 2 Cor. 6. 16.

LECTURE IV.
1 TIMOTHY 1. 8, 9. Knowing the Law is good, if a man use it lawfully.
HAving confuted some dangerous inferences, that the Antinomian makes from that
precious doctrine of Justification, I shall at this time answer only one
question, Upon what grounds are the people of God to be zealous of good works?
for it is very hard to repent, to love, to be patient, or fruitful, and not to
do them for this end, to justify us: And, howsoever theologically, and in the
notion, we may make a great difference between holiness as a way or means,
and as a cause or merit of salvation; yet practically the heart does not use to
distinguish so subtilely. Therefore, although I intend not to handle the whole
doctrine of Sanctification or new obedience at this time; yet I should leave my
discourse imperfect, if I did not inform you, how good works of the Law done
by grace, and justification of the Gospel, may stand together.

First therefore take notice what we mean by good works. We take not good
works strictly, for the works of charity or liberality; nor for any external
actions of religion, which may be done where the heart is not cleansed; much
less for the Popish good works of supererogation: but for the graces of Gods
Spirit in us, and the actions flowing from them: For, usually, with the Papists
and Popish persons, good works are commonly called those superstitious and
supererogant works, which God never commanded: or, if God has commanded them,
they mean them as external and sensible; such as, Coming to Church, and,
Receiving of sacraments; not internal and spiritual faith, and a contrite
spirit, which are the soul of all duties: and if these be not there, the
outward duties are like clothes upon a dead man, that cannot warm him, because
there is no life within. Therefore much is required even to the essence of a
godly work, though it be not perfect in degrees: As, 1. It must be commanded
Four things required to the essence of good works.
by God, 2. It must be wrought in us by the Spirit of God. All the unregenerate
man's actions, his prayers, and services are sins. 3. It must flow from an
inward principle of grace, or a supernatural being in the soul, whereby a man
is a new creature. 4. The end must be Gods glory. That which the most refined
man can do, is but a glow-worme, not a star: So that then only is the work
good, when, being answerable to the rule, it is from God, and through God, and
to God.

2. That the Antinomian erreth two contrary ways about good works: Sometimes
they speak very erroneously and grossly about them. Thus Islebius Agricola, the
first Antimonian that was (who afterward joined with others in making that
wicked Book, called, The Interim) and his followers, deliver these Positions,
That saying of Peter, Make your calling and election sure, is dictum inutile,
an unprofitable saying, and Peter did not understand Christian liberty. So
again, As soon as thou once beginnest to think, how men should live godlily
and modestly, presently thou have wandered from the Gospel. And again, The Law
and works only belong to the Court of Rome. Then, on the other side, they
lift them up so high, that, by reason of Christ's righteousness imputed to us,
they hold all our works perfect, and so apply that place, Ephesians. 1. Christ's
cleansing his Church, so, as to be without spot or wrinkle, even pure in this
life. They tell us not only of a righteousness or justification by
imputation, but also Saintship and holiness by this obedience of Christ: And
hence it is, that God sees no sin in believers. This is a dangerous position:
and, although they have Similies to illustrate, and distinctions to qualify
it; yet, when I speak of imputed righteousness, there will be the proper place
to show the dangerous falsehood of them.

3. You must, in the discourse you shall hear concerning the necessity of good
works, carefully distinguish between these two Propositions: Good works are
necessary to believers, to justified persons, or to those that shall be saved;
and this, Good works are necessary to justification and salvation. Howsoever
this later is true in some sense, yet, because the words carry as if holiness
had some effect immediately upon our justification and salvation, therefore I
do wholly assent to those learned men, that think, in these two cases, we
should not use such a Proposition: 1. When we deal with adversaries,
especially Papists, in disputation; for then we ought to speak exactly:
Therefore the Fathers would not use the word (...) of the Virgin Mary, lest
they should seem to yield to Nestorius, who denied her to be (...). The second
case is in our sermons and exhortations to people; for, what common hearer is
there, that, upon such a speech, does not conceive that they are so necessary,
as that they immediately work our justification? The former proposition holds
them offices and duties in the persons justified; the other, as conditions
effecting justification.

4. These good works ought to be done, or are necessary upon Good works are
necessary:
these grounds: 1. They are the fruit and end of Christ's death, Titus 1.
Because they are the fruit of Christ's death.
2. 14. It Is a full place: The Apostle there shows, that the whole fruit and
benefit of Christ's redemption is lost by those that live not holily. There are
two things in our sins: 1. The guilt, and that Christ does redeem us from: 2.
The filth, and that he does purify from: If Christ redeem thee from the guilt
of thy lusts, he will purify thee from the noisomenesse of them. And mark a
twofold end of this purification, that we may be a peculiar people: This word
(...), Hierome says, he sought for among humane authors, and could not find
it: therefore some think the Seventy feigned this, and (...). It answers to the
Hebrew word Begullah, and signifies that which is precious and excellent, got
also with much labor: so that this holiness, this repentance of thine, it
cost Christ dear. And the other effect is, zealous of good works. The Greek
Fathers observe, the Apostle does not say followers, but zealous; that does
imply great alacrity and affection. And, lest men should think we should only
preach of Christ and grace; These things speak, (says he) and exhort: And
Calvine thinks the last words [Let no man despise thee] spoken to the people:
they are for the most part of delicate ears, and cannot abide plain words of
mortification.

2. There is some kind of analogicall relation between them and 2. Because (in
respect of evil works) there is some Analogy between heaven and them.
heaven, comparatively with evil works. So those places, where it is said, If
we confess our sins, he is not only faithful, but also just, to forgive us
our iniquities: So 2 Timothy 4. 8. a Crown of righteousness, which the righteous
Judge, etc. These words do not imply any condignity, or efficiency in the good
things we do; but an ordinability of them to eternal life: so that evil and
wicked works, they cannot be ordained to everlasting life, but these may.
Hence some Divines say, That though godliness be not meritorious, nor causall
of salvation, yet it may be a motive: as they instance; If a King should give
great preferment to one that should salute him in a morning, this salutation
were neither meritorious, nor causall of that preferment, but a mere motive
arising from the good pleasure of the King: And thus much they think that
particle, for I was an hungry, does imply. So that God, having appointed
holiness the way, and salvation the end, hence there arises a relation
between one and the other.

3. There is a promise made to them. 1 Timothy 4. 8. Godliness has 3. Because a
promise is made unto them.
the promises (as its in the Original;) because there are many promises
scattered up and down in the Word of God: so that to every godly action thou
do, there is a promise of eternal life. And hereby, though God be not a
debtor to thee, yet he is to himself, and to his own faithfulness; Reddis
debita, nulli debens, cried Austine: so that the godly may say, Oh, Lord, it
was free for thee before thou had promised, whether thou would give me
heaven or no; but now the word is out of thy mouth: not but that we deserve
the contrary, only the Lord is faithful; therefore, says David, I will
mention thy righteousness, i. e. faithfulness, only: and then mark what the
Apostle says of this speech, This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance. This made them labor, and suffer shame. If you ask, How then is
not the Gospel a covenant of works? That in brief shall be answered
afterward.

4. They are testimonies whereby our election is made sure. 2 Pet. 4. Because
testimonies assuring us of our election.
1. ver. 10. Make your calling and election sure. The Vulgar Translator
interprets those words [per bona opera,] and complains of Luther, as putting
this out of the Text, because it made against him, but it is no part of
Scripture. Now observe the emphasis of the Apostle, (...) first they must be
very diligent, and the rather (which is spoken ex abundanti) [to make their
calling and election sure] What God does in time, or what he has decreed from
eternity to us in love: [to make sure, (...).] Estius and other Papists strive
for firm, and not sure; and so indeed the word is sometimes used: but here the
Apostle speaks not of what it is in it self, but what it is to us, and the
certainty thereof. And observe the Apostles motives for making our election
sure; 1. Ye shall never fail: the word is used sometimes of grievous, and
sometimes of lesser sins; but here he means such a failing, that a man shall
not recover again. 2. An entrance shall be abundantly ministered into heaven.
It Is true, these are not testimonies without the Spirit of God.

5. They are a condition, without which a man cannot be saved. So 5. Because we
cannot be saved without them.
that although a man cannot by the presence of them gather a cause of his
salvation; yet by the absence of them he may conclude his damnation: so that it
is an inexcusable speech of the Antinomian, Good works do not profit us, nor
bad hinder us; thus Islebius. Now the Scripture, how full is it to the
contrary? Romans 8. 13. If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die. So, Except
ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Such places are so frequent, that
its a wonder an Antinomian can pass them all over, and always speak of those
places which declare Gods grace to us, but not our duty to him. Without
holiness no man can see God: now, by the Antinomians argument, as a man may be
justified, while he is wicked, and does abide so; so also he may be glorified
and saved: for this is their principle, that, Christ has purchased
justification, glory, and salvation for us, even though sinners and enemies.

6. They are in their own nature a defense against sin and corruption. 6.
Because they are a defense against sin.
If we do but consider the nature of these graces, though imperfect, yet that
will plead for the necessity of them. Ephesians. 6. 14, 16. There you have some
graces a shield, and some a breastplate: now every soldier knows the
necessity of these in time of war. Its true, the Apostle speaks of the might of
the Lord, and prayer must be joined to these; but yet the principal does not
oppose the isntrumental. Hence Romans 13. they are called the weapons of the
light. Its Luthers observation, He does not call the works of darkness, the
weapons of darkness; but good works he does call weapons, quia bonis operibus
debemus uti tanquam armis to resist Satan: and he calls them the weapons of
light, because they are from God, the fountain of light; and because they are,
according to Scripture, the true light; although Drusius thinks light is here
used for victory, as Jud. 5. 31. Psalm. 132. 17, 18. and so the word is used of
Homer: and Marcellinus speaks of an ancient custom, when, at supper time, the
children brought in the candles, they cried, (...).

7. They are necessary by a natural connection with faith, and the 7. Because
necessary by a natural connection with faith, and the Spirit of God.
Spirit of God: Hence it is called faith which works by love. The Papist
Lorinus thinks we speak a contradiction, because sometimes we say, faith
only justifies; sometimes, that unless our faith be working, it cannot
justify us: but here is no contradiction; for it is only thus: Faith, which is
a living faith, does justify, though not as it does live; for faith has two
notable acts: 1. To apprehend and lay hold upon Christ, and thus it justifies.
2. To purify and cleanse the heart, and to stir up other graces, and thus it
does not: And thus Paul and James may be reconciled; for James brings that very
passage to prove Abraham was not justified by faith alone, which Paul brings to
prove he was; because one intends to show that his faith was a working faith;
and the other, that that alone did concur to justify: and thus in this sense
some learned men say, Good works are necessary to preserve a man in the state
of justification, although they do not immediately concur to that act: as in
a man, although his shoulders and breast do not concur immediately to the act
of seeing; yet if a man's eye and head were not knit to those parts, he could
not see: and so, though the fire do not burn as it is light, yet it could not
burn unless it were so; for it supposes then the subject would be destroyed.
Its a saying of John Husse, Vbi bona opera non apparent ad extra, ibi fides non
est ad intra: Therefore, as Christ, while he remained the second Person, was
invisible, but when he was incarnated, then he became visible; so must thy
faith be incarnated into works, and it must become flesh as it were.

8. They are necessary by debt and obligation: So that God by his 8 By debt and
obligation.
sovereignty might have commanded all obedience from man, though he should give
him no reward of eternal life: Therefore David did well argue, that we cannot
merit at Gods hand, because the more good we are enabled to do, we are the
more beholding to God. Hence it is, that we are his servants, Servus non est
persona, sed res: and we are more servants to God, then the meerest slave can
be to man; for, we have our being and power to work from him: And this
obligation is so perpetual and necessary, that no covenant of grace can
abolish it; for, gratia non destruit naturam.

9. By command of God. This is the will of God, your sanctification: 9. By
command of God. 1 These. 43. Romans 12. 2.
So that you may prove what is that good and acceptable will of God. And thus
the Law of God still remains as a rule and directory: And thus Paul professed
he delighted in the Law of God in his inward man; and that place, Romans 12.
presses our renovation, comparing us to a sacrifice, implying we are
consecrated, and set apart to him (a dog or a swine might not be offered to
God:) And the word [Offer] does imply our readiness and alacrity. He also
adds many epithets to the will of God, that so we may be moved to rejoice in
it. There is therefore no disputing or arguing against the will of God. If our
Savior, Mat. 5. says, He shall be least in the Kingdom of heaven, that
breaks the least commandment; how much more inexcusable is the Antinomian,
who teaches, the abolition of all of them?

10. They are necessary by way of comfort to our selves. And this 10. By way of
comfort to our selves.
opposes many Antinomian passages, who forbid us to take any peace by our
holiness. Now it is true, to take them so as to put confidence in them, to take
comfort from them, as a cause, that cannot be; for, who can look upon any thing
he does with that boldness? It was a desperate speech of Panigarola a Papist
(as Rivet relates) who called it folly to put confidence only in Christ's
blood. We know no godly man satisfies his own heart in any thing he does,
much less can he the will of God. We cannot at the same time say, Lord,
forgive me, and, Pay me what thou owe; yet these good works, though
imperfect, may be a great comfort unto us, as the testimony of Gods eternal
love to us. Thus did Hezekiah, 2 Kings 20. 3. Hezekiah is not there a proud
Pharisee, but a thankful acknowledger of what is in him: and some consider,
that this temptation might fall upon Hezekiah, that when he had labored to
demolish all those superstitions, and now became dangerously sick that he had
not done well; therefore he comforts himself in his heart, that he did those
things with, not that he meant an absolute perfect heart, but sincere, and
comparatively perfect. Hence it is observed, the word I have walked, is in
Hiphil, I have made my self to walk; implying the dullness, and
sluggishnesse, and averseness he found in his heart to that duty: so that
prayer being, as one calls it well, Speculum animi, the souls glass, you may
gather what was a comfort to him. Thus Paul, 2 Timothy 4. I have fought a good
fight, etc. It is true, those words, A crown of righteousness, The just
Judge, and Render, do not prove any merits in Paul, as the Papists plead; but
yet Paul declares this, to keep up his heart against all discouragements. We
are not therefore to take comfort from them, so as to rest in them; but so as
to praise God thereby. It Is a good way, nesciendo seire, that so we may praise
God for them; and, sciendo nescire, that so we may be humble in our selves.

11. They are necessary in respect of God, both in that he is hereby 11.
Because God is glorified by them.
pleased, and also glorified. When we say, They are necessary in respect of
God, we understand it declaratively, to set forth his glory; for, when God is
said to be the end of all our actions and goodness, he is not finis
indigentiae, an end that needs them; but finis assimilationis, an end that
perfects those things, in making them like him: Now two ways they relate to
God; 1. God is hereby pleased, so the Apostle, Hebr. 13. He is well pleased: So
that as Leah, though blear-eyed, yet, when she was fruitful in children,
said, Now my husband will love me; so may Faith say, Now God will love me,
when it abounds in the fruits of righteousness; for, our godly actions please
God, though imperfect; only the ground is, because our persons were first
reconciled with God. Secondly, they refer to God, so as to glorify him; as
his name is blasphemed, when we walk in all wickedness. It Is true, it is Gods
grace to account of this as his glory, seeing it is so defective.

12. They are necessary in regard of others. Matthew. 5. 17. Let your 12. Because
others are benefited thereby.
light shine before men. He does not there encourage vainglory, but he
propounds the true end of our visible holiness; for godliness, being light,
it ought not to be under a bushel. Hence, both in the Tabernacle and Temple,
the light was placed in the midst; and it ought to extend to others, that
hereby they may glorify God in heaven: As, when we see an excellent picture,
we do not praise that so much, as the Artificer who made it. We ought so to
walk, that men should glorify God, who has made us so heavenly, so humble, so
mortified. Hierome said of Austin, that he did diligere Christum habitantem in
Augustino; so ought we to walk, that others may love Christ dwelling in us. 1
Pet. 3. 1. it is an exhortation to wives, so to walk, that their husbands may
be won to the Lord. Thou prayest for thy husband in a carnal condition, thou
would have him go hear such a Minister, and such Sermons; see that thy life
also may convert him. The Apostle by the phrase, without the word, means the
public preaching; so that the wives life may preach to him all the day: and
that same phrase, (...), does imply, 1. the great prize that every man's soul
is worth; 2. the delight that they ought to take in converting of others, even
the same that merchants do in their trade.

13. Holiness and godliness inherent is the end of our faith and
justification: 13. Because godliness inherent is the end of our faith and
justification.
and that is the meaning of our Divines, who say, Charity, or Love of God is
the end of faith, because God has appointed this way of justification by
faith, till he has brought us into eternal glory, and there we have perfect
inherent holiness, though even then the glory and honor of all that shall be
given to Christ. Now, indeed, it has pleased God to take another way for our
acceptance, then shall be hereafter; not but that God might, if he had
pleased, have given us such a measure of grace inherent, whereby we might have
obtained eternal life, being without sin, and conformable to his will: but
this way has pleased his wisdom, that so Christ and Grace may be exalted, and
we for our sins debased in our selves. Therefore good is that of Anselme,
Terret me tota vita mea; nam apparet mihi aut peccatum, aut tota sterilitas:
Only this may make for the excellency of Sanctification, that therefore is
Christ, and Grace, and Justification, and all, that at last we may be made
perfectly holy.

Now some Divines have gone further, but I cannot go along with them: As, 1.
Those that do give them causality and efficiencie of our justification and
salvation: And, if they should use the word Efficiency in a large sense, it
might be true, but dangerous: but otherwise, to take Efficient strictly, they
cannot; for so was the covenant of works at first. Adams obedience would not
have meritoriously, but efficiently procured his happiness. Hence, by the
Apostle, faith is not included as works are rejected, for they are rejected as
efficients of our salvation; but faith is included as the isntrumental and
passive receiving of it.

2. Some learned men have said, Though good works do not merit eternal life,
for that is wholly purchased by Christ's death; yet, say they, accidental
degrees of glory our godliness may obtain: but that is not safe; for, first
it is questioned by some, whether there be such degrees at all, or no; but grant
it, yet even that must be of grace as well as others.

Lastly, some hold our temporal mercies to come to us by a covenant of works,
but not our spiritual: this also is hard; for, we may have these good things
either by Christ, or else by the forbearance of God, who does not take the
advantage against us for our sins.

I shall say no more of this, then by answering a main doubt.

Object. If good works be still necessarily requisite, why then is not the
covenant of grace still a covenant of works: not as at first in Adam, when they
were to be perfect and entire; but by grace, pardoning the imperfection of
them, in which sense the Arminians affirm it?

Answ. Although good works be requisite in the man justified or saved, yet
it is not a covenant of works, but faith: and the reason is, because faith
only is the instrument that receives justification and eternal life; and
good works are to qualify the subject believing, but not the instrument to
receive the covenant: so that faith only is the condition that does receive
the covenant, but yet that a man believe, is required the change of the whole
man; and that faith only has such a receiving nature, shall be proved
hereafter (God willing.)

Use. Of exhortation, to take heed, you turn not the grace of God into
licentiousness: suspect all doctrines that teach comfort, but not duty; labor
indeed to be a spiritual Anatomist, dividing between having godliness, and
trusting in it: but take heed of separating Sanctification from Justification.
Be not a Pharisee, nor yet a Publican: so that I shall exhort thee at this
time, not against the Antinomianisme in thy judgment only, but in thine heart
also. As Luther said, Every man has a Pope in his belly; so every man has an
Antinomian. Paul found his flesh rebelling against the Law of God, reconcile
the Law and the Gospel, Justification and Holiness. Follow holiness as
earnestly, as if thou had nothing to help thee but that; and yet rely upon
Christ's merits as fully, as if thou had no holiness at all. And what though
thy intent be only to set up Christ and Grace, yet a corrupted opinion may
soon corrupt a man's life; as rheum, falling from the head, does putrefie the
lungs, and other vital parts.

LECTURE V.
1 TIMOTHY 1. 9. Knowing this, that the Law is not made for a righteous man.
WE are at this time to demolish one of the strongest holds that the Adversary
has: For, it may be supposed, that the eighth verse cannot be so much against
them, as the ninth is for them: Therefore Austin observes well, The Apostle
(says he) joining two things, as it were contrary, together, does monere and
movere, both admonish and provoke the Reader to find out the true answer to
this question, how both of them can be true. We must therefore say to these
places, as Moses did to the two Israelites fighting, Why fall you out, seeing
you are brethren? Austin improveth the objection thus, If the Law be good, when
used lawfully, and none but the righteous man can use it lawfully, how then
should it not be but to him, who only can make the true use of it? Therefore,
for the better understanding of these words, let us consider, who they are that
are said to know: and secondly, what is said to be known.

The subject knowing is here in this Verse in the singular number, in the Verse
before in the plural: it is therefore doubted, whether this be affirmed of the
same persons or no. Some Exposito^s think those in the eighth, and these in the
ninth, are the same, and that the Apostle does change the number from the
plural to the singular; which is very frequent in Scripture: as, Galat. 6. 1.
Others (as Salmeron) make a mystical reason in the changing, Because (says
he) there are but few that know the Law is not made for the righteous,
therefore he speaks in the singular number. There is a second kind of
Interpreters, and they do not make this spoken of the same, but understand this
word, as a qualification of him that does rightly use the Law: Thus, The Law is
good, if a man use it lawfully; and he uses it lawfully, that knows it is not
made for the righteous. Which of these interpretations you take is not much
material: only this is good to observe, that the Apostle, using these words,
We know, and Knowing, does imply, what understanding all Christians ought to
have in the nature of the Law.

Secondly, let us consider, what Law he here speaks of. Some have understood it
of the ceremonial Law, because of Christ's death that was to be abolished, and
because all the ceremonies of the Law were convictions of sins, and
hand-writings against those that used them: But this cannot be; for
circumcision was commanded to Abraham a righteous man, and so to all the godly
under the Old Testament: and the persons, who are opposed to the righteous man
are such, who transgress the Moral Law. Others, that do understand it of the
Moral Law, apply it to the repetition and renovation of it by Moses: for, the
Law being at first made to Adam upon his fall, wickedness by degrees did arise
to such an height, that the Law was added because of transgressions, as Paul
speaks. But we may understand it of the Moral Law generally; only take
notice of this, that the Apostle does not here undertake a theological
handling of the use of the Law, (for that he does in other places) but he
brings it in as a general sentence to be acco^modated to his particular
meaning concerning the righteous man here. We must not interpret it of one
absolutely righteous, but one that is so quoad conatum and desiderium; for the
people of God are called righteous, because of the righteousness that is in
them, although they be not justified by it. The Antinomian and Papist do both
concur in this error, though upon different grounds, that our righteousness
and works are perfect, and therefore do apply those places; A people without
spot or wrinkle, etc. to the people of God in this life, and that not only in
justification, but in sanctification also. As (says the Antinomian) in a dark
dungeon, when the door is opened, and the sun-light come in, though that be
dark in it self, yet it is made all light by the sun: Or, As water in a red
glass, though that be not red, yet, by reason of the glass, it looks all
red: so though we be filthy in our selves, yet all that God sees in us looks
as Christ's, not only in justification, but sanctification. This is to be
confuted hereafter.

Thirdly, let us take notice how the Antinomian explaineth this place, and what
he means by this Text. The old Antinomian, Islebius Agricola, states the
question thus: Whether the Law be to a righteous man as a teacher, ruler,
commander, and requirer of obedience actively: Or, Whether the righteous man
does indeed the works of the Law, but that is passive; the Law is wrought by
him, but the Law does not work on him. So then, the question is not, Whether
the things of the Law be done, (for they say the righteous man is active to the
Law, and not that to him) but, Whether, when these things are done, they are
done by a godly man, admonished, instructed, and commanded by the Law of God:
And this they deny. As for the later Antinomian, he speaks very uncertainly,
and inconsistently: Sometimes he grants the Law is a rule, but very hardly and
seldom; then presently kicketh all down again: For, says he, it cannot be
conceived that it should rule, but also it should reign; and therefore think
it impossible, that one act of the Law should be without the other. The
damnatory power of the Law is inseparable from it: Can you put your conscience
under the mandatory power, and yet keep it from the damnatory? (Assertion of
Grace page 33. Again, the same Author, page 31.) If it be true that the Law
cannot condemn, it is no more a Law, says Luther. I say not that you have
dealt as uncourteously with the Law, as did that King with David's servants, who
cut off their garments by the midst: but you have done worse, for even,
Joab-like, under friendly words, you have destroyed the life and soul of the
Law. You can as well take your Appendices from the Law, as you term them, and
yet let it remain a true law; as you can take the brains and heart of a man,
and yet leave him a man still. By this it appears, that if the Law does not
curse a man, neither can it command a man, according to their opinion. The same
Author again, page 5. He dare not trust a believer to walk without his
keeper [the Law,] as if he judged no otherwise of him then of a malefactor in
Newgate, who would kill and rob if his Jailer were not with him: Thus they are
only kept within the compass of the Law, but are not keepers of it. Yet, at
another time, the same Author calls it a slander, to say, that they deny the
Law. Now, who can reconcile these contradictions? Nor is this shufling and
uncertainty any new thing; for the old and first Antinomian did many times
promise amendment, and yet afterward fell to his error again; after that he
condemned his error, and recanted his error in a public Auditory, and
printed his revocation, yet, when Luther was dead, he relapsed into that
error: so hard a thing is it to get poison out, when its once swallowed down.

In the fourth place we come to lay down those things that may clear the
meaning of the Apostle: and first know, that humane Authors, who yet have
acknowledged the help of precepts, do speak thus much of a righteous, man,
only to show this, that he does that which is righteous, for love of
righteousness, not for fear of punishment: As Aquinas said of his love to
God, Amo, quia amo; and amo, ut amem. Thus Seneca, Ad Legem esse bonum exiguum
est: Its a poor small thing to be good only according to the law. And so
Aristotle, lib. 3. Polit. cap. 9. shows how a righteous man would be good,
though there were no law; as they say of a Magistrate, he ought to be (...), a
living law. Thus Socrates said of the Civil Law, (...) And Plato Polit. 3.
(...), It is not fit to command or make laws for those that are good. These
Sayings are not altogether true, yet they have some kind of truth in them.
Hence it was that Antisthenes said, A wise man was not bound by any laws: And
Demonax told a Lawyer, that all their laws would come to nothing; for good men
did not need them, and wicked men would not be the better for them. And as the
Heathens have said thus, so the Fathers: Hierome, What needs the Law say to a
righteous man, Thou shall not kill, to whom it is not permitted to be angry? Yet
we see David, though a righteous man, needed this precept. But especially
Chrysostom, even from these words, does wonderfully hyperbolize, A righteous
man needs not the Law, no not teaching or admonishing; yea, he disdaines to be
warned by it, he does not wait or stay to learn of it. As therefore a Musician
or Grammarian, that has these arts within him, scorns the Grammar, or to go
to look to the rules; so does a righteous man. Now these are but hyperbole's;
for what godly man is there, that needs not the Word as a light, that needs it
not as a goad? Indeed, in heaven the godly shall not need the Law; no more
shall they the Gospel, or the whole word of God.

2. There are three interpretations which come very near one another, and all
do well help to the clearing of the Apostle. 1. Some learned men lay an
emphasis in the word [Made] (...). It is not made to a godly man as a burden,
he has a love and a delight in it; Lex est posita, sed non imposita: He does
not say, Justi The Law to a godly man is a delight, not a burden.
non habent legem, aut sunt sine lege; sed non imminet ^is tanquam flagellum,
it is not like a whip to them. The wicked wish there were no Law, and cry out as
he, Utinam hoc esset non peccare! The righteous man is rather in the Law, then
under it. It Is true, the word [(...)] in the general does signify no more
then to lie, or be, or is; therefore, in Athenaus, Vlpianus was called (...),
because of his frequent questions, (...); where such or such a word might be
found: but yet sometimes it signifies to be laid to a thing, as to destroy it;
so Matthew. 3. 10. The axe is laid to the root of the tree, (...) in the
original. Now this is to be understood so far forth as he is righteous,
otherwise the things of God are many times a burden to a godly man. Let us not
oppose then the works of the Law, and the works of the Spirit, Grace and
Gospel; for the same actions are the works of the Law ratione objecti, and the
works of the Spirit ratione efficientis. Indeed the Scripture opposes Grace
and Works, and Faith and Works, but in a clean other sense then the
Antinomian, in time is to be showed.

The second interpretation is of the damnatory and cursing part The godly are
under the desert of the curse, but not the actual condemnation of the Law.
of the Law: The Law is not made to the believer so, as he should abide under
the cursing, and condemning power of it: and in this sense we are frequently
denied to be under the Law. It Is true, the godly are under the desert of the
curse of the Law, but not the actual curse, and condemnation: Nor does it
therefore follow, that there is no Law, because it does not curse; for it is a
good rule in Divinity, a remotione actus secund^ in subjecto impediti, non
valet argumentum ad remotionem actus primi; from the removal of an act or
operation, the argument does not hold to the removing of the thing it self: as
it did not follow, The fire did not burn the three Worthies, therefore there
was no fire; God did hinder the act: And if that could be in natural agents,
which work naturally, how much rather in moral causes, such as the Law is of
condemnation, which works according to the appointment of God? So then the Law
is not to curse or condemn the righteous man.

The last interpretation is, that the Law was not made because The Law, in the
restraining power thereof, was not made for the righteous, but un^^ghteous.
of righteous men, but unrighteous. Had Adam continued in innocence, there had
not been such a solemn declaration of Moses his Law; for it had been graven in
their hearts: Therefore, though God gave a positive law to Adam, for the try
all of his obedience, and to show his homage; yet he did not give the Moral
Law to him by outward prescript, though it was given to him in another sense:
and so the phrase shall be like that Proverb, E malis moribus bonae leges
nascuntur, Good laws arise from evil manners: And certainly laws, in the
restraining and changing power of them upon the lives of men, are not for such
who are already holy, but those that need to be made holy; and so it may be
like that of our Savior in a sense which some explain it in, I come not to
call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. By repentance they mean
conversion, and by the righteous, not Pharisees, but such as are already
converted.

Now that these interpretations, much agreeing in one, may the better be
assented to, consider some parallel places of Scripture: Galat. 5. 23. speaking
of the fruits of the spirit, Against such there is no law; The Law was not made
to these, to condemn them, or accuse them: so that what is said of the actions
and graces of the godly, may be applied to the godly themselves. You may take
another parallel, Romans 13. 3. Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to
evil: Would thou not be afraid of them? do no evil. And thus the Apostle,
to show how the grace of love was wrought in the Thessalonians hearts, I need
not (says he) write to you to love, for you have been taught of God to do
this: His very saying, I need not write, was a writing; so that these
expressions do hold forth no more, then that the godly, so far as they are
regenerate, do delight in the Law of God, and it is not a terror to them. And
if because the godly have an ingenuous free spirit to do what is good, he need
not the Law directing or regulating; it would follow as well, he needed not the
whole Scripture, he needed not the Gospel that calls upon him to believe,
because faith is implanted in his heart. This rock cannot be avoided: And
therefore upon this ground, because the godly are made holy in themselves, the
Swencfeldians did deny the whole Scripture to be needful to a man that has
the Spirit: And that which the Antinomian does limit to the Law, It is a
killing letter, they apply to the whole Scripture; and I cannot see how they
can escape this argument. Hence Chrysostom that spoke so hyperbolically about
the Law, speaks as high about the Scriptures themselves, We ought to have the
word of God engraven in our hearts so, that there should be no need of
Scripture: And Austin speaks of some, that had attained to such holiness,
that they lived without a Bible. Now who does not see what a damnable and
dangerous position this would be?

That the Law must needs have a directive, regulating, and informing power over
a godly man, will appear in these two particulars:

1. We cannot discern the true worship of God from superstition 1. The true
worship of God cannot be discerned from false, but by the Law.
and idolatry, but by the first and second Commandment. It is true, many
places in Scripture speak against false worship, but to know when it is a false
worship, the second Commandment is a special director. How do the orthodox
Writers prove Images unlawful? how do they prove that the setting up any part
or means of worship which the Lord has not commanded is unlawful, but by the
second Commandment? And, certainly, the want of exact knowledge in the
latitude of this Commandment brought in all idolatry and superstition. And we
shall show you (God willing, in time) that the Decalogue is not only Moses his
ten Commandments, but it is Christ's ten Commandments, and the Apostles ten
Commandments as well as his.

2. Another instance at this time is, in comparing the depth of 2. The depth of
sin cannot be discovered without it.
the Law, and the depth of our sin together. There is a great deal more
spiritual excellency and holiness commanded in the Law of God, the Decalogue,
then we can reach unto: Therefore we are to study into it more and more: Open
mine eyes, that I may understand the wonderful things of thy Law; thus David
prays, though godly, and his eyes were in a great measure opened by the
Spirit of God. And as there is a depth in the Law, so a depth in our original
and native sin: There is a great deal more flith in us, then we can or do
discover, Psalm. 19. Who can understand his errors? Cleanse me from secret
sins. Therefore, there being such a world of filth in thy carnal heart, what
need is there of the spiritual and holy Law, to make thee see thy self thus
polluted and abominable? Certainly, a godly man grows partly by discovering
that pride, that deadness, that filth in his soul he never thought of, or was
acquainted with.

The practical use that is to be made of this Scripture explained, is, to pray
and labor for such a free heavenly heart, that the Law of God, and all the
precepts of it may not be a terror to you, but sweetness and delight. Oh how
I love thy Law! cries David; he could not express it. And again, My soul
breaks in the longing after thy judgments. In another place, he and Job do
account of them above their necessary food; you do not hale and drag an hungry
or thirsty man to his bread and water: I do not speak this, but that it is
lawful to eye the reward, as Moses and Christ did; yea, and to fear God: for
who can think that the Scripture, using these motives, would stir up in us
sinful and unlawful affections? but yet such ought to be the filial and
son-like affections to God and his will, that we ought to love and delight in
his Commandments, because they are his; as the poor son loves his father,
though he has no lordship or rich inheritance to give him.

There is this difference between a free and violent motion: a free motion is
that which is done for its own self sake; a violent is that which comes from
an outward principle, the patient helping it not forward at all: Let not, to
pray, to believe, to love God, be violent motions in you. Where faith works
by love, this makes all duties relish, this overcomes all difficulties. The
Lacedaemonians, when they went to war, did sacrifice to Love, because love only
could make hardship, and wounds, and death it self easy. Do thou therefore
pray, that the love of God may be shed abroad in thine heart; and consider
these two things: 1. How the Law laid upon Christ to dye, and suffer for thee,
was not a burden or terror to him. How does he witness this by crying out,
With desire I have desired to drink of this cup? Think with thy self, If Christ
had been as unwilling to dye for me, as I to pray to him, to be patient, to be
holy, what had become of my soul? If Christ therefore said of that Law, to be
a Mediator for thee, Lo, I come to do thy will, O God, thy Law is within mine
heart; how much rather ought this to be true of thee in any thing thou shall
do for him? Thou have not so much to part with for him, as he for thee. What
is thy life and wealth to the glory of his Godhead, which was laid aside for a
while? And then secondly, consider how that men love lusts for lusts sake, they
love the world because of the world. Now evil is not so much evil, as good is
good; sin is not so much sin, as God is God, and Christ is Christ. If therefore
a profane man, because of his carnal heart, can love his sin, though it cost
him hell, because of the sweetness in it; shall not the godly heart love the
things of God, because of the excellency in them? But these things may be more
enlarged in another place.

LECTURE VI.
ROMANS 2. 14, 15. For when the Gentiles which know not the law, do the things of
the law by nature, these having not the law, are a law unto themselves: which
show the work of the law written in their hearts.
BEfore I handle the other places of Scripture that are brought by the
Antinomians against the Law, it is my intent, for better methods sake, and your
more sound instruction, to handle the whole theology of the Law of God in the
several distributions of it, and that positively, controversally, and
practically; and I shall begin first with the law of Nature, that God has
imprinted in us, and consider of this two ways: 1. As it is a mere law; and
secondly, As it was a covenant of works made with Adam: And then in time I
shall speak of the Moral Law given by Moses, which is the proper subject of
these controversies.

The Text I have read is a golden Mine, and deserves diligent digging and
searching into: Therefore, for the better understanding of these words, let us
answer these Questions:

1. Who are meant by the Gentiles here? It is ordinarily known, Who meant by
Gentiles.
that the Jews did call all those Gentiles that were not Jews, by way of
contempt; as the Greeks and Romans called all other nations Barbarians. Hence
sometimes in the Scripture the word is applied to wicked men, though Jews: as,
Psalm. 2. Why do the heathen rage? It may be interpreted of the Pharisees
resisting Christ. Indeed, the Jews will not confess, that the word (...)
Gentes, is any where applied to them: but this is very false, for Genes. 17.
Abraham is there said to be the father of many nations, ((...) Gentes:)
therefore they must either deny themselves to be Abraham's seed, or else
acknowledge this word belonging to them. But generally it signifies those that
had not the Laws of Moses, nor did live by them. Therefore Gal. 2. 14. (...)*
to live like a Gentile, is, not to observe the Laws of Moses: and in this
sense it is to be taken here; for the Apostles scope is to make good that great
charge upon all mankind, both Jew and Gentile, that naturally they are wholly
in sin; and God, being no accepter of persons, will destroy the one as well as
the other. And whereas it might be thought very hard to deal thus with the
Gentile, because no law was delivered unto him, as unto the the Jew, the
Apostle answers that objection in this place, But grant it be understood of
such Gentiles, then there is a greater question whether it be meant of the
Gentiles abiding so, or the Gentiles converted and turned believers; for, that
the Apostle speaks of such, most of the Latin Interpreters, both ancient and
modern, do affirm: and so the Greek Father, Chrysostom, and Estius, a
learned Papist, do think there are so many arguments for it, that it is
certain. I confess, they bring many probable reasons; but I will not trouble
you with them: this seeemeth a strong argument against them, because the
Apostle speaks of such who are without a law, and a law to themselves, which
could not be true of Gentiles converted: we take the Apostle therefore to
speak of Gentiles abiding so; but in this sense there is also a dangerons
exposition and a sound one. The poisonous interpretation is of the Pelagians,
who understand the law written in their hearts, in the same sense as it is used
Jerem. 33. even such a fulfilling of the law which will attain to salvation;
and this they hold the Heathens by the law and help of nature did sufficiently:
But this is to overthrow the doctrine of Grace and Christ. Therefore the said
interpretation is of the Gentiles indeed, but yet to understand the law written
in their hearts, only of those relicts of natural reason and conscience which
was in the Heathens, as is to be proved anon.

The 2d. Question is easily answered, How they are said to be How the Gentiles
are said to be without a law.
without a law; to wit, without a written law, as the Jews had; so that we may
say, they had a law without a law; a law written, but not declared.

The 3d. Question, In what sense they are said to do the things of How said to
do the things of the law by nature.
the law, and that by nature. To do the things of the law is not meant
universally of all the Heathens, for the Apostle showed how most of them lived
in the Chapter before: nor secondly universally in regard of the matter
contained in the law, but some external acts, as Aristides and Socrates, with
others. And here its disputed, Whether a mere Heathen can do any work
morally good? But we answer, No: for every action ought to have a
supernatural end, viz. the glory of God, which they did not aim at; therefore
we do refuse that distinction of a moral good, and theological, because
every moral good ought to be theological: The distinction of Moral and
Theological good rejected.
they may do that good matter of the law, though not well. And as for the
manner how, by nature; those Interpreters that understand this Text of Gentiles
believers, say, Nature is not here opposed to Grace, but to the law written by
Moses; and therefore make it nature enabled by grace: but this is showed to be
improbable. By nature therefore we may understand that natural What is here
meant by Nature.
light of conscience, whereby they judged and performed some external acts,
though these were done by the help of God.

The next Question is, How this Law is said to be written in their hearts? You
must not, with Austine, compare this place with that gracious promise in
Jeremy, of God writing his law in the hearts of his people. There is therefore
a twofold writing in the A twofold writing of the Law in men's hearts, and
which here meant.
hearts of men; the first, of knowledge and judgment, whereby they apprehend
what is good and bad: the second is in the will and affections, by giving a
propensity and delight, with some measure of strength, to do this upon good
grounds. This later is spoken of by the Prophet in the covenant of Grace, and
the former is to be understood here, as will appear, if you compare this with
Chapt. 1. 19.

The last Question is, How they declare this Law written in their The Law
written in men's hearts two ways.
hearts? And that is first externally, two ways: 1. By making good and
wholesome laws to govern men by; and, 2dly. By their practice, at least of some
of them, according to those laws: And secondly internally, by their
consciences, in the comfort or fear they had there.

Observat. There is a law of Nature written in men's hearts. And if this be not
abolished, but that a believer is bound to follow the direction and obligation
of it, how can the Antinomian think that the Moral Law, in respect of the
mandatory power of it, cease? Now, because I intend a methodicall Tractate of
the several kinds of Gods Law, you might expect I should say much about Laws
in general; but because many have written large Volumes, especially the
Schoolmen, and it cannot be denied but that good rational matter is delivered
by them; yet, because it would not be so pertinent to my scope, I forbear. I
will not therefore examine the Etymology of the words that signify a Law;
whether Lex in the Latin come of legendo, because it was written to be read
(though that be not always necessary;) or of ligando, because a law binds to
obedience; or of deligendo, because it selects some precepts: nor concerning
(...) in the Greek, whether it come of (...), which is improbable; or of (...),
because it destributes to every one that which is right: neither the Hebrew
word (...), which some make to come of (...), to instruct and teach; others of
the word (...), that signifies a disposition, or compiling of things together,
as laws use to be. In the next place, I will not trouble you with the
desinition of a law, whether it be an act, or habit, or the soul it self:
only this is good to take notice of, against a fundamental error of the
Antinomian, about a law in general; for they conceive it impossible but that
the damning act of a law must be where the commanding act of a law is, and this
is frequently urged (as I showed the last time:) Therefore observe, that there
are only two things go to the essence of a law, (I speak not of external
causes) and that is, first, Direction, secondly, Obligation: 1. Direction,
therefore a law is a rule; hence the Law of God is compared to a light. And,
Prove. 20. 27. there is a notable expression of the law of Nature, It Is a candle
of the Lord, searching the inwards of the belly. So it is observed, that the
Chaldee word for a law, is as much as light. The second essential constitute
of a law is, Obligation, for therein lies the essence of a sin, that it
breaks this law, which supposes the obligatory force of it. In the next
place there are two Consequents of the Law which are ad been esse, that the Law
may be the better obeyed; and this indeed turns the law into a covenant,
which is another notion upon it, as afterward is to be shown. Now as for the
sanction of the Law by way of a promise, that is a mere free thing; God, by
reason of that dominion which he had over man, might have commanded his
obedience, and yet never have made a promise of eternal life unto him. And as
for the other consequent act of the law, to curse, and punish, this is but an
accidental act, and not necessary to a law; for it comes in upon supposition
of transgression: and therefore, as we may say of a Magistrate, He was a just
and complete Magistrate for his time, though he put forth no punitive justice,
if there be no malefactors offending; so it is about a law, a law is a complete
law obliging, though it do not actually curse: as in the confirmed Angels, it
never had any more then obligatory, and mandatory acts upon them; for that they
were under a law is plain, because otherwise they could not have sinned, for
where there is no law, Romans 4. 15.
there is no transgression. If therefore the Antinomian were rectified in this
principle, which is very true and plain, he would quickly be satisfied: but of
this more in another place. But we come to the particulars of the doctrine, the
pressing of which will serve much against the Antinomian. Therefore, for the
better understanding of this Law of Nature, consider these particulars:

1. The nature of it in which it does consist; and that is in those The Law of
Nature consists in those common notions which are ingraffed in all men's hearts.
common notions and maxims, which are ingraffed in all men's hearts: and these
are some of them speculative, that there is a God; and some practical, that
good is to be embraced, and evil to be avoided: and therefore Aquinas says
well, that what principles of Sciences are in things of demonstration, the same
are these rules of nature in practicals: therefore we cannot give any reasons
of them; but, as the Sun manifests it self by its own light, so do these.
Hence Chrysostom observes well, that God, forbidding murder, and other sins,
gives no reason of it, because its natural: but, speaking of the seventh day,
why that in particular was to be observed, he gives a reason, because on the
seventh day the Lord rested, not but that the seventh day is moral (as some
have denied,) but because its not moral natural, only moral positive, as
the Learned show.

2. The difference of its being in Adam and in us. This is necessary Some
fragments only of this Law left in us.
to observe; for it was perfectly implanted in Adams heart, but we have only
some fragments, and a mere shadow of it left in us. The whole Law of Nature,
as it was perfectly instructing us the will of God, was then communicated to
him: and howsoever God, for good reasons hereafter to be mentioned, did give,
besides that law of Nature, a positive law to try his obedience; yet the other
cannot be denied to be in him, seeing he was made after Gods image, in
righteousness, and holiness, and otherwise Adam had been destitute of the
light of reason, and without a conscience. Therefore it is a most impudent thing
in Socinus, to deny that Adam had any such law or precept, and that he could
not lie, or commit any other sin though he would; for, it may not be doubted,
but that if Adam had told a lie, or murdered Eve, it had been a sin, as well as
to eat of the forbidden fruit.

3. The natural impression of it in us. We have it by nature; it is Those
common notions, in which this law consists, are in us by nature.
not a superadded work of God to put this into us. This assertion is much
opposed by Flaccus Illyricus, who, out of his vehement desire to aggravate
original sin in us, and to show how destitute we are of the image of God, does
labor to show, that those common notions and dictates of conscience are
infused de novo into us, and that we have none of these by nature in us. And a
godly man, in his Book of Temptations, holds the same opinion. Illyricus
indeed has many probable arguments for his opinion, but he goes upon a false
supposition, that the Apostle his scope is, to compare a Gentile supposed only
to do the Law, and not asserted to do it, before a Jew who was an hearer of
the Law, but not a doer of it: therefore, to debase the Jew, he says, the
Apostle speaks conditionally, to this purpose, If an Heathen should keep the
Law, though he be not circumcised, yet he would be preferred before you; not
(says he) that the Apostle means assertively and positively that any such
do: and therefore presses the word (...), which is a particle of the
Subjunctive Mood, and is equivalent to (...), If the Gentiles, etc. But his
supposition is false; for the Apostles scope is, to show that the Gentile has
no excuse if God condemn him, because he has a law in himself: as
appears, verse 12. As for the other consideration of (...), though Erasmus
render it [cum fecerint;] yet that particle is applied to the Indicative Mood,
as well as the Subjunctive. It cannot therefore be true, which he says, that
the Apostle speaks such great things of men by nature, that if they were
true, it would necessarily justify all Pelagianisme. I shall not speak of his
many arguments against natural principles and knowledge of a God; for he does
in effect at last yield to it.

4. The extent of it. And here it is very hard to measure out the bounds of the
law of Nature; for, some have judged that to be condemned by the law of Nature,
which others have thought the law of Nature approves: so true is that of
Tertullian, Legens Naturae opiniones suas vecant, They call their opinions the
law of Nature. There are four ways of bounding this law.

1. Some make it those general things wherein man and beast agree; Four
bounds of the law of Nature.
as, defense of it self, and desire of life: but by this means, that of
natural honesty and righteousness would be excluded; for, a beast is not
capable of any sin, or obligation by a law. And howsoever that be much disputed
upon, Why God would have the beast killed that killed a man; yet, to omit the
thoughts of many about it, that was not because a beast could be tied by a law:
but God, to show the horridness of the fact, would have the very instrument
punished.

2. Some bound it by the custom of Nations, that is, jus Gentium; but that is
so diversified, that a sin with some, was a virtue with others.

3. Some do bind it by reason in every man: but this is very uncertain, and
one man's reason is contrary to another, and one man's conscience is larger then
another; even as it is with measures in diverse countries, though they have the
fame name, as a bushel, etc. yet they are different in quantity, one is larger
then another.

Lastly, Others bound it by the will of God, declared and manifested first to
Noah in seven precepts, and afterward to Moses in the ten Commandments: but
these extend the law of Nature not only to first principles, but conclusions
also deduced from thence.

5. The obligation of it, when the law of Nature does bind: And The obligation
of the law of Nature is from God.
that is from God the author of it, God only is under no law. Every believer,
though justified by Christ, is under the Moral Law of Moses, as also the law
of Nature: but now this law of Nature does not so properly bind, as it is man's
reason or conscience, as that it is the Vicegerent of God, or a command from
him: and thus Cain by the law of Nature found a tie upon him not to sin, and
guilt because he did sin in murdering his brother, although there was no Moral
Law as yet given. It is true indeed, our Divines do well reprove the Papists,
for calling all that time from Adam to Moses, a state, or law of Nature: and
this the Papists do, that therefore to offer sacrifice unto God may be proved
from the law of Nature; whereas those sacrifices, being done in faith, had the
word of God, otherwise we were bound still to offer Lambs or Kids to God, which
they deny.

6. The perpetuity of this obligation. This Law can never be abrogated. The
obligation of the law of Nature is perpetual and immutable.
And herein we may demand of the Antinomian, Whether the law of Nature do bind
a believer, or no? Whether he be bound to obey the dictates of his natural
conscience? Suppose a believer has his natural conscience dictating to him,
This sin he may not do; is he not obliged hereunto not only from the matter
(for that he grants,) but as it is a law and command of God implanted in his
sonle? I know there is a difference between the law of Nature, and the ten
Commandments, as may be showed hereafter; but yet they agree in this, that
they are a rule immutable, and of perpetual obligation. Therefore think not,
that because he dyed to free you from the curse of the Law, that therefore you
are freed from the obedience unto the law natural, or delivered by Moses. To
deny this, is to deny that a believer is bound to obey the sure dictates of a
natural conscience. I know we are not always bound to follow what conscience
suggests, for that is obscured and darkened; but I speak of those dictates
which are naturally known.

Other particulars, as, The insufficiency of it to direct in worship, as also,
to save men, I do put off, and make application of what has been delivered.

Use 1. Of Instruction, against the Antinomian, who must needs overthrow the
directive and obligative force of the law of Nature, as well as that of Moses.
Does not even Nature teach you (says the Apostle?) Now if a man may not care
for Moses teaching, need he care for Nature teaching? It is true (I told you)
sometimes they grant the Law to be a rule, but then afterward they speak such
things as are absolutely inconsistent with it.

There were some (as W^ndelinus reports) Swencfeldians, that held a man was
never truly mortified, till he had put out all sense of conscience for sin; if
his conscience troubled him, that was his imperfection, he was not mortified
enough. I should do the Antinomians wrong, if I should say, they deliver such
things in their books; but let them consider, whether some of their Positions
will not carry them near such a dangerous rock: For, if the Law have nothing to
do with me in respect of the mandatory part of it, then if I be troubled for
the breach of it, it is my weakness, because I am not enough in Christ.

Use 2. Of Reproof, to those who live against this Law. Sins that are against
the law of Nature do most terrify. How many live in such sins that the law of
Nature condemns? Does not Nature condemn lying, couzening in your trades,
lusts, and uncleanness? How many Tradesmen are there that need not a Paul?
Even Tully in his Book of Offices will condemn their lying, sophisticate
wares, and unlawful gain. It Is much how far they saw this way. Sins against
natural conscience are called Crying sins; and, though men have repented of
them, yet how long is it ere faith can still their cry? Have not many Heathens
been faithful and just in their dealings? It Is true, that man has not
godliness enough, who has natural honesty; therefore there are many
spiritual sins that he never humbles himself for: as Paul says, he knew not
the motions of his heart to be sin. Hence men are to be exhorted to get further
light, and more tenderness then a natural conscience can ever attain unto.
Nevertheless, if men so live, as if they had not this Law in their hearts,
they are the more inexcusable: Are there not men who call themselves
Christians, that yet the very Heathens will condemn at that great day?

Use 3. Why it is so hard to believe in the Lord Christ; because here is
nothing of nature in it, it is all supernatural. The Papists say, we make an
easy way to heaven; for, let a man be never so great a sinner, yet if he do
but believe, all is well. Now the people of God, sensible of their sin, find
nothing harder: for, it is in the law of Nature they should not lie, or steal,
but that they should believe in Christ for pardon, when laboring under their
offenses, here nature does not help at all. I acknowledge it is a dispute among
Divines, Whether in that law implanted in Adams heart, there was not also a
power to believe in Christ, when revealed? But of that hereafter; but the
orthodox deny, that he had explicit justifying faith, for that was repugnant
to the condition he was in. But the thing I intend is, to show how
supernatural and hidden the way of believing is. No marvel therefore if it be
made such a peculiar work of the Spirit, to convince of this sin.

LECTURE VII.
ROMANS 2. 14. For when the Gentiles, which have not the law, do by nature the
things of the law, etc.
THe Doctrine already gathered from these words is, that, The Gentiles have a
law of Nature written in their hearts: Which law does consist partly in light
and knowledge of speculative principles; and partly in practice and obedience
to practical principles. So then from hence we may consider, first, Of the
light of Nature, and then secondly, Of the power of Nature; and from both these
we may have profitable matter, and also may confute some dangerous errors,
which have poisoned too many. I shall begin therefore with the light of Nature,
or Reason, and shall endeavor to show the Necessity of it, and yet the
Insufficiency of it: It is not such a star that can lead us to Christ.

In the first place take notice, that this light of Nature may be considered in
a threefold respect:

First, As it is a relict or remnant of the image of God: for, howsoever The
light of Nature is a remnant of Gods image.
the image of God did primarily consist in righteousness and true holiness;
yet secondarily it did also comprehend the powers and faculties of the
reasonable soul in the acts thereof: And this later part abides. It is true,
this light of Nature, comparatively to that of faith, is but as a glow-worme to
the Sun; yet some light and irradiation it has. God, when he made man, had so
excellently wrought his own image in him, that man could not fall, unless
that were also destroyed; as they write of Phidias, who made Alexanders statue,
yet had wrought his own picture so artificially in it, that none could break
Alexanders statue, but he must also spoil Phidias his image, who was the maker
of it: And thus it is in Adams fall, yet there remains some light still,
which the Apostle calls (Romans 1.) Truth; he vouchsafes that name to it, They
detain the truth in unrighteousness. Now this moonlight or glimmering of
Nature is of a threefold use:

1. For societies and public Commonwealths, whereby they have 1. The light of
Nature useful and necessary for the making of wholesome laws in Commonwealths.
made wholesome laws. It Is wonderful to consider, how excellent the Heathens
have been therein. Thus Chrysostom, speaking how the most excellent men need
the counsel of others, instanceth in Jethro's advice to Moses, about choosing
assistant officers: That great man Moses (says he) who was so potent in words
and works, who was the friend of God, which commanded the creatures, was
helped in counsel by Jethro his father-in-law, an obscure man, and a
Barbarian: Although, to speak the truth, Jethro, when he gave this counsel,
was not so, but had the knowledge of the true God.

2. This light of nature serves for the instigation and provocation 2. It
instigateth to good duties toward God and man.
of men to many good actions and duties toward God and man. Hence still
observe that phrase, They detain: reason and natural light is bound, as a
prisoner, by the chains of lusts and sinful affections; which thing Aristotle
does fully set forth in his incontinent person, whom he describes to have a
right opinion in the general about that which is good; yet, being too much
affected to some particular pleasure or profit, by that means the better part
is over-borne: and therefore Aristotle says, the better part of the mind did
provoke to better things. This agrees with that of Paul. And as they bound
captivated practical truths toward man, so they also imprisoned them about
God. Plato had the knowledge of one God, yet he dared not to communicate it to
the vulgar: Therefore (says he) Opificem universorum neque invenire facile,
neque inventum in vulgus promulgare tutum: Here for fear of the people, he
detained this truth. And Austin has a most excellent chapter, cap. 10. lib. 6.
de Civit. to show how Seneca kept the truth in unrighteousness: he speaks of a
Book Seneca wrote (which now is lost) against Superstitions, where he does
most freely and boldly write against the practices of their worship; but, says
Austin, Libertas affuit scribenti, non viventi. I will name some passages,
because they are applicable to Popish Idolatry, as well as Paganish: Immortales
does in materia vilissima and immobili dedicant -- Numina vocant, quae si
spiritu accepto subito occurrerent, monstra haberentur -- Faciunt tam indecora
honestis, tam indigna liberis, tam dissimillima sanis, ut nemo fuerit
dubitaturus furere cos, si cum paucioribus furerent; nunc sanitatis patrocinium
est insanientium turba. But Seneca, when he had spoken thus, and much more, in
the scorn of those gods, what does he resolve upon that his wise man shall do
in those times? In animi religione non habeat, sed in actibus fingat. And
again, Quae omnia sapiens servabit tanquam legibus jussa, non diis grata. And
further, Istam ignobilem deorum turbam, quam longo aevo longa superstitio
congessit, sic adorabimus, ut meminerimus cultum ejus ad morem magis pertinere
quam rem. Some say, Seneca was coetaneous with Paul, and that he had Paul's
Epistles; might he not (if so) see himself described in this phrase, detaining
the truth in unrighteousness? But how well does Austin in the same place
stigmatize him? Colebat, quod reprehendebat; agebat, quod arguebat; quod
culpabat, adorabat. And are there not many such Popish spirits, that know their
superstitions and falsehoods, yet, because of long custom, will not leave them?
What else was the meaning of Domitianus Calderinus, when, speaking of going to
Mass, he said, Eamus ad communem errorem? And so it was a speech of a
disputing Sophister, Sic dico quando sum in scholis, sed, penes nos sit, aliter
sentio. You see then by this, that natural truth would incline to better
actions, but it is suppressed. When I say, natural light enclineth the heart
to good, it is to be understood by way of object merely, showing what is to be
desired, not that we have any strength naturally to what is good. If you ask
why truth, apprehended by natural light, should be less efficacious to alter
and new-mould the heart and life, then truth received by faith (for in the
Scripture we read of wonderful conversions; and the Heathens have but one
story that they much boast of, of one Palemon (if I mistake not) who was a
great drunkard, and came to deride Socrates, while he was reading his discourse
to his scholars, but was so changed by that lecture, that he lest off his
drunkenness: This alteration was only in the skin, and not in the vitalls.
What then should be the difference?) I answer, not that one truth in it self
is stronger then another, but the difference is in medio, or instrumento, the
instrument to receive this truth. When Nature receives a truth, it is but with a
dim eye, and a palsie-hand; but when we receive it by faith, that is
accompanied with the power and might of the holy Ghost. The influence of truth
by natural light, is like that of the Moon, waterish and weak, never able to
ripen any thing; but that of faith is like the influence of the Sun, that does
heat, and soon bring to maturity.

3. The last use of this natural light is, to make men inexcusable; 3. It
makes men inexcusable.
for, seeing they did not glorify God according to their knowledge, for that
they are justly condemned. This indeed is not the only use of the light of
Nature, as some say; but it is a maine one, Romans 1. 20. not that this is the
end of God, in putting these principles into us, but it falls out by our
sinfulness. But how are they inexcusable, if they could not glorify God by
nature, as they ought? Some answer, the Apostle speaks of excuse in regard of
knowledge: but if you understand it of power, it is true; for by our fault we
are unable, and none went so far as naturally they were able. And thus Nature
is considered in the first place.

Secondly, You may consider it as corrupted and obscured by sin: The light of
Nature, as corrupted by sin, is an enemy to God and goodness.
And in this sense it is no help, but a desperate enemy to what is good; and the
more reason this way, the more opposition to God: and thus it fell out with all
the great natural Luminists; they became vain in their reasonings, the more
they enquired and searched, the further off they were from what is true, 1 Cor.
2. 14. The natural man perceives not the things of God: (...), is not a man
carnal and gross in sin, but a souly man, one that does excolere animam, such
as Tully and Aristotle. Now the wiser these men were, the vainer they were.
Chrysostom's comparison does well agree with them: As if (says he) a king
should give much money to a servant, that by it he should make his family more
glorious, and he goes presently and spends all his money upon whores and bawds.
Thus did the Heathens: As Austin wrote to a man of great parts, Ornari abs te
Diabolus quaerit, The Devil seeks to be adorned by thee.

Hence Egypt, that is accounted the mother of Sciences, and Moses in regard of
knowledge is preferred before the Egyptians; yet that was the seat also of
Idolaters: and so the Astronomers, who lifted up themselves above others in
their knowledge of heavenly things, brought in those monsters into heaven, and
attributed worship to them, and in their worship of their gods they added many
feasts and sports. Thus they invented an happiness, which Austin calls
Scyllaeum bonum, consisting of humane and brutish parts. If you ask how this
natural light comes to be thus obscured; I answer, three ways: 1. By ill
education. This The light of Nature obscured three ways.
is like the first concoction, or the first settling of the limbs of a man.
Secondly, By long custom and degeneration. Hence some Nations have by their
public laws allowed gross sins lawful; as some Nations have allowed
robberies, some incest, some that all old men should be thrown down headlong
a steep hill. Thirdly, By the just judgment of God; therefore three times in
Romans 1. God is said to give them up to sin.

Thirdly, You may speak of Nature as informed, and enlightened The light of
Nature informed by Gods word an excellent help.
by Gods word: and while it is thus, you need not cast this Hagar out of doors.
Let Scripture and the word of God lay the foundation stone, and then Reason may
build upon it. It is Stella his comparison: It is with Faith and Reason, as
with the mould that is at the root of the barren and fruitless tree; take the
mould out, and throw in muck or other compost, and then put the mould in, it
will much help the tree, which hindered it before. Thus, lay aside Reason at
first, and then receive truths by Faith; and afterward improve them by Reason,
and it will excellently help. Divine truths are not founded upon Reason, but
Scripture; yet Reason may bear them up: as you see the elm or wall bear up the
vine, but the elm or wall does not bring forth the fruit; only the vine does
that. As long therefore as the light of Nature is not the rule, but ruled and
squared by Gods word, so long it cannot deceive us. The light of Nature, as it
is a relict of Gods image, is necessary in religious and moral things, and
that two ways.


The second grand consideration is, That the light of Nature is necessary in
religious and moral things, though it be not sufficient. We speak of the light
of Nature in the first consideration, as it is the residue of the glorious
image of God put into us (for of the later, as it is informed by Scripture, it
is no question.) Now this is absolutely necessary two ways: 1. As a passive
qualification of the subject for faith; for, there cannot be faith in a stone,
or in a beast, no more then there can be sin in them: Therefore Reason, or the
light of Nature, makes man in a passive capacity fit for grace; although he
has no active ability for it: And, when he is compared to a stone, it is not
in the former sense, but the later. And secondly, it is necessary by way of an
instrument; for we cannot believe, unless we understand whether knowledge be
an act ingredient into the essence of faith, or whether it be prerequisite: all
hold there must be an act of the understanding, one way or other, going to
believe. Hence knowledge is put for faith, and Hebr. 11. By says we
understand. Thus it is necessary as an instrument.

3. There is nothing true in Divinity that does cross the truth of Though some
divine truths may transcend the reach of Nature, none do cross the truth
thereof, as it is the remnant of Gods image.
Nature, as it is the remnant of Gods image. This indeed is hard to clear in
many points of Divinity; as in the doctrine of the Trinity, and the doctrine of
Christ's Incarnation, which seems paradoxall to Reason; of whom Tertullian,
lib. 5. de carne Christi, cap. 5. thus, Natus est Dei Filius, non pudet, quia
pudendum est; Mortuus est Dei Filius, prorsus credibile est, quia ineptum;
Sepultus resurrexit, certum est, quia impossible. Yet, seeing the Apostle
calls the natural knowledge of a man Truth, and all truth is from God, which
ways soever it come, there can therefore be no contradiction between it. And
hereupon our Divines do, when they have confuted the Poposh doctrine of
Transubstantiation by Scripture, show also, that for a body to be in two
places, is against the principles of Nature. They indeed call for faith in this
point: and Lapide, upon these words, Hoc est corpus meum, says, If Christ
should ask me at the day of judgment, Why did you believe the bread to be the
body of Christ? I will answer, This text, if I be deceived, These words have
deceived me. But we must compare place with place, and Scripture with
Scripture. As for the doctrine of the Trinity, though it be above Reason, and
we cannot look into that mystery, no more then an Owl can into the Sun Faith
and the light of Nature go to the knowledge of the same thing different ways.
beams, yet it is not against it.

4. The same object may be known by the light of Nature, and by the light of
Faith. This may easily be understood: I may know there is a God by the light of
Nature; and I may believe it, because the Scripture faith so: so Hebr. 11. I
may by faith understand the Word was made, and by arguments know it was made;
and this is called faith, by James. The devils believe, that is, they have an
evident intuitive knowledge of God, and feel it by experience; not that they
have faith, for that is a supernatural gift wrought by God, and has
accompanying it pia affectio, to him that speaks, as the first truth. Faith
therefore, and the light of Nature go to the knowledge of the same thing
different ways: faith does, because of the testimony and divine revelation of
God; the light of Nature does, because of arguments in the thing it self by
discourse. And faith is not a dianoeticall or discursive act of the
understanding, but its simple and apprehensive.

5. Though Reason and the light of Nature be necessary, yet it is not The light
of Nature a necessary instrument, but no Judge in matters of Faith.
a Judge in matters of faith. The Lutheran seems to depresse Reason too much,
and the Socinian exalts it too high: They make it not only an instrument,
but a Judge; and thereupon they reject the greatest mysteries of Religion. I
know some have endeavored to show, that Religio est summa ratio; and there are
excellent men that have proved the truth of the Christian Religion by Reason:
and certainly, if we can by Reason prove there is any Religion at all, we may
by the same Reason prove that the Christian Religion is the true one. But who
does not see how uncertain Reason is in comparison of Faith? I do not
therefore like that assertion of one, who affects to be a great Rationalist (it
is Chillingworth) that says, We therefore receive the Scriptures to be the
Word of God, because we have the greatest Reason that this is the Word of God.
But we must not confound the instrument and the Judge: holy truths, they are
Scripture truths, though hammered out by Reason. As the Smith that takes
golden plate, and beats it into what shape he pleases, his hammer does not
make it gold, but only gold of such a shape: And thus also Reason does not
make a truth divine, only holds it forth, and declares it in such a way.

6. Its altogether insufficient to prescribe or set down any worship of Nature
insufficient to prescribe divine Worship.
God. Hence God does so often forbid us to walk after our own imaginations,
and to do that which we shall choose. The Apostle calls it Will Worship,
when a man's Will is the mere cause of it. Now, its true, men are more apt to
admire this, as we see in the Pharisees and Papists; they dote upon their
Traditions more then Gods Institutions. Hence Raymundus, a Papist, speaking of
the Mass, It is (says he) as full of mysteries, as the sea is full of drops
of water, as the heaven has Angels, as the firmament has stars, and the
earth little crummes of sand. But what says our Savior, Luke 18. that which
is highly esteemed before men, is abomination before God? That word, (...), is
applied to idols and false-worship. Its true indeed, even in worship, light of
Nature and prudence is instrumentally required to order the Institutions of
God; but as Reason may not make a new Article of Faith, so neither a new part
of worship. Now Natures in sufficiency is described in these three reasonings:

1. To have all the worship of God sensible and pleasing to the eye. It 1.
Because it would have all the worship of God sensible and pleasing to the eye.
was well called by Parisiensis, a madness in some, who doubted not to say, The
Church was better ruled by the inventions of men then by the Scriptures. The
people of Israel would have sensible gods, that they might see them: and
certainly men do as much delight in sensible pompous worship, as children do
in gay babies; therefore the Prophet speaks of their goodly images. But all
this arises, because they are ignorant of spiritual worship, and cannot tell
how to make spiritual advantage from God. It was well said by one, that A
superstitious man is Gods flatterer, and not his friend; he is more officious
then needs: and where a man is busy ubi non oportet, (said Tertullian) he is
negligent ubi oportet. Such carnal sensible worshippers are well compared to
those that, because they have no children, delight in birds and dogs; so
because they have no true graces of the Spirit of God, they delight in these
imitations.

2. To appoint mediators between us and God. This was the 2. Because its prone
to appoint mediators between God and us.
great Argument of the Heathens; they thought themselves unworthy, and
therefore appointed others to mediate between them and God; which Argument of
the Heathens, some of the Fathers wrote against. But, do not the Papists the
same thing? Do not they tell us, Petitioners at the Court do not address
themselves immediately to the Prince, but get Favorites to speak for them; so
must we to God? And therefore Salmeron does give some reasons why its more
piety and religion to pray to God and Saints together, then to God alone. But
is not this to forget Christ our head, who is made nearer to us then Angels
are? And, indeed, Angels are reconciled to us by Christ. If therefore we follow
the light of Nature thus, we shall fall into the ditch at last; and
superstition is never more dangerous, then when its colored over with the
specious colors of Arguments.

3. To do all by way of compensation, and satisfaction to God. 3. Because it
performs all duties by way of compensation and merit.
Upon this ground were all the sacrifices of the Heathens. And is not all this
with Popery? Do they not make all penal things compensative? If they pray,
that is meritorious; if they fast, that is satisfactory. Hence arises that
seeming not to spare the flesh, Col. 3. ult. and the Apostle says, it has a
show of wisdom. But the more like any actions are to worship and wisdom,
and are not so, the more loathsome they are: as in an Ape, that which makes an
Ape so much deformed and loathsome, is because it is so like a man, and is not
a man.

Use. Of Instruction. What has made the idolatry of the Church of Rome so like
Paganish and Ethnicall idolatry? Even because they followed their light, the
light of Nature and Reason. Look over all their Paganish gods, and they have
answerable saints. As the Heathens had their Ceres, and Bacchus, and
Aesculapius; insomuch that Varro said, Discendum fuisset qua de causa quisque
deorum avocandus esset, ne a Libero aqua, a Lympho vinum optaretur: so here,
they have their St. Martin for the vineyard, Christopher for sudden death,
Nicholas for mariners, etc. And this was done at first, they say, to gain the
Heathens; but the contrary fell out. Let us then follow the light of Nature no
further then we ought; let her be an handmaid, not a mistress And then we
must take heed of going against her where she does truly direct. Are there
not many, not only unchristian, but also unnatural actions; let us remember
that.

LECTURE VIII.
ROMANS 2. 14. For the Gentiles, etc.
YOu have heard of two things considerable in the law of Nature; the knowledge
or light of it, and the power or ability of it. We shall (God willing) at this
time prosecute the doctrine of the former part, and the task we have at this
time is to answer some Questions about the light of the Nature: for, as there
are some who depresse it too much; so there are others advance it too high. The
Philosophers called the Christians Credentes, by way of reproach, because they
did not argue by reason, but receive upon trust: and there are some, who do
not indeed, with Abilardus, make faith [aestimatio] a fancy, yet they make it
ratio. Let us see therefore what this light can do, by way of answer to some
Questions only; not to answer all.

The first Question, Whether a man can by the light of Nature, That there is a
God, may be known by the light of Nature.
and by the consideration of the creatures, come to know there is a God. This
is denied by Socinians and others. Indeed Bellarmine charge tenets to this
effect upon Calvin, but that which the Protestant Authors hold, is, that he
may indeed have a knowledge that there is a God, but what this God is, whether
he be one, and what his attributes are, they cannot so reach to. Nihil Deo
notius, nihil ignotius: otherwise, they say, there is no natural Atheist in
opinion, though many in affections, desiring there were no God. As Tully
argues, let us take heed, how we bring this opinion into the world, that there
is a God, lest hereby we bring a great slavery and fear upon our selves. Are
there not many Politicians have too much of this poison in their hearts? But of
this more anon. Only that there is such a knowledge natural, appears by
some places: as first, Romans 1. 19. (...), That which may be known of God: for
there are some things, that by Nature could never be known, as the Trinity and
Incarnation of Christ. Now this knowledge is by the book of the creatures. This
whole universe may be called the laymens book; Rebus pro speculo utamur, we
may see the power and wisdom of God in them. Tully has a good comparison: As
a man that sees and reads a book, and observes how every letter is put
together to make an harmonious sense, must needs gather, that all those letters
did not fall together by chance, but that there was a wise author in the
composing of them: so it is in the world, which is (...), none can think such a
sweet compagination of all the parts of it should come together merely
accidentally. It Is said to be the speech of one Antony, much spoken of in
Ecclesiastical story, that he called the world a great volume, and the heaven,
and water, and earth were the pages and leaves; the stars and living creatures
were the letters in those pages: and how glorious a letter is the Sun, when
Eudoxus said, he was made only to behold it? The ways and arguments by which
Naturalists have proved this, have not been by demonstrations a priori, for
that is impossible; but by the effects. As a man that cannot see the Sun in it
self, it is so dazeling, does look upon it in a basin of water: thus we who
cannot know God in himself, know him in the creatures.

The second proof is from Psalm. 19. compared with Romans 10. where the Psalmist
makes the creatures so many tongues speaking a God, yea the Hebrew word (...)
eructat does signify the plenty and serenity, as also the fluid eloquence of
the heavens; and this is quoted by the Apostle. And here two doubts are by the
way to be removed: first, Whether that of Bellarmine and others be true, that
the text is here corrupt: and, Whether the Psalmists meaning be not perverted.
For the first; in the Hebrew it is there line, but the Apostle, following the
Septuagint, renders it (...), as if they had read Colam for Cavam: But the
Answer is, that the Septuagint regarded the sense, and, the Psalmist having
spoken before of the words or speech of heaven, they therefore interpret
according to that sense: And by line, is meant the Structure and exact
composing of all these things, which declares the admirable wisdom of the
Maker.

As for the later, it is indeed generally taken, as if the Apostle did speak
this of the Apostles preaching the Gospel, which the Psalmist did of the
heavens: insomuch that the Lutherans interpret all the former part of the
Psalm allegorically. Others think the Apostle alleges that place allusively,
not by way of argument, as in that place of the Epistle to the Corinthians,
where the Apostle applies the speech about Manna to matter of liberality. But
Jansenius and Vasquez among the Papists, and Beza with others among the
orthodox, think the Apostle keeps to the literal meaning of the Psalmist; as
if this should be the Apostles meaning, Israel has heard, for God made known
himself even to the very Heathens by the creatures, how much more to the Jews
by the Prophets? Which way soever you take it, it proves that God has a
school of Nature by his creatures, as well as a school of Grace by his
Ministers.

The last proof is from John 1. He is the true light, which enlightneth every
man coming into the world: for so we think [(...)] does refer to man, not
light; though Socinus and Grotius plead much for it. Some indeed understand
this of the light of Grace; but it will be more universally and necessarily
true of the light of Reason, which is in infants radically, though not
actually. I shall not here relate what unsound Positions an Antinomian Author
has in a manuscript Sermon upon this place, because it is not pertinent. So
then, there is an implanted sense and feeling of a deity; which made Tertullian
say, O anima naturaliter Christiana! and Cyprian, Summa est delicti nolle
agnoscere, quem ignorare non potes. If you object, that the Scripture speaks of
the Gentiles as (...), that is to be understood of a distinct and obedient
knowledge of him. And as for some Atheists spoken of, that have expressedly
professed it; what they did was partly in derision of the many gods, as
Socrates and another, who needing a fire, threw a statue of Hercules into the
fire, saying, Age Hercules, XIII. laborem subiturus adesto, obsonium nobis
cocturus. Besides, they did this with their tongue more then their heart, as
appears by Diagoras, who when he had made a famous oration against a deity,
the people came applauding him, and said, he had almost persuaded them, but
only they thought, that if any were God, he was, for his eloquence sake: and
then this wretch, like Herod, was content to be thought a god.

The second Question is, Whether the mystery of the Trinity, and The mystery
of the Trinity, and the Incarnation of Christ cannot be found out by the light
of Nature.
of the Incarnation of Christ, can be found out as a truth by the light of
Nature. And here, certainly, we must answer negatively; for the Apostle, 2 Corinthians. 2. speaking of the mysteries of the Gospel, says, It has not
entered into the heart of a man to conceive of them: which is to be understood,
not only of the blessed joy and peace of those truths, but also as they are
truths; so that all these things are of mere supernatural revelation. Hence
we read, that when, by reason of the Arrians, there was an hot dispute about
these mysteries, there was a voice heard from heaven, (...), The fall of the
wise men. I do acknowledge, that Austin and others have sought the footsteps
or representations of the Trinity in the creatures; yea, Nierembergius a
Jesuit, de origin sacrae Scripturae, lib. 1. cap. 3. does hold, that God did
intend by the works of creation, to declare the mysteries of graces; as by
those artificial things of the Ark, Tabernacle, and Temple, he intended
spiritual mysteries: but this is false. But then they did first know and
believe this doctrine by Scripture, and then afterward go to represent it.
Yet it must be confessed, that all these Similies have scarce one foot, much
less four, to run on. The Schoolmen speak of the three things in every
creature, Esse, Posse, and Operari. But especially that is taken up about the
soul, when it understands or knows, and when it loves: and the Son of God
is represented by that Verbum mentis, and the holy Ghost by Amor. Now here is a
mistake, for Christ is called (...), Joh. 1. by John, imitating the Chaldee,
not in respect of any such scholasticall sense, but because he does reveal and
make known the will of God to us: so the union of the humane nature and the
divine in one person, though learned men give many examples, yet none come up
to the full resemblance: And indeed, if you could give the like instance, it
were not wonderful or singular. We conclude then, that the Scriptures are the
only ladder, whereby we climb up to these things, and our understandings are
of such a little stature, that we must climb up into the tree of life (the
Scriptures) to see Jesus. The light of Nature insufficient for salvation.


The third Question concerning this natural light is, Whether it be sufficient
for salvation: For, there are some that hold, If any man, of whatsoever Nation
he be, worship God according to the light of Nature, and so serve him, he may
be saved. Hence they have coined a distinction of a threefold piety: Judaica,
Christiana, and Ethnica. Therefore say they, What Moses was to the Jews, and
Christ to the Christians; the same is Philosophy, or the knowledge of God by
nature, to Heathens. But this opinion is derogatory to the Lord Christ; for
only by faith in his Name can we be saved, as the Scripture speaks. And,
certainly, if the Apostle argued that Christ died in vain, if works were
joined to him; how much more if he be totally excluded? It is true, it seems
a very hard thing to man's reason, that the greater part of the world, being
Pagans and Heathens, with all their infants, should be excluded from heaven.
Hence, because Vedelius, a learned man, did make it an aggravation of Gods
grace to him, to choose and call him, when so many thousand thousands of
pagan-infants are damned: this speech, as being full of horridness, a scoffing
Remonstrant takes, and sets it forth odiously in the Frontispiece of his Book.
But, though our Reason is offended, yet we must judge according to the way of
the Scripture; which makes Christ the only way for salvation. If so be it
could be proved, as Zwinglius held, that Christ did communicate himself to some
Heathens, then it were another matter. I will not bring all the places they
stand upon, that which is mainely urged is Act. 10. of Cornelius; his prayers
were accepted, and, says Peter, Now I perceive, etc. But this proceeds from
a mere mistake; for Cornelius had the implicit knowledge and faith of Christ,
and had received the doctrine of the Messiah, though he was ignorant of Christ,
that individual Person. And as for that worshipping of him in every Nation,
that is not to be understood of men abiding so, but whereas before it was
limited to the Jews, now God would receive all that should come to him, of
what Nation soever.

There is a twofold Unbelief: one Negative, and for this no Heathen is
damned: He is not condemned because he does not believe in Christ, but for his
original and actual sins. Secondly, there is Positive Unbelief, which they
only are guilty of, who live under the means of the Gospel.

The fourth Question is, Whether that be true of the Papists, which hold, that
the sacrifices the Patriarchs offered to God, were by The Patriarchs did not
offer sacrifices by the light of Nature, but God revealed his will to Adam to
be so worshipped.
the mere light of Nature: For so says Lessius, Lex Naturae and obstringit and
suadet, etc. the Law of Nature both binds and dictateth all to offer
sacrifices to God; therefore they make it necessary that there should be a
sacrifice now under the New Testament offered unto God: And upon this ground
Lessius says it is lawful for the Indians to offer up sacrifices unto God,
according to their way and custom. And, making this doubt to himself, How
shall they do for a Priest? He answers, that as a commonwealth may appoint a
Governor to rule over them, and to whom they will submit in all things; so may
it appoint a Priest to officiate in all things for them. This is strange for a
Papist to say, who doteth so much upon succession, as if where that is not,
there could be no ministry. Now in this case he gives the people a power to
make a Priest. But, howsoever it may be, by the light of Nature, that God is
religiously to be worshipped; yet it must be only instituted worship that can
please him: And thus much Socrates an Heathen said, That God must only be
worshipped in that way wherein he has declared his will to be so. Seeing
therefore Abel, and so others, offered in faith, and faith does always relate
to some testimony and word, it is necessary to hold, that God did reveal to
Adam his will, to be worshipped by those external sacrifices, and the
oblations of them. It is true, almost all the Heathens offered sacrifices unto
their gods, but this they did, as having it at first by hearsay from the
people of God; and also Satan is always imitating of God in his institutions:
And howsoever the destructive mutation or change of the thing (which is always
necessary to a sacrifice) does argue, and is a sign of subjection and deepest
humiliation; yet how should Nature prescribe, that the demonstration of our
submission must be in such a kind or way?

The fifth Question is, Whether original sin can be found out by Original sin
can only be truly known by Scripturelight.
the mere light of Nature, Or, Whether it is only a mere matter of faith
that we are thus polluted. It is true, the learned Mornay labors to prove by
natural reason our pollution, and shows how many of the ancient Platonists
do agree in this, That the soul is now vassalled to sense and affections, and
that her wings are cut whereby she should so are up into heaven. And so Tully
he says, Cum primum nascimur, in omni continuo pravitate versa, mur; much like
that of the Scripture, The Imagination of the thoughts of a man's heart is only
evil, and that continually: But Aristotle (of whom one said wickedly and
falsely, that he was the same in Naturals, which Christ was in Supernaturals)
he makes a man to be obrasa tabula, without sin or virtue; though indeed it
does incline ad meliora. Tully affirms also, that there are semina innata
virtutum in us, only we overcome them presently: Thus also Seneca, Erras, si
tecum nasci vitia putas, supervenerunt, ingesta sunt, as I said before. Here we
see the wisest of the Philosophers speaking against it. Hence Julian, the
Pelagian, heaped many sentences out of the chiefest Philosophers against any
such corruption of nature. But Austine answered, It was not much matter what
they said, seeing they were ignorant of these things. The truth is, by nature
we may discover a great languishment and infirmity come upon us; but the true
nature of this, and how it came about, can only be known by Scripture Light:
Therefore the Apostle, Romans 7. says, he had not known lust to be sin, had not
the Law said, Thou shall not lust.

The sixth Question is, What is the meaning of that grand rule of Matthew. 19.
12. expounded.
Nature, which our Savior also repeateth, That which you would not have other
men do to you, do not you to them, Matthew. 7. 12. It is reported of Alexander
Severus, that he did much delight in this saying, which he had from the Jews
or Christians: and our Savior adds this, that, This is the Law, and the
Prophets; so that it is a great thing even for Christians to keep to this
principle. Men may pray, and exercise religious duties, and yet not do this;
therefore the Apostle adds this to prayer, so that we may live as we pray,
according to that good rule of the Platonish, (...). How would this subdue all
those proud, envious, censorious, and inimicitious carriages to one another?
But Communion of all things no precept of Nature, and the Apostles practice of
it was only occasional, not binding to posterity.
now when we speak of doing that to another, which we would have done to our
selves, it is to be understood of a right and well-regulated will, not
corrupted or depraved.

The seventh Question is, Whether the practice of the Apostles, making all
their goods common, was according to the precept of Nature, and so binding all
to such a practice. For there have been, and still are those that hold this.
But now, that communion of all things is not jure Naturae, appears, in that
theft is a sin against the Moral Law; which could not be, if division of goods
were not according to the law of Nature. Indeed, by Nature all things were
common, but then it was Natures dictate to divide them; as Aristotle shows in
many reasons against Plato. What would have been in innocence, if Adam had
stood, whether a common right to all things, or a divided propriety (I speak of
goods) is hard to say. But as for the practice of the Church of Jerusalem, that
was occasional, and necessary, therefore not to be a ground for perpetual
command; for other Churches did it not, as appears by the alms that were
gathered, nor was it laid necessarily upon all to sell what they had, as
appears by Paul's speech to Ananias.

Use 1. If God be so angry with those that abuse natural God is more offended
with those that abuse Gospel light, then those that abuse the light of Nature.
light, how much rather then with such, who also abuse Gospel light? These do
not put light under a bushel, but under a dunghill. There are many that are
Solifuga, as Bats and Owls are. In one Chapter God is said three times to
deliver them up, because they did not glorify God according to Natures light;
how much more then according to the Gospels light? Gravis est lux conscientiae,
said Seneca; but gravior est lux Evangelii: The light of the Ministry and Word
must needs be more troublesome to thy sinful ways.

Use 2. Of Examination, whether, even among Christians, may not be found men no
better then Heathens. Now such are, 1. Ignorant people: how few have any
knowledge of God? 2. Violent Three sorts of Christians little better then
Heathens.
adherers to former Idololatricall courses, taken up by forefathers. There is
this difference between an Idolater and a true Believer: The Believer is like
those creatures, that you can make nothing lie on their backs, unless it be
fastened by some Scripture or reason; but the Heathen is like the Camel, that
had a back for burdens on purpose: so that any idolatry he would bear, though
it were tied on by arguments. 3. Such as are inordinately distracted about the
things of this world, Matthew. 6. After these things do the Heathens seek. Have
thou not much of an Heathen in thee? 4. Such as rage at Christ, and his
reformation, Psalm. 2. Why do the Heathens rage?

LECTURE IX.
ROMANS 2. 14. For the Gentiles do by nature the things of the law.
WE have handled those things that concern the light and conduct of Nature:
now we shall speak of that which belongs to the ability and power of Nature;
for herein are two extreme errors: one of the Pelagian, Papist, and Arminian,
with others, who lift up this power too high, Sub laudibus Naturae latent
inimici gratiae; and the other of the Antinomians, who seem to deny all the
preparatory works upon the heart of a man; holding, that Christ immediately
communicates himself to gross sinners abiding so: and though they hold us
passive at the first receiving of Christ, which all orthodox do; yet they
express it in an unsound sense, comparing God unto a Physician, that does
violently open the sick man's throat, and pour down his physic whether he
will or no; whereas God, though he does convert fortiter, yet he does it also
suaviter. Now for the full clearing of our inability to any good thing, we will
lay down these Propositions:

1. There is a natural power of free will left in us. Free Will is There is in
man a natural power, by the help of Reason, to choose or refuse this or that
thing.
not indeed a Scripture name, but merely ecclesiastical, and has been so
abused, that Calvin wished the very name of it were quite exploded: but if we
speak of the quid sit, and not the quid possit, the being of it, and not the
working of it, we must necessarily acknowledge it. The nearest expression to
the word Free Will, is that 1 Cor. 7. 37. having (...), power over his own
will: but generally the Scripture uses the word (...), and (...), which is as
much as we intend. There is in all men naturally that power, whereby, through
the help of Reason, he chooses this, and refuses another thing; only this
must not be extended to the things of grace. Now to say what this Free Will is,
is very hard: Perkins, following some Schoolmen, makes it a mixed power of
the Understanding and the Will; others a third real distinct power from them:
but it may probably be thought, that it is nothing but the Will in electing or
refusing such things; so that we call it the Will in those things its
necessarily carried out to, as to will what is good, and not sin as sin: and
then Free Will, when it is carried out to those things that are not necessarily
connexed with it: Even as in the Understanding, while the Understanding does
consider first Principles, it is called Intellectus; while Conclusions that are
gathered from them, it is called Ratio. Therefore our Adversaries do but
calumniate us, when they say, we turn men into beasts; for we hold the
Understanding going before, and the Will after: and this is more then a mere
spontaneous inclination in things natural. Therefore it is, that we do not
bid the fire burn, or persuade an horse to go, because there is not
Understanding or Will in these things, as there is in a man.

2. This which is left in us is not able to perform natural actions, This
natural power in man not able to perform natural actions without Gods
general assistance.
without the general help of God. That which we have acknowledged to be in a
man naturally, must still be limited to his proper sphere, to natural, and
civil actions, or some externally religious duties: but even then we must
acknowledge a general help, or assistance of God, without which we could not
do any natural thing; so that place in the Acts, In him we live, and move,
and have our being: by which we prove, that God does not only give us the
principles of being and moving, but we move in him, i. e. by him. Therefore
Hierome did well reprove the Pelagians, that thought, without the general aid
of God, a man might move his finger, or write, and speak. There have been some
who have thought, that all which God does for us in our natural actions, is
only to give the principles and power of actions; and then afterward we need
no further aid, then mere preservation of our being, no concourse or aid of
God helping us in the action: Thus Durand of old, and one Dodo of late, who
has written a Book only to that purpose: but the place above said does
evidently convince it; and we see, that God did hinder the fire from burning
the three Worthies, though he did preserve the fire at the same time in the
power of burning, which could not be otherwise, then by denying his actual
aid to the working of the fire: For, to say that the reason was because of
Gods doing something upon their bodies, were to make the miracle there, where
the Scripture does not lay it If you ask then, why this may not be called a
special help of God, as well as that, whereby we are enabled to believe, or
repent; I answer, there is a great deal of difference:

1. Because this general aid is necessary to wicked actions, in regard of
their positive nature, as well as to good.

2. God does this in the way of his Providence, as a Creator; the other he
does in the way of Predestination, as a father in Christ.

3. The other aid may be said to be due, as our Divines speak of original
righteousness, upon a supposition that a man is made a creature to do such
actions; yet not properly a debt, but that for our sin we are deprived of it:
but this special help of grace cannot be called so.

3. It is wholly unable to work any good thing. All this while we Man by the
power of nature wholly unable to perform good actions.
have considered the power of man but as in the lower region; and if you do
consider him, in reference to good things, so he has no power, or will, or
free will at all; but, as Austin said before Luther, it is servum arbitrium, a
servant, and inslaved will to sin only. Indeed we have not lost our
understandings or our wills, but to know or will that which is good, is wholly
lost: Though we have not lost the will, yet we have the rectitude in that will,
whereby we should incline to good. And this may be proved from many Arguments:

1. From all those places of Scripture which declare our estate 1. Because our
natures are full of sin and corruption.
to be full of sin and corruption, and altogether wicked. Now, Do men gather
grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Hence the Father compares us well to
the ship in a tempest, that is destitute of a Pilot: we are dashed continually
upon rocks, though this speak of the negative only, not the positive
corruption.

2. All those places, which speak of grace, and conversion, and 2. Because
grace and conversion are the work of God.
regeneration, as the work of God. As for those places, where we are said to
repent, and to turn unto God, in time we shall clear; only these Texts prove,
that all the good things we do, they are the works of the Lord: not that God
believes or repents in us, but he works those actions in us efficiently,
which we do formally and vitally.

3. All those places whereby glory and praise is to be given 3. Because glory
is to be given to God only, not to our selves.
unto God only, and not unto our selves. What have thou thou have not
received? We are to glory in nothing, because no good thing is ours. Therefore,
we bring forth good things, as Sarahs dead womb brought forth a child; it was
not a child of nature, but a child of the mere promise: thus are all our
graces. And, indeed, if we could either in whole or part work our own
conversion, we might thank God, and our wills: But how absurd would this be,
Lord, I thank thee for the turning of my heart, when I was willing to turn it?

4. It cannot prepare or dispose it self for the grace of justification Nature
of it self cannot dispose for justification, or sanctification: and the
reasons why.
or sanctification. As it cannot immediately work any good thing, so neither can
a natural man dispose, or prepare himself for the great works of grace. There
is no truth in such an assertion. Let man do what he can naturally, God will
meet him graciously; and the reasons are plain:

1. Because no natural thing is in it self an order or a disposition to a
supernatural thing; for they differ in their whole kind and nature. Hence it
is, that we never read of any Heathens, that, by the improvement of a natural
light, had supernatural vouchsafed unto them.

2. Those places that speak of our total corruption, intensively only evil,
and extensively, all the thoughts of a man are evil, and protensively,
continually, do sufficiently declare, that we cannot prepare our selves to meet
God.

3. If we could prepare, or dispose ourselves to grace, then the greatest
cause of glory would still be in a man's own self: For, Why does Peter repent,
and not Judas? Because, may some say, he disposed and set himself to repent,
and not Judas. But still here is the Question, Why did Peter set himself to
repent, and not Judas? Here it must be ultimately resolved either into the
grace of God, or the will of man.

4. All those similitudes that the Scripture uses, do illustrate this thing.
We are not said to be blind, or lame, but dead in sin: now did Lazarus prepare
himself to rise? So its called Regeneration. Can a man dispose himself to have
life? I know these comparisons must not be extended too far; yet, the Scripture
using such expressions to declare our utter inability, we may well press those
breasts of the Scripture so far, and bring out no blood. The parched earth does
not dispose it self for the rain, nor does the cold ice of it self thaw,
which is the Fathers Similie.

Yet fifthly, We may hold truly some antecedaneous works upon the There are,
and may be some preparatory and antecedaneous works upon the heart before
justification or sanctification.
heart, before those graces be bestowed on us. This take to antidote against
the Antinomian, who speaks constantly of the soul taking Christ, even while
it is a grievous polluted soul; as if there were no polishing of this crooked
timber and rough stone, but even taken out of the quarry, and so immediately
put into the building. Those in the Acts that were pricked in heart, were yet
bid to repent; and so they cried out, What shall we do to be saved? The sick
feels his burden before he comes for ease, so that a gross sinner is not
immediately put out of his vile ways into Christ; only these limitations you
must take:

1. That all these things, sight of sin, trembling for fear, confused desires,
they are the works of Gods grace moving us, they do not come from our own
natural strength.

2. These are not absolutely necessary in every one. We know how Matthew and
Lydia did follow Christ; and God says, he was found of some that did not seek
him. Paul was in a most cursed indisposition when the Lord called him: but
generally God takes this way.

3. These are not necessary antecedents, so as the grace of conversion does
necessarily follow. We read of Cain and Judas troubled for sin. These are a
wilderness that a man may dye in, and never go into Canaan: There may be
throes and pangs, when yet no child, but wind is to be delivered. Hence a
people that have been civil, have not been called: but Publicans and Harlots.
The object of election is for the most part few for number, infirm for power,
and sinful for conversation: though in the godly these are needles that will
draw in the thread, yet this state must not be called a third middle estate
between regenerate and unregenerate, as some feign.

Lastly, none of these workings can be called so properly preparations, or
dispositions in themselves, but only intentionally in God. Our Savior looked
on a young man, and loved him, and said, he was not far from the Kingdom of
heaven: that is, the life he lived was not far from the Kingdom of heaven;
yet this was no preparation in it self to it: nay, he may be further off, as
two high hills may be near in the tops to one another, but the bottomes some
miles asunder. And this is so great a matter, that great sins are made by God a
preparation to some man's conversion, which yet of themselves they could never
be: As a child, whose coat is a little dirty, has it not presently washed;
but when he falls wholly all over in the dirt, this may be the cause of the
washing of it: so that they are preparations only so far as God intends them.

6. All determination to one does not take away that natural liberty.
Determination to one kind of acts takes not away liberty.
This will further clear the truth: for it may be thought strange, that there
should be this freedom of will in a man, and yet thus determined to one sin
only; whereas it is plain, a determination to one kind of acts, good or evil,
does not take away liberty. God can only will that which is good, and so the
Angels and Saints confirmed in happiness; yet they do this freely: and so the
Devils will that which is wicked only. It Is true, some exclaim at such
passages, but that is only because they are prepossessed with a false opinion
about liberty; for a determination to one may arise from perfection, as well as
natural imperfection. It is from Gods absolute perfection that he is
determined to will only good; and when Adam did will to sin against God, it
did not arise from the liberty of his will, but his mutability. There is a
natural necessity, such which determines a thing to one; and that is
imperfection: but a necessity of immutability in that which is good, is a
glorious perfection. The Learned speak of a threefold liberty: 1. From misery,
A threefold liberty.
such as the Saints shall have in heaven. 2. From sin, to which is opposed that
freedom to righteousness, of which our Savior speaks, Then are ye free
indeed, when the Son has made you free; and of which Austin, Tunc est liberum,
quando liberatum. 3. From natural necessity, and thus also man, though he be
necessarily carried on to sin, yet it is not by a natural necessity, as beasts
are, but there is Reason and Will in him when he does thus transgress: only
you must take notice, that this determination of our Will only to sin, is the
loss of that perfection we had in Adam, and does not arise from the primaeve
constitution of the will, but by Adams fall, and so is merely accidental to it.

7. Nor does it take away that willingness or delight in sin, which
Determination to sin, takes not away that delight in sin which man is
inevitably carried out unto.
we are inevitably carried out unto: For now, if man were carried out to sin
against his will and his delight, then there might be some show of pleading for
him; but it is not so, he sins as willingly, and as electively in respect of
his corrupt heart, as if there were no necessity brought upon him. Therefore
that is good of Bernards, The necessity takes not away the willingness of it,
nor the willingness of it the necessity. Its both an handmaid, and so free,
and, which is to be wondered, eoque magis ancilla, quo magis libera. Hence
therefore no wicked or ungodly man can have any excuse for himself, to say the
fates or necessity drove him: for, besides that by his fault he has cast
himself into this necessity, and so is, as if a man in debt, who was once able
to pay, but by his wilful prodigal courses has spent all, should think to
be excused because he cannot pay. Besides (I say, this just and full answer)
this also is to be said, that no man sins constrainedly, but every one is
carried on with that delight to sin, as if he were independent upon any
providence, or predefinitive permissive decrees of God, or any such corrupt
necessity within him. Hereby he pitieth not himself, he sees not his undone
estate, and nihil miserius misero non miserante seipsum. Hence it is, that a
man's whole damnation is to be ascribed to himself. We our selves have
destroyed our own souls, we cannot cast it upon Gods decrees. And this is
necessarily to be urged, because of that natural corruption in us with Adam,
to cast our sin upon God.

8. A man may acknowledge grace and give much to it, and yet Much may be
ascribed to grace, and yet the total efficacy not given unto it.
not give the total efficacy unto it. This is amain particular to consider;
for Pelagius, and Arminius, and Papists, all do aknowledge grace. Pelagius,
its noted of him, that he did four times incrustate his opinion, and held
grace in every one of them: He did gratiae vocabulo uti ad frangendum invidiam;
yea, by this means, he deceived all the Eastern Churches, and they acquitted
him when he said thus: If any man deny grace to be necessary to every good act
we do, let him be an anathema. So Papists and Arminians, they all acknowledge
grace, but not grace enough; Gratia non est gratia, nisi sit omni modo
gratuita: As for example; First, they acknowledge grace to be only as an
universal help, which must be made effectual by the particular will of man:
so that grace is efficacious with them, not by any inward virtue of it self
antecedaneous to, and independent upon the Will, but eventually only, because
the Will does yield; and therefore Bellarmine compares it to Sol and homo
generant hominem: one as the universal cause, the other as the particular
cause. Thus grace and free will produce a good action; grace as the general
cause, and free will as the particular: but how derogatory is this to grace?
how can our actions be said to be the fruit of grace? For, if I should ask,
Who is the father of such a man? it would be very hard to say, The Sun in the
firmament: so it would be as absurd to say, Grace regenerated and converted
this man. Again, they make grace a partial cause only; so that it stirs
up our natural strength to work this or that good thing: and therefore we are
synergists or co-workers with God in the work of conversion; but this
supposes us not dead in sin.

9. Men may naturally perform the outward act of a commandment. The outward
act of a commandment may be performed by the power of Nature.
Now though we be thus corrupt, yet for all that, men by nature may do that
outward act which is commanded by God, or abstain from the matter prohibited.
Thus Alexander abstained from the Virgins he took captives, which is so much
related in stories, and many other famous instances of the Heathens, though
some indeed think they had a special help and aid from God to do that: but
here the Apostle in the Text is clear, They do by nature the things of the
law. Some do not like that distinction, They may do the substance of the
work, but not the manner of a good work, because they think the substance
does comprehend that indeed which makes a good work; howsoever, they agree that
the external act may be done. Thus Ahab he externally humbled himself, and
some think that Uriah, which Esaias calls, The faithful witness he took to him,
to be the same with him that brought in the Altar of Damascus: so that, though
he was an idolater, and an ungodly man, yet he was reputed a faithful man in
his word. And certainly this is something, to make many men inexcusable. They
may forbear those acts of gross impiety which they do, supposing they have
not customarily, or by the just judgment of God thrown themselves into the
power of such sins; not that this will help to save them, only their
punishment will be less. Thus Fabritius and Camillus (says Austin) will be
less punished then Verres or Catiline, not because these were holy, but
because they were less wicked, and minora vitia virtutes vocamus. I know it is
a question, Whether a godly man can do more good then he does, or less evil
then he does: but this may be handled in the controversall part; we speak now
of a wicked man, who can do no good at all, unless in the external act.

Yet 10. All that they do is a sin before God. This is an antidote Whatsoever
mere natural men do, is sin before God: because 1. The act wants faith, the
person reconciliation with God. 2. It proceeds not from a regenerate nature.
to the former: Whatsoever they have done, though for the matter glorious, yet
they were but glorious sins; for,

1. They could not come from faith, or one reconciled with God: and the person
must be first accepted before the action, Heb. 11. Without faith it is
impossible to please God.

2. It could not come from a regenerate nature; and therefore the tree not
being good, the fruit was also bad. It Is not in Divinity as in Moral
Philosophy, where justa, and just agendo fimus justi; but we have the esse or
being first, and then the operari. It Is a question worth the disputing, Whether
the grace of God works the act of believing and other graces in us first, and
then by them we receive the habits. The Papists, and Arminians, and some others
go that way; but it is not consonant to Scripture, as may be showed hereafter.

3. They could not be good, if you regard the end: They could do 3. It Is not
done in reference to Gods glory.
nothing for the glory of God. This made Theophylact say, We could not
instance in one good Heathen; for, that which they did was for their
vainglory, and carnalis cupidit as non alia sanatur, one devil did but cast
out another: and if they did intend some particular good end, as to relieve the
miserable, to help the commonwealth, this was not enough; for the ultimate and
chief end ought to be intended by them. 4. There is no promise annexed to any
act that wants says.


Lastly, There is no promise of God made to any thing a man does, that has not
faith. Ahab indeed, and Nebuchadnezzar had temporal rewards, but in what
sense, I shall show in answering the Objections.

Use. To bewail the woeful condition of man by nature. How is every bird in
the air, and beast in the field in a better natural condition then they are?
This is worse then to be blind, to be lame; for our souls are all blind, lame,
deaf, yea and dead in sin. What a sad thing is it, to be all the day and year
long damning our souls? If we eat or drink, we sin; if we buy or sell, we sin.
And consider, that sin is the greatest evil, and that only which God loathes
and abhorres. Let all thou do therefore terrify thee, and make thee to
tremble; let this make thee cry for grace, as the poor, blind, and lame did,
that they might be healed: And, because you do not feel this, or are
unwilling to be heard, therefore you are the more miserable: Nolunt phrenetici
ligari, and lethargici excitari.

LECTURE X.
ROMANS 2. 14. For if the Gentiles do by nature the things of the law, etc.
WE have already positively and plainly (so far as we conceived necessary)
declared and proved the truth about the power and ability of a man by Nature to
do that which is good: now it remains we should antidote against those
objections that do militate against this truth, and that indeed with much show
of reason; for never have men been more witty, then when they have undertaken
to be the patrons of Nature. But Austin well called it vitreum acumen: the more
it glitters, the easier it is broken. The Heathens are very obstinate in
propugning man's power. Ignavis opus est auxilio divino, says Seneca the
Tragedian; and so the other Seneca, Deorum quidem munus esse quod vivimus,
nostrum vero quod been sanct^que vivimus: and that of Tully is very arrogant,
lib. 3. de not. deorum, Quia sibi quisque virtutem acquirit, neminem e
sapientibus unquam de ea gratias Deo egisse: and (says he) We are praised for
our virtue; which could not be, if it were the gift of God, and not of our
selves. But how different are the holy men in the Scripture, from these wise
men of the world, who, when they have been enabled by God to do any good
thing, have not taken the glory of it to themselves? And, as Joab did about
Rabbah, when he had taken it, sent to David to come and take all the glory; so
do they say, Not I, but the grace of God which works in me: for so 1 Cor.
15. (...) is to be understood, which was present with me, not which did work
with me.

First therefore they say, If so be we are not able to do any thing There is
in man's nature a passive capacity of grace, which is not in stones and beasts.
toward our salvation, this is to turn men into stocks, and stones, or
beasts, and so no difference between them and us. But we say, Although those
similitudes the Scripture holds forth do prove our inability for that which is
good, yet they must not be made alike in all things. It Is true, to convert men,
is to make children unto Abraham out of stones; yet we must not think that is
therefore an universal likeness between men and stones: For first, consider
this vast dissimilitude; In stones and beasts there is no passive capacity of
grace, but in man there is. We say, there is a power for grace in a man's
nature; and the Papists say, there is a power: only they say it is an active
power, though remote, we say, only a passive. There is a power to be converted
to God, which is not in stones or beasts: they say, there is a power to convert
or turn to God; here is a great difference.

Besides, we may consider these degrees in the creatures: 1. There is an
inclination to such an act, as in the fire to burn. 2. A spontaneous
inclination to some acts accompanied with sense, and sensible apprehensions, as
in beasts. 3. A willing inclination accompanied with reason or judgment, and
this is in man: Now, because man is thus affected, therefore God in converting,
though he does it by a potent work, yet by arguments, which we never use to
horses, or brute beasts: and although man has lost that rectitude in his will
and mind, yet he has not lost the faculties themselves; therefore though he be
theologically dead, yet he is ethically alive, being to be wrought upon by
arguments. Hence is that saying, To will is of nature, To will well of grace,
To will ill of corrupt nature. Hence we may grant those objections, that if a
man had not this free will (if you do not extend it to good things) there could
be no conversion or obedience; for grace does not destroy, but perfect nature.

2. This puts men upon speaking and preaching contradictions: To press a
duty, and yet to acknowledge Gods grace or gift to do it, is no contradiction.
For so some have said, that the Calvinists, though they be Calvinists in their
Doctrines, yet they are Arminians in their Uses. And they say, How incongruous
is it, to tell us we can do nothing of our selves, and then to make this use,
Therefore let us seek out for the grace of Christ? But to answer, 1. This
contradiction may be cast as well upon Christ and Paul: Take Christ for an
instance, John 6. in that Sermon, he bade the Jews labor for that meat that
perishes not, and yet at the same time said, None can come unto me, except my
Father draw him. Might not the Arminian say, How can these two things stand
together? So John 15. our Savior tells them, Without him they can do
nothing and yet at the same time he exhorts them, to abide in him, and keep
his commandments: So Paul; take two instances from him, Romans cap. 9. and cap.
11. The Apostle there shows, God will have mercy on whom he will have mercy,
and that it is not of him that runs or wills, but of God that calls; yet
he bids them that stand take heed lest they fall: and, Be not high-minded, but
fear. So Phil. 2. 12, 13. Work out your salvation with fear and trembling;
for it is God that works in you both to will and to do. This reason, in their
sense, would quite overthrow the former. Nay (say they) it being attributed
thus to God, and to man, it seems both do it. How this may be answered, we
shall see anon. But to make us speak contradictions, because we press a duty,
and yet acknowledge Gods grace or gift to do it, is to make a perpetual
discord between precepts and promises: For the same things which God commands
us to do, does he not also promise to do for us, as, to circumcise our
hearts, and, to walk in his commandments? How much better is that of Austins,
O man, in Gods precepts acknowledge what thou ought to do, in his promises
acknowledge that thou can not do it? But 2. we may return upon them, that
their Sermons and Prayers are contradictions; they say, they can do it, and
then they pray God they may do it: They say, the Will may receive the grace of
God, and may obey God calling; and then they pray, God would make them obey his
calling; as much as to say, O Lord, make me to obey if I will.

3. This evacuateth the whole nature of Gods precepts and commands: Man's
inability to observe Gods precepts, makes not void the nature of the precepts,
because this inability proceeded from man's own fault. A thing said to be
impossible three ways.
For, say they, Is not this to make God mock us, as if we should bid the blind
man see; or tell a dwarf, if he would touch the heavens with his finger, he
should have so much money? Now, to this many things are to be said: as, first,
If these things were absolutely and simply impossible, that which they say
would be true; but a thing may be said to be impossible three ways:

1. Simply and universally, even to the power of God: and so all those things
are, that imply a contradiction; and this impossibility arises from the nature
of the thing, not from any defect in God: Yea, we may say with one,
Potentissime-hoc Deus non potest.

2. There may be a thing impossible in its kind; as for Adam to reach the
heavens, for a man to work above natural causes.

3. That which is possible in it self to such a subject, but becomes
impossible accidentally through a man's fault. Now for a man to be commanded
that, which through his own fault he becomes unable to do, is no illusion or
cruelty. If a creditor require his debt of a bankrupt, who has prodigally
spent all, and made himself unable to pay, what unrighteousness is this?
Therefore they are but odious instances, of touching the skies, of bidding
blind men to see; for this Rule observe, Whatsoever is so impossible, that it
is extra officium debitum, and potentiam unquam datam, that indeed were absurd
to press upon men. Again consider, that the commands of God do imply if any
power, then more then they will acknowledge; for they suppose a man can do all
of himself without the grace of God, and therefore indeed the old Pelagian,
and the new Socinian speak more consonantly then these, that divide it between
grace, and the power of man.

Lastly, The commands of God are for many other ends, as to convince, Gods
commands, though they be not a measure of our power, may serve to convince,
humble, etc.
and humble, though they be not a measure or rule of our power. That place,
Deuteronomy. 30. 11. is much urged by the adversary, where Moses seems to declare
the easiness of that command: and certainly it has a very great show; for, as
for that answer, That Moses speaks of the easiness of knowing, and not
fulfilling, Calvin does not stand upon it; and indeed of our selves we are not
able to know the Law of God. The answer then to this may be taken out of Romans
10. 11. That howsoever Moses speaks of the Law, yet Paul interprets it of the
Gospel. What then? Does Paul pervert the scope of Moses? Some do almost say
so; but the truth is, the Law (as is to be showed against the general mistake)
if it was not in it self a covenant of grace, yet it was given Evangelically,
and to Evangelicall purposes, which made the Apostle allege that place: and
therefore the Antinomian does wholly mistake, in setting up the Law as some
horrid Gorgon, or Medusa's head, as is to be showed.

4. How can God upbraid or reprove men for their transgressions, Necessity of
sinning hinders not the delight and willingness man has in sin, and
consequently God may reprove him for his transgressions.
if they could do no other ways? This also seems very strange, if men can
do no otherwise. Is not this as ridiculous to threaten them, as that of
Xerxes, who menaced the sea? I answer, No, because still whatsoever man offends
in, it is properly his fault, and truly his sin; for whatsoever he sins in,
he does it voluntarily, and with much delight; and is therefore the freer in
sin, by how much the more he delights in it. And this Austin would diligently
inculcate, that so no man might think to cast his faults upon God. There is no
man forced to sin, but he does it with all his inclination and delight. How
far voluntarinesse is requisite to the nature of a sin, at least actual,
though not to original, is not now to be determined; for we all acknowledge,
that this necessity of sinning in every man, does not hinder the delight and
willingness he has in it at the same time.

Nor should this be thought so absurd, for even Aristotle says, Cap. 5. l. 3.
Ethie. ad Nicom.
that though men at first may choose, whether they will be wicked or no, yet if
once habituated, they cannot but be evil: and yet for all that, this does not
excuse, but aggravate. If an Ethiopian can change his skin, says the Prophet,
then may you do good, who have accustomed your selves to do evil. The Oak,
while it was a little plant, might be pulled up; but when it is grown into its
full breadth and height, none can move it. Now if it be thus of an habit, how
much more of original sin, which is the depravation of the nature? And
howsoever Austin was shye of calling it natural malum, for fear of the
Manichees; yet sometimes he would do it. Well therefore does the Scripture use
those sharp reprofes and upbraidings, because there is no man a sinner or a
damner of himself, but it is by his own fault: and withal, these serve to be
a goad and a sharp thorn in the sinners side, whereby he is made restless in
his sin.

5. To what purpose are exhortations and admonitions? Though Though God works
all our good in us, yet exhortations are the instrument whereby he works it.
the other answers might serve for this, yet something may be specially
answered here, which is, that though God work all our good in us, and for us,
yet it is not upon us as stocks or stones; but he deals sutably to our
natures, with arguments and reasons: And if you say, To what purpose? Is it any
more then if the Sun should shine, or a candle be held out to a blind man? Yes,
because these exhortations and the word of God read or preached, are that
instrument, by which God will work these things. Therefore you are not to look
upon preaching, as a mere exhortation, but as a sanctified medium or
instrument, by which God works that he exhorts unto. Sometimes indeed we
read, that God has sent his Prophets to exhort those, whom yet he knew would
not hearken: Thus he sent Moses to bid Pharaoh let the people of Israel go, and
thus the Prophets did preach, when they could not believe, because of the
deafness and blindness upon them. But unto the godly these are operative
means, and practical, even as when God said, Let there be light, and there
was light; or, when Christ said, Lazarus, come forth of the grave. And this by
the way should keep you from despising the most plain ministry or preaching
that is; for, a Sermon does not work upon your hearts, as it is thus elegant,
thus admirable, but as it is an instrument of God, appointed to such an end:
Even as Austin said, The conduits of water, though one might be in the shape of
an Angel, another of a beast, yet the water does refresh as it is water, not
as it comes from such a conduit; or the seed that is thrown into the ground
fructifieth, even that which comes from a plain hand, as well as that which
may have golden rings or jewels upon it: not but that the Minister is to
improve his gifts, Qui dedit Petrum piscatorem, dedit Cyprianum rhetorem, but
only to show whence the power of God is. Bonorum ingoniorum insignis est
indoles, in verbis verum amare, non verba. Quid obest clavis lignea, quando
nihil aliud quaerimus, nisi patere clausum?

6. The Scripture makes conversion and repentance to be our acts, How
conversion and repentance may be said to be our acts.
as well as the effects of Gods grace. And this cannot be denied but that we
are the subject, who being acti, agimus* enabled by grace, do work; for, grace
cannot be but in an intelligent subject: As before the Manna fell upon the
ground, there fell a dew, which (say Interpreters) was preparatory to
constringe and bind the earth, that it might receive the Manna; so does reason
and liberty qualify the subject, that it is passively capable of grace: but
when enabled by grace, it is made active also. These be places indeed have
stuck much upon some, which has made them demand, Why, if those promises of
God converting us do prove conversion to be his act, should not other places
also, which bid us turn unto the Lord, prove that it is our act? The answer is
easy: none deny, but that to believe, and to turn unto God, are our acts; we
cannot believe without the mind and will. That of Austin is strong and good,
If, because it is said, Not of him that wills and runs, but of him that
shows mercy, man is made a partial cause with God, then we may as well say,
Not in him that shows mercy, but in him that runs and wills.

But the Question is, Whether we can do this of our selves, with grace? Or,
Whether grace only enable us to do it? That distinction of Bernards is very
clear: The heart of a man is the subjectum in quo, but not a quo; the subject
in which, not from which this grace proceeds: Therefore you are not to
conceive, when grace does enable the mind and will to turn unto God, as if
those motions of grace had such an impression upon the heart, as when the seal
imprints a stamp upon the wax, or when wine is poured into the vessel, where
the subject recipient does not move, or stir at all: Nor is it as when
Balaam's Ass spoke, or as when a stone is thrown into a place, nor as an
enthusiasticall or arreptitious motion, as those that spoke oracles, and
understood not; Nor as those that are possessed of Satan, which did many
things, wherein the mind and will had no action at all: but the Spirit of God
inclines the Will and Affections to their proper object.

Nor is the Antinomians similitude sound, that (as you heard) makes God
converting of a man, to be as when a Physician pours down his potion into
the sick-mans throat, whether he will or no: For it is most true, that the
Will, in the illicite and immediate acts of it, cannot be forced by any power
whatsoever: It Is impossible that a man should believe unwillingly; for, to
believe, requires an act of the Will. The Schoolmen dispute, Whether fear,
or ignorance, or lust do not compel the Will; and they do rightly conclude,
that it cannot: Therefore, though a man's conversion be resisted by the corrupt
heart and will of a man, yet when it is overcome by the grace of God, it
turns willingly unto him. Therefore this argument, though it seem strange,
yet we may say of it as he in another case, Hoc argumentum non venit a Dea
Suada.

7. Then men may sit still and never stir, only expecting when Gods working
upon the heart of a sinner for conversion, excludes not man's working.
grace shall come; for, if we have no power, why are men exhorted to come to
Christ, and read the word? And indeed, this has so wrought upon some, that
they have not used any means at all, but expect Gods providence to be a
supplyer of all, as Brentius (if I mistake not) relates of an Anabaptist
woman, who invited many to supper, and never provided any thing, expecting God
would do it. Now this Question is built upon a falsehood, as if a man's working
were wholly excluded; whereas you are to know, that there are two kinds of holy
things:

1. There are holy things that are internally and essentially so, and these we
cannot do without God, John 15. Without me ye can do nothing. Austin observes
the emphasis; he does not say, No hard thing, but nothing: and he does not say
Perficere, perfect; but Facere, you cannot do it any way.

2. There are holy actions externally so, as to come to hear the word
preached, to read and meditate upon the word: experience teaches, that men
have a natural power to this; witness those many Comments and learned
Expositions, that men without any grace have made upon the Scripture. Now it is
true, to do any of these holily is Gods act, The natural man perceives not
the things of God: and, God opened Lydia's heart. But yet God converteth in the
use of these means. He will not ordinarily change the heart of any, that does
not wait at the gates of wisdom. Therefore God does not work upon the heart,
as the Artificer uses his instrument, but he commands to read and hear; and
this is the organ, or the means by which the Spirit of God will change his
heart. Now indeed, when a man reads or hears any natural or philosophical
truth, he is able by these (...), strength left in nature, to comprehend them,
but he cannot in the same manner bring forth any thoughts or affections of
heart suitable unto those spiritual mysteries laid open before him. But now the
patrons of Nature speak otherwise; they say it is, as if a man, almost spent by
a disease, should receive physic, and so that physic does repair and
increase strength, not infuse strength: Or, as a bird tied by a string, that
has a power to fly, only is outwardly hindered, so that they suppose a
latent power in Nature to be excited and stirred up by grace: we say, the power
must be first infused.

8. If they thus necessarily sin, then they were not bound to pray, nor Though
wicked men cannot but sin in praying and hearing, yet they are bound to these
duties.
to come to hear the Word of God preached; for then also they sin, and no man
is bound to sin. Now to this the answer is clear, that though a wicked man
cannot but sin in praying and hearing, yet he is bound to these things: and
the reason is, because, that he sins in them, it is merely accidental, but
the duty is a duty essentially in it self; and a man must not omit that which
is per se requisite, for that which is accidentally forbidden: so that his
resolution should not be, not to pray, or to hear, but deponere peccatum, to
lay down his sin, which corrupts, leaveneth, and makes sour all he does.
Besides, there is less judgment to him that prays, then to him that prays
not, although in some particular consideration his aggravation may be the
greater.

9. The Scripture does say, To him that has, shall be given, God does not bind
himself to this way.
and, when God distributed his talents, it was to every one as he was able,
Matthew. 25. If we answer to this, that theologia symbolica non est
argumentativa, that is denied, and is now a-late questioned; although Austins
and others comparisons about parables must needs be granted: which are, As in a
picture there are lineaments, and essentialls of it, but, besides these, the
shadows and colors, which are for mere ornament; so in parables: Or, as
others, As in the musical instrument, only the strings touched make the noise
or tune, yet they could not do so, unless fastened unto the wood; so only
the scope of the parable is that which is argumentative, though this principal
have many accessaries joined to it: And thus we may say of that passage, (...),
that it is taken from the custom of men, and goes to make up the parable. But
let us consider it otherwise, and Theophylact refers it dangerously to our
preparations and dispositions. In the vessel (says he) which I am to bring to
God, he pours in his gift: If I bring a little vessel, he gives a little
gift; if a great vessel, he gives a great gift: But, seeing that under the
name of these talents, be understood not only dona sanctificantia, but
ministrantia, and the Apostle says expressly, that the Spirit of God gives
these diversity of gifts, as he pleases, this wholly overthrows that
exposition. Therefore the Papists, Barradius and Maldonat, do confess it
makes only ad ornatum, non ad rem per parabolam significatam; and that it is
taken from the custom of men, who use indeed to look to the gifts of men,
their prudence and fidelity: but we know by experience, God did not so. But if
we make an argument of it, then this disposition or capacity must be either
supernatural, and then it is the gift of God; or if of natural capacity, as
sometimes to him that has excellent parts, a prompt wit, an happy memory, God
gives the habit of Divinity (for there is such a thing that is distinct from
the habit of faith) and a gift of interpreting Scripture, although that
natural dexterity be a gift of God also, but in another kind; and then God
does not tie or bind himself to this way: and therefore, if we should say, as
some do, God gave the spirit of government to Moses, because by nature he was
most prudent and meek; yet it is not universally so, because God gave to Saul a
spirit of government from his own mere good will, without any respect to
Saul. And how many men of parts have been so far from being blessed, because of
these natural endowments, that they have turned their wedge of gold into an
idol, to worship it?

Use 1. To extol the work of grace for the initiall, progressive, and
consummative work of conversion: for by all that has been said, you have seen
the weakness of nature, and the power of grace; the strength of our disease,
and the necessity of a physician. How uncomfortable will it be when thou die,
to commit thy soul to that grace, which thou have disputed against? And be not
content with giving something to it, unless thou give all to it; Grace that
justifies, Grace that sanctifies, Grace that saves.

Use 2. Not to abuse the doctrine of grace to idleness or negligence. You see
how both these promises and precepts, grace and duties, may be reconciled. And
as not to negligence, so not to curious disputes: do not so trouble your
selves about the doctrine of grace, that you feel not the power of grace in
your hearts; and do not so far dispute about your natural corruption, and how
deep you are in it, as not to labor to get out of it. Austin compares this to
one, who being fallen into a great pit, his friend asked him how he came in;
Nay (says he) rather seek how to get me out. And thus do ye in these matters
of sin, wherein you are wholly plunged.

LECTURE XI.
GENES. 2. 17. But of the tree of knowledge of good and evil thou may not
eat; for in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die.
WE come now in order to the law God gave Adam; and this may be considered two
ways: First, as a Law, secondly, as a Covenant. We will handle it first in the
former notion. Now, because the law God gave Adam was partly natural, and
partly positive, both which did go to the making up of that covenant, I shall
handle both those distinctly: and first, let us consider Gods positive law in
the text, which is also called by Divines, a symbolicall precept, because the
obedience unto it was a symbolum, or outward testimony of our homage and
service to God And the object of this command is not a thing good or bad in its
own nature, but indifferent, and only evil because prohibited: So that in
the words you have the object of this negative precept described two ways;
first, by that which is proper to it, the tree of knowledge of good and evil:
secondly, by that which is accidental to it, viz. death infallibly upon the
eating of it. And that this commandment might be the better received, in the
Verse before, God gives a large commission to eat of any other tree besides
this. When God made this world as a great house, he puts man into it as his
tenant; and by this trial of obedience, he must acknowledge his Landlord.
That Adam did eat in the state of innocence, and was hungry, does appear by
this text; only hunger was not in him, as it is in us, with pain and trouble.
The difficulties must be handled in the opening of the doctrine, which is, That
God, besides the natural law engraven in Adams heart, did give a positive law,
to try his obedience.

The doubts in explicating of this point are, 1. What is meant by the tree of
knowledge of good and evil? And here, certainly, we must take heed of being
too curious, lest, as it was Adams sin, to eat of it; so it may be our
curiosity to dive too far into the knowledge of it. Now when I ask what is
meant by it, I do not understand what kind of fruit or tree it was, whether
apple or fig (that cannot be determined) but why it had that name. The Rabbis,
who have as many foolish dreams about the Old Testament, as the Friars about
the New, conceive Adam and Eve to be created without the use of reason, and
that this tree was to accelerate it. And, indeed, the Socinians border upon
this opinion, for they say, Adam and Eve were created very Tanta suit Adami
recens conditi stupiditas, ut major in infantes cadere non posiit.
simple, and weak in understanding; and, say they, it is impossible to conceive,
that if Adams soul were created so adorned with all knowledge and graces (as
the firmament is bespangled with stars) how he should come to eat of the
forbidden fruit, or to sin against God.

But both these are false. That he had perfect knowledge, appears in his
giving names to the creatures, and to Eve, so fitting The tree of knowledge why
so called.
and apt; and, Ephesians. 3 the image of God is said to have a renewed mind: and
that though thus knowing he did yet sin; and though thus holy, he did yet fall,
it was because he was not perfectly confirmed, but mutable. Indeed Divines do
much labor to express how his sin did begin, whether in the Will first, or in
the Understanding; but that is impertinent to this matter. That which is the
most received, both by Austin and others, is, that it was so called, not from
any effect, but from the event, because it did indeed experimentally make to
know good and evil: and so it is usual in Scripture to call that by a name,
which it had afterward. Now though this be generally received, and cannot well
be rejected, yet certainly it may be further said, that it was not called so by
the mere event, but by the divine decree and appointment of God, as being
given to be a boundary and limit to Adam, that he should not desire to know
more, or otherwise then God had appointed.

2. Why God would give a positive law, besides that of the natural God,
besides the natural law engraven in Adams heart, did give a positive law:
law in his heart. There are these reasons commonly given:

1. That hereby Gods dominion and power over man might be the more
acknowledged: for, to obey the natural law, might be a necessary condition,
and not an act of the Will: Even as the Heathens do abstain from many sins,
not because forbidden by 1. That the power which God had over him might be the
more eminently held forth.
God, but as dissonant to their natural reason. And even among Christians
there is a great deal of difference between good actions, that are done
because God commands, and because of a natural conscience. These two
principles make the same actions to differ in their whole nature. Therefore God
would try Adam by some positive law, that so the dominion and power which God
had over him might be the more eminently held forth: and therefore Adam in this
was not to consider the greatness or goodness of the matter, but the will of
the commander.

2. Another reason, which flows from the former, is, that so 2. To try and
manifest Adams obedience.
Adams obedience might be the more tried, and be manifested to be obedience.
For, as Austin, speaking of himself in confessing his wickedness, that though
he had no need or temptation to sin, yet to be a sinner he delighted in that;
Nulla alia causa malitiae, nisi malitia: so on the contrary, it is an excellent
aggravation of obedience, when there is nulla alia causa obedientiae, nisi
obedientia; so that the forbearing to eat, was not from any sin in the action,
but from the will of the lawgiver. And Austin does well explain this: If a
man (says he) forbid another to touch such an herb, because it is poison, this
herb is contrary to a man's health, whether it be forbidden or no: Or if a man
forbid a thing, because it will be an hinderance to him that forbids; as to
take away a man's money, or goods, here it is forbidden, because it would be loss
to him that forbids: but if a man forbids that which is neither of these
ways hurtful, therefore it is forbidden, because bonum obedientiae per se, and
malum inobedientiae per se monstraretur.

And this is also further to be observed, that though the obedience unto this
positive law be far inferior unto that of the moral law, because the object
of one is inwardly good, and the object of the other rather a profession of
obedience, then obedience; yet the disobedience unto the positive law is no
less heinous then that to the moral law, because hereby man does professedly
acknowledge he will not submit to God: Even as a vassal, that is to pay such
homage a year, if he wilfully refuse it, does yearly acknowledge his
refractorinesse. Hence the Apostle does expressly call Adams sin disobedience,
Romans 5. not in a general sense, as every sin is disobedience; but specifically
it was (strictly taken) the sin of disobedience: he did by that act cast off
the dominion and power that God had over him, as much as in him lay; and though
pride and unbelief were in this sin, yet this was properly his sin.

3. Why God would make this law, seeing he fore-knew his fall, and The proper
essential end of the positive law was to exercise Adams obedience.
abuse of it. For such is the profane boldness of many men, that would have a
reason of all Gods actions, whereas this is as Altitudinem consilii ejus
penetrare non possum, and long supra vires meas esse confiteor, August.
if the Owl would look into the Sun, or the Pigmee measure the Pyramides.
Although this may be answered without that of Paul's, Who art thou, O man, etc.
for God did not give him this law to make him fall; Adam had power to stand.
Therefore the proper essential end of this commandment was to exercise Adams
obedience. Hence there was no iniquity or unrighteousness in God. Bellarmine
does confess, that God may do that, which if man should do, he sinned: as,
for instance, Man is bound to hinder him from sin that he knows would do it,
if it lay in his power; but God is not so tied, both because he has the chief
providence, it is fit he should let causes work according to their nature; and
therefore Adam, being created free, he might sin, as well as not sin; as also
because God can work evil things out of good; and lastly, because God, if he
should hinder all evil things, there would many good things be wanting to the
world, for there is nothing which some do not abuse. The English Divines in
the Synod of Dort held, that God had a serious will of saving all men, but not
an efficacious will of saving all: Thus differing from the Arminians on one
side, and from some Protestant Authors on the other side; and their great
instance of the possibility of a serious will and not efficacious, is this of
Gods to Adam, seriously willing him to stand, and withal giving him ability to
stand: yet it was not such an efficacious will, as de facto did make him stand;
for, no question, God could have confirmed the will of Adam in good, as well as
that of the Angels and the glorified Saints in heaven. But concerning the truth
of this their assertion, we are to enquire in its time: For that error much
spreads, and the Antinomian cannot by his principles avoid, that Christ
intentionally died, and so offers his grace to all. But for the matter in
hand, if by a serious will be meant a will of approbation and complacency, yea
and efficiency in some sense, no question but God did seriously will his
standing, when he gave that commandment. And howsoever Adam did fall, because
he had not such help that would in the event make him stand, yet God did not
withdraw or deny any help unto him, whereby he was enabled to obey God. To deny
Adam that help, which should indeed make him stand, was no necessary requisite
at all on Gods part.

But secondly, that of Austins is good, God would not have suffered sin to be,
if he could not have wrought greater good then sin was evil: not that God
needed sin to show his glory; for he needed no glory from the creature: but it
pleased him to permit sin, that so thereby the riches of his grace and
goodness might be manifested unto the children of his love. And if Arminians
will not be satisfied with these Scripture considerations, we will say as
Austin to the Heretics, Illi garriant, nos credamus, Let them prate, while we
believe.

5. Whether this law would have obliged all posterity. And certainly The
positive law did lay an obligation upon Adam posterity.
we must conclude, that this positive command was universal, and that Adam is
here taken collectively; for, although that Adam was the person to whom this
command was given, yet it was not personal, but to Adam as an head, or common
person: Hence Romans 5. all are said to sin in him, for whether it be in him, or,
in as much as all have sinned, it comes to the same purpose; for how could all
be said to have sinned, but because they were in him? And this is also further
to be proved by the commination, In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall
dye: now all the posterity of Adam dies hereby. Besides, the same reasons
which prove a convenience for a positive law, besides the natural for Adam,
do also infer for Adams posterity. It is true, some Divines that do hold a
positive law would have been, yet seem to be afraid to affirm fully, that the
posterity of Adam would have been tried with the very same commandment of
eating the forbidden fruit: but I see no cause of questioning it. Now all this
will be further cleared, when we come to show, that this is not merely a law,
but a covenant, and so by that means there is a communicating of Adams sin
unto his posterity. And, indeed, if God had not dealt in a covenant way in this
thing, there could be no more reason, why Adams sin should be made ours, then
the sins of our immediate parents are made ours. I know Peter Martyr (and he
quoteth Bucer) is of a mind, that the sins of the immediate parents are made
the sins of the posterity, and Austin inclines much to that way: but this may
serve to confute it, that the Apostle, Romans 5. does still lay death upon one
man's disobedience. Now, if our parents and ancestors were as full a cause as
Adam was, why should the accusation be still laid upon him? But of this more
hereafter.

6. How the threatening was fulfilled upon him, when he did eat of Adam, by
eating the forbidden fruit, became mortal, and in the state of death, not
natural only, but spiritual and eternal also.
the forbidden fruit. We need not run to the answer of some, that this was
spoken only by way of threatening, and not positively, as that sentence upon
the Ninivites; for these conclude, therefore Adam died not, because of his
repentance: but Adam did not immediately repent, and when he did, yet for all
that he died. Others read it thus, In the day thou eatest thereof, and then
make the words absolute that follow, Thou shall die: as if God had said, There
is no day excepted from thy death, when thou shall eat. But the common answer
is best, which takes to dye, for to be in the state of death: and therefore
Symmachus his translation is commended, which has, Thou shall be mortal; so
that hereby is employed a condition and a change of Adams state as soon as he
should eat this forbidden fruit: And by death, we are not only to mean that
of the actual dissolution of soul and body, but all diseases and pains, that
are the harbingers of it. So that hereby Christians are to be raised higher, to
be more Eagle-eyed then Philosophers: They spoke of death and diseases, as
tributes to be paid, they complained of Nature as a stepmother; but they were
not able to see sin the cause of this. Yea, in this threatening we are to
understand spiritual death, and eternal also. Indeed, it is made a question,
Whether, if Adam had continued, he should have been translated into heaven, or
confirmed only in Paradise: but that his death would have been more then
temporal, appears fully by Romans 5. Indeed, the things that concern heaven
and hell, or the resurrection, are not so frequently and plainly mentioned in
the Old Testament as in the New; yet there are sufficient places to convince,
that the promises and threatenings in the Old Testament were not only
temporal, as some do most erroneously maintain.

7. Whether Adam was mortal, before his eating of the forbidden Adam before
his sin was immortal.
fruit. And this indeed is a very famous question; but I shall not be large in
it. The orthodox they hold, that immortality was a privilege of innocence, and
that Adams body then only became mortal, when his soul was made sinful.
This is vehemently opposed by Papists, and by Socinians: now they both agree,
that man should not actually have dyed, but for sin; only they say, he was
mortal, as the Socinians, or immortal, by a mere supernatural gift of God.
But a thing may be said to be immortal several ways, as the Learned observe:
1. From an absolute A thing may be said to be immortal four ways.
necessity, either inward or outward; in this sense God only is said to be
immortal. 2. When there is no inward material cause of dissolution, though
outwardly it may be destroyed; and thus are Angels, and the souls of men. 3. A
thing may be said to be immortal by some special gift and appointment of God,
as the bodies glorified: and, as some say, the heavens and maine parts of the
world shall have only a qualitative alteration, not a substantial abolition.
4. That is immortal, which has no propensity to death, yet such a condition
being put, it will die; and thus Adam was: therefore in some sense he may be
said mortal, in another immortal: But because he is commonly called mortal
that is obnoxious to death, therefore we say, Adam, before his sin, was
immortal; and this is abundantly confirmed by this sentence of commination.
And therefore though Adam would have eaten and drunk, though his body was
elementary, and the original of it dust, though he would have begotten
children; yet none of these can prove him mortal, because the righteousness
in his soul would have preserved the fit temperament of his body, especially
having Gods promise made to his obedience.

8. Whether upon this threatening, Thou shall die, can be fixed The mortality of
the whole man cannot be evinced from this threatening, In the day thou eatest
thereof, thou shall die.
that cursed opinion of the mortality of the whole man, in soul as well as
body. Of all the errors that have risen up, there is none more horrid in
nature, and more monstrous in falsehood then this: so that if it could be true
of any man's soul, that it was not an immateriall substance, but only a
quality of the temperament; it would be true of the Author of that Book, which
seems to have little sense and apprehension of the divine authority in the
Scriptures concerning this matter. What an horrid falsehood is it to call the
doctrine of the immortal soul an hell-hatched doctrine? But certainly you
would think, for a man to dare to broach such an opinion, he must have places
of Scripture as visible as the Sun. But this Text is his Achilles, and all the
rest shroud under this, from which he frames his first and chiefest argument,
thus:

What of Adam was immortal through innocence, was to be mortaliz'd by
transgression:

But whole Adam was in innocence immortal:

Therefore all and every part, even whole man was liable to death by sin. But
what Logician does not see a great deal more foisted into the Conclusion, then
was in the Premises? Whole Adam was to be mortaliz'd, therefore all and every
part. What a non sequitur is here? That is true of the whole, as it is the
whole, which is not true of every part. If I should say, Whole Christ dyed,
(for death is of the concrete, the person) therefore all and every part of
Christ dyed, therefore his divine nature dyed; this would be a strange
inference: yet upon this fallacy is the frame of all his arguments built. Man
is said to be mortal, whole man dies, therefore every part of man dies.
There is difference between totum and totalitas, the whole, and every part of
that whole. It Is true, death does bring the compositum, the person, to a
nonentity, but not every part of that compositum to a nonentity.

Besides, that which was immortal, is mortalized, according to their natures,
the soul dies a spiritual and an eternal death. But see how the Devil
carries this man further, and sets him upon the pinnacle of error, and bids him
throw himself headlong; because he does evidently say, that if the souls
were destroyed as well as the bodies, then there would be no heaven nor hell as
yet; he is bold, and confesses there is none till the resurrection. Now if
this be so, then how shall that be true, that the heaven must contain Christ
till he come. This does exceedingly puzzle him, but he takes the heaven for the
place where the Sun is, and concludes peremptorily (as if he had been in the
same also) that Christ's glorified body is in the Sun: Without doubt (says he,
page 33.) he must be in the Sun; and (says he, page 34.) The Sun may be called
well the right hand of God, by which through Christ in him we live, and move,
and have our being: and there speaks nothing but darkness about light, as
that the Sun is the veil, to keep off the light of Christ's body from us, which
otherwise would be so glorious, we could not see it and live. But how dare any
man make this interpretation, The heavens must contain him, that is, he must
be in the Sun, till be come to restitution of all things? The naming of these
things is confutation enough, only this I brought as in a passage merely, to
see what cause we have to pray to God to keep us from our selves, and our own
presumptuous thoughts.

Use 1. Of Instruction, that a law may be made, even to a righteous man, and
that threatenings may be menaced to a man, who yet is not under the actual
curse and damning power of the Law.

Use 2. To see the goodness of God, that tried Adam but with one positive
precept. This should be a caution against multitude of Church precepts: how did
Austin complain of it, and Gerson in his time?

Use 3. How the Devil does still prevail over us with this temptation of
knowledge. There were Heretics called Gnostici, and Ophitae. This desire to
eat of the tree of knowledge, has brought much ignorance and error. I know
there are many people so sottish and stupid, that the Devil could never entice
them with this temptation: They account it a trouble, even the knowledge of
mere necessary things to salvation; but when men desire to know above that
which is written, this is a dangerous precepice.

Use 4. To take heed of our selves. If Adam, thus perfect, did fail in a
command of trial about so little a matter, take heed where you set gunpowder,
seeing fire is in your heart. Compare this of Adams with that of Abraham, what
a vast difference? Austin thanks God that the heart and temptation did not meet
together.

LECTURE XII.
GENES. 1. 26. And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness.
YOu have heard of a twofold law given to Adam: one by outward prescript, for
trial and exhortation of his obedience; the other by implantation, which was
the Moral Law, and of that at this time.

When God had made all other things, then man, the immediate and proxime end,
was created; it being Gods goodness to make no living creature before he
provided the food and nourishment of it. And thus man, the last, but the
choicest external and visible piece of his workmanship, is created, but in a
great difference from the former; for his creation is brought in by way of
deliberation and advice, Let us make man: which words denote, 1. the excellency
of the man to be made, 2. the mystery of the Trinity is here employed; for,
howsoever the Jews would have it, that he spoke to the Angels, or the
inanimate creatures: or others, that the word is used in the plural number for
dignity sake, as they show examples in the Hebrew: yet we rather join with
those that do think it employed, not indeed that this text of it self can
prove a Trinity, for the plural number proves no more three, then four or
two, but with other places that do hold forth this doctrine more expressly: so
that in the words you have the noble and great effect, Man; the wise and
powerful efficient, God; the excellent and admirable pattern or exemplar,
After our image: God made man after his image, and so implanted it in him, that
that image could not be destroyed, unless man destroyed himself; not that this
image was his natural substance and essence, but it was a concreated
perfection in him. Now, for the opening of this truth, let us consider these
particulars:

1. Whether image or likeness do signify the same thing. For Image, and
likeness signify one and the same thing.
the Papists, following the Fathers, make this difference: That image does
relate to the naturalls that man has, his rational soul with the natural
properties; and likeness to the gratuitalls or supernaturalls, which were
bestowed upon him. Now the orthodox, especially the Calvinists, though they
deny not but that the soul of a man, with the faculties thereof, may be called
the image of God, secondarily and remotely (herein differing from the
Lutherans, who will not acknowledge thus much) so that principally and chiefly
it be placed in righteousness and holiness; yet they say, this cannot be
gathered from the words, for these reasons: 1. Because verse 27. where there is
the execution of this decree in the text, there only likeness is named, and
Genesis 9. there is only image named, and Genesis 5. Adam is said to beget Seth
after his image and likeness; where such a distinction cannot be made: And
this is so clear, that Pererins and Lapide do confess it. Nor is that any
matter, because they are put down as two Substantives: for that is usual with
the Hebrews, when the later is intended only as an Adjective: so Jerem. 29.
11. To give you an end and expectation, that is, an expected end; so here,
image and likeness, that is, an image most like.

2. Its considerable in what an image does consist. Now the An Image consists
in likeness to another pattern after which it is made. A Four-sold image.
Learned, they speak of a fourfold image, or likeness: 1 Where there is a
likeness in an absolute agreement in the same nature: and thus the Son of God
is the express image of the Father. 2. By participation of some universal
nature: so a man and a beast are alike in their common nature of animality. 3.
By proportion only: as the Pilot of a ship, and the Governor in the
commonwealth are alike. 4. By agreement of order, when one thing is a pattern
for another to be made after it: and this is properly to be an image; for two
things go to the nature of an image: 1. Likeness, and then 2. that this
likeness be made after another as a pattern. Thus one egg is like another,
but not a pattern of another: so man was made like Angels, yet not after their
image, as the Socinians would have it. So that, to be made after the image of
God, implies a likeness in us to God; and then, that this likeness in us, is
made after that pattern which is in God. And howsoever man is a body, and God
a spirit; yet this image and likeness may well be in other considerations. It
was the opinion of Osiander, that therefore we are said to be made after the
iof God, because we are made after the likeness of that humane nature, which
the second Person in Trinity was to assume: and this has been preached alate
as probable; but that may hereafter be confuted, when we come to handle that
Question, Whether Christ, as a Mediator, was known and considered of in the
state of innocence.

3. Let us consider in what that image or likeness does consist. The image of
God in Adam consisted in the several perfections and qualifications in his
soul.
Where, not standing upon the rational soul of a man, which we call the
remote image of God, in which sense, we are forbid to kill a man, or to curse a
man, because he is made after the image of God; we may take notice of the
several perfections and qualifications in Adams soul: As, 1. In his
Understanding there was 1. In his Understanding was exact knowledge of divine
and natural things
an exact knowledge of divine and natural things: Of divine, because otherwise
he could not have loved God, if he had not known him, nor could he be said to
be made very good. Hence some make a threefold light: 1. That of imediate
knowledge, which Adam had. 2. The light of faith, which the regenerate have: 3.
The light of glory, which the Saints in heaven have. Now how great is this
perfection? Even Aristotle said, that a little knowledge, though conjecturall,
about heavenly things, is to be preferred above much knowledge, though
certains, about inferior things. How glorious must Adams estate be, when his
Understanding was made thus perfect? And then for inferior things, the
creatures, his knowledge appears in the giving of Names to all the creatures,
and especially unto Evo. Adam indeed did not know all things, yea he might grow
in experimental knowledge; but all things that were necessary for him, created
to such an happy end, to know, those he did: but to know that he should fall,
and that Christ would be a Mediator, these things he could not, unless it
were by revelation, which is not supposed to be made unto him. So, to know
those things which were of ornament and beauty to his soul, cannot be denied
him. Thus was Adam created excellent in intellectual abilities; for sapience,
knowing God; for science, knowing the creatures; and for prudence, exquisite in
all things to be done.

2. His Will, which is the universal appetite of the whole man, 2. His Will
was wonderfully good, and furnished with many habits of goodness.
which is like the supreme orb, that carries the inferior with the power of
it, this was wonderfully good, furnished with several habits of goodness, as
the firmament with stars: for in it was a propensity to all good, Ephesians. 4. 24.
It Is called righteousness and true holiness: and Eccl. 7. 29. God made man
upright: His Will was not bad, or not good, that is, indifferent; but very
good. The imaginations of the thoughts of his heart were only good, and that
continually. And certainly if David, Job, and others, who have this image
restored in them but in part, do yet delight in Gods will, how much more must
Adam, who when he would do good, found no evil present with him? He could not
say as we must, Lord, I believe, help my unbelief: Lord, I love, help my want
of love. He could not complain, as that man, Libenter bonus esse vellem, sed
cogitationes meae non patiuntur.

Yet, though his Will was thus good, he needed help from God to be able to do
any good thing. I know there are some learned Divines, as Pareus, that do deny
the holiness Adam had, or the help God gave Adam, to be truly and properly
called grace; righteousness they will call it, and the gift of God, but not
grace. Therefore Pareus reproves Bellarmine for stiling his Book De gratia
primi hominis: and his reason is, because the Scripture makes that only grace
which comes by Christ, and when the subject is in a contrary condition, as we
are; but it was not so with Adam: but I cannot tell whether this be worth the
while to dispute. This is certain, 1. that Adam could not persevere or
continue in obedience to God, without help from God. Nor secondly, was he
confirmed in a state of goodness, as the Angels are; yea, as every godly man
now is through Christ: and therefore being mutable, we may well conceive a
possibility of his falling, though made thus holy.

3. In his Affections. 1. These tempests and waves were under the 3. In his
Affections regularity and subjection.
command of that holiness: They were to Adam as wings to the bird, as wheels
to the chariot; and he was not, as Actaeon, devoured of those that followed
him, as it is with us: for, if you consider Affections in the rise of them,
they did not move, or stir, but when holiness commanded them. This is
proved, in that he was made right: Therefore there could not any Affection
stir or move irregularly; as it is said of Christ, (...), he troubled
himself. There were indeed Affections moving in Christ, and so in Adam; but
they were as clean water moved in a clear glass: but in us they are as water
stirred in a muddy place, which casts great desilement. Adam therefore, being
made right, he could set his Affections, as the Artificer does his clock, to
make it strike when and what he will.

2. These Affections are subjected in regard of the continuance of them. When
our Affections and Passions are raised, how hardly are they composed again?
how are we angry, and sin? how do we grieve, and sin? whereas in the state of
innocence, they were so under the nurture of it, that, as we command our dogs
to fetch and carry, and to lay down; so could Adam then do, bid come fetch
such an object, and then bid it to lay down again.

3. In regard of the degrees of them. We are so corrupted, that we cannot love,
but we over-love; we cannot grieve, but we over-grieve: All our heat is
presently feverish; but it was then far otherwise. Now then by this
righteousness you may perceive the glorious image that God put upon us, and
apply it to us, who are banished not only out of a place of Paradise, but out
of all these inward abilities: and who can deplore our estate enough?

Thus was the Moral Law written in his heart: and what the command is for
direction, that he was for conversation. And howsoever the Socinians deny this
law written in his heart, yet acknowledging he had a conscience, which had
dictates of that which was good and righteous, it amounts almost to as much.
Nor is it any matter, though we read not of any such outward law given to him:
nor is it necessary to make such a Question, Whether the breach of the Moral
Law would have undone Adam and his posterity, as well as the transgression of
the positive law. For all must necessarily think, that the Moral Law implanted
in his heart, and obedience thereunto, was the greatest part of Adams
happiness and holiness. Although we told you, disobedience unto that positive
precept, which was only for trial, might in some sense be judged more
heinous, then disobedience to the Moral Law.

In the next place, the image of God did consist in a freedom from 2. The
image of God consisted in a freedom from all misery and danger.
all fear of misery and danger, even proportionably as God is without fear:
And this happiness is the consequent of his holiness. And if it be true of
the image of God repaired in us, that it is to make us serve him without fear
all the days of our life, how much more must it be verified of Adam in that
estate? And if you demand how Adam could be without fear, seeing he knew he
might fall, and so become miserable: the Answer is to be taken from that state
wherein he was created; having no guilt within him, he could have no fear:
Even as some learned men say, the godly shall remember their sins in heaven,
yet without shame and sorrow, because that glorified nature is not capable of
it. And this is a reason why Eve was not a friend of the Serpent, though it was
used by the Devil to speak.

Lastly, this image of God consisted in the dominion and sovereignty 3. It
consisted in that dominion and sovereignty Adam had over the creatures.
he had over the other creatures. And this was rather a consequent of this
image, then part of it; for when God had declared his will to make man after
his image, then he also said he should rule over the rest. The Socinians indeed
make this the only ground or particular wherein this image does consist, and
therefore hold that the woman was not made after the image of God, because she
was made in subordination to the man. But that is easily answered; for,
although she was made in subjection to him, yet with dominion over the rest of
the creatures. Now we might add also, that in his body there was something of
Gods image; as the impassibility of it, and the immortality: but these things
do not come within my subject.

We therefore come to show the properties of this righteousness and holiness
that was thus fixed in Adams heart.

1. It Is called original, to difference it from actual holiness; as That
righteousness and holiness fixed in Adam was,
we call it original sin, to distinguish it from actual: and therefore the
Learned call it original, partly in regard of it self, because 1. Original.
it was the first righteousness; partly because of Adam, who had it as soon as
he was created. As the Schools say of original sin, Quam primum originatur
homo, originatur itidem peccatum; so we may of Adam in his righteousness, In
ortu virtus, as the Father said, In ortu vitium est: and partly in regard of
his posterity, for it should have been propagated to them.

2. Another property of this righteousness is, That it is universal, 2.
Universal.
comprehending the rectitude of all the parts and faculties of the soul: so
that Adam was, for his soul, as Absalom is said to be comely for his body,
from the head to the foot no blemish at all: so that this was not a perfection
in one part only, but all over; as our corruption makes us, as he said of the
Martyr wounded in many places, totum vulnus.

3. It was harmonious: there was not only rectitude in every 3. Harmonious.
part, but a sweet correspondency one with the other; there was no rebellion or
fight between the inferior appetite and the understanding. Therefore some
learned men say, This righteousness is not to be conceived as an aggregation
of several habits, but as an inward rectitude of all faculties: Even as the
exact temperament of the body is not from any superadded habit, but from the
natural constitution of the parts.

4. This righteousness and holiness it was a perfection due to 4. A
perfection due unto him, upon supposition of the end whereunto God made him.
Adam, supposing the end to which God made him. If God required obedience of
Adam to keep the law, and happiness thereupon, it was due not by way of merit,
but condecency to Gods goodness, to furnish him with abilities to perform it;
as the soul of Adam was a due to him, supposing the end for which God made
him. Indeed, now it is of grace to us, and in a far different consideration made
ours, because we lost it. Lastly, this was to be a propagated righteousness;
for, as it is to be proved hereafter, God did all this in a way of covenant
with Adam, as a public person: And howsoever every thing that Adam did
personally was not made ours, (we did not eat in his eating, nor drink in his
drinking, we did not dress the garden in his dressing of it) yet that which he
did federally, as one in covenant with God, that is made ours; so his sin and
misery is made ours, then his righteousness and happiness: As it is now, By
one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; so then it would have been
by one man righteousness, and life by righteousness.

Questions to be made:

1. Whether this righteousness was natural to Adam, or no. Howsoever
Righteousness was a perfection suitable and connaturall to Adam.
some have thought this a mere contention of words, and therefore if they were
well explained, there would be no great difference; yet the Papists make this a
foundation for other great errors: for, grant this righteousness to be
supernatural to Adam, as it is to us, then 1. it will follow, That all the
motions rising in the Appetite against Reason, are from the constitution of our
nature; and so no more sin, then hunger and thirst is. 2. That free will is
still in us, and that we have lost nothing but that which is merely superadded
to us. Or they compare this righteousness Adam had, sometimes to an Antidote,
which preserves against the deadly effect of poison: sometimes to a bridle,
that rules the horse; so that they suppose man's nature would of it self
rebel, but only this was given to Adam to check it: sometimes to Sampsons
hair, whereby he had supernatural strength, but when that was cut off, he had
only natural: So that by this doctrine, man, now fallen, should be weaker
then he was, but not corrupted. Therefore we must necessarily conclude, that
this righteousness was natural to him; not inindeed flowing from the
principles of nature, for so it was of God, but it was a perfection suitable or
connaturall to him; it was not above him, as it is now in us. As a blind man
that was made to see, though the manner was supernatural, yet to see was a
natural perfection.

2. Whether justifying faith was then in Adam: Or, Whether faith Adam had power
to believe, so far as it did not imply an imperfection in the subject.
and repentance are now parts of that image. This is a dispute among Arminians,
who plead Adam had not a power to believe in Christ, and therefore it is unjust
in God to require faith of us, who never had power in Adam to do it. The
Answer is easy, that Adam had power to believe, so far as it did not imply
an imperfection in the subject. It was a greater power then to believe in
Christ, and therefore it was from the defect of an object that he could not do
it: as Adam had love in him, yet there could be no miserable objects in that
state to show his love.

As for that other Question, Whether repentance be part of the Repentance, as
it flows from a regenerate nature, reductively the image of God.
image of God: Answ. So far forth as it denotes an imperfection in the
subject, it cannot be the image of God; for we do not resemble God in these
things: yet as it flows from a regenerated nature, so far it is reductively
the image of God.

3. Whether this shall be restored to us in this life again. Howsoever Gods
image not fully repaired in us in this life.
we are said to be partakers of the divine nature, and to be renewed in the
image of God; yet we shall not in this life have it fully repaired. God has
declared his will in this, and therefore are those stubs of sin and
imperfection left in us, that we might be low in our selves, bewail our loss,
and long for that heaven, where the soul shall be made holy, and the body
immortal: yet, for all this, we are to pray for the full abolition of sin in
this life, because Gods will and our duty, to be holy as he is holy, is the
ground of our prayer, and not his decree for to have such or such things done.
Yea, this corruption is so far rooted in us now, that it is not cleansed out of
us by mere death, but by cinerifaction, consuming the body to ashes: for we
know, Lazarus and others that dyed, being restored again to life, yet could
not be thought to have the image of God perfectly, as they were obnoxious to
sin and death.

Use 1. To humble our selves under this great loss. Consider what we were, and
what we are, how holy once, how unholy now: and here who can but take up bitter
mourning? Shall we lament, because we are banished from houses and habitations,
because we have lost our estates, and comforts? and shall we not be affected
here? This argues us to be carnal more then spiritual: we have lost a
father, a friend, and we wring our hands; we cry, We are undone: and though we
have lost God and his image, all happiness thereby, yet we lay it not to
heart. Oh think what a glorious thing it was to enjoy God without any
interruption; no proud heart, no earthly heart, no lazy heart to grapple with:
see it in Paul, Oh miserable man that I am, etc. Basil compares Paul to a man
thrown off his horse, and dragged after him, and he cries out for help; so is
Paul thrown down by his corruptions, and dragged after them.

Use 2. To magnify the grace of God in Christ, which is more potent to save
us, then Adams sin can be to destroy us. This is of comfort to the godly, Romans
5. the Apostle, on purpose, makes a comparison between them, and shows the
preheminency of one to save, above the other to destroy. There is more in
Christ to save, then in Adam to damn: Christ's obedience is a greater good,
then Adams sin is an evil: It Is more honor to God, then this is or can be a
dishonor. Let not then sin be great in thy thoughts, in thy conscience, in thy
fears; and grace small and weak. As the time has been, when thy heart has
felt the gall and wormwood of sin; so let it be to feel the power of Christ.
As thy soul has said, By one man sin; so let it say, By one man life.

LECTURE XIII.
GENES. 2. 17. In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall die.
I Have already handled this Text, as it contains a law given to Adam by God,
as a sovereign Lord over him; now I shall reassume this Text, and consider it
as part of a Covenant, which God did enter into with Adam and his posterity;
for these two things, a Law, and a Covenant, arise from different grounds: The
Law is from God as supreme, and having absolute power, and so requiring
subjection; the other arises from the love and goodness of God, whereby he
does sweeten and mollify that power of his, and ingageth himself to reward
that obedience, which were otherwise due, though God should never recompense
it. The words therefore being heretofore explained, and the Text eased of all
difficulties, I observe this Doctrine, That God did not only, as a Lawgiver,
injoyne obedience unto Adam; but, The covenant with Adam before the fall more
obscurely laid down, then the covenant of grace after the fall.
as a loving God, did also enter into covenant with him. And for the opening of
this, you must take these Considerations:

1. That this covenant with Adam in the state of innocence, is more obscurely
laid down, then the covenant of grace after the fall: for afterward you have
the express name of the Covenant, and the solemn entering into it by both
parties; but this Covenant made with Adam, must only be gathered by deduction
and consequence. This Text comes the nearest to a Covenant, because here is
the threatening expressed, and so by consequent some good thing promised to
obedience. We are not therefore to be so rigid, as to call for express places,
which do name this Covenant; for that which is necessarily and immediately
drawn from Scripture, is as truly Scripture, as that which is expressly
contained in it. Now there are these grounds to prove God dealt in these
commandments by way of Covenant:

1. From the evil threatened, and the good promised. For, while That God dealt
with Adam by way of Covenant, appears, 1. From evil threatened, and good
promised.
there is a mere command, so long it is a law only; but when it is further
confirmed by promises and threatenings, then it becomes a Covenant. And if that
position be true of some, which makes the tree of life a sacrament, then here
was not only nudum pactum, a mere covenant; but a seal also to confirm it.
And certainly, being God was not bound to give Adam eternal life if he did
obey, seeing he owed obedience to God under the title of a creature, it was of
his mere goodness to become engaged in a promise for this. I know it is a
Question by some, Whether Adam, upon his obedience, should have been translated
into heaven, or confirmed only in that natural life, which was mavelous
happy: But either way would have been by mere promise of God, not by any
natural necessity. Life must be extended as far as death; now the death
threatened was not only a bodily death, but death in hell: why therefore should
not the life promised be a life in heaven?

In the second place, another argument to confirm that God 2. Because his
posterity become guilty of his sin, and obnoxious to his punishment.
dealt in a Covenant with Adam is, in that his posterity becomes guilty of his
sin, and so obnoxious unto the same punishment which was inflicted upon Adam in
his own person. Now we must come to be thus in Adam, either by a natural
propagation, and then Adam should be no more to us then our parents, and our
parents sins should be made ours as well as Adams; which is contrary to the
Apostle, Romans 5. who charge it still upon one man. And besides, who can say,
that the righteousness, holiness and happiness, which we should have been
partakers of in Adams standing, could come by a natural necessity, but only
by the mere covenant and agreement of God? Adams repentance might then have
been imputed to us, as well as his sin.

Lastly, the Apostle Rom 5. makes all men in Adam, as the godly are in Christ:
now believers come to receive of Christ, not from a natural necessity, because
they have that humane nature which Christ took upon him (for so all should be
saved) but by a federall agreement.

2. Let us consider in the next place, what a Covenant does imply; A Covenant
implies Gods decree, will, or promise to, and concerning his creatures, whether
rational, or irrational.
first in the word, then in the thing signified. For I should deal very
imperfectly, if I did not speak something of the general nature of it, though
hereafter more may be spoken of. You may therefore take notice, that there are
things among men, that do induce a public obligation, that yet do differ: A
Law, a Covenant, and a Testament. Now a Law and a Testament, they are absolute,
and do not imply any consent of the party under them: As a Law requires
subjection, not attending unto, or expecting the consent of inferiors; and so
a Testament, or a Will of man, is to bequeath such goods and legacies unto a
man, not expecting a consent. Indeed sometimes such goods are bequeathed to an
heir with a condition, and so a man may refuse whether he will be executor, or
no; but this is accidental to the nature of a Testament. But a Covenant, that
differs from the two former, in that it does require consent and agreement
between two parties: and in Divinity, if it be between man entire and upright,
it is called by some, A Covenant of friendship; if it be between God and man
fallen, it is called, A Covenant of reconciliation. Hence in Covenants, that
are not nuda pacta (mere Covenants) but are accompanied with some solemnities,
there were stipulations added, which were done by Question and Answer: Do you
promise? I promise. Hence it is called (...). and we call it Stipulation, from
the Latin word, which comes from the Greek word, (...), or (...), which is as
much as (...), or (...), because these words did make the Covenant valid. As
for Isidorus his definition of stipulation, a frangendis stipulis, because,
when they promised or entered into an agreement, they brake a stick between
them, and then joining it together, so made a promise, and every party kept a
piece, as Tully, to maintain their agreement; this is rejected by the learned
Salmasius.

But because a Covenant does thus differ from a Testament, hence has it
troubled the Learned, why the Hebrew word, which signifies a Covenant, should
be translated by the Septuagint, (...), a Testament; and so the New Testament
uses it in this sense: for, if it be a Covenant, how can it be a Testament,
which implies no consent? Let us answer first to the word, and then to the
matter. Therefore is a Covenant called (...), a Testament, and not (...) (as
Aquila translates it) because this word is of a large sense, coming from (...),
to order and dispose: and when we say, the New or Old Testament, it is not to
be taken so strictly, as we call a man's Will and Testament, though sometimes
the Apostle does, in reference to Christ's death; but more largely, for Gods
gracious ordering of such mercies and spiritual benefits to us, by the death
of Christ: for the Covenant of grace implies Christ's death, it being a
Covenant of reconciliation. Now, because there is in the Covenant of grace
something of a Covenant, and something of a Testament also, hence some do call
it a Testament-Covenant, because it is of a mixed nature. The rise of the Hebrew
word Berith is variously conjectured: some make it to come from a word that
signifies to eat, because of the sacrifices and feasts that were at a
Covenant: some from a word that signifies to cut, because then in the striking
of the Covenant, there was a division of the beast that was killed: some from
the word that signifies to create, as also to order and dispose things by way
of likeness: some from a word that signifies to be pure, and to choose,
either because it is by agreement, or because in Covenants they ought to deal
without all fraud: but I stand not upon these things.

By this which has been said it may appear, that the Covenant God made with
Adam, though it be truly called a Covenant; yet no ways a Testament, because
there did not intervene the death of any to procure this good for Adam. Now to
all this that has been said, there must this caution be added, That a Covenant
is not so properly said to be with God and man, as between man and man: for
among them consent is requisite, and does mutually concur to make the
Covenant valid: but neither in the Covenant of Nature or Grace is this consent
anteceding the validity of the Covenant required in man. Therefore if you
regard the use of the word, and the application of it, it does denote Gods
decree, and will, or promise about things, whether about the irrational
creatures, or the reasonable: Such was Gods Covenant not to drown the world,
and Gods Covenant with day and night; yea, Gods Covenant with Abraham did
induce an obligation and tie upon Abraham to circumcise his child. And thus it
was with Adam, Gods Covenant did not depend properly upon his consent and
acceptance, for he was bound to do as God commanded, whether he would agree,
or no.

That Adams consent was not necessary to make the Covenant valid, does appear,
in that he was bound to accept what God did require. And it is indeed disputed,
Whether Adam did so much as know (and if he did not know, he could not consent)
that God did indent with him as a public person, and so all his posterity in
him; although it may truly be thought, that Adam did know this precept to be to
him and his posterity: for hereby his sin is made the more heinous, in undoing
himself and all his; as also, by the knowledge of this, he would be the more
thankful unto God, that should propagate such great mercies to him and his,
and also be made more vigilant against falling.

3. In the next place let us consider, how God can be said to covenant, God
enters into Covenant with man by way of condescension, and makes promises unto
him to confirm him in his hope and confidence in him.
or enter into a promise with man: for it may be thought an imperfection, and
hereby God may seem to lose his right, that he cannot do what he will. But
this may be easily answered; for, if God can give good things to man, he may
also promise to give them: and therefore both to give, and to promise to give,
are acts of liberality and dominion, and so not repugning to the majesty of
God: Nor does God by promising to give, lose his dominion, no more then he does
by giving. It is true, a promise does induce an obligation, and so in man it is
with some imperfection; but in God it is not, because he does not hereby become
obliged to us, but to his own self: so that we have not a right of justice to
the thing, because God has promised it to us; but only God cannot deny
himself nor his word, and therefore we are confident.

And so Aquinas well, Deus non est debtor, quia ad alia non ordinatur, sed
omnia ad ipsum, God by covenanting and promising does not become a debtor,
because he is not to be ordered for other things, but all things for him. Hence
is that saying of God, Reddit debita nulli debens, donat debita nihil pendens:
And so again, Justus est, non quia reddit debitum, sed quia facit quod decet
sum bonum: So that when God enters into a covenant or promise, you must
conceive of this sutably to his great majesty; you must not apprehend of it, as
when two men agree that are equal, and therefore a debt of justice arises
between them, and one may implead the other; but as a merciful condescension
on Gods part, to promise such things to us, that so we might be the more
confirmed in our hope in him. Hence Durand and Ariminensis labor to prove,
that Gods promises do not induce an obligation, but denote the disposition of
God to give, although their arguments exclude only a debt of justice from God.

4. Consider why God will deal with man in a covenant way, rather then in a
mere absolute supreme way. There may be these Reasons:

1. That God might hereby sweeten and indeare himself to us. For, God deals
with man by way of covenant, not of power,
whereas he might require all obedience from us, and annihilate us at last, or
at least not vouchsafe heaven and everlasting happiness; to show how good and
loving he is, he will reward that most bountifully, which is otherwise due to
him: for God did 1. To indeare himself unto him.
not make man, because he needed him, but that there might be objects to whom
he would communicate his love. Thou need not my goodness, or, that
extends not to thee, says David. It Is Austins expression, The earth does
far otherwise dry up, or swallow the water, thirsting for it, then the Sun
beams, which also consume the water: the one does it indigentia, out of want;
the other potentia, out of power and strength: so that Adam could not but have
thankful and loving thoughts of God, that would thus condescend.

2. Another Reason might be, to incite and encourage Adam the 2. To incite man
to more obedience.
more to obedience. For, howsoever there was no sin in Adam, or remissness; yet
this might serve as a means to preserve him in his obedience to God. And here
you may see, that to do a duty, because of a reward promised, is not a slavish
and unlawful thing; for did not God deal thus with Adam? If he would obey, he
should live; but if not, then he must dye. Will you say, with the Antinomian,
That this was an unlawful thing, and this was to make Adam legal, and one
that was not affected with the goodness of God to him? It is true, if a man
obey God out of love to any thing more then God, or equally with God, this is
unlawful, according to that, Minus te amat, qui tecum (Domine) aliquid amat.

3. That hereby Adams obedience might be the more willing and 3. To make this
obedience more willing and free.
free. An absolute law might seem to extort obedience, but a covenant and
agreement makes it to appear more free and willing, as if Adam would have
obeyed, though there could have been no obligation upon him to do it.

5. Consider that the nature of this Covenant was of works, and not The
Covenant God made with Adam was of works, not of faith.
of faith. It was not said to Adam, Believe, and have life eternal; but, Obey,
even perfect and entire obedience. It is true indeed, there was faith of
adherence and dependence upon God in his promise and word, and this faith does
not imply any imperfection of the state of the subject as sinful, (which
justifying faith does) for it was in Christ, who in his temptations and trials
did trust in God. And what the Old Testament calls trusting, the New calls
believing; yea, some say, that this kind of faith shall be in heaven, viz. a
dependence upon God for the continuance of that happiness which they do
enjoy. This faith therefore Adam had, but in that Covenant it was considered as
a gracious act and work of the soul, not as it is now, an organ or instrument
to receive and apply Christ.

With us indeed there is justifying faith and repentance, which keeps up a
Christians life; as the Naturalists say, the calor innatus, and humidum
radicale do the natural life: Faith is like the calor innatus, and Repentance
is like the humidum radicale; and, as the Philosopher says, if the innate heat
devour too much the radical moisture, or the radical moisture too much the
heat, there breed presently diseases: so it is with us, if believing make a man
repent less, or repenting make a man believe the less, this turns to a
distemper.

Yet, though it were a Covenant of works, it cannot be said to be of merit.
Adam, though in innocence, could not merit that happiness which God would
bestow upon him: first, because the enjoying of God, in which Adams happiness
did consist, was such a good, as did far exceed the power and ability of man.
It Is an infinite good, and all that is done by us is finite. And then in the
next place, Because even then Adam was not able to obey any command of God,
without the help of God. Though some will not call it grace, because they
suppose that only comes by Christ; yet all they that are orthodox do
acknowledge a necessity of Gods enabling Adam to that which was good, else he
would have failed. Now then, if by the help of God Adam was strengthened to do
the good he did, he was so far from meriting thereby, that indeed he was the
more obliged to God.

6. God, who entered into this Covenant with him, is to be considered God,
entering into Covenant with Adam, must be looked upon as one already pleased
with him, not as a reconciled Father through Christ.
as already pleased, and a friend with him, not as a reconciled Father through
Christ. Therefore here needed no Mediator, nor comfort, because the soul
could not be terrified with any sin. Here needed not one to be either medius,
to take both natures; or Mediator, to perform the offices of such an one. In
this estate that speech of Luthers was true, which he denies in ours, Deus est
absolute considerandus. Adam dealt with him as absolutely considered, not
relatively: with us, God without Christ is a consuming fire, and we are
combustible matter, chafe and straw: we are loathsome to God, and God terrible
to us; but Adam he was Deo proximo amicus, and Paradisi colonus, as Tertullian,
and therefore was in familiarity and communion with him.

But, although there was not that ordered administration and working of the
three Persons in this Covenant of works, yet all these did work in it. Hence
the second Person, though not as incarnated, or to be incarnated; yet he with
the Father did cause all righteousness in Adam: and so the holy Ghost, he was
the worker of holiness in Adam, though not as the holy Spirit of Christ
purchased by his death for his Church, yet as the third Person; so that it is
an unlikely assertion which one maintains, That the Trinity was not revealed
in this Covenant to Adam: so that this shows a vast difference between that
Covenant in innocence, and this of grace. What ado is here for the troubled
soul to have any good thoughts of God, to have any faith in Gods Covenant did
suppose a power and possibility in Adam to keep it.
him as reconciled? but then Adam had no fear, nor doubt about it.

7. This Covenant did suppose in Adam a power, being assisted by God, to keep
it; and therefore that which is now impossible to us, was possible to him. And
certainly, if there had been a necessity to sin, it would have been either from
his nature, or from the Devil: Not from his nature, for then he would have
excused himself by this, when he endeavored to clear himself. But
Tertullian speaks wittily, Nunquam figulo suo dixit, Non prudenter definxisti
me, rudis admodum haereticus fuit, non obaudiit, non tamen blasphemavit
creatorem, lib. 2. ad Mar. cap. 2. Nor could any necessity arise from the
Devil, whose temptations cannot reach beyond a moral swasion. Therefore our
Divines do well argue, that if God did not work in our conversion beyond a
moral swasion, he should no further cause a work good, then Satan does evil.

Nor could this necessity be of God, who made him good and righteous: nor would
God subtract his gifts from him before he sinned, seeing his fall was the cause
of his defection, not Gods deserting of him the cause of his fall. Therefore,
although God did not give Adam such an help, that de facto would hinder his
fall, yet he gave him so much, that might and ought to prevent it. And upon
this ground it is, that we answer all those cavills, why God does command of us
that which is impossible for us to do: for the things commanded are not
impossible in themselves, but, when required of Adam, he had power to keep
them; but he sinned away that power from himself and us. Neither is God bound,
as the Arminians fancy, to give every one power to believe and repent, because
Adam in innocence had not ability to do these; for he had them eminently and
virtually, though not formally: But more of these things in the Covenant of
grace.

Use 1. To admire with thankfulness Gods way of dealing with us his creatures,
that he condescends to a promise-way, to a covenant-way. There is no natural
or moral necessity that God should do thus. We are his, and he might require
an obedience, without any covenanting: but yet, to show his love and goodness,
he condescends to this way. Beloved, not only we corrupted, and our duties,
might be rejected; not only we in our persons might be abashed, but had we all
that innocence and purity which did once adorn our nature, yet even then were
we unprofitable to God, and it was Gods goodness to receive it, and to reward
it. Was then eternal life and happiness a mere gift of God to Adam for his
obedience and love? what a free and mere gift then is salvation and eternal
life to thee? If Adam were not to put any trust in his duties, if he could not
challenge God for a reward; how then shall we rely upon our performances, that
are so full of sin?

Use 2. Further to admire Gods exceeding grace to us, that does not hold us to
this Covenant still. That was a Covenant which did admit of no repentance:
though Adam and Eve had torn and rent their hearts out, yet there was no hope
or way for them, till the Covenant of grace was revealed. Beloved, our
condition might have been so, that no tears, no repentance could have helped
us: the way to salvation might have been as impossible, as to the damned
angels. To be under the Covenant of works, is as woeful, as the poor
malefactor condemned to death by the Judge, according to the law; he falls
then upon his knees, Good my lord spare me, it shall be a warning to me, I
have a wife and small children, O spare me: But, says the Judge, I cannot
spare you, the Law condemns you: So it is here, though man cry and roar, yet
you cannot be spared, here is no promise or grace for you.

LECTURE XIV.
GENES. 2. 17. In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the death.
HAving handled the Law of God both natural and positive, which was given to
Adam absolutely; as also relatively in the notion of a Covenant God made with
Adam, I shall put a period to this discourse about the state of innocence, by
handling several Questions, which will conduce much to the information of our
judgment against the errors spread abroad at this time, as also to the
inlivening and inflaming of our affections practically.

These Questions therefore I shall endeavor to clear:

1. Whether there can be any such distinction made of Adam, while innocent, so
as to be considered either in his naturalls, or supernaturalls. For this is
affirmed by some, that Adam may be considered in his mere naturalls, without
the help of grace, and so he loves God as his natural utmost end, in that he
is the preserver and author of nature: or else in his supernaturalls, as God
did bestow righteousness upon him, whereby he was enabled to enjoy God as his
supernatural end. And for this end is this error maintained, that so man now
borne, may be made no worse then Adam in that condition at first: which error,
if admitted, would much eclipse all that glory which is attributed in Scripture
to grace converting and healing of us. Therefore to this Question these things
may be answered:

1. That it cannot be denied, but that in Adam such qualities 1. In Adam such
qualities and actions may be considered, as did flow from him as a living
creature, endued with a rational soul.
and actions may be considered, which did flow from him as a living creature,
endued with a reasonable soul; so 1 Cor. 15. 45. there the first Adam is said
to be made a living soul, that is, a living creature in his kind, whereby he
did provide and prepare those things for his nourishment and life that he
needed: and this is to have a natural body, as the Apostle calls it. But we
may not stay in the consideration of him as a man in an abstracted notion, but
as so created by God for that end, to be made happy. Therefore howsoever some
learned speak of the animal state and spiritual estate of Adam, yet both must
be acknowledged to be natural to him.

2. In the next place, we do not hold in such a manner his 2. The principle
and habit of righteousness was natural to Adam, but help from God to
persevere, supernatural.
righteousness and holiness to be natural to him, as that we deny every
thing to Adam that was supernatural; for, no question but the favor of God,
which he did enjoy, may well be called supernatural; so also that actual help
of God (say some,) which was to be continued to him: For howsoever the
principle, and habit as it were of righteousness, was natural to him; yet to
have help from God to continue and persevere, was supernatural. Adam in the
state of innocence needed not Christ by way of reconciliation, but of
conservation in righteousness.
Even as you see the eye, though it has a natural power to see, yet there is
a further requisite to the act of seeing, which is light, without which it
could not be.

The second Question is, Whether Christ did intervene in his help to Adam, so
that he needed Christ in that state. For here we see many learned and sound men
differ: some say, that Christ, being only a Mediator of reconciliation, could
no ways be considered in any respect to Adam; for God and he were friends:
Others again make the grace of Christ universally necessary, even to Angels,
and Adam; saying that proposition, [Without me ye can do nothing,] is of
everlasting truth, and did extend to Adam, not indeed by way of pardon or
reconciliation, but by way of preservation and conservation in the state of
righteousness: Thus those excellent pillars in the Church of God, Calvin,
Bucer, and Zanchy, with others. Now for the clearing of this truth, we must
consider these particulars:

1. That it cannot be denied, but that Christ, as the second Person of the
Trinity, did create and make all things. This is to be diligently maintained
against those cursed opinions that begin, even publicly, to deny the Deity of
Christ. Now there are three general ways of proving Christ to be God: 1. In
that the name Jehovah, and God, is applied to him, without any such respect as
to other creatures. 2. In that he has the attributes of God, which are
Omnipotency and Omnisciency, etc. 3. In that he does the works which God only
can do; such are, raising up from the dead by his own power, and creation: Now
that Christ does create and sustain all things appears, John 1. Colos. 1.
and Hebrews 1. 3. so that it is impudent blasphemy which opposes clear
Scripture, to detract this from Christ. Indeed, his creating of the world, does
not exclude the other Persons, only he is included hereby.

2. What help the Angels had by Christ. Here I find different thoughts, even of
the judicious. That place Colos. 1. 20. To reconcile all things to himself by
him, whether things in heaven or earth, is thought by some a firm place, to
prove that the Angels needed Christ, even as a Mediator: and Calvin upon the
place brings two Reasons why the Angels need Christ's mediation:

1. Because they were not without danger of falling, and therefore their
confirmation was by Christ. But how can this be proved, that their confirmation
came from Christ, and not from God, as a plentiful rewarder of their continued
obedience? Indeed, if that opinion of Salmerons were true, which holds it very
probable, that the fallen Angels were not immediately condemned, but had a set
space and time of repentance given them, this would with more color have
pleaded for Christ's mediation; but that opinion cannot be made good out of the
Scripture.

2. The second Reason of Calvin's is, that the obedience of the The obedience of
Angels may be said to be imperfect negatively, not privatively.
Angels was imperfect, or not so perfect, but that it needed pardon; which he
groundeth upon Job 4. 18. His Angels he charged with folly. This may be
answered thus, That the obedience of the Angels may be said imperfect
negatively, or comparative, in respect of God; it is not answerable to his
greatness: but yet it is not imperfect privatively, as if it did want any
perfection due to it, and so was to be pardoned. Therefore Eliphaz his
expression tends only to this, to show the greatness and majesty of God, and
that even Angels themselves are but darkness to his glory. If you ask then,
What shall be thought of the place Colos. 1. 20? I answer, This place compared
with Ephesians. 1. 10. [That he might gather together in one all things in Christ,]
may well be laid together; for they speak the same thing. In the Epistle to the
Colossians it is (...), to reconcile; and that to the Ephesians, (...), which
word some expound to be as much as to bring to its first beginning; and so it is
explained by them, that all things have suffered a defect from the beginning,
and by Christ are to be restored to their former state: Others expound it of
reducing all to one head, which is Christ: Others make it a metaphor, from
those things which are largely set down, and then briefly capitulated, and
summed up again; thus, say they, all that was prefigured by the sacrifices, is
fulfilled in Christ: but we take the word in this sense, as it does imply, to
gather together those things which were scattered and divided; and so it does
excellently describe the ruin and confusion that is brought upon all by sin.
But then here is the difficulty again, how the Angels can be said to be
gathered, seeing they were never divided. To this some answer, that the All
things here spoken in the text, are to be limited to men only: so that the
things in heaven, shall be the spirits of godly men already translated thither;
and the things in earth, those men that are living. But suppose it be extended
to Angels, yet will not this infer their need of mediation by Christ, but
only some benefit to redound unto them by Christ; and that is certain: for,
first, by Christ they have a knowledge of the mysteries of our salvation, as
appears, Ephesians. 3. 10. and secondly, hereby they have joy in the conversion
of a sinner, and, lastly, Angels become hereby reconciled with man: and this
seems to be the most proper and immediate sense of the place. So that I
cannot see any ground for that assertion, which says, Because there is no
proportion between a creature and the Creator, therefore there must be a
Mediator. And if this hold true of the Angels, then it will also hold about
Adam; for, there being no offense or breach made, there needed no Mediator to
interpose.

It Is hard to say, Christ would have been incarnated, if Adam had Christ's
incarnation cannot be supposed, but upon supposition of Adams fall.
not sinned. All those, who hold the necessity of Christ to Adam and Angels,
must also necessarily maintain, that, though Adam had not fallen, Christ would
have been incarnated. Now when the Scripture names this to be the principal
end of Christ's coming into the world, to save that which is lost; unless this
had been, we cannot suppose Christ's coming into the flesh. Whether indeed
Christ was not the first object in Gods decree and predestination, and then
afterward men, and then other things, is a far different question from this.
As for Colos. 1. which seems to speak of Christ as head of the Church, that
he might have preheminency in all things, this does not prove his incarnation,
though no fall of Adam, but rather supposes it.

3. Whether the tree of life was a sacrament of Christ to Adam, or The tree of
life was not a sacrament of Christ to Adam.
no. For this also is affirmed by some, that the tree of life was a sacrament
given to Adam, which did represent Christ, from whom Adam was to receive his
life. But upon the former grounds I do deny, the tree of life to have any such
sacramental signification. It is true, I grant it to be a sacrament; for there
is no good reason to the contrary, but that sacraments may be in the state of
innocence; only they did not signify Christ. Why it was called a tree of
life, is not the same way determined by all: some think, because it had a
special quality and efficacy with it, to preserve Adam immortal; for,
although he was so made, yet there were means appointed by God to preserve
this state. But we will not conclude on this; only we say, It was a sacrament,
not only to admonish Adam of his life received from God, but also of that happy
life, which upon his obedience he was always to enjoy. Hence Revel. 2. 7.
happiness is called eating of the tree of life, which is in the midst of
Paradise. We do not in this exclude Adam from depending upon God for all
things, or acknowledging him the sole author of all his bliss: but only
there was not then that way of administration of good to us, as is now by
Christ to man plunged into sin. And this must be said, that we must not
curiously start questions about that state in innocence; for the Scripture,
having related that there was such a state once, does not tell us what would
have been, upon supposition of his obedience.

4. And so we may answer that demand, Whether there was The Scripture does not
affirm any revelation of a Christ unto Adam.
any revelation unto Adam of a Christ. Now what might be done, we cannot say;
but there is no solid ground to assert it: for, howsoever the Apostle indeed
makes a mysterious application of that speech of Adam unto Christ and his
Church, to set forth their immediate union; yet it does not follow, that Adam
did then know any such mystery. Indeed Zanchie says, that Christ did in an
humane shape appear, and put Adam and Eve together in that conjugall band; but
we cannot affirm this from Scripture. And by this also it does appear, that
the Sabbath, as it was figurative of Christ, had this consideration added unto
it, as it was given to the Jews afterward, and in that respect it was to be
abolished. That opinion is very much forced, which makes those words of Gods
blessing and sanctifying the Sabbath day, Genes. 1. to be by way of
anticipation; and therefore would deny the command of the Sabbath to be given
to Adam, saying, there was only one positive law, which was that of not eating
the forbidden fruit, that was delivered unto Adam. Now, though this be false,
yet that consideration of the Sabbath, as it was figurative of Christ, was not
then in the state of the innocence.

5. Another maine question is, Whether this state of reparation The state of
innocence excelled the state of reparation in rectitude, immortality, and
outward felicity.
be more excellent then that in innocence. Now here we cannot say one is
absolutely better then the other, only in some respects one is excelled by the
other: As, the first estate of Adam did far exceed this in the rectitude it
had, being altogether without any sin; for he was not created (as some would
have it) in a neutrall estate, as being neither good or bad, but possibly
either: such an estate does plainly repugne that image of God, after which he
is said to be created. Now what a blessed estate it is to have an heart not
stained with sin, to have no blemish, nor spot in the soul, will appear by
Paul's bitter complaint, Who shall deliver me from this body of death? That
estate also does excel ours in the immortality and outward felicity he
enjoyed; for our second Adam, Christ, howsoever he has destroyed the works of
sin and Satan, yet he has not fully removed the scars which those sins have
left upon us: Christ doing here, as those Emperors, who had taken their enemies
prisoners and captives, but yet killed them not immediately, till the day of
triumph came.

But on the other side, our condition is in one respect made The state of
reparation more happy then that of innocence, respect of the certainty of
perseverance in the state of grace.
happier then Adams; which is the certainty of perseverance in the state of
grace, if once translated into it. And this consideration Austin did much
press. We have indeed much sin with our grace, yet God will not let that spark
of fire go out: but Adam had much holiness, and no sin; yet how quickly did
he lose it? Not but that grace of it self is amissible as well as that of
Adams, but because of the special promise and grace of God in Christ;
therefore whom he loves, he will always love.

The next Question is, Whether we may be now by Christ said to The imputation
of Christ's righteousness does not infer, that therefore we are more
righteous then Adam.
be more righteous then Adam. For so an Antinomian in his Treatise of
Justification, page 320. 321. quoteth places out of some Authors, as affirming
this, that now by Christ we have a more perfect righteousness, then that of
Angels, or was lost in Adam; and by this means labors to prove, that we are
so holy, that God can see no sin in us. Now, to answer this, I deny not, but
the orthodox sometimes have used such expressions, and upon this ground,
because the righteousness of Christ as it was his, was of infinite value and
consequence; and so as we are in a Mediator, we are in a better and surer
condition, then the Angels or Adam was: but they never used such expressions to
the Antinomian sense, as if hereby we were made not only perfectly righteous,
but also holy, and without sin. This opinion is at large to be refuted in the
Treatise about Justification; only thus much take for an answer, That the
doctrine, which holds the imputation of Christ's righteousness, does not
necessarily infer, that therefore we have righteousness more excellent then
Angels or Adam; for it is only imputed to us for that righteousness which we
ought to have: it is not made ours in that largeness or latitude as it was
Christ's, but as we needed it. Now God never required of us such an holiness as
the Angels have, or a greater righteousness then Adam had; and therefore it is
a senseless thing to imagine, that that should be made ours which we never
needed, or ever were bound to have: so that those expressions of the orthodox
must be understood in a sound sense.

7. Whether that which God requires of us be greater, then that he What God
requires of us, is not greater then what he demanded of Adam in innocence.
demanded of Adam in the state of innocence. For thus the Arminians hold, that
greater abilities are now required of a man to believe the Gospel, then were of
Adam to fulfill the Law; partly, because the mystery of the Gospel does
consist in mere revelation, which the Law does not; as also, because all the
actions required by the Gospel do suppose a resurrection from that first fall.
Now (say they) more is required to rise from a fall, then to prevent a fall.
And all this they urge, to prove the necessity of universal grace given to all.

Now to answer this: First, I conclude (as before has been proved) that the
nature of justifying faith was in Adam, though there was not such a particular
object about which it may be exercised; for a thing may be for the nature of
it, and yet not have such a name which it has from a certain respect to some
object that now is not, or from some effects which it cannot now produce: So
Mercy and Grace was in God for the nature of it always, but as it has respect
to a miserable and wretched creature, that was not till the creature was made
so. And so in Adam, there was the nature of love and pity, but yet in regard of
some effects, which could not be exercised in that estate, his love could have
no such name, as mercy or pity. Thus Adam for his faith, that faith which he
did put forth in Gods promise about eternal life, upon his obedience, was a
justifying faith for the nature of it, but had not the denomination or respect
of justifying, because such an object was impossible in that condition. Hence
that faith of dependency which Adam had, was the same in nature which
justifying faith is. Therefore to the arguments proposed, we deny, that greater
strength is required to rise, then to keep from falling, for the same things
which would have preserved Adam from falling, as says in the first place, the
same also are required for a man to rise. And as Adam would have stood, as long
as his faith in God stood, the Devil laboring to shake that by his
temptation; so Christ praying for Peter, a man fallen by Adam, does especially
pray, that his faith may not fail, because by that he was supported and
strengthened.

Lastly, Whether Adams immortality in that estate, be not different Adams
immortality in the state of innocence different from, and short of that which
shall be in heaven.
from that which shall be in heaven. Yes, it is very plain it is so; for he
was so immortal, as that there was a possibility of mortality, but it is not
so with those that are glorified. Again, he was so immortal, as that he had a
natural body, which did need nourishment; but it is not so with those that are
made happy. It is true, we have heretofore concluded, that Adam in his first
estate was naturally immortal, for if death had been natural, God had been
the author of death, and man would not have abhorred it. Neither did Christ
dye simply because he was a man, but because he was a man made for us, who
ought to dye because of our sin. Indeed, because Adam did eat and drink, and
his body was a natural body, therefore there was mortality in him in a remote
power, but actual mortality was hindered, by reason of that glorious condition
he was placed in; and therefore not actually to dye, but to be in a mortal
state was threatened as a punishment to him of all apostasy from God.

Use 1. Of Instruction. What comfort may be to the godly from Christ, though by
nature all is lost. Who can hear without trembling of this great loss?
Righteousness and immortality lost, God and his image lost. If thou look
upon thy proud earthly sinful heart, thou may say, It was not thus from the
beginning: if upon thy sick, weak, and mortal body, It was not thus from the
beginning. Now here is no way to keep up the heart, but by looking to Christ.
Though thou have lost the image of God, yet he is the express image of his
Father. Though thou have not perfect righteousness, he has. Whatsoever thy
loss and evil be by the first Adam, thy gain and good may be by the last
Adam. Admire herein the mysteries of Gods grace and love. What may we not
expect for temporalls, if needful, when he is thus gracious in spiritualls?
Are riches, subsistence, equal to Christ?

Use 2. Of Exhortation, not to rest in any estate, but that of restoration
again. The word (as you heard) Ephesians. 1. 10. to gather, does imply that all
mankind is like an house fallen down, lying in its rubbish and ruins. Let us
not therefore stay in this condition: It Is a condition of sin, of wrath: Oh,
much better never to have been borne, then to be thus. How happy are all the
irrational creatures in their estate above us, if not repaired by Christ? And
know, that to be restored again to this image of God, is a great and rare
blessing, few partake of it. Holiness must be as inwardly rooted and settled
in thee, as ever sin and corruption has soaked into thee. Thou did drink
iniquity like water; do thou now, as the Heart, pant after the waterbrooks?
The resurrection of the soul must be in this life. It was sinful, proud; but
it is raised an holy, humble soul.

LECTURE XV.
EXODUS 20. 1. And God spoke all these words, saying, etc.
HAving handled the Law given to Adam in innocence, both absolutely as it is a
Law, and relatively as a Covenant; we now proceed to speak of that Law given by
God, through the ministry of Moses, to the people of Israel; which is the
great subject in controversy between the Antinomians and us. There were indeed
Precepts and Laws given before Moses. Hence the Learned speak much of Noah's
Precepts. The Talmudists say (as Cuneus relates) that these seven Precepts of
Noah did contain such an exact rule of righteousness, that whosoever did not
know them, the Israelites were commanded to kill. But because these are
impertinent to my scope, I pass them by. And in the handling of this Law of
Moses, I will use my former method, considering the Law absolutely in it self,
and then relatively as a Covenant: for, as God (you have heard) has suffered
other errors about the Deity of Christ, and the Trinity, and the Grace of God,
therefore to break forth, that the truth about them may be more cleared and
manifested; so happily the Law will be more extolled in its dignity and
excellency then ever, by those opinions which would overthrow it. The Text,
upon which most of the matter I have to say, shall be grounded, are the words
now read unto you, that are an introduction to the Law, containing briefly,

1. The nature of the matter delivered, which is called Words; 1. What meant by
words.
so Deuteronomy. 4. ten words: hence it is called the Decalogue. Now the Hebrew word is
used not for a word merely, as we say, one word; for so the ten Commandments
are more then ten words: but it signifies a concise and brief sentence by way
of command. Hence it is translated sometimes by the Septuagint, (...), Deuteronomy. 17.
19. and sometimes (...), Psalm. 118. 57. so in the New Testament, that which is
called by Mark 7. 13. the word of God, is by Matthew named the commandment of
God: So Paul also, Galat. 5. 14. The whole Law is fulfilled in one word, that
is, one brief sentence by way of command.

2. You have the note of universality, All these words, to show, 2. Nothing to
be added or taken from them.
that nothing may be added to them, or diminished: only here is a difficulty,
for Deuteronomy. 5. where these things are repeated again by Moses, there some things
are transposed, and some words are changed. But this may be answered easily,
that the Scripture does frequently use a liberty in changing of words when it
repeateth the same thing, only it does not alter the sense. And happily this
may be to confute that superstitious opinion of the Jews, who are ready to
dream of miraculous mysteries in every letter.

3. There is the efficient cause of this in the Hebrew (...) 3. God the Author
of this Law.
(...). This word is used in the plural, as some of the Learned observe,
defectively; and is to be supplied thus, (...), to denote the excellency of
God, as they say the word (...) is used for (...) or (...), for excellentissima
fera. By the Septuagint its translated (...), and not (...), because (says a
learned man) they interpreting this for the Grecians, and the wisemen amongst
them attributing the name (...) to those that are called (...), therefore they
would use a word, to show, that he who gave the Law, was Lord even over all
those. Now God is here described to be the author of these Laws, that so the
greater authority may be procured to them. Hence all Lawgivers have
endeavored to persuade the people, that they had their Laws from God.

4. You have the manner of delivering them, God spoke them, 4. The manner of
delivering it.
saying: which is not to be understood, as if God were a body, and had organs
of speaking; but only that he formed a voice in the air. Now here arises a
great difficulty, because of Acts 7. where he that spoke to Moses on Mount
Sinai is called the Angel: This makes the Papists and Grotius go upon a
dangerous foundation, That God did not immediately deliver the Law, but an
Angel; who is therefore called God, and assumes unto himself the name
Jehovah, because he did represent the person of God. But this is confuted by
the Learned. I shall not preface any further, but raise this Doctrine, That God
delivered a Law to the people of Israel by the hand or ministry of Moses.

I shall (God willing) handle this point doctrinally in all the theological
considerations about the Law: and,

First, you must still remember, that the word Law may be used The word Law is
capable of diverse senses and significations.
in diverse senses; and, before this or that be asserted of it, you must clear
in what sense you speak of the Law. Not to trouble you again with the several
acceptions of the word, which you must have always in your eye, take notice at
the present, of what a large or restrained signification the word Law is
capable of: for we may either take the word Law for the whole dispensation and
promulgation of the Commandments, Moral, Judicial, and Ceremonial: Or else
more strictly, for that part which we call the Moral Law; yet with the preface
and promises added to it: and in both these respects the Law was given as a
Covenant of grace (which is to be proved in due time:) Or else most strictly,
for that which is mere mandative and preceptive, without any promise at all:
And in this sense, most of those assertions which the Learned have concerning
the difference between the Law and the Gospel, are to be understood; for, if
you take (as for the most part they do) all the precepts and threatenings
scattered up and down in the Scripture, to be properly the Law; and then all
the gracious promises, wheresoever they are, to be the Gospel, then it is no
marvel if the Law have many hard expressions cast upon it. Now this shall be
handled on purpose in a distinct question by it self, because I see many
excellent men peremptory for this difference: but I much question, whether it
will hold, or no.

2. What Law this delivered in Mount Sinai is, and what kinds of Of the
division of Laws in general, and why the Moral so called.
laws there are, and why it is called the Moral Law. It is plain by Exodus 20.
and cap. 21. All the laws that the Jews had were then given to Moses, to
deliver unto the people, only that which we call the Moral Law, had the great
preheminency, being twice written by God himself in tables of stone. Now the
whole body of these laws is, according to the matter and object, divided into
Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial. We will not meddle with the Queries that
may be made about this division. We may, without any danger, receive it, and
that Law which we are to treat upon is the Moral Law. And here it must be
acknowledged, that the different use of the word Moral, has bred many
perplexities; yea in whatsoever controversy it has been used, it has caused
mistakes. The word Moral, or Morally, is used in the controversy of the
Sabbath, in the question about converting grace; in the doctrine of the
Sacraments, about their efficacy and causality; and so in this question, about
a Law, what makes it moral. Now in this present doubt, howsoever the word
Moral bears no such force in the notation of it, (it being as much as that
which directs and obliges about manners, and so applicable even to the
Judicial and Ceremonial: and these are in a sense commanded in the Moral
Law, though they be not perpetual) as to denote that which is perpetual and
always obliging; yet thus it is meant here, when we speak of a thing moral,
as opposite to that, which is binding but for a time.

3. Whether this law repeated by Moses be the same with the Law The Law of
Moses differs from the law, of Nature:
of Nature implanted in us. And this is taken for granted by many: but
certainly there may be given many great differences between them; for,

First, if he speak of the Law of Nature implanted in Adam at 1. In respect of
power of binding.
first, or as now degenerated, and almost defaced in us, whatsoever is by that
law enjoined, does reach unto all, and bind all, though there be no
promulgation of such things unto them: But now the Moral Law in some things
that are positive, and determined by the will of God merely, did not bind all
the nations in the world; for, howsoever the command for the Sabbath day was
perpetual, yet it did not bind the Gentiles, who never heard of that
determined time by God: so that there are more things expressed in that, then
in the law of Nature.

Besides, in the second place, The Moral Law given by God 2 The breach of the
Law given by Moses, is a greater sin, then the breach of the law of Nature.
does induce a new obligation from the command of it; so that though the matter
of it, and of the law of Nature agree in many things, yet he that breaks
these Commandments now, does sin more hainously then he that is an Heathen or
Pagan; because by Gods command there comes a further obligation and tie upon
him.

In the third place, in the Moral Law is required justifying 3. The Moral Law
requires justifying faith and repentance, and contains more particulars in it,
then the law of Nature.
faith and repentance, as is to be proved, when I come to speak of it as a
Covenant; which could not be in the Law given to Adam: so the second
Commandment requires the particular worship of God, insomuch that all the
Ceremonial Law, yea our Sacraments are commanded in the second Commandment;
it being of a very spiritual and comprehensive nature: so that although the
Moral Law has many things which are also contained in the law of Nature, yet
the Moral Law has more particulars then can be in that. Hence you see the
Apostle says, he had not known lust to be sin, had not the Law said so,
although he had the law of Nature to convince him of sin.

4. Why it was now added. The time when it was added appears The Law was
given when the Israelites were in the wilderness, and not sooner:
by the 18. Chapter, to wit, when the people of Israel were in the Wilderness,
and had now come to their twelfth station in Mount Sinai. That reason which
Philo gives, because the Laws of God are to be learnt in a Wilderness,
seeing there we cannot be hindered by the multitude, is no ways solid. Two
reasons there may be, why now, and not sooner or later, God gave this Law:

First, because the people of Israel coming out of Egypt, had 1. Because, being
come out of Egypt, they were to be restrained of their impiety and idolatry.
defiled themselves with their ways: and we see, while they were in their
journie in the Wilderness, what horrible gross impieties they plunged
themselves into: therefore God, to restrain their impiety and idolatry,
gives them this Law, to repress all that insolency, so Romans 5. and Gal. 3.
The Law came because of transgressions. But,

Secondly, I conceive the great and proper reason why God at 2. Because they
were now to grow into a Commonwealth.
this time, rather then another, gave the Law, was, because now they began to
be a great people: they were to enter into Canaan, and to set up a
Commonwealth, and therefore God makes them laws, for he was their King in a
special manner; insomuch that all their laws, even political, were divine:
and therefore the Magistrates could not dispense in their laws, as now
Governors may in their laws of the Commonwealth, which are merely so;
because then they should dispensare de jure alieno, which is not lawful. This
therefore was the proper reason, why God at this time set up the whole body of
their Laws, because they were now to grow into a Commonwealth. Hence Josephus
calls the Commonwealth of the Jews (...), a place where God was the Governor.

5. Whether this Law was not before in the Church of God. And The Law not only
was, but was publicly preached in the Church before Moses.
certainly, he that should think this Law was not in the Church of God before
Moses his administration of it, should greatly err. Murder was a sin before,
as appears by Gods words to Cain; yea the very anger it self that goes
before murder: So all the outward worship of God, as when it is said, This began
man to call upon the Name of the Lord; so that the Church of God never was, nor
ever shall be without this Law. And when we say, the Law was before Moses, I
do not mean only, that it was written in the hearts of men, but it was
publicly preached in the ministry that the Church did then enjoy, as appears
by Noah's preaching to the old world, and Gods striving with men then by his
word.

So that we may say, the Decalogue is Adams, and Abraham's, and Noah's, and
Christ's, and the Apostles, as well as of Moses. Indeed there was special
reason, as you heard, why, at that time, there should be a special
promulgation of it, and a solemn repetition; but yet the Law did perpetually
sound in the Church, ever since it was a Church. And this consideration will
make much to set forth the excellency of it, it being a perpetual means and
instrument which God has used in his Church for information of duty,
conviction of sin, and exhortation to all holiness: So that men who speak
against the use of the Law, and the preaching of it, do oppose the universal
way of the Church of God in the Old and New Testament.

6. The end why God gave this law to them. I spoke before of the The ends of
the promulgation of the Law were.
end, why he gave it then, now I speak of the final cause in general: and
here I shall not speak of it in reference to Christ, or Justification, (that is
to be thought on when we handle it as a Covenant) but only as it was an
absolute rule or law. And here it will be a great error, to think the
promulgation of it had but one end, for there were many ends:

1. Because much corruption had now seized upon mankind, 1. That the Israelites
might see what holiness was required of them.
and the people of Israel had lived long without the public worship and
service of God, it was necessary to have this law enjoined them, that they
might see far more purity and holiness required of them, then otherwise they
would be persuaded of.

2. By this means they would come to know sin, as the A 2. That they might
come to know sin, and be humbled.
postle speaks, and so be deeply humbled in themselves: the law of God being a
clear light to manifest those inward heart-sins and soule-lusts that crawle in
us as so many toads, and serpents, which we could never discover before.

3. Hereby was shadowed forth the excellent and holy nature 3. To shadow out
unto them the excellent and holy nature of God.
of God, as also what purity was accepted by him, and how we should be holy, as
he himself is holy; for the law is holy as God is holy: Its nothing but an
expression and draught of that great purity which is in his nature; insomuch
that its accounted the great wisdom of that people of Israel to have such
laws; and the very nations themselves should admire at it.

7. The great goodness and favor of God in delivering this law to The
delivering of this Law to the Israelites, was a great mercy unto them.
them. And this comes fitly in the next place to consider of, that it was an
infinite mercy of God to that people to give them this law. Hence Deuteronomy. 9. and
in other places, how often does God press them with this love of his in giving
them those commandments? And that it was not for their sakes, or because of
any merit in them, but because he loved them? So David, Psalm. 147. he has not
done so to other nations. And to this may be referred all the benefits that the
Psalmist and Prophets do make to come by the law of God: insomuch that it is a
very great ingratitude and unthankfulnes unto God, when people cry down the
Law, and the preaching of it. That which God speaks of as a great mercy to a
people, these do reject.

Nor, because that God has vouchsafed greater expressions of his love to us in
these latter days, therefore may those former mercies be forgotten by us,
seeing the Law does belong unto us for those ends it was given to the Jews now
under the Gospel, (as is to be proved) as much as unto them. And therefore you
cannot read one commandment in the spiritual explication of it, (for the law
is spiritual) but you have cause to bless God, saying, Lord, what are we,
that thy will should be so clearly, and purely manifested to us, above what it
is to Heathens, yea and Papists, with many others? Therefore, beloved, it is
not enough for you to be no Antinomian, but you are to bless God, and praise
him for it, that its read, and opened in our congregations.

8. The perfection of this law, containing a perfect rule of all things The Law
of Moses is a perfect rule.
belonging to God or man. And here again I shall not speak of it as a
covenant, but merely as its a rule of obedience. And thus, though it be short,
yet its so perfect, that it contains all that is to be done, or omitted by
us: Insomuch that all the Prophets, and Apostles do but add the explication
of the Law, if it be not taken in too strict a sense. Hence is that
commandment of not adding to it, or detracting from it. And in what sense the
Apostle speaks against it, calling it the killing letter, and the ministration
of death working wrath, is to be showed hereafter. When our Savior, Matthew. 5.
gave those several precepts, he did not add them as new unto the Moral Law,
but did vindicate that from the corrupt glosses and interpretations of the
Pharisees, is is to be proved. Indeed it may seem hard to say that Christ, and
justifying faith, and the doctrine of the Trinity, is included in this
promulgation of the Law; but it is to be proved, that all these were then
comprehended in the administration of it, though more obscurely. Nor will this
be to confound the Law and the Gospel, as some may think. This law therefore
and rule of life which God gave the people of Israel, and to all us Christians
in them, is so perfect and full, that there is nothing necessary to the duty
and worship of God, which is not here commanded; nor no sin to be avoided,
which is not here forbidden. And this made Peter Martyr (as you heard) compare
it to the ten Predicaments.

Use. Of Admonition, to take heed how we vilify or contemn this Law of God,
either doctrinally or practically. Doctrinally, so the Marcionites, and the
Manichees, and Basilides; whereof some have said, it was carnal, yea that it
was from a Devil, and that it was given to the Jews for their destruction;
because it is said to work wrath, and to be the instrument of death. And those
opinions and expressions of the Antinomians about it are very dangerous. What,
shall we revile that which is Gods great mercy to a people? Because the Jews
and Papists do abuse the Law, and the works of it to justification, shall it
not therefore have its proper place and dignity? How sacred are the laws of a
Commonwealth, which yet are made by men? But this is by the wise God.

Take heed therefore of such phrases, An Old-Testament-spirit, and, His Sermon
is nothing but an explication of the Law: For it ought much to rejoice thee, to
hear that pure and excellent image of Gods holiness opened. How may thou
delight to have that purity enjoined, which will make thee loath thy self,
prize Christ and Grace more, and be a quick goad to all holiness? And if you
say, Here is nothing of Christ all this while: I answer, That is false, as is
to be proved, if the Law be not taken very strictly: And besides, the Law and
the Gospel are not to be severed, but they mutually put a fresh relish and
taste upon each other. And shall no mercy be esteemed, but what is the Gospel?
Thou art thankful for temporal mercies, and yet they are not the Gospel; but
this is a spiritual mercy.

LECTURE XVI.
EXODUS 20. 1. God spoke these words, saying, etc.
I Have already begun the discourse about the Moral Law; and shall at this
time consider those historical passages, which we meet with in the
promulgation of it, that so the excellency of it may hereby be more known;
for, whosoever shall diligently observe all the circumstances of the history of
the Law, he shall find, that God did put glory, upon it: and howsoever the
Apostle, Hebr. 12. and 2 Corinthians. 3. does prefer the Gospel above this
ministration of Moses; yet absolutely in it self, it was greatly honored by
God. In the general therefore you may take notice, that therefore did God so
solemnly, and with great majesty 1. The Law was given with great majesty,
thereby to procure the greater authority to it.
give the Law, that so the greater authority may thereby be procured to it.
Hence it is related of many Heathens, that they have feigned some familiarity
with their gods, when they made their laws, that so the people might with
greater awe and reverence receive them: Thus Numa feigned his discourse with
the goddess Aeg^ria for his laws; and it is related of Pythagoras, that he had
a tamed Eagle, which he would cause to come flying to him, to make people think
his sentences were delivered from heaven to him. If laws of men might well be
called by Demosthenes (...), how much rather this Law of God? It Is but a
conceit of Prospers, that Judaei were so called, because they received Jus Dei,
the Law of God. It Is further also to be observed in the general, that God has
always had apparitions suitable to the matter in hand. Thus he appeared in a
burning bush to Moses, like an armed man to Jusua; and with all signs of
majesty, and a great God, being to deliver laws to the people, that they might
see how potent he was to be avenged for every breach.

Again, in the next place, take also this general Observation, That although
the Judicial and Ceremonial laws were given There is a difference between
the Moral, Judicial, and Ceremonial Law, notwithstanding they were given at
the same time.
at the same time with the Moral Law, yet there is a difference between them.
And this is to be taken notice of, lest any should think, what will this
discourse make for the honor of the Moral Law, more then the other laws?
It Is true, these three kinds of laws agree in the common efficient cause,
which was God; and in the minister, or mediator, which was Moses; in the
subject, which was the people of Israel; and all and every one of them; as also
in the common effects, of binding and obliging them to obedience, and to punish
the bold offenders against them. But herein the Moral Law is preheminent: 1.
In that it The Moral Law more excellent them the Judicial and Ceremonial in
three respects.
is a foundation of the other laws, and they are reduceable to it. 2. This was
to abide always, not the other. 3. This was immediately written by God, and
commanded to be kept in the Ark, which the other were not.

Lastly observe, these two things in the general, about the God humbled the
Israelites before he gave them his Law.
time of the delivery of the Law: First, God did not give them his Law, till he
had deeply humbled them; and it may be now, Christ will not settle his
ordinances with us, till he has brought us low: And secondly, Before they come
unto the Land of promise, God God settled his worship before he gave them
Canaan.
settleth his worship and laws. When he has done this, then he bids them,
Deuteronomy. 2. 1. Go toward Canaan. This shows, A people cannot have Canaan, till
the things of God be settled.

But we come to the remarkable parts of the history of the promulgation of this
Law; and, first, you may consider the great and diligent preparation of the
people to hear it, Exodus 1. 9. for, Preparation required before the hearing of
the Law.
first, They were to sanctify themselves, and to wash their clothes. This,
indeed, was peculiar unto those times, yet God did thereby require the
cleansing and sanctification of their hearts. The superstitious 1. The people
must sanctify themselves.
imitating of this was among the Gentiles, who used to wash, that they may go
to sacrifice, Plaut. in Aulul. Act. 3. scen. 6. yea, this superstition was
brought into the Church, Chrysostom. Hom. 52. in Mat. We see (says he) this
custom confirmed in many Churches, that many study diligently how they may
come to Church with their hands washed, and white garments: And, Tert. cap. 11.
de Orat. Hae sunt vera mundiciae, non quas plerique superstitiose curant, ad
omnem orationem etiam cum lavacro totius corporis aquam sumentes: but this by
the way, God did hereby signify what purity and holiness of heart should be
in them to receive his Law.

The second thing requisite was, to set bounds, so that none 2. They must not
touch the Mount.
might touch the Mount. It Is a violent perverting of Scripture which the popish
Canons have, applying this allegorically to a layman, if he read, or meddle
with the Scripture; whereas not only a beast, but not the Priests themselves
should touch this mountain: and hereby God would have men keep within their
bounds, and not to be too curious. The Doctrine of the Trinity, of
Predestination, are such a mountain, that a man must keep at the bottom of it,
and not climb up.

The third thing was, not to come at their wives. Some do refer 3. Nor come
at their wives.
this to those women that were legally polluted; but it may be well understood
of their conjugall abstinence, not as a thing sinful, but that hereby God
would have them put off not only affections to all sins, but all lawful
things: so that this preparation for three days, does make much for the
excellency of the Law, and shows how spiritual we should be in the receiving
of it.

2. The Declaration of Majesty and greatness upon the delivery 2. The Law was
given with great Majesty, that so the people might be raised up to reverence
the Lawgiver.
of it: For, although it must be granted, that this was an accommodated way to
the Law, that did convince of sin, and terrify, (hence the Apostle, Heb. 12.
18, 19, etc. prefers the ministration of the Gospel above it) yet this also
was a true cause, why thundrings and terrors did accompany the promulgation of
it, that so the people might be raised up to fear, and reverence of the
Lawgiver. Hence Rev. 4. 5. God is described in his Majesty sitting upon his
throne, and lightnings with thunders proceeding from him. Now it is very
probable, that these were raised by God in an extraordinary manner, to overcome
the heart of the stoutest. And in this nature we are still to suppose the Law
preached to us; for, howsoever all that terror be past, yet the effect of it
ought to abide upon every man, so far forth as corruption abides in him:
for, what man is there, whose pride, lukewarmnesse, or any sinful corruption
needs not this awakening?

It Is said Exodus 19. 18. God descended upon the mount Sinai in a smoke of
fire, and a cloud: all was to show the incomprehensible Majesty of God, as also
his terror to wicked men; and in this respect the dispensation of the Gospel
was of greater sweetness. Hence Gal. 4. 24. the Apostle makes this mount Sinai
to be Agar, generating to bondage. This, I say, must be granted, if you speak
comparatively with Gospel-dispensations; but yet the Psalmist speaks of this
resolutely in it self, as a great mercy, Psalm. 50. 2. Out of Sion, the
perfection of beauty, God has shined; and the fire about him did signify his
glorious splendor, as also his power to overthrow his enemies, and consume
them: so Psalm. 96. All the earth is bid to rejoice at the Lords reigning, which
is described by his solemn giving of the Law, which the Church is to rejoice
at; yea, ver. 7. it is applied to Christ, Heb. 7. though the Apostle follows
the Septuagint: so that if you take these things absolutely, they are looked
upon as mercies; yea, and applied to Christ. And it is made a wonderful mercy
to them, that God did thus familiarly reveal himself to them, Deuteronomy. 4. 7. and
Deuteronomy. 5. 4, yea, learned men think, that Christ, the Son of God, did in the
shape of a man deliver this Law to Moses, and spoke familiarly with him; but
especially see Deuteronomy. 33. 3. where the word loving signifies embracing by way of
protection in the bosom. The gifts of the holy Ghost were given with fiery
tongues, and a mighty rushing wind, so that the Gospel is fire, as well as the
Law.

3. Gods immediate writing of these with his own fingers in tables 3. The Law
was written by God in Tables of stone, to denote the dignity and perpetuity of
it. What meant by the finger of God.
of stone, Exodus 31. 18. Which honor was not vouchsafed to the other Laws.

Now by the Finger of God, howsoever some of the Fathers have understood the
holy Ghost, and, because the Finger is of the same essence with the body,
infer the holy Ghost to be of the same nature with God; yet this conceit is
not solid: yet Luke 11. 20. that which is called the finger of God, is Matthew.
12. 28. called the Spirit of God: We must therefore understand it of the power
and operation of God, who caused those words to be written there. The matter
upon which this is written, is said to be tables of stone. The Rabbis conceit,
saying, that because it is said of stone in the singular number, that therefore
it was but one table, which sometimes did appear as one, sometimes as two, is
not worthy the confuting. That which is here to be considered, and makes much
to the dignity of the Law, is, that it was written by God, upon tables of
stone, to show the perpetuity, and stability of it.

And howsoever this of it self be not a demonstrative argument to establish
the perpetuity of the Law against any Antinomian, yet it may prevail with any
reasonable man. Hence Lawgivers, that have labored the stability of their
laws, caused them to be engraven in Brass, or a Marble: so Pliny, lib. 39.
ca. 9. Job 19. 14.
speaks of brassie tables ad perpetuitatem monimentorum: and Plato as
Rhodoginus reports, lib. 25. cap. 2. thought that Laws should be written in
tabulis cupressinis, quod futuras putabat aterniores, quam aereas. It is true,
there is also a mystical signification, which is not to be rejected, because
the Apostle alludes to it, that hereby was signified the hardness of the Jews
heart, which could not easily receive that impression of the Law. Hence the
excellency of the Gospel does appear, in that it is by grace wrought in the
hearts of men. But yet this is not so to be understood, as if God did not in
the old Testament, even then write his Law in the hearts of men. Therefore that
Promise of the Gospel mentioned by Jeremiah is not to be understood
exclusively, as if God did not at all write his Law in their hearts, but
comparatively.

4. The sad breaking of this Law by the people of Israel. As the 4. The
Israelites, notwithstanding the delivery of this Law was with power and
Majesty, quickly broke it.
Law given by God to Adam was immediately broken; so this Law given in such a
powerful manner to keep the Israelites in an holy fear, and reverence; yet how
soon was it forgotten by them: For, upon Moses his delay, they presently fell
into idolatry. Some think, they thought Moses was dead, and therefore they
desired some visible god among them, as the Egyptians had: and because they
worshipped Apis, an Ox, hence they made a Calfe, wherein their wickedness was
exceeding great (though, against the truth, some Rabbis excuse them from
idolatry) because they did immediately upon the promulgation of the Law, when
they had so solemnly promised obedience, fall into this sin; and not only
so, but worshipped it, and gave the glory of all the benefits they enjoyed unto
this: not as if they were so simple, as to think this a god, but to worship the
true God by this. And this confuteth all those distinctions that Idolaters use,
especially Papists, about their false worship. We are not to follow our own
hearts, but the Word. As the child in the womb lives by fetching nourishment
by the navell only from the mother, so does the Church by fetching instruction
and direction from Christ.

5. The time of Moses his abode on the Mount. This also is observable 5. Moses
his abode in the Mount, procured authority both to himself and the Law.
in the story; for hereby God did not only procure great ground of Authority
for Moses among the people, but also unto the Law: And therefore, as some
compare the time of giving the Law, with the effusion of the gifts of the holy
Ghost in the Gospel, making the former to be the fiftieth day of their egresse
out of Egypt, called Pentecost; so at the same time the holy Ghost was given to
the Church: Thus also they compare Moses forty days upon the Mount, with our
Saviors forty days in the wilderness, when he was tempted. It was certainly
a miraculous preservation of Moses, that he should be there so long, and
neither eat, nor drink. But this example of Moses, with that of our Saviors,
is very vainly, and unwarrantably brought for fasting in Lent.

6. Moses his zeal against this their idolatry, and breaking of the 6. Moses
his breaking of the Tables intimates, that justification is not to be had by
them.
Tables. When Moses came down, he saw how the people had transgressed the Law
of God, which so moved him, that, in his zeal, he brake the Tables that were
first made. This certainly was by the immediate ordering of God, to signify,
that this could not be a way of justification for them: and, indeed, to hold
that the Law can justify, is so great an error, that we are all Antinomians
in this sense. One has said, that the Law was like the tree of knowledge of
good and evil, but the Gospel that is like the tree of life: yet this must be
rightly understood; for God uses the Law, as he does his whole Word, to beget
and increase the life of grace in us, only this life is not that which can
justify us: and in this effect of the Law, to increase life, David does often
commend it.

Now some have attributed this to Moses, as a sin, accounting Moses his zeal
in breaking the Tables, vindicated from rashness, and sinful perturbation of
mind.
it his impatiency and rashness to break the Tables. They acknowledge it to be
a good zeal for the maine, only they think here was some strange fire, as
well as the fire of the Sanctuary. But although this excandescency of Moses was
sudden, yet I see not why it should be attributed as rashness in him to break
the Tables; for he had brought those Tables as a sign of their Covenant
stricken with God: but now, they having broken it by their Idolatry, it was
very just to have the Tables broken in the eyes of the people, that so they
might see how God was alienated from them: so that we think, he did it not with
any sinful perturbation of mind, but an holy zeal: God hereby also ordering,
that they should understand God would enter into a new Covenant with them;
which made Austin cry out, O ira prophetica, and animus non perturbatus, sed
illuminatus!

7. Moses his petition unto God for his presence, and the manifestation 7. Gods
manifestation of his glory unto Moses, makes for his honor.
of Gods glory unto him, with Gods answer. Howsoever this does not immediately
concern the promulgation of the Law, yet, because it is inserted before the
reparation of the Tables again, and makes for the honor which God put upon
Moses, while he was settling the laws of Israel, we will give a touch at it.
Cap. 33. ver. 12. Moses desires Gods presence to be with him in conducting of
the people of Israel; and, as a sign, whereby he might be confirmed of his
presence, he desires to see Gods glory. It is hard to say, what was Moses his
petition in this thing. I cannot be of their mind, who make this only a
vision, and nothing really acted: nor of theirs, who think that Moses desired
to see the essence of God. I will not dispute that Question, Whether the bodily
eyes of a man may be lifted up to that perfection, as to see God, who is a
spirit.

Nor can I think that they attain to the truth, who think by the glory of God,
to be meant the reasons and grounds of Gods mercies, and, in particular, his
providence to the Israelites; and by the back-parts, which Moses was allowed to
see, the effects themselves of his mercy and providence, as if God intended to
show Moses his wonderful effects, but not the reasons of them.

Nor lastly, That Moses desired to see the humanity of Christ in glory, like
that vision of transfiguration; therefore I judge this most literal, that
although it is said, ver. 11. that Moses spoke with God face to face, which
argues familiarity, yet for all that, even then God was clothed as it were in
a cloud, interposing it self. Now Moses he desires, that God would manifest
himself in a more sensible, visible, and glorious way of an outward shape;
even as before he would have known Gods Name. Now God in part answers him,
and in part denies him, showing such a glorious object, that yet he was not
able to see, but where the light was less intense.

8. The reparation of the Tables again. And here is some difference 8. Though
the writing of the second Tables was Gods work, yet the forming and polishing
them was the work of Moses.
between the former and the later Tables: The former God provided both for the
shape and the writing, as you heard; but here the forming or polishing of the
Table is Moses his work, and the writing is Gods. The first is said expressly,
Exodus 34. 1. Go, hew thee two Tables of stone like the former, and I will write
upon these Tables. Here is the second expressly. So Deuteronomy. 10. 1, 2, 3. so that
the writing of the Law on the second Tables, was as immediately Gods work, as
the former; but not the polishing or preparing of the Tables. Only there is
one place of Scripture, which troubles the Learned much, that seems to
oppose this, and to make the writing upon the second Table to be immediately
the act of Moses, and mediately only of God, because he commanded and directed
Moses to do so.

The place that seems to oppose this, is Exodus 34. 27, 28. I confess, if we
look into the coherence of these Texts, we shall find some things difficult.
But two things will help to clear it: first, that the things which Moses did
write, were not the ten Commandments, but the several precepts, that were by
way of explication; and then the second thing is, that whereas the 28. verse
seems to speak of the same subject, Moses; yet the two former predicates are
to be attributed to him, viz. his staying with God forty days and nights, and
his neither eating nor drinking all that while: Then the third predicate is to
be given to God, viz. writing upon the ten Commandments; for it is ordinary
with the Hebrews, to refer the relative to some remote subject, and not the
nearest: and this may untye that knot. There is this remarkable, that though
the former Tables were broken, yet now God enters into a Covenant of grace with
them, as appears by proclaiming himself long-suffering, and gracious; but
yet God causes the ten Commandments to be written again for them, implying,
that these may very well stand with a Covenant of grace, which opposes the
Antinomian.

9. The extraordinary glory that was upon Moses. This is a considerable 9. The
extraordinary glory that was upon Moses, argues the administration of the Law
to be glorious.
passage; for the Apostle speaking of this 2 Cor. 3. does acknowledge the
ministration of the Law to have a great deal of glory; but yet such as was to
vanish. Where, by the way, take notice against the Antinomian, that the Apostle
does not there speak of the Law absolutely in it self, as if that were to be
done away; but, the particular administration and dispensation of it, that was
no more to continue, who all grant. Now the Antinomian confounds the Law, with
the administration of it. This glory and shining that was upon Moses, was (as
it may seem probable) communicated unto him, when he beheld the glory of God.
How long it continued, is not certain: that has no probability of the
Rabbis, who hold, it did continue all his life time. The Vulgar Translation
makes it horned, Cornuta; hence the Painters pictured Moses with horns: but
the word that signifies an horn, is also for to glitter, and shine: as also
those rays of light might be cast forth from Moses his face like horns. This
was so glorious, that he was forced to put a veil upon his face, when he spoke
to the people. Now the Text says, Moses did not know his face shone. It Is an
excellent thing, when God puts a great deal of glory upon a man, and he does
not know it. Gregory applies this of Moses to Ministers, that, as Moses,
because the people could not endure the glorious light of his face, put a veil
upon it, that so the people might converse with him: thus the Minister, whose
parts and scholarship is far above the people, should put on a veil, by
condescending to the people. But the Apostle makes another mystical meaning,
wherein the hard things shall in time (God willing) be opened.

10. The custody and preservation of the Law in the Ark. And 10. The
preservation of the Law in the Arc makes much for the glory of it.
this shall be the last Observation, that will tend to the excellency of the
Law. As this one was written by the immediate hand of God, so was it only
commanded to be preserved in the Ark. Now here is a great dispute in matter of
history: for, 1 Kin. 8. 9. it is expressly said, that in the Ark there was
nothing save the tables of stone; but Hebr. 9. 4. there is joined Aarons rod,
and the pot of Manna. Those that for this respect would reject the Epistle to
the Hebrews, as of no authority, are too bold and insolent. Some think we
cannot reconcile them; yet the Scripture is true, only our understandings are
weak. Some think, that at first God commanded those two to be laid with the
tables of the Covenant; but when the Temple was built by Solomon, then all were
laid aside by themselves: and therefore, say they, that the history of the
Kings speaks of it as a new thing. Some, as Piscator, make in to be as much
as coram, before, or hard by: and so they say, the pot and rod were by the Ark.
But I shall close with that of Junius, who observes, that the relative is in
the feminine, (...), and so does not relate to (...), Arc, the word
immediately going before; but (...), Tabernacle, In which Tabernacle. And this
is frequent in the Scripture to do so. And this, though it may be capable of
some objection, yet does excellently reconcile the truth of the history with
Paul. Now how long these Tables of stone were kept, and what became of them at
last, we have no certainty. This proves the great glory God did put upon the
Law above any thing else, which I intended in all these historical
observations.

Use 1. Of Instruction. How willing God was to put marks Seeing God has put
such marks of glory upon the Law, let us take heed of disparaging it.
of glory and perpetuity upon the Law; and therefore we are to take heed of
disparaging it. For, how necessary is it to have this Law promulged, if it were
possible, as terribly in our congregations, as it was on Mount Sinai? This
would make the very Antinomians find the power of the Law, and be afraid to
reject it. Certainly, as the Physician does not purge the bodies, till he has
made them fluid, and prepared; so may not the Ministers of Christ apply grace,
and the promises thereof, to men of Epicurean or Pharisaicall spirits, till
they be humbled by the discovery of sin, which is made by the Law. And I doubt
it may fall out with an Antinomian, who accounts sin nothing in the believer,
because of justification, as with one Dionysius a Stoic (as I take it) who
held, that pain was nothing; but, being once sick, and tortured with the stone
in the kidneys, cried out, that all which he had writ about Pain was false;
for now he found it was something: So it may fall out that a man, who has writ
and preached, that God sees no sin in a believer, may sometime or other be
so awed and troubled by God, that he shall cry out, All that he preached about
this, he now finds to be false. Therefore let those that have disparaged, or
despised it, see their sin, and give it its due dignity. They report of
Stesichorus, that when in some words he had disparaged Helena's beauty, he was
struck blind; but afterward when he praised her again, he obtained the use of
seeing. It may be, because thou have not set forth the due excellency of the
Law, God has taken away thy eyesight, not to see the beauty of it; but begin
with David to set forth the excellent benefits of it, and then thou may see
more glory in it then ever.

LECTURE XVII.
EXODUS 20. 1. And God spoke all these words, saying, etc.
WE have already considered those historical Observations, which are in the
delivery of the Law, and improved them to the dignity and excellency thereof. I
now come to the handling of those Questions which make much to the clearing of
the truths about it, that are now doubted of: And, first of all, it may be
demanded, To what purpose is this discourse about the Law given by Moses? Are
we Jews? Does that belong to us? Has not Christ abolished the Law? Is not
Moses, with his Ministry, now at an end? It is therefore worth the inquiry,
Whether the ten Commandments, as given by Moses, do belong to us Christians,
or no?

And in the answering of this Question, I will lay down some Propositions by
way of Preface, and then bring arguments for the affirmative. The doctrine of
the Antinomians heterodoxe, though the Law, as given by Moses, did not bind
Christians.


First therefore, Though it should be granted, that the Moral Law, as given by
Moses, does not belong to us Christians; yet the doctrine of the Antinomians
would not hold: for there are some learned and solid Divines, as Zanchy and
Rivet; and many Papists, as Suarez and Medina, which hold the Law, as delivered
by Moses, not to belong to us, and yet are expressly against Antinomists: for
they say, that howsoever the Law does not bind under that notion, as
Mosaicall; yet it binds, because it is confirmed by Christ: so that although
the first obligation cease, and we have nothing to do with Moses now; yet
the second obligation, which comes by Christ, is still upon us. And this is
enough to overthrow the Antinomian, who pleads for the total abrogation of
the Law.

Thus, you see, that if this should be granted, yet the Law should be kept up
in its full vigor and force as much as if it were continued by Moses. But I
conceive that this position goes upon a false ground, as if our Savior,
Matthew. 5. did there take away the obligation by Moses, and put a new sanction
upon it, by his own authority; as if he should have said, The Law shall no
longer bind you as it is Moses his Law, but as it is mine. Now this seems to
overthrow the whole scope of our Savior, which is to show, that he did not
come to destroy the Law: And therefore he does not take upon him to be a new
Lawgiver, but an Interpreter of the old Law by Moses. This I intend to handle,
God willing, in that Question, Whether Christ has appointed any new duties,
that were not in the Law before. Only this seems to be very clear, that our
Savior there does but interpret the old Law, and vindicate it from corrupt
glosses, and not either make a new Law, or intend a new confirmation of the old
Law.

Secondly, Consider in what sense we say, that the Law does bind us in regard
of Moses; And,

First, this may be understood reduplicatively, as if it did The Law given by
Moses does not bind us in regard of Moses.
bind because of Moses; so that whatsoever is of Moses his ministry does
belong to us: and this is very false, and contrary to the whole current of
Scripture; for then the Ceremonial Law would also bind us, because, a
quatenus ad omne valet consequentia; The Law given by Moses, as written for the
Church of God, and intended for good to Christians in the N. Testament, is
binding.
so that you must not understand it in this sense.

Secondly, you may understand it thus, that Moses as a Penman of the Scripture,
writing this down for the Church of God, did by this intend good to Christians
in the New Testament: and this cannot be well denied by any, that do hold the
Old Testament does belong to Christians; for why should not the books of Moses
belong to us, as well as the books of the Prophets. Though indeed this be
denied by all those that are for the negative.

Thirdly, therefore we may understand it thus, that God, Though the people of
Israel were the present subject to whom the Moral Law was given, yet the
observation thereof was intended for the Church of God perpetually.
when he gave the ten Commandments by Moses to the people of Israel, though
they were the present subject to whom he spoke; yet he did intend an obligation
by these Laws, not only upon the Jews, but also all other Nations that should
be converted, and come to embrace their Religion: And this is indeed the very
proper state of the Question, not, Whether Moses was a Minister, or a Mediator
to the Christians as well as the Jews? (for that is clearly false) but,
Whether, when he delivered the ten Commandments, he intended only the Jews,
and not all that should be converted hereafter? It is true, the people of
Israel were the people to whom this Law was immediately promulged; but yet the
Question is, Whether others, as they came under the promulgation of it, were
not bound to receive it as well as Jews? So that we must conceive of Moses as
receiving the Moral Law for the Church of God perpetually; but the other Laws
in a peculiar and more appropriated way to the Jews: For the Church of the
Jews may be considered in their proper peculiar way, as wherein most of their
ordinances were typical, and so Moses, a typical Mediator: or, Secondly, as
an Academy, or School, or Library, wherein the true doctrine about God and his
will was preserved, as also the interpretations of this given by the Prophets
then living; and in this latter sense, what they did, they did for us, as well
as for the Jews. And, that this may be the more cleared to you, you may
consider the Moral Law to bind two ways: The Moral Law is binding


1. In regard of the matter, and so whatsoever in it is the Law of Nature, does
oblige all: and thus, as the Law of Nature, it 1. In regard of the matter of it.
did bind the Jews before the promulgation of it upon Mount Sinai.

2. Or you may consider it secondly, to bind in regard of the 2. In regard of
the preceptive authority put upon it.
preceptive authority, and command, which is put upon it; for when a Law is
promulged by a Messenger, then there comes a new obligation upon it: and
therefore Moses, a Minister, and Servant of God delivering this Law to them,
did bring an obligation upon the people.

Now the Question is, Whether this obligation was temporary or The obligation
of the Moral Law perpetual, proved by several Arguments.
perpetual? I incline to that opinion, which Pareus also does, that it is
perpetual, and so does Bellarmine and Vasquez.

3. Howsoever Rivet seems to make no great matter in this Question, if so be
that we hold the Law obliges in regard of the matter, though we deny it
binding in regard of the promulgation of it by Moses: howsoever (I say) he
thinks it a Logomachy, and of no great consequence; yet certainly it is: For,
although they profess themselves against the Antinomists, and do say, The Law
still obliges, because of Christ's confirmation of it; yet the Antinomians do
profess they do not differ here from them, but they say, the Law binds in
regard of the matter, and as it is in the hand of Jesus Christ. It is true,
this expression of theirs is contradicted by them, and necessarily it must be
so: for Islebius, and the old Antinomians, with the latter also, do not only
speak against the Law as binding by Moses; but the bona opera, the good works,
which are the matter of the Law, as appears in their dangerous positions
about good works, which heretofore I have examined: but, truly, take the
Antinomian in their former expressions, and I do not yet understand how those
Orthodox Divines differ from them. And therefore if it can be made good,
without any forcing or constraining the Scripture, that God, when he gave the
ten Commandments (for I speak of the Moral Law only) by Moses, did intend an
obligation perpetual of the Jews, and all others converted to him, then will
the Antinomian error fall more clearly to the ground; only when I bring my
Arguments for the affirmative, you must still remember in what sense the
Question is stated, and that I speak not of the whole latitude of the Ministry
of Moses.

And, in the first place, I bring this Argument, (which much If so be the
Ceremonial Law, as given by Moses, had still obliged Christians, though there
could be no obligation from the matter, had it not been revoked and abolished;
then the Moral Law given by Moses must still oblige, though it did not bind
in respect of the matter, unless we can show where it is repealed. For the
further clearing of this, you may consider, that this was the great Question,
which did so much trouble the Church in her infancy, Whether Gentiles converted
were bound to keep up the Ceremonial Law? Whether they were bound to
circumcise, and to use all those legal purifications? Now how are these
Questions decided, but thus? That they were but the shadows, and Christ the
fullness was come, and therefore they were to cease.

And thus for the Judicial Laws, because they were given to them as a
politic body, that polity ceasing, which was the principal, the accessory
falls with it; so that the Ceremonial Law, in the judgment of all, had still
bound Christians, were there not special revocations of these commands, and
were there not reasons for their expiration from the very nature of them. Now
no such thing can be affirmed by the Moral Law; for the matter of that is
perpetual, and there are no places of Scripture that do abrogate it. And, if
you say, that the Apostle in some places, speaking of the Law, seems to take
in Moral, as well as Ceremonial, I answer it thus: The question which was
first started up, and troubled the Church, was merely about Ceremonies, as
appears Act. 15. and their opinion was, that by the usage of this Ceremonial
worship they were justified; either wholly excluding Christ, or joining him
together with the Ceremonial Law. Now it is true, the Apostles, in demolishing
this error, do ex abundanti show, that not only the works of the Ceremonial
Law, but neither of the Moral Law do justify; but that benefit we have by
Christ only: Therefore the Apostles, when they bring in the Moral Law in the
dispute, they do it in respect of justification, not obligation; for the maine
Question was, Whether the Ceremonial Law did still oblige: and their
additionall error was, that if it did oblige, we should still be justified by
the performance of those acts; so that the Apostles do not join the Moral
and Ceremonial Law in the issue of obligation (for, though the Jews would
have held, they were not justified by them, yet they might not have practiced
them) but in regard of justification: and this is the first Argument.

The second Argument is from the Scripture, urging the Moral Law upon Gentiles
converted, as obliging of them, with the ground and reason of it; which is,
that they were our fathers: so that the Jews and Christians believing are
looked upon as one people. Now, that the Scripture urges the Moral Law upon
Heathens converted, as a commandment heretofore delivered, is plain. When
Paul writes to the Romans, chap. 13. 8, 9. he tells them, Love is the
fulfilling of the Law; and thereupon reckons up the commandments which were
given by Moses. Thus when he writes to the Ephesians, that were not Jews,
cap. 6. 2. he urges children to honor their father and mother, because it is
the first Commandment with Promise. Now this was wholly from Moses, and could
be no other way: And this is further evident by James, chap. 2. 8, 10. in his
Epistle, which is general, and so to Gentiles converted, as well as to the
Jews. Now mark those two expressions, v. 8. If you fulfill the royal Law,
according to the Scriptures; that is, of Moses, where the second Table
contains our love to our neighbor: and then v. 10. He that said, Do not
commit adultery, said also, Do not kill; where, you see, he makes the Argument
not in the matter, but in the Author, who was God by Moses to the people of
Israel. And if you say, Why should these Commandments reach to them? I answer,
because (as it is to be showed in answering the objections against this truth)
the Jews and we are looked upon as one people. Observe that place 1 Cor. 10.
The Apostle, writing to the Corinthians, says, Our fathers were all baptized
unto Moses in the cloud and the sea, etc. Now how could this be true of the
Corinthians, but only because since they believed, they were looked upon as one?

The third Argument is from the obligation upon us to keep the Sabbath day:
This is a full Argument to me, that the Moral Law given by Moses does bind us
Christians; for, supposing that opinion (which is abundantly proved by the
Orthodox) that the Sabbath day is perpetual, and that by virtue of the fourth
Commandment, we cannot then but gather, that the Commandments, as given by
Moses, do bind us: For here their distinction will not hold of binding
ratione materia, by reason of the matter; and ratione ministerii, by reason of
the ministry: for the seventh day cannot bind from the matter of it, there
being nothing in nature, why the seventh, rather then the fifth, should oblige;
but only from the mere Command of God for that day: and yet it will not follow,
that we are bound to keep the Jewish seventh day, as the Learned show in that
controversy.

Now then, those that deny the Law as given by Moses, must needs conclude, that
we keep the Sabbath day at the best, but from the grounds of the New Testament,
and not from the fourth Command at all: And, howsoever it be no argument to
build upon, yet all Churches have kept the moral Law with the Preface to it,
and have it in their Catechismes, as supposing it to belong unto us.

And when those profane opinions, and licentious doctrines came up against the
Sabbath Day; did not all learned and sound men look upon it as taking away one
of the Commandments? Therefore that distinction of theirs, The Moral Law
binds as the Law of Nature, but not as the Law of Moses, does no ways hold:
for the Sabbath day cannot be from the Law of Nature, in regard of the
determinate time, but has its morality and perpetuity from the mere positive
Commandment of God.

The fourth Argument from Reason, that it is very incongruous to have a
temporary obligation upon a perpetual duty. How probable can it be, that God,
delivering the Law by Moses, should intend a temporary obligation only, when
the matter is perpetual. As if it had been thus ordered, You shall have no
other gods but till Moses his time: You shall not murder or commit adultery but
till his ministry lasts, and then that obligation must cease, and a new
obligation come upon you. Why should we conceive that, when the matter is
necessary and perpetual, God would alter and change the obligations? None can
give a probable reason for any such alteration. Indeed, that they should
circumcise, or offer sacrifices till Moses ministry lasted only, there is great
reason to be given; and thus Austin well answered Porphyrius, that objected God
was worshipped otherwise in the old Testament then in the New: That is no
matter, says Austin, if that which be worshipped be the true object, though it
be worshipped diverse ways (when appointed by him) no more then when the same
thing is pronounced in diverse Languages.

The fifth Argument, If the Law by Moses do not bind us; then the explication
of it by the other Prophets does not also belong unto us: For this you must
know, that Moses in other places does explain this Law; and David's Psalms, and
Solomon's Proverbs, as also the Prophesies of the Prophets, so far as they are
Moral, are nothing but explications of the Moral Law. Now what a wide door
will here be open to overthrow the Old Testament, if I bring that place Deuteronomy.
32. 46. [Set your hearts upon these words which I testify to you this day,
because it is your life, etc.] to urge Christians to keep the Commandments of
the Lord? It may be replied, What is that to us? We have nothing to do with
Moses: The matter, indeed, does belong to us as it is in the New Testament, but
as it is there written, so we have nothing to do with it. And by this means
all our Texts, and proofs, which are brought in our Sermons may be rejected.
And therefore Dominicus a Soto (who is among the Papists for the negative)
expressly says, lib. 2. de Just. and jure, quaest. 5. Art. 4. that no place can
be brought out of the books of the Old Testament, unto Christians, as in
respect of the obliging force of it. This is plainly to overthrow the Old
Testament.

Now let us consider what are the chiefest Arguments which Arguments of the
Antinomians, whereby they would prove, that the Law, as given by Moses, does
not bind Christians, examined and answered.
they bring for the support of this opinion, that the Law, as given by Moses,
does not bind Christians. And, first, they urge the Preface [I am the Lord thy
God, which brought thee out of Egypt.] This does not belong to us, because we
nor our fathers ever were in Egypt: and, say they further, The temporal
Promise to keep the Law, does not belong to us: therefore Ephesians. chap. 6. 2.
when Paul urges that Commandment with Promise, he that thy life may be long
in the land the Lord thy God shall give thee; but speaks generally, first by
adding something, that it may be well with thee, which was not in the first
Promise; and then secondly, by detracting, saying only, that thou may live
long upon the earth in general.

Now to the Preface some answer thus, That we may be said Romans to prove
this, where the Gentiles are said to be graffed in, so that they become of the
same stock. And it is plain, that the Believers are Abraham's seed; and then, by
this interpretation, whatsoever mercy was vouchsafed unto them, we are to
account it as ours. This cannot well be rejected, but yet I shall not pitch
upon this. Others therefore they say, That this bondage was typical, of our
spiritual bondage; and I am the Lord thy God, this belongs to us; and then
that peculiar argument may belong to them. And this is no new thing to have a
perpetual duty pressed upon a people, by some occasional, or peculiar motive.
Hence Jerem. 16. 14. 15. God says there by the Prophet, that they shall no
more say, The Lord that brought up out of the land of Egypt, but that brought
up out of the land of the North. Where you see a special new argument may be
brought for the general duty. And as for the particular temporal Promise, I
grant that did only belong to them; but I deny the consequence, that therefore
the precept does not: for the Scripture uses diverse arguments to the obedience
of the same Command. David's Psalms for the most part, and some of Paul's
Epistles, as Philemon, etc. were written upon particular occasions, yet the
matter of them does still belong to us.

The second Argument is, that, If the Law did oblige us as Moses, then it did
the Gentiles, and Heathens also, and so the Heathens were bound to those
Commandments, as well as the Jews: but that is not so; therefore Paul, Romans
2. speaks of the Gentiles without this Law, and as those that shall be judged
without it.

Now this may be answered: It does not follow that the Moses must presently
bind the Gentiles, but when promulged and made known to them; as at this time,
Infidels and Pagans are not bound to believe in Jesus Christ: but if the
doctrine of Christ were promulged to them, they were then bound. And I make no
question but other Nations were then bound in the time of Moses his ministry,
to inquire after the true God, and to worship him in the Jewish way, so far as
they could. Thus we read of the Eunuch coming up to Jerusalem to worship. And
certainly, if a whole Nation had then been converted, either they must have
worshipped God according to their own institution, or God would have revealed
unto them some different way of worshipping him from the Jews, or else they
were bound so far as they could (for the Ceremonial worship bound them no
otherways) to worship God in the Jewish way, then appointed by him. The Law
then given by Moses did bind Gentiles, as it was made known to them: Thus the
stranger in the gates was to keep the Sabbath, though that be meant of a
stranger that had received their religion; yea, Nehem. 13. 19. Nehemiah would
not suffer the Tyrians that were strangers, who did not submit to the Jewish
Law, to pollute the Sabbath.

Now to all this that has been said, you must take this limitation, Though the
Law given by Moses does not belong to us in all the particulars of the
administration of it, yet in the obliging power of it, it does.
That the Law given by Moses does not belong to us in all the particulars of
the administration of it. The giving of the Law in that terrible manner might
be a peculiar thing belonging to the Jews, as becoming the despensation of the
Old Testament; but yet the giving of the Law it self, in the obliging power of
it, does belong to us. We all acknowledge that the Old Testament had a peculiar
administration from the New; it was fuller of terror, and so did gender more
to bondage then the New: Hence some say, that the Law was given on Mount Sinai;
which it was so called from Seneh, a bramble bush (the bush God appeared in,)
the Mountain being full of bramble bushes, representing unto us the terrible
and pricking power of the Law.

Use. To take heed of rejecting the Law, as given by Moses, Take heed of
rejecting the Law, as given by Moses.
lest at the same time we reject the whole Old Testament: for it is said of the
Prophets, as well as of the Law, that they are till John; and then why should
they limit the Law to Moses his hands, more then others? Why should they not
say, The Law, as by David, as by Isaiah, and Jeremiah, does not bind? And if
you say, they in other places speak of Christ; so does Moses also, as our
Savior expressly says. So that I see not how an Antinomian can follow his
principle, but he must needs cast off the Old Testament, except it be in what
it is prophetical of Christ.

LECTURE XVIII.
MATTHEW. 5. 21, 22. Ye have heard, that it was said by them of old time, etc.
But I say unto you, etc.
THe Law, as you have heard, may be considered either absolutely, as a Rule; or
relatively, as a Covenant: We are handling of it in the first consideration,
and have proved, that, as it was delivered by Moses, it does belong to us
Christians. I shall now handle the Perfection of it, and labor to show, that
Christ has instituted no new duty which was not commanded before by the Law of
Moses. And this Question will be very profitable, partly against the
Antinomians, partly the Papists, and lastly the Socinians, as will appear in
the handling of it. That therefore I may the better come to my matter intended,
take notice in the general, that these words are part of Christ's Sermon upon
the Mount; so that as the Law was first given upon a Mount, so also it is
explained and interpreted by Christ upon a Mount. And in this Sermon is
observable; first, that Christ begins with the end of actions, Blessedness;
for so Moral Philosophy, which is practical, does also begin. Secondly, he
describes the Subjects who shall be made partakers of this, and they are
described by several properties. In the next place, as some think, ver. 13. he
instructs the Apostles about their peculiar Office, Ye are salt, (not honey, as
one observes) which is bitter to wounds: Ye are light, which is also offensive
to sore eyes. In the next place he instructs the people (though some make this
only spoken to the Disciples) and that first about the substance of the
Precepts, what duties are to be done against the false interpretations of the
Pharisees and Scribes: and in the next Chapter he shows the end, Why we do
the good things God requires of us, and that is for the glory of God, which
ought to consume all other ends, as the Sun puts out the light of the fire:
and the first substantial duty of the Commandments which he instanceth in, is
this in my text.

Now, before I raise the Doctrine, I must answer some Questions: as, First,
What meant by, It has been said by them of old.
What is meant by those words, [It has been said by them of old] For here is
some difference. It is understood by some in the dative case, (thus) It has
been said to them of old: and hereby our Savior would comprehend the Auditors,
or Hearers that have been heretofore. Others do understand it equivalent unto
(...), as if (...) were in the ablative case; and so it seems our
Interpreters take it, and thus others that are Orthodox: but, truly, the
opposition that seems to be in those words, [It has been said to them of
old: but I say unto you] makes me incline to the former way, for (...) is in
the dative case. It is also demanded, who are meant Who meant by those of old.
by those of old, to what age that does extend? Some refer it to those times
only, that were between Esdras and Christ: but I rather think it is to be
extended even unto Moses his time, for we see our Savior instanceth in
commands delivered then, and thus the word (...) generally (except Act. 21.
16.) refers to the times of Moses, or the Prophets.

Secondly, Whether those Precepts which are said to be heard of old, Those
precepts said to be of old, are the law and words of Moses.
be the Law and words of Moses, or the additions of corrupt glossers. And that
most of them are the express words of Moses, it is plain; as, Thou shall not
kill, or, Commit adultery: but the doubt lies upon two places; The first is
ver. 21. Shall be in danger of judgment. Here is, say some, a twofold
corruption: 1. By adding words, which are not in the Scripture; for they speak
peremptorily, He shall dye: whereas these words seem to be obscure and
doubtful, He shall be brought before the Judges to be tried, whether he be
guilty or no. The second corruption they conceive in the sense, and that is, as
if the Pharisees did understand the Commandment only to forbid actual murder,
but not murderous thoughts, affections, or intentions: And this last seems
clearly to be the truth, as is to be showed afterward; but for the former I
do something doubt, because, though that addition be not expressed in so many
words, yet there seems to be that which is equivalent; for, Numb. 35. 30.
there we read, the murderer who was to be put to death, was to be tried by
witnesses, which argues there were Judges to determine the cause. The second
particular, is that ver. 43. Thou shall hate thy enemy: where some learned men
observe a threefold depravation; 1. An employed one, as if a friend were only a
neighbor. 2. A plain omission; for Levit. 19. its added, as thy self, which is
here omitted. 3. A plain addition of that which was not only not commanded or
permitted, but expressly prohibited, as Exodus 23. 4. Prove. 25. 21. And this may
probably be thought an interpretation of the Scribes and Pharisees arguing on
the contrary, that if we were to love our neighbors, then we were to hate our
enemies; yet there are some who would make the sense of this in the Scripture;
that is, in a limited sense to the Canaanites, for they think, that because
they were commanded to make no Covenant with them, but to destroy them, and not
to pity them, therefore this is as much as to hate them: and thereupon, they
understand the two fore-quoted places, that speak of relieving of our enemies,
to be only meant of enemies that were Jews their Countrymen, and not of
strangers. And the Jews thought they might kill any idolaters; Therefore
Tacitus says of them, there was misericordia in promptu apud suos, but contra
omnes alios hostile odium: yet this command of God to destroy those Nations,
some understand not absolutely but limitedly, if so be they did refuse the
conditions of peace. I therefore incline to those, who think it a perverse
addition of the Scribes and Pharisees, yet am not able to say the other is
false.

3. Whether our Savior do oppose himself here to others as a Law giver, or as
an Interpreter, cleansing away the mud and filth from the fountain. And this
indeed is worthy the disquisition: for this Chapter has been taken by the
Manichees and Marcionites of old, and by other erroneous persons of late, to
countenance great errors; for some have said, that the Author of the Old
Testament, and the New Testament are contrary; some have said, that the New
Testament or the Gospel contains more exact and spiritual duties then the
Old: Hence they conclude, that many things were lawful then, which are not
now; and they instance in Magistracy, resisting of injuries, swearing, and
loving of our enemies; and many counsels of perfection added. And this is a
very necessary Question; for hereby will be laid open the excellency of the
Law, when it shall be seen, that Jesus Christ (setting aside the positive
precepts of Baptism and the Lords Supper, etc.) commanded no new duty, but all
was a duty before, that is now.

Now, that our Savior does only interpret, and not add new Laws, will
appear,

1. From that protestation and solemn affirmation he makes, Christ does only
interpret the old, adds no new Laws.
before he comes to instruct the hearers about their duties: Think not that I
came to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it. Now, although it be true, that
Christ may be said to fulfill the Law diverse ways, yet I think he speaks
here most principally, for his doctrinall fulfilling it; for he opposes
teaching the Law, to breaking of the Law: and if this be so, then our Saviors
intent was, that he came not to teach them any new duty, to which they were
not obliged before; only he would better explicate the Law to them, that so
they might be sensible of sin more then they were, and discover themselves to
be fouler, and more abominable then ever they judged themselves. Thus
Theophylact, As a painter does not destroy the old lineaments, only makes them
more glorious and beautiful, so did Christ about the Law.

In the next place, Christ did not add new duties, which were not commanded in
the Law, because the Law is perfect, and they were bound not to add to it, or
detract from it: Therefore we are not to continue a more excellent way of duty,
then that prescribed there.

Indeed the Gospel does infinitely exceed in regard of the remedy prescribed
for afflicted sinners, and the glorious manifestation of his grace and
goodness; but if we speak of holy, and spiritual duties, there cannot be a
more excellent way of holiness, this being an idea and representation of the
glorious nature of God.

3. That nothing can be added to the Law, appears by that Commandment of
loving God with all our heart and soul: Now there can be nothing greater then
this; and this command is not only indicative of an end which we are to aim
at, but also preceptive of all the means which tend thereunto.

And lastly, our Savior says not, Except your righteousness exceed that of
Moses his Law, or which was delivered by him, but that of the Scribes and
Pharisees; implying by that plainly, his intent was to detect and discover
those formal and hypocritical ways which they pleased themselves in, when
indeed they never understood the marrow, and excellency of the Law.

Question 4. What was the opinion received among the Pharisees The Pharisees
were of opinion, that the Law did only reach the outward man, and forbid
outward acts.
concerning the Commandments of God? That you may know the just ground our
Savior had thus to expound the Law, it will be manifest, if you consider the
general opinion received among the Jews about the sense of the Commandments;
and that was, The Law did only reach to the outward man, did only forbid
outward acts, and that there was no sin before God in our hearts, though we
delighted in, and purposed the outward acts, if they were not outwardly
committed. And this we may gather by Paul, that all the while he was bewitched
with Pharisaicall principles, he did not understand inward lust to be sin:
and as famous, as it is false, is that exposition brought by the Learned of
Kimchy upon that Psalm 66. 18. If I regard iniquity in my heart, he will not
hear: he makes this strange meaning of it, If I regard iniquity only in my
heart, so that it break not forth into outward act, the Lord will not hear,
that is, hear, so as to impute it, or account it a sin. And thus it is
observed of Josephus, that he derideth Polybius the noble historian, because he
attributed the death of Antiochus to sacrilege only in his purpose and will,
which he thought could not be; that a man, having a purpose only to sin,
should be punished by God for it. But the Heathens did herein exceed the
Pharisees, fecit quisque quantum voluit: its Seneca's saying. And, indeed, its
no wonder if the Pharisees did thus corrupt Scripture, for its a doctrine we
all naturally incline unto, not to take notice, or ever be humbled for
heart-sinnes; if so be they break not out into acts. Oh, what an hell may thy
heart be, when thy outward man is not defiled? Good is that passage 2 Chronicles.
22. 26. Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his heart. Certainly, as
God, who is a spirit, does most love spirit-graces; so he does most abhor
spirit-sinnes. The Schools do well observe, that outward sins are majoris
infamiae, but inward heart-sinnes are majoris reatus, as we see in the devils.
And from this corruption in our nature arises that poisonous principle in
Popery, which is also in all formal Protestants, That the commands of God do
only forbid the voluntary omssion of outward acts, whereas our Saviors
explication will find every man to be a murderer, an adulterer, etc. Now our
Saviors explications of the Law go upon those grounds which are observed by
all sound Divines, viz. 1. That the Law is spiritual, and forbids not only
the fruit and branches of sin, but even the root it self and fountain: And
2. that wheresoever any sin is forbidden, and in what latitude soever; the
contrary good things are commanded, and in that proportionable latitude. This
therefore considered, may make every man tremble and be afraid of his own
heart, and with him to cry out, Gehenna sum Domine, I am a very hell it self.
Let us not therefore be afraid of preaching the Law as we see Christ here does,
for this is the great engine to beat down the formality, and Pharisaisme that
is in people.

And thus I come to raise the Doctrine, which is, that The Law Doctr.
of God is such a perfect rule of life, that Christ added no new precept or
duty unto it: But even as the Prophets before did only explicate the Law, when
they pressed moral duties, so also Christ and the Apostles, when they urge men
unto holy duties, they are the same commanded heretofore: I do not speak of
Sacraments, or the outward positive worship, which is otherwise then was in the
Old Testament (they had Circumcision, and we have Baptism) No specificall
difference of the duties in the old Testament, from those of the New, but only
graduall in their manifestation. The Law did not only command the outward duty,
but required the worship of the heart.
but of the moral duties required of us.

It is true, in the Old Testament many things were expressed more grossly and
carnally, which the people for the most part understood carnally; yet the
duties then commanded were as spiritual as now: There is only a graduall
difference in the manifestation of the duties, no specificall difference of the
duties themselves. And that this may appear the more to the dignity and
excellency of the Law, I will instance in particulars:

First, The Law of God required the heart-worship and service. That this may be
understood, take this for a general rule, which is not denied by any; That
when there are any moral duties pressed in the Old Testament, the Prophets do
it, as explainers of the Law; they do but unfold and draw out that Arras which
was folded together before. This being premised, then consider those places in
the Old Testament that call for the heart: Thus Pro. 3. 1. Let thine heart keep
my commandments; So Pro. 23. 26. My son, give me thine heart: So that all
the duties then performed, which were without the heart and inward man, were
not regarded: God required then heart-prayer, and heart-humiliation. Its true,
the people for the most part understood all carnally and grossly, thinking the
outward duty commanded only: and that is no marvel; for do not people, even
in these times of the Gospel, look to the external duty, not examining whether
they pray or humble themselves according as the Word speaks of such duties?
Thus David was very sensible of his heart-neglect, when he prayed, Unite my
heart to fear thy Name: and are not the people of God still under the same
temptations? They would pray, they would humble themselves, but oh how they
want an heart! That is so divided and distracted, that if after any duty we
should put that question to it, as God did to Satan, From whence come thou?
it would return Satan's answer, From compassing the earth.

2. It preferred duties of Mortification, and Sanctification, before 2. The Law
preferred inward graces before outward duties.
religious outward duties. This you shall see frequently pressed and inculcated
by the Prophets. Isaiah 1. how does God abhor there all their solemn duties,
making them abominable even like carrion, and all because they did not wash
them, and make them clean? So David says, A broken and contrite heart, it was
more then any burnt offering now under the times of the Gospel. This is an high
duty, and few reach unto it. Does not the Apostle reprove the Corinthians for
desiring gifts, rather then graces; and abilities of parts, rather then
holiness? So that this is an excellent duty prescribed by Gods Law, that to be
able to mortify our affections, to have sanctified natures, is more then to
have Seraphicall knowledge, and Cherubinicall affections in any duty. Who then
can be against the preaching of the Law, when its such an excellent and pure
rule, holding forth such precious holiness?

3. It required all our duties to be done, All the duties required by the Law,
were to be done,


1. In faith: for who can think, that when God required in the first Table,
having him for their God, that hereby was not commanded faith and trusting in
him, as a God in Covenant, who 1. In Faith.
would pardon sin? How could the Jews love God, or pray unto him acceptably,
if they had not faith in him? Therefore the Law is to be considered most
strictly, as it contains nothing but precepts of things to be done; in which
sense, its sometimes, though seldom, taken. And 2. more largely, as it had the
Preface, and Promises added unto it: and so it did necessarily require
justifying faith; for it cannot be conceived, that when God commanded the
people of Israel, by Moses, to worship him, and to acknowledge him as their
God, but that his will was, they should believe on him as a Father: But more of
this when we speak of the Law as a Covenant.

2. In love: and this is so much commanded by the Law, that 2. In Love.
Christ makes the sum of the Law to be in these two things; love of God, and
of our neighbor. Therefore I wonder at the Antinomian, who is so apt to oppose
the doing of things in love, and doing of them by the Law together: for, does
not the Law of God command every duty to be in love, to pray in love to God, to
bear afflictions in love to God? Yea, by the law we are to love God, because
he has given Christ for us; for the Law commands us to love God for
whatsoever benefits he bestows upon us: now, if we are to love him for
temporal benefits, much more for spiritual.

It is true, the dispensation of the Law was in a terrible way, and did gender
to bondage; but the doctrine of the Law, that was for love, and the more any
Jew did any thing in love to God, the more conformable he was to Gods Law.

4. It required such an heavenly heart, that we are to love God more Love to
God in as great a measure commanded by the Law as by the Gospel.
then any thing else. It did not only require love to God, but also it
commanded it in such a preheminency, as that none under the times of the Gospel
can do an higher duty, or expression of love, than then was commanded; suppose
a man be a Martyr, will lose his life for Gods cause, this is an obedience to
the first Commandment. When our Savior says, He that loves father or mother
more then me, is not worthy of me; he commands no higher thing of any
Christian, then every Jew was bound to do. Hence Levi was so commended,
because, in executing of Justice, he knew not father or mother: and it must
needs be so, for what can be more then all? and yet God requires all the mind,
all the heart, all the strength; not that we were bound to love God in quantum
est diligibilis, for so God only can love himself; but nihil supra, aeque, or
contra.

5. It required spiritual motives for all our solemn addresses unto In all
our addresses to God, it required spiritual motives.
him. There are some men who look upon all the Jews under the Old Testament as
so many bruit beasts, that did only mind earthly things: and that as children
are allured by Apples and Nuts, rather then by a great Inheritance; so they
were only invited to duties by carnal and temporal motives, not by any
spiritual considerations. Now how false this is, appears by the Prophets
general complaints, that when they fasted, it was not to him, even to him; and
so they howled, because of their miseries, but not because God was offended:
And thus David, though he had received the pardon of his sin, yet how kindly,
and spiritually does he mourn, Against thee, thee only have I sinned? Thus
Micah 7. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned
against him. What can be more spiritual?

6. It required joy and contentedness in him more then in any creature; It
required joy in God above all things else.
yea, to the contempt of all creatures: And does the Gospel rise higher in any
command? We judge those very spiritual expressions, Rejoice in the Lord
always; and, Set your affections on things above; and, Our Conversation is in
Heaven: but does not David go as high, when he says, Whom have I in Heaven
but thee, and none in earth in comparison of thee? Did not David prefer the
Word of God above gold and honey? Did not his heart faint, and yern within him?
What a sweet strain is that of him, when banished, he does not wish for his
kingdom, nor outward estate, but to see God in the beauties of holiness?
Therefore, howsoever the dispensation was not so clear and manifest, yet those
that were diligent and blessed by God, did arise to such excellent tempers. It
required perfection of the subject, object, degrees, etc.


7. Yea, it required all perfection. But what need I run further in
perfection, seeing it commanded all perfection? Perfection of the subject, the
man ought to be in mind and soul and affections all over holy; Perfection in
the object, there was no duty, or performance but the Law requires it;
Perfection in degrees, it did require love without any defect, without any
remissness at all: so that there cannot be a more excellent doctrinall way of
holiness then the preaching of the Law.

8. God did work grace in us by this, as well as by the Gospel. I The Law
isntrumental to work grace in us, as well as the Gospel.
add this particular, lest any should say, All this terrifieth the more,
because it only commands, and does not help: I answer, That God does use the
Law instrumentally, for to quicken up grace, and increase it in us, as David,
Psalm. 119. does at large show. It is true, the Law of it self cannot work
grace; no more can the Gospel of it self work grace: only here is the
difference, we cannot be justified by any works of the Law that we are enabled
to do, only we are justified by Faith; not as it is a work, for so its
commanded in the Law, but as an instrument applying Christ. Therefore Gods
Spirit does graciously accompany us in the pressing of these duties; and hereby
we become like a living Law: neither does this exclude Christ, but advance him
the more.

Use. Of Instruction. How necessary a duty it is for a Minister It is the duty
of Ministers to be diligent in preaching and expounding the Law.
of Jesus Christ to be diligent in preaching and explicating of the Law of God.
We see Christ here, the first, and the longest Sermon that ever he preached,
was to vindicate the Law, and to hold forth the excellency of it: and if we be
legal Preachers in so doing, then Christ also is so to be accounted: And
indeed some have not been afraid to speak so of Christ. But to speak the
truth, the preaching of the Law is so necessary, that you can never be
spiritual, heavenly, heart-Christians, unless these things be daily set
before your eyes. Can the boy ever learn to write well, unless an exact Copy
be laid before him? Therefore you can never advance the Law too much, or hear
of it too much, if so be it still be propounded as a Rule, as a Doctrine.
Indeed when it is made a ground for our Justification, then we turn the
precious Manna into corrupt worms. Therefore be so far from condemning, or
disputing against the Law, as that you would earnestly desire to have more and
more of this excellent Rule laid down before your eyes. How proud will be my
best humility? How carnal will my best heavenly-mindednesse be, if so be that
I go to this Rule? Where will formality, and customary duties appear, if so
be that we attend to this guide? Oh know, there is a great deal of unknown
sinfulness in thy heart, because the Law is unknown to thee.

LECTURE XIX.
MATTHEW. 5. 21, 22. Ye have heard, it was said of old, etc.
BEcause my purpose is to set forth the dignity of the Moral Law, I shall
therefore briefly demonstrate in this present Sermon, the falsehood of that
opinion, maintained by Papists, Anabaptists, and Socinians, That Christ came to
give us more exact precepts than Moses delivered to the Jews, and therefore
that Christ was not here an Interpreter, but a Reformer. It cannot be denied,
but this Sermon of our Saviors has bred many thoughts of heart: for, because
of these precepts here, not rightly understood, the Heathens took occasion to
calumniate the Christian Religion, as that which could not stand with a
Commonwealth: And the Ancient Fathers were much troubled in answer to their
objections; for when Julian and others did urge, that, seeing by Christ's
commands we might not resist evil, but rather be prepared to receive more
injuries, therefore no War, no Magistracy, no places of Judicature were
lawful: the Fathers in their answer did seem to yield this, only they said,
Here was a lawful way, and a better way: To war, or to take places of
Justice were lawful ways; but yet to refuse these, and not to meddle with them
at all, was a more sublime, Christian way. And from this mistake came that
erroneous opinion of Precepts and Councels. Besides, it is thought by the
Learned, that some of the Ancient Fathers, being Philosophers before, did
retain much of that stoicall disposition in them, and so made Christ's Precepts
comply with their affections: But this I shall endeavor to prove, that there
is no lawful Moral way heretofore commanded by Moses to the Jews, which does
not at this time also belong to Christians. Only let me premise thus much,
That, howsoever the things questioned by the Adversaries, are lawful to
Christians, yet there are few that rise up to the practice of them as Christ
commanded. Certainly these places; Of not resisting evil, Of giving our cloak
to him that would take away our coat, etc. though they do not exclude the
office of a Magistrate, or our desire of him to aid us in our defense; yet
they do forbid the frequent and common practice of most Christians; so that we
may say, there are few states, and Kingdoms which do rise up to the practice
of that patience, and christian meekness, which we see here commanded.
Insomuch that kingdoms are more the kingdoms of the world then of Christ, and
the laws and practices of Commonwealths are such as suit more with humane
states, then with the laws of Christ. But I come to the particulars.

And first, whereas it is granted to be lawful by the Law of Swearing neither
absolutely unlawful, not universally forbidden by our Savior, with reasons
why.
Moses to swear, now (say some) under the Gospel it is made absolutely
unlawful, under any pretense whatsoever, and (say they) here our Savior
forbids it absolutely, Swear not at all; and James, following this of our
Savior, does the like. Hence their opinion is, that it is not only unlawful
to swear falsely and vainly, but at all in any respect. And this (say they) is
a perfection required of Christians above those of the Law. Nor is it any
wonder that men of late have doubted of this, seeing the Learned show, that
some of the Fathers of old have thought it absolutely unlawful for a Christian
to swear. In Eusebius one Basilides, a Christian, being commanded to swear,
replied, It was not lawful for him, because he was a Christian: And Hierome
says, that to swear was permitted to the Jews, or infants, as to offer
sacrifices unto God; yet I cannot see, but that they did swear also, although
sometimes they speak as if they thought there were an absolute prohibition of
it. Yet Athanasius made a solemn oath, to purge himself, when accused to the
Emperor: and Tertullian says, though the Christians refused to swear per
genium Principis, because that they conceived it a devil, yet they did swear
per salutem principis.

Some again have thought, that it is lawful to swear, but then only in
religious things, or in things that do concern the safety of the Public, but
that it is not lawful to swear in any thing of our own, or about any money
matter: and Basil does object to the Christians of his time, the Example of one
Clinius a Pythagorean, who being fined a great sum of money, and might have
escaped it by an oath, yet chose rather to undergo that damage then to swear.

Some have thought it better, if in humane affairs, where promissory oaths use
to be, there were only a naked promise, yet with as great a punishment upon the
breaking of it, as if it were perjury, because men are for the most part more
awed with fear of punishment then breaking an oath. But, whatsoever the
thoughts of men may be about limiting of swearing, yet it is lawful in some
cases to swear: neither is our Savior so to be understood as universally
forbidding:

First, because then he would have destroyed the Law, which yet he denies that
he does; for Deuteronomy. 6. to swear by God, is a command not indeed of a thing
absolutely in it self, but occasionally, as opportunity shall be: Therefore the
word that signifies To swear in the Heb. is in the passive sense; implying
that we are not voluntarily to choose to do so, but when necessity requires
it.

Secondly, again, Christ does not absolutely prohibit it, because the use and
end of an oath is perpetual, which is to end controversies, Heb. 6. Therefore
Aquinas says well, that, what first principles are in speculatives, to
determine all conclusions, the same an oath is in practicalls, to end
controversies.

Thirdly, and lastly, we have the example of Paul swearing sometimes in his
Epistle; so that our Savior does not altogether forbid it, but he reproves
the Pharisees corrupt glosses, Corrupt glosses of the Pharisees, touching
Swearing, reproved.
which were, 1. To think that if a man did not name God in his oath, though it
were by other creatures, it was not perjury, if he did falsify that oath. And
how many come near this, who think if they swear by the creatures, so that God
is not named, it is not such an heinous thing. The second corrupt interpretation
was, They thought that Gods Name was not polluted, if so be they intended to
make good their promise, though they did use the Name of God in their oaths,
about unnecessary, and vain matters. Now this our Savior forbids by his
affirmative Direction, Let your yea, be yea, and nay, nay, whatsoever is more
then this is of sin. He speaks there of our ordinary and familiar discourse
as private persons; not concerning a public consideration: even as afterward,
when he mentions the duty of not resisting evil, he forbids private revenge,
and not public justice. Although some understand this of our Saviors, and
that of James, not of assertory oaths (for it is spoken by our Savior, in
addition unto that, Thou shall pay unto the Lord thy vows) but of promissory
oaths; and so the meaning is, Although thou intend to perform or do such a
thing, yet do not swear, because things are so uncertain, and many things may
fall out: and this is very probable. Only if you understand it the former way,
you must not take it so, as if an oath were such a lawful thing, as that it is
propter se appetendum; but only as physic is, which is sometimes necessary for
another thing. Thus therefore having cleared, that our Savior intends no
higher thing then that was lawful before, give me leave to reprove the common
practice among men, who say they are Christians, about swearing. If you observe
men in their discourse, in their trading, do they carry themselves so, as if
Christ had said, Swear not at all; and not rather, as if he said, Swear
always, and altogether? Oh therefore that this common customary way of
swearing, which does so directly oppose Christ, were wholly laid aside! The
very Heathens will condemn us herein, and among the Heathens, ex animi sui
sententia, was in stead of an oath. It seems this custom of swearing in
discourse has been of old; for Chrysostom and Austin are very vehement
against it in their Sermons. Now let us proceed.

There are some, who from those words of our Savior spoken ver. 38, 39, 40,
41. do gather, that now under the Gospel it is not lawful, 1. To put any man
to death for any fault whatsoever. 2. That it is not lawful to war. 3. Not to
go to law in any case. 4. Not to seek to a Magistrate for the defense of our
selves; Therefore in these opinions they think they hold forth much of
Christian meekness and patience: but before we come to the particulars, let us
consider in what sense it is said, An eye for an eye, A tooth for a tooth. This
kind of In what sense the words, An eye for an eye, A tooth for a tooth, are
to be taken.
Law was an ancient one among other Nations: Aristotle calls it (...). And we
read of a double retaliation, one Pythagoricall, which was wicked and ungodly,
holding that if a man did thieve from one, the same might thieve from him
again: The other Mosaicall, which was good, and had justice in it. Only the
Question is, Whether this be literally to be understood, that it was lawful
for a man, who had his eye or teeth struck out by another, to desire of the
Judge, that he, who did this violence, should also have his eye or tooth beaten
out.

You may read the Law Exodus 21. 23. and how it ought to be moderated by
Judges, (private men not being left to revenge themselves) Deuteronomy. 19. 19. This
Law was not given (as one wickedly says) to indulge the childish condition of
the Jews, as being apt to revenge, and therefore makes it an imperfect Law,
(saying that many laws of men were more perfect laws) but it was given
against private revenge, and the end was that justice might be done. Now some
have said, this Law was literally observed, and that a man who was wounded by
another, he himself was wounded again. But I do rather think that the
command in the letter of it was not observed, but that a recompense was made
according to the judgment of the Judge for the loss: and* it would have been
a very hard thing, if one man had wounded another, to inflict just such a
wound, neither deeper nor broader, nor doing no more hurt upon the man who
offered violence.

We therefore come to the Questions: And first concerning Capital
punishments, even death it self, may be inflicted upon offenders:
capital punishments to be inflicted upon some offenders. There are those that
say, It does not stand with the goodness and meaknesse of a Gospel Spirit to
put any man to death for any crime whatsoever. But the falsenesse hereof does
appear, 1. In 1. Because commanded by God.
that its a command of God from the beginning, with a perpetual reason added
to it, that he who was guilty of murder, should be put to death; so that at
least in this case there ought to be a capital punishment. Now the command
that God gave is Genesis 9. 6. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his
blood be shed, and there is the reason given of it, because the image of God,
viz. in his soul, is in him. To elude this, they say, that this is not a
command, but a mere prediction: God does here foretell (say they) what will
befall the murderer, not what a Magistrate is bound to do. But that is a mere
evasion; for why should God foretell this, but because it was a duty to be
done? Therefore its not said indefinitely, He that sheddeth man's blood, his
blood shall be shed, but he adds, by man it shall be shed. Therefore,
howsoever a great Grotius.
Scholar says, That those are deceived, who think capital punishments are
appointed by the Law of Nature, or any perpetual Law of God; yet this place
demonstrateth the contrary: neither is it any matter that Plato would have
reduced into his commonwealth the abrogation of capital punishments; or that
the Romans for a while did use no heavier punishment, then deportation, or
banishment; we must live by commands, and not by examples, especially humane.
It Is instanced in Cain, who, though he killed his brother Abel, yet God did not
destroy him. It must be granted, that Gods indulgence to Cain was very great;
for he does not only spare his life, but sets a mark upon him to preserve him
(what this was, they are most to be commended, who dare not determine it,
because the Scripture is silent in it.) and not only so, but he adds a more
severe punishment to that man that shall kill Cain, then was due to the killing
of any man. This has made some wonder, but the answer is very easy, that
where God, for some special reasons, does prohibit such a fact, if that be
notwithstanding committed, it is to be accounted more heinous. And God in
suffering Cain to live, was not so much indulgent as severe, in suffering him
to be an instance of his displeasure against him to all the world; As Psalm. 59.
11. Slay them not (says the Psalmist) lest my people forget: so that it is one
thing, what God may do for special reasons; and another, what the common Law
of Nature, and the perpetual Law of God requires.

A seccond Argument for capital punishments under the Gospel, 2. Because it is
the Magistrates office.
is from the Magistrates office, who, Romans 13. is said, not to bear the sword
in vain: Now the sword, does imply a power of 3. Because practiced under the
Gospel, upon Ananias and Sapphira, and so not repugnant to it.
life and death, and therefore Paul said, If I have done any thing worthy of
death, implying there were some things that did deserve it.

Lastly, that to put to death men for faults, is not repugnant to the spirit of
the Gospel, appears by the judgment upon Ananias and Sapphira. You cannot
read of a more severe expression under the Law, then that was of the Gospel;
so that as we are indeed to labor for the meeknes and patience of a Christian,
yet we are not to forget zeal for Gods glory, and the public good, it being
cruelty to the good to spare the bad: and if we would pity such a man
offending, we must much more pity the commonwealth.

That which is objected to this is, 1. The rebuke that our Savior they knew
not what spirit they were of. Now, say they, this spirit is the spirit of the
New Testament, which is opposed to the Spirit of Elias in the Old. The answer
is obvious, that Christ does Elias his spirit. What Elias did, he was moved
unto by the Spirit of God, not for any private revenge, but that the glory of
God might be illustrated. Now this fire of theirs was rash and vindicative: It
was not elementary fire, but culinary; nourished by low and unworthy
considerations.

In the next place they urge the fact of our Savior, John 8. to

The answer is, that Christ in his first coming was not as a Judge, and
therefore did not take upon him to meddle in temporal

And whereas again it is objected, that this way of putting to

The answer is, that all Magistrates, they are to take care for the New
Testament for the putting of some malefactors to death.

The third thing which they say was allowed in the Law, but War allowed by
Christ under the Gospel.
forbid by Christ in the Gospel, is War: And certainly we may read in
Antiquity, that the Christians did refuse war, but not universally; for there
were Christian soldiers, only there were some peculiar causes, why in those
times, the Christians might decline it; As, first, because in their military
oath, Two causes for which the Primitive Christians might decline War.
there was a calling upon an heathen god, and their banners lifted up were
polluted with idolatry. And secondly, because they should be forced sometimes
to be instruments in accomplishing the Emperors Edicts against the Christians,
which they would not do: Now if we bring places out of the Old Testament for
the lawfulness of wars, they care not; for, say they, the laws of Nature,
and of Moses are to be reformed by the Laws of Christ, God indeed (say they)
gave the Jews in the Old Testament leave to fight, because they had a
temporal inheritance and possession given them, which they could not keep but
by force of arms: now under the New Testament, God has not done so to his
people. Thus they say, but this is a shift, for we know Abraham, by a mere law
of nature, went to war, and delivered his nephew Lot, being oppressed by
enemies.

But that War is allowed by Christ, appears plainly by comparing 1 Timothy 2.
3. and Romans 13. where the Apostle would have us pray for Magistrates, and
supposes, that while they are Magistrates, they may be Christians, and come to
the faith; so that thereby we may live a quiet and godly life under them; now
how can this be, unless they draw their sword upon offenders? And if they
cannot in an ordinary legal way be brought to judgment, then by force of
Arms.

The second known argument is from Luke 3. where John Baptist counsels the
soldiers not to lay down their office, but to look to such duties as was
necessary to them in that place; and, which is to be observed, these were
mercenary soldiers, as it is thought, they were at that time. As for the
Objections, they are taken from such considerations as will be examined in the
next particular; only the Orthodoxe that do hold war lawful, they do
acknowledge many rules necessary for the godly and holy managing of it: and
it is an hard thing to have an holy camp; and this made Austin say, in regard of
the concomitant evils of it, that Omne bellum etiam justum esse detestandum;
yet not but he thought it necessary to have it used, when it concerned the
glory of God, and the good of the Public.

LECTURE XX.
MATTHEW. 5. 21, 22. You have heard it has been said by them of old, etc.
THere remain two Questions more to be decided in this business, concerning
Christ's interpretation of the Law of Moses: The one is about the lawfulness of
repelling force by force: The other about applying our selves to the
Magistrate, to defend us against the injury, and violence of others. Now, that
I may not be tedious in the discussing of these, I will lay down some few
grounds that serve to the clearing of the truth herein, and so proceed to other
matter, although (as you have heard) this tends much to the dignity and
excellency of the Law.

First therefore take notice, that there is in all a cursed pronenesse to do
things by way of revenge: Insomuch that there is not All men naturally prone to
revenge injuries.
one in a thousand that does rise up in practice to this excellent way, and
rule of patience. The Heathens, they thought to revenge our selves was lawful:
Thus Tully, It Is the first office of Justice to hurt no body, unless first
provoked by injury: O quam simplicem, veramque sententiam (says Lanctantius)
duorum verborum adjectione corrupit! But Seneca, he was against this, Immane
verbum est ultio; and, Qui ulsciscitur, excusatius peccat. Now whatsoever the
thoughts of men may be about the lawfulness, it is certain, the practices of
men are much contaminated this way. In State and Civil matters, in Church
matters, what a revengefull spirit breaths in men? This certainly comes much
short of our Saviors Directions. There is no injury or violence offered unto
thee, but, in stead of revengefull affections, there may be holy mortifying
thoughts in thee: As when Sheba cursed David, see how that brought him to the
sense of sin, to look up unto God more then to the instrument. All
defamations and reproaches may serve to make thy graces more splendent. As
Plutarch observes, the Gardener planteth his unsavory herbs, Garlike and
Onyons near his sweetest Roses, that so the smell thereof may be the more
prized. That was an excellent temper of Calvin, when reviled by Luther, he
said, Etiamsi Lutherus millies me diabolum vocet, ego tamen illum insignem
Domini servum agnosco. Why is it, that there are such suspicions,
heart-burnings, defamations of one another, hard speeches and censures, but
because this lesson of Christ is not learned by us?

2. Consider this, that the primitive Christians have gone very The primitive
Christians held it unlawful for a man in his own defense to kill the invader.
far in this Question, holding it unlawful to defend a man's self from
another who would kill us, by killing of the Invader. Austin says; he cannot
tell how to defend those that do kill the invader; and to this purpose others.
It is maintained by some, that though indeed a man is not bound to be killed
rather then to kill; yet if he do choose the former rather then the latter, he
does a work full of charity, and worthy of admiration. Another says, these
precepts of Christ were given to the Disciples, who were by their blood to
increase the Church, and by their patience and humility to convert tyrants: but
now modernis non congruit, nec locum habet hodie, esset enim ad detrimentum
Ecclesiae; A foolish assertion. As these go too high, so the Jesuits in their
cases, they go too low, and give too much room to the revenge of man; for so
it is determined by them, That a noble man, though he may save his life by
flying, when invaded suddenly, yet is not bound to fly, but may lawfully kill
the invader, if he cannot otherwise preserve his life and honor together. But
this is corrupt counsel, and opens a way to many murders upon a pretense of
honor.

3. Take notice of this, That the Law of God in the Old Testament Revenge as
strictly forbidden in the Old Test. as in the New.
was as strict against revenge as any precept in the New Testament, and
therefore nothing is now required of us, which was not then. Consider that
place, Levit. 19. 16. Thou shall not avenge, or bear any grudge against the
children of thy people, but thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: What can
be clearer then this, to subdue those waves and tempests that do rise in our
hearts? So Prove. 24. 29. Say not, I will do to him, as he has done to me: I
will render to the man, according to his work: here also revengefull
expressions and resolutions are forbidden; yea, the reason why we are forbidden
to avenge our selves given by Paul, Romans 12. 19. because vengeance belongs unto
God, is that which was drawn from the Old Testament. In stead therefore of
disputing, let us seriously set upon the practice of the duty, and the rather
because it is sweeter then honey it self to our corrupt hearts; and at this
time, this sin does much rage every where.

Lastly, Our Savior does not here forbid a lawful public revenge, Private
revenge unlawful, and forbidden by our Savior.
but a private one. This distinction of public and private revenge, being
unknown to the Fathers in the Primitive times, made them run into very hard
and incommodious expressions; some giving occasion hereby of that distinction
of counsels and precepts: others, as Austin, making the revenge allowed in the
Old Testament to be peculiar to the dispensation of those times: Hence, when
one Volusianus objected to him, that the Doctrine of Christ did not agree to
the manners of a Commonwealth; he answers by comparing the Precept of Christ
with that of Caesar's, That he used to forget nothing, but injuries. Now this
does not indeed speak according to the scope of our Savior here, who is
giving rules to private Christians, not to public Magistrates. Now that there
is such a distinction as this, appears plain, thus; Paul, Romans 12. 18.
exhorts Christians not to avenge themselves, because vengeance belongs to
God; yet, Chap. 13. speaking of the Magistrate, ver. 4. he says, He is the
avenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil: so then there is revenge and
a revenger, which is not God; nor yet our selves, but the Magistrate; yet the
revenge that the Magistrate inflicteth may well be called the vengeance of God,
because it is Gods appointment he should do it. Thus Numb. 31. 3. Arm your
selves, and avenge the Lord on the Midianites: so 2 Chronicles. 19. You execute the
judgments of the Lord, and not of men; yet for all this, you must know that
Magistrates may have revengefull affections in them, even when they execute
justice; and so people, when they implore the Magistrates aid, it may not be
out of zeal to justice, and love to the public good, but because of private
affections, and carnal dispositions. And oh the blessedness that would accrue
to the Commonwealth, if all were carried in their several places upon this
public ground!

Having therefore dispatched briefly these controversies, I come to another,
wherein the Antinomian does directly derogate from the profitable effect and
benefit of the Law. This therefore is an assertion which an Antinomian Author
maintains, that the Law is not an instrument of true sanctification, and that
The preaching of the Law not only preparatively, but (being blessed by God)
instrumentally works the conversion of men.
the promise or the Gospel is the seed and doctrine of our ^ew birth: and for
this he brings many arguments, and the judgments of diverse learned men,
Assertion of grace, page, 163. And it may not be denied, but that many speeches
might fall from some men, which might seem to comply with that opinion. I shall
now labor to maintain the positive part, viz. that the Law of God preached,
may be blessed by him instrumentally to work the conversion of men: and it is
necessary to make this good; for, were the contrary true, it would be a
Ministers duty in great part, to lay aside the preaching of the Moral Law, as
not isntrumental, or subservient to that maine end of the Ministry, which is
the conversion of souls. Nor can I yield to that, that the preaching of the
Law works only preparatorily, or some terrors about sin, and can go no
further; but (I suppose) that Jesus Christ has obtained of God by his death,
that such efficacy and virtue should go forth in the Ministry, that whether
it be by Law, or Gospel he preaches, the souls of men may be healed, and
converted thereupon: Only two things must be premised;

First, that the Law could never work to regeneration, were it The Law with*out
Christ cannot work to regeneration.
not for the Gospel-promise. Had not God graciously promised to give a new
heart through Christ, there had been no way to make any thing effectual that
we preach out of the Law; so that (for instance) while a Minister, preaching of
any Commandment, does thereby mould, and new frame the heart; all this benefit
comes by Christ, who therefore died, and ascended into Heaven, that so the
things we preach may be advantageous to our souls, so that there never was in
the Church of God mere pure Law, or mere pure Gospel. But they have been
subservient to each other in the great work of Conversion. I know it is of great
consequence to give an exact difference between the Law and the Gospel. It is
well said of Luther, Qui scit inter Legem and Evangelium discernere, gratias
aga^ Deo, and sciat se esse Theologum: but I shall not meddle with that now.
This is that which I assert, That, as to the point of a man's conversion, God
may make the opening of the Moral Law instrumentully to concur thereunto,
only this comes by Christ.

The second thing which I premise is this, that howsoever the The Law may be
blessed to conversion, yet the matter of it can neither be ground of
justification, or consolation to us.
Law preached may be blessed to conversion, yet the matter of it cannot be the
ground of our justification, adoption, or consolation: so that when a man does
repent, and turn unto God from his sins, he cannot have hope or consolation in
any thing he does, but it must be in the promise of the Gospel; so that the
difference of the Law and Gospel lies not in this, (as some do assign) that
one is the instrument of grace, and the other not; (for God uses both, as I
shall show) but in this, that the holiness wrought in us by preaching of the
Word of God, whether it be Law or Gospel, does not justify us; but this favor
is in an evangelicall manner, by forgiving whatsoever is irregular in us, and
communicating Christ his righteousness to us. Therefore let us not confound
the Law, or Gospel, nor yet make them so contrary in their natures and effects,
that where one is, the other cannot be.

To these two, there is also a third thing to be premised, and that is, how the
Word of God in general is a medium, or isntrumental The Scripture in general
is a medium, working by Christ to our conversion.
to our conversion. For, the clearing of this well, must needs discover, that
the Law of God, being part of Gods word, does convert as well as the Gospel:
and this must needs be the opinion of all sound Divines, whatsoever may fall
from them at other times, as appears by their common answer to the Papists
Question. If the Law, and the commands thereof be impossible, to what purpose
then does he command them? why does he bid us turn to him when we cannot? Then
we answer, that these commandments are not only informing of a duty, but they
are practical and operative means appointed by God, to work, at least in some
degree, that which is commanded. Hence those commands are compared, by the
Learned, to that command of our Savior to Lazarus, that he should rise up and
walk.

Therefore, for the clearing of this general, take notice, 1. That the word of
God, as it is read, or preached, works no further The Word real or preached
concurres objectively only to man's conversion.
then objectively to the conversion of a man, if considered in it self. Take
it (I say) in it self, not animated by the Spirit of God, and the utmost
effect it can reach unto, is to work only as an object upon the
Understanding. And in this sense it is that the Scripture is compared to a
light. Now we know the Sun gives light by way of an object, it does not give
a seeing eye to a blind man. It is a noble Question in Divinity, Seeing
regeneration is attributed both to the Word, and to Baptism, how one works
it differently from the other: Or, If both work it, why is not one superfluous?
Now concerning the Word preached, we may more easily answer, then about the
Sacraments, viz. that it works by way of an object upon the soul of a man: and
were it not set home by the Spirit of God, this is the furthest work it could
obtain. And this does plainly appear, in that the word of God does only
convert those who are able to hear and understand. And the word of God being
thus of it self only a directive and informative rule: hence its compared to
the Pilots Compass, to Theseus his thread, leading us in the Circean gardens of
this world: and therefore take away the Spirit of God, and we may say, the
whole Scripture is a letter killing, yea that which we call the Gospel. Preach
the promises of the Gospel a thousand times over, they conveigh no grace, if
the Spirit of God be not there effectually. Indeed, if the communicating of
grace were inseparably annexed to the preaching of the Gospel, then that were
of some consequence which is objected by the Antinomian.

Therefore in the next place consider this, Whatsoever good effects, All the
benefits conveyed to the soul by the preaching of the Word, are efficiently
from Gods Spirit.
or benefit is conveyed to the soul by the preaching of the Law, or the
Gospel, it is efficiently from Gods Spirit: so that we must not take the Law
without the Spirit of God; and then compare it with the Gospel, having the
Spirit of God, for that is unequal. And by the same reason, I may prefer the
Law sometimes before the Gospel; for I may suppose a Minister, opening the
duties of the Law, as Christ does here in this Chapter, and the Spirit of God
accompanying this, to change the heart of a man: and on the other side, one
preaching the Gospel, in the greatest glory of it, yet not accompanied with
Gods Spirit, there may not be the least degree of grace wrought in any hearer:
Therefore I cannot well understand that, the Law indeed that shows us our
duty, but the Gospel, that gives us grace to do it; for, if you take the
Gospel for the Promises preached, how many are there that hear these, that yet
receive no benefit by them? And on the other side, if the Law, setting forth
our duty, be accompanied with Gods Spirit, that may instrumentally work in us
an ability to our duty; and without the Spirit the Gospel cannot do it. It is
true, if this were the meaning, that had there been only Law, there could never
have been any grace vouchsafed, but it is by reason of Christ, and so the
Promises of the Gospel, that any good is brought to the souls; and so the Law
works as a medium to our Conversion by Christ as the Gospel: If, I say, this
be the meaning, then it is true; but the obscure, and unclear expressing of
this, gives an occasion to the Antinomian error.

Now that the Scripture, as it is written, or preached; without The Word,
without the Spirit, cannot convert us, and why.
the Spirit of God cannot convert us, is plain, partly because then the
devils, and great men of parts, which do understand the letter of the Scripture
better then others, would be sooner converted; partly because the Scripture, so
far as it is a word read, or preached, cannot reach to the heart, to alter and
change that: Hence the Word of God, though it be compared to a sword, yet it is
called a Sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6. 17. Yet, although this be true, we must
not fall into that extreme error of some, who therefore deny the necessity of
the Scripture, and would have us wholly depend upon the Spirit of God, saying,
The Scripture is a creature, and we must not give too much to a creature; for
the Spirit is the efficient, and the Word is the subordinate, and these two
must not be opposed, but composed one with the other.

Now, having cleared this general, I bring these Arguments Six Arguments to
prove the Law, and the preaching of it, means of Conversion.
to prove the Law, and the preaching of it, the means of Conversion.

1. That which is attributed to the whole Word of God, as it is Gods Word,
ought not to be denied to any part of it. Now this is made the property of the
whole Word of God, to be the instrument Tim. 3. 16. where you have the manifold
effects of Gods Word, To reprove, to correct, and to instruct in
righteousness, that the man of God may be thoroughly furnished to every good
work. Now mark the universality of this, All Scripture, whether you take all
collectively or distributively, it will not invalidate this argument, because
every part of Scripture has it is partial ability, and fitness for these
effects here mentioned. Thus Matthew. 13. the Word of God in general is compared
to seed sown, that brings forth fruit: see also Heb. 4. 12.

2. The second Argument is taken from those places where the Law is expressly
named to be isntrumental in this great work. Not to name that place of Romans
7. 14. where the Law is called spiritual, in this respect as well as in
others, because it is that which works spiritually in us; as Paul was carnal,
because he worked carnally: The places are clear out of the 119. Psalm. and
Psalm. 19. 7. The Law of God is perfect, converting the soul. It is true, some
understand the converting of the soul, to be as much as the reviving of it, as
if the soul were ready to swoune away through the troubles thereof; but then
the Law does revive them again, and comfort them: and according to this sense
they take Law largely, as comprehending the Gospel; but it seems hard to
expound that phrase in such a manner. That therefore which the Antinomian does
object against this place is, that the Hebrew word does signify largely any
doctrine, and so may comprehend the whole Word of God. But this is easily
answered: First, the same Hebrew word is commonly used for the Law, when it is
strictly taken; and therefore this makes more against them, that the word
[Law] in the Hebrew notion does not signify such a commanding, terrifying and
damning thing, but rather that which does instruct and inform.

But, in the next place, grant that the Word has such an extensive and
comprehensive sense, yet it does not exclude the Moral Law, but does always
include. Can any man think, when David commends the Law of God, that he means
all the Word of God but the Moral Law, when indeed that was the greatest part
of it at that time?

3. That opinion, which would make Christ not take an isntrumental way for the
conversion of men, in his first Sermon, wherein he was very large, that must
not be asserted; but to hold that the preaching of the Law is not a Medium to
conversion, must needs be to say, that Christ did not take the nearest way to
convert his hearers; for if you consider that Sermon, it is principally spent in
the opening of the Moral Law, and pressing the duties thereof: and how can we
think, but that our Savior judged this profitable and soul-saving matter? Nor
can I see, why it should be said to be only the occasion, and not medium, if
powerfully set home by Gods Spirit.

4. If the Law of God have that objectively in it, that may work exceedingly
upon the heart, when set home by Gods Spirit, then it may be used
instrumentally as well as the Gospel; but it has objectively such a nature in
it: which does appear by David's approving and delighting in Gods Law: by Paul,
Romans 7. who delighted in the Law of God. When therefore a Minister sets
forth the lovely purity and excellency of the matter of the Law, how it
resembles the nature of God, why may not the Spirit of God, in the exercise
hereof, raise up the heart and affections to be more and more in love with it?
If the Heathen said of Virtue, that if it could be seen with corporal eyes,
the beauty thereof would ravish men: how much more may this be true of the
purity and holiness of the Law?

5. If the Law of God may be blessed after a man is converted, to the increase
of his grace, and holiness; why not then to the first beginning of it? That it
is for the increase of godliness in persons already regenerated, is apparent
by experience. And it is hard to think, that a Minister, having opened any
Moral duty of the Law, may not pray to God for his Spirit, to cloth that word
with power and efficacy to change the hearts of hearers.

6. If the Ceremonial Law, the Sacraments and Sacrifices were blessed by Gods
Spirit, while they were commanded to be used for the strengthening and increase
of grace, notwithstanding the deadly nature of them now; then the Moral Law
may also be blessed by God for spiritual effects, seeing it stands still in
force.

Let the Use then of this be, by way of admonition, that in Pray for the
benefit of the Law in our souls.
to have the savoury benefit and fruit of it in our souls. Urge God with that
Promise of writing his Law in our heart: Be thou so far from being an
Antinomian, that thou have thy heart and life full of this holy Law of God: Not
that the matter of the Law can be the ground of thy Justification, but yet it
is thy Sanctification. What is Regeneration, but the writing of the Moral Law
in thy heart? This is that image of God, which Adam was created in. Oh
therefore that we could see more of this holy Law in the hearts and lives of
men, that the Law of God might be in men's minds inlightning them, in their
wills and affections inflaming, and kindling of them.

LECTURE XXI.
ROMANS 3. 31. Do we then make void the Law through faith? God forbid: But we
rather establish the Law.
I Shall in the next place discuss that famous Question, about the abrogating
of the Moral Law: only I must answer to some Objections that are made against
the former position, That the Law may be used by God in the preaching of it to
man's Conversion, in the sense explained: which, if not attended unto, may make
the assertion seem harsh, and incredible. But before I answer the Objections,
let us consider a great mistake of the Antinomian author, Assert. of grace,
page 171. where he makes the very ground, why they are charged with
Antinomianisme, to be, because they do not hold the Law to be used by God
instrumentally for the conversion of men. Certainly this is a great mistake,
for there are many learned men, who hold the work of the Law by the power of
Gods Spirit to be no more then preparatory; yet for all that, do peremptorily
maintain the use and the obligation of the Law in respect of believers.
Therefore they are not in this respect condemned for that error.

Another consideration that I would propound is this, Conversion not wrought
totally by the word read or preached, but is to be attributed to the Covenant
of grace in Christ.
That the work of conversion is not wrought totally in a man without the
Gospel: for, as I told you, now in the preaching of the Word there is not mere
Law, nor mere Gospel, but they are to be composed and to be made helpful to
each other; and also, whatsoever benefit or effect we get in the hearing,
preaching, or meditating upon the Law of God, it is to be attributed unto the
Covenant of grace in Christ. And therefore all these places, which attribute
conversion and holiness to the Gospel, do not at all make against my
Assertion; for the Question is not, Whether by the power of the Law we come to
obey the Law; but, Whether grace may not use the Precepts, or Law preached, for
the inflaming of our affections so in love with the things commanded, that we
are thereby made more holy. And thus I interpret those Authors that deny the
Law to be isntrumental to holiness, that is, not animated by Gods Spirit, or
separated from it.

I come therefore to consider of those places which are brought against this
truth delivered: I shall not take all, because one answer may serve for many,
they being built upon the same ground.

And, first the state and Question is obscurely propounded by him; for thus he
says, [The promise, or the Gospel, and not the Law, is the seed or doctrine of
our new birth.] Assert of grace, page 163. Now here are ambiguites; as first,
the promise, or Gospel, for by this he seems to decide a great Question,
that whatsoever is a promise in the Scripture, that belongs to the Gospel; and
whatsoever is not that, but a command or threatening, that belongs to the Law:
whereas this needs a great discussion.

2. The state of the Question is not about the Gospel, or the Law, as they are
both a doctrine in the Scripture: but about the Spirit of God, working by one
or the other; and the not attending to this, makes the arguments so confounded.

3. He says, it is not the seed of the new birth; whereas conversion or
regeneration is made the writing of the Law in the heart: and Mat. 13. The Word
of God in general is compared to seed sown, that brings forth different
fruit; as was said before: but to let this pass.

The first instance that is brought, comes from John 17. v. 17. Sanctify them
through thy truth, thy Word is truth. Where, says the Author, to sanctify,
is to separate any thing from a common use, and to consecrate it to God: and,
applied here to man, includes two things; 1. Justification by the
communication of Christ's perfect holiness, whereby the believer is presented
holy, and without blame to God. 2. An inward renewing and changeing, purifying
the heart and life by degrees, etc. page 165.

I answer, 1. The word sanctify, when applied to men, does Chrysostom, you
have a parallel place Jer. 1. 5. Before thou came forth out of the womb, I
sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a Prophet unto the Nations. And this
exposition is confirmed by the manner (...) in truth (so they read it, and
mention not the particle (...), which is not in some copies) so that they take
it as an expression opposing the sanctification of the Priests, which was by
legal types and shadows. But that which does especially confirm this
exposition, seems to be the two verses following, As thou have sent me into
the world, so have I also sent them into the world, and for their sakes I
sanctify my self, that they also may be sanctified through the truth. Now
sanctification, as it comprehends justification and renovation, cannot be
applied to Christ: but it must signify the segregating and setting apart
himself for the office of the Mediator. Besides, if sanctification do here
include justification, how, by the Antinomian principle, can our Savior pray
for the justification of those, who are already justified?

But in the next place, grant that interpretation, of sanctification thy word
is truth. And may not this be affirmed of the Law, as well as the Gospel? Does
not David, speaking of the Law, call it pure, and clean, that is, true, having
no falsehood in it? Yea, it is thought probable by a learned man, that this
speech of our Saviors is taken out of Psalm. 119. 142. where are these words
Gerbard.
expressly, Thy Law is the truth: Where the word Law cannot exclude the Moral
Law, though it may include more.

The next instance is Tit. 2. ver. 11, 12. For the grace of God that brings
salvation, has appeared to all men, teaching us, that denying ungodliness,
and wordly lusts, etc.

I answer, All this may be granted, and nothing makes against effectually,
which is not in the Text; for, although God does by his grace in the Gospel
effectually move those that are elected to Godliness; yet Scripture, and
experience shows, that where the grace of the Gospel has appeared, thus
teaching men, yet all are not effectually turned unto holiness from their
worldly lusts.

Besides, the argument may be retorted upon him: What word teaches to deny all
ungodliness, that sanctifies, instructs, but the Law does so, insomuch that
the Psalmist says, Psalm. 119. A young man, whose lusts are strongest, and
temptations most violent, may be cleansed by attending thereunto: only you must
always take notice of the preheminency of the Gospel, above the Law; for the
Law could never have any such good effect upon the heart of man, were it not
for the gracious Promise by Christ: Therefore all the godly men in the Old
Testament, that received benefit by the Moral Law, in studying of it, and
meditating upon it, did depend upon the Gospel, or the grace of God in Christ,
as appears by David, praying so often to be quickened by Gods Law. And here,
by the way, let me take notice of a remarkable passage of Peter Martyr in his
Comment on the seventh Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans ver. 14. where,
speaking of the great commendation the Psalmist gives the Law of God, that it
converts the soul, (and we may add those places, of inlightning the mind,
that they cleanse a man's way, etc.) he makes this Question, Whether the Law
does ever obtain such effects or no? And he answers affirmatively, that it
does: but then when its written not in tables, but in the hearts and bowels of
men: so that he conceives the Spirit of God does use the Law instrumentally,
so that he writes it in our hearts. And this is all we so contend for.

A third and last instance out of Scripture, in answering of Gal. 3. 2.
Received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law; or by the hearing of faith?
that is, of the Three Errors to be taken heed of in opening Gal. 3. 2.
Gospel, the doctrine of faith. In the opening of this text, we must take heed
of three errors: First, of those, who hold we have faith first, before we have
the Spirit; for how can we come Peter Martyr, that in causes and effects, there
is a kind of circle, one increasing the other: As the clouds arise from the
vapors, then these fall down again, and make vapors; only you must
acknowledge one first cause, which had not its being from the other, and this
is the Spirit of God, which at first did work faith.

The second error is of the Papists, that makes this difference

The third is of the Socinian mentioned afterward. These rocks avoided, we
come to consider the place: and first I Whether any under the Old Testament
were made partakers of Gods Spirit, or no? If they were, how came they by it?
There can be no other way said, but that God did give his Spirit in all those
public Ordinances unto the believing Israelites; so that although they did in
some measure obey the Law, yet they did it not by the power of the Law, but by
the power of Grace.

Again, in the next place, (which has always much prevailed with me) did not
the people of God receive the Grace of God offered in the Sacraments at that
time? We constantly maintain against the Papists, that our Sacraments and
theirs differ not for substance. Therefore in Circumcision, and the Paschall
Lamb, they were made partakers of Christ as well as we: yet the Apostle does as
much exclude Circumcision, and those Jewish Ordinances from Grace, as any thing
else. Therefore that there may be no contradiction in Scripture, some other way
is to be thought upon, about the exposition of these words. Some there are
therefore that do understand by the Spirit, the wonderful and miraculous
works of Gods Spirit: for this was reserved till the times of the Messiah, and
by these miracles his doctrine was confirmed to be from Heaven; and to this
sense the fifth verse speaks very expressly: and Beza does confess, that this
is the principal scope of the Apostle, though he will not exclude the other
gracious works of Gods Spirit: And if this should be the meaning, it were
nothing to our purpose.

Again, thus it may be explained, as by faith is meant the doctrine of faith,
so by the works of the Law, is to be understood the doctrine of the works of
the Law, which the false Apostles taught, namely, that Christ was not enough to
justification, unless the works of the Law were put in as a cause also. And if
this should be the sense of the Text, then it was clear, that the Galathians
were not made partakers of Gods Spirit, by the corrupt doctrine that was taught
them alate by their seducers, but before, while they did receive the pure
doctrine of Christ: and therefore it was their folly, having begun in the
spirit, to end in the flesh. This may be a probable interpretation. But that
which I shall stand upon is this, The Jews and false Apostles they looked upon
the Law as sufficient to save them without Christ, consider Romans 2. 17, 18, 19.
or when they went furthest, they joined Christ, and the observance of the
Moral Law equally together for justification and salvation: whereas the Law
separated from Christ, did nothing but accuse and condemn, not being able to
help the soul at all. Therefore it was a vain thing in them, to hope for any
such grace, or benefit as they did by it. So that the Apostles scope is, not
absolutely to argue against the benefit of the Law, which David and Moses did
so much commend, but against it in the sense, as the Jews did commonly dote
upon it, which was to have justification by it alone; or at the best, when they
put the Law and Christ together. Now both these we disclaim, either that God
does use the Law for our justification; or that of it self, it is able to
stir up the least godly affection in us.

More places of Scripture are brought against this, but they will come in more
fitly under the notion of the Law as a covenant. Thus therefore I shall
conclude this point, acknowledgeing that many learned and orthodoxe men speak
otherwise, and that there is a difficulty in clearing every particular about
this Question: but as yet that which I have delivered, carries the more
probability with me; and I will give one text more, which I have not yet
mentioned, and that is Act. 7. 38. where the Moral Law that Moses is said to
receive, that he might give the Israelites, is called (...), the lively
Oracles; that is, not verba vitae, but verba, viva and vivificantia, so that
(...) is as much as (...), giving life: not that we could have life by virtue
of any obedience to them; but when we by grace are enabled to obey them, God,
out of his mercy, bestows eternal life. Let me also add this, that I the
rather incline to this opinion, because I see the Socinians, urging these
places, or the like, where justification and faith is said to be by Christ, and
the Gospel, that they wholly deny that any such thing as grace and
justification was under the Law, and wonder how any should be so blind as not
to see, that these privileges were revealed first by Christ in the Gospel
under the new Covenant; whereas it is plain, that the Apostle instanceth in
Abraham and David, (who lived under the Law as a schoolmasters,) for the same
kind of justification as ours is.

And thus I come to another Question, which is the proper and immediate ground
of strife between the Antinomian and us, and from whence, they have their name;
and that is, the abrogation of the Moral Law: And howsoever I have already
delivered many things that do confirm the perpetual obligation of it; yet I
did it not then so directly, and professedly, as now I shall; The Text (I have
chosen) being a very fit foundation to build such a structure upon. I will
therefore open The Text opened.
the words and proceed as time shall suffer. The Apostle Paul, having laid
down, in verses preceding, the nature of justification, so exactly, that we may
find all the causes, efficient, meritorious, formal, isntrumental and final
described; as also the consequent of this truth, which is the excluding of all
selfconfidence, and boasting in what we do; he draws a conclusion or
inference, ver. 26. And this conclusion is laid down first affirmatively and
positively, [A man is justified by faith,] the Phrases (...), and (...), and
(...), are all equivalent with the Apostle: And then, to prevent all errors
and cavils, he does secondly lay it down exclusively without works. And this
proposition he does extend to the Jews and Gentiles also from the unity or
oneness of God; which is not to be understood of the unity of his Essence, but
Will and Promise. Now when all this is asserted, he makes an objection (which
is usual with him in this Epistle;) and he does it for this end, to take away
the calumny and reproach cast upon him by his adversaries, as one that would
destroy the Law. The objection then is this, (propounded by way of
interrogation, to affect the more,) Do we make void the Law? (...); The
Apostle used this word in this Chapter, ver. 3. and it signifies to make empty
and void, so that, the Law shall be of no use, or operation.

Now to this, the Apostle answers negatively, by words of defiance and
detestation, God forbid: So that by this expression you see how intolerable
that doctrine ought to be unto the people of God, that would take away the Law.
And the Apostle does not only defy this objection, but adds, we establish
the Law, (...) a Metaphor from those that do corroborate and make firm a
pillar, or any such thing that was falling. It has much troubled Interpreters,
how Paul could say, he established the Law, especially considering those many
places in his Epistles, which seem to abrogate it. Some understand it thus,
That the righteousness of faith, has it is witness from the Law and Prophets,
as ver. 21. in this Chapter; so that in this sense they make the Law
established, because that which was witnessed therein, does now come to pass.
Even as our Savior said Moses did bear witness of him. But this
interpretation does not come up to the Apostles meaning. Those that limit this
speech to the Ceremonial Law, do easily interpret it thus: That the ceremonies
and types were fulfilled in Christ; who, being the substance and body, they are
all now fulfilled in him. But the Apostle comprehends the Moral Law under the
word [Law.]

The Papists they make the Gospel a new Law, and they compare it with the old
Law having the Spirit, as two things differing only gradually; so that they
say, the old Law is established by the new, as the childhood is established by
elder age: which is not by abolition, but perfection.

That which I see the Orthodoxe pitch upon, is that the Law The Law established
three ways by the Gospel.
is established three ways by the Gospel.

First, whereas the Law did threaten death to every transgressor, this is
established in Christ, who satisfied the justice of God.

Secondly, in that the Law requires perfect obedience, this is also fulfilled
in Christ. Now this is a matter worth discussion, Whether the righteousness we
are yet justified by, be the righteousness of the Law.

For those learned men, that are against the imputation of Christ's active
obedience, they urge this argument, which seems to carry much strength with
it: That if Christ's active obedience be made ours, and we justified by that,
then are we still justified by the works of the Law, and so the righteousness
of faith and works is all one; faith in us, and works in Christ. If therefore
active obedience be made ours, (as I conceive the truth to be in that doctrine)
then we may easily see the Law is established.

Thirdly, but lastly, which I take to be the truth, and Austin heretofore
interprets it so, the Law is established, because by the Gospel we obtain
grace in some measure, to fulfill the Law; so that we still keep the Law in the
preceptive and informative part of it: and do obtain by faith in Christ,
obedience in some degree to it; which obedience also, though it be not the
Covenant of grace, yet is the way to Salvation.

LECTURE XXII.
ROMANS 3. 31. Do we then make void the Law?
THis Text is already explained; and there are two Observations do naturally
arise from it, as first, That it is an It Is hard to set up Christ and grace,
and not be thought to destroy the Law.
hard thing so to set up Christ and grace, as not thereby be thought to destroy
the Law. Thus was Paul misunderstood by some; and so the Antinomians, not
rightly understanding in what latitude the Orthodoxe in their disputations
against Popery did oppose the Law to the Gospel, were thereby plunged into a
dangerous error. But on this point I will not insist. The second doctrine is
that which I intend, namely, That the doctrine The doctrine of Christ and grace
does establish the Law.
of Christ and grace in the highest and fullest manner, does not overthrow, but
establish the Law. And this doctrine will directly lead us to lay our hands on
the chief pillars of that house, which the Antinomians have built. The
Question then at this time to be discussed is, Whether the Law be abrogated or
no by Christ, to the believers under the Gospel. And this Question I will
answer by several propositions, that may conduce to the clearing of the truth:
for it would seem, as if the Scripture held out contradictions in this point.
In my Text it is denied, that the Apostles do (...) make void the Law; yet 2
Cor. 3. 11. The Apostle speaking of the Law has this passage, [If that which
be done away, (...)] where the word is expressly used, that yet here is denied:
so Ephesians. 2. 14. Christ is described [(...)] that makes void the handwriting
against us. And in that place the Apostle uses the word (...), when yet Mat.
5. he denied that he came (...), to dissolve the Law. Grave therefore and
serious is, Ghimnitius his admonition, In all other things general words beget
confusion, and obscurity; but in the doctrine of the abrogation of the Law they
are very dangerous, unless it be distinctly explained, how it is abrogated.

In the first place therefore consider, That about a Law there Interpretation,
dispensation, etc. affections of a Law.
are these affections (if I may call them so;) There is an Interpretation, a
dispensation, or relaxation: and these differ from an abrogation; for the
former do suppose the Law still standing in force, though mitigated; but
abrogation is then properly, when a Law is totally taken away. And this
abrogation arises sometimes from the express constitution at first, which did
limit and prescribe the time of the laws continuance: sometimes by an express
revoking and repealing of it by that authority which made it: sometimes by
adding to that repeal an express law commanding the contrary. Now it may be
easily proved, that the Ceremonial, and Judicial laws they are abrogated by
express repeal. The Judicial Law 1 Pet. 2. 13. where they are commanded to
be subject to every ordination of man: and this was long foretold Genes. 49.
10. The Lawgiver shall be taken from Judah. The Ceremonial Law that is also
expressly repealed Act. 15. and in other places: not that these were ill, or
that they did come from an ill author; but because the fullness and substance
of them was now come, of whom the ceremonies were a shadow. Yet still you must
remember, that while they were commanded of God, they were the exercises of
faith and piety, and God did dispense grace in the use of them; only they were
beggarly and empty to such who trusted in them and neglected Christ. Nor does
this assertion contradict that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 2. 15. where he calls
those ordinances, enmity, and decrees against us: for those ceremonies may be
considered two ways; first, as they were signs of Gods grace and favor: and
secondly, as they were demonstrative of a duty, which we were tied unto, but
could not perform, and in this sense all those purifications and cleansings
were against us. Thus we see these laws in every consideration made void; so
that it is not now an indifferent thing to use them, though we would not put
our trust in them, but sinful. Hence I cannot see how that of Luther is true
upon Gal. 2. who says, He believes that, if the Jews believing had observed
the Law and Circumcision in that manner which the Apostles permitted them, that
Judaisme had yet stood, and that all the world should have received the
ceremonies of the Jews.

In the second place, if we would speak exactly and properly, We may say that
the Moral Law is mitigated, as to our persons, but it is not abrogated.
We cannot say, in any good sense, that the Moral Law is abrogated at all. It
is true indeed, our learned Writers show, that the Law is abrogated in respect
of justification, condemnation, and rigor of obedience; all which I shall
instance in afterward: but if a man would speak rigidly, he cannot say, it is
abrogated. We may say, it is mitigated, as to our persons, though Christ our
surety did fully undergo it: for if God had taken away the Law so, that man
nor his surety had been under the curse of it, or should have obeyed it, then
had it been properly abrogated: whereas now, seeing our surety was bound to
satisfy it, and perfectly to obey it, and we still obliged to conform unto
it, we cannot so properly in the general say, it was abrogated. Therefore we
may more properly say, that there is a change and alteration in us toward the
Law, then that the Law is changed or abrogated. Hence observe, though the
Apostle denies that he does (...) make void the Law, yet he uses this
expression Romans 7. 6. (...), we are freed or abrogated from the Law, rather
then that is abrogated. Thus it is, if we would speak properly: yet, because
the satisfaction and obedience is by Christ, and not by us, we may say, that it
is abrogated to us, so that we may not look for remission of sins, or
justification by it. But you must still distinguish, when we speak of the Law,
some parts of it from the whole: some parts of the Law may be abolished, and
yet not the whole nature of it: for there is in the Law these parts; First, the
Commands. Three parts in the Law.
Secondly, the Promises of life to him that does them; and thirdly, the
threatenings of eternal wrath to him that fails in the least. Now the Moral
Law, though it be abrogated in respect of the two later to a believer, yet in
respect of the former it does still abide; yea, and will continue in Heaven it
self. And we have already proved against the Antinomians, that one part of the
Law may abide, when the other does not. The Law is abolished as it is a
Covenant, but not as it is a Rule.


The third proposition,

Those that say the Law is abolished as it is foedus, but not as it is regula;
say true. The Law may be considered as it is a Covenant, or as it is an
absolute Rule, requiring conformity unto it: Now it may be truly granted, that
the Law is abolished in the former notion, though not in the later; only in
expressing this Covenant there is difference among the Learned: some make the
Law a Covenant of works, and upon that ground that it is abrogated: others call
it a subservient covenant to the covenant of grace, and make it only
occasionally, as it were, introduced, to put more luster and splendor upon
grace: Others call it a mixed covenant of works and grace; but that is hardly
to be understood as possible, much less as true. I therefore think that
opinion true, as shall be hereafter showed, that the The Law given by Moses a
Covenant of grace.
Law given by Moses was a Covenant of grace; and that God did not, since man
fallen, ever transact with him in any other Covenant, but that of grace: Though
indeed this Covenant of grace did break out more clearly, in succession of
ages, according to the wise dispensation of Gods good pleasure. So then, the
Law, as a Covenant, though of grace, is abrogated, because though there be
still the same essence of the former and later covenant, yet the administration
of the former is altogether antiquated. This fully appears in Heb. 7. 18, 19.
and again, Heb. 8. 7, 8. whosoever therefore expects life and justification by
the Law, he sets up the covenant of works again. Nor is it any advantage to
say, these works are the works of grace, and wrought by Christ's Spirit; for
still if we were justified by doing whatsoever the works were, yet it would be
in such a way as Adam was, though with some difference. We therefore do desire
to lift up our voices, as vehemently as any Antinomian, against
self-Justiciaries, against pharisaicall, popish, formal men, that say unto the
good works they do, These are thy Christ, These are thy Jesus, oh my soul. In
matter of Justification, we would have all of Paul's Spirit, to know nothing but
Christ crucified, to account all things dung and dross. We desire to bewail,
and abundantly to bewail the little need and want that people feel of Christ
in all their duties. We are troubled, that any can be quiet in their duties,
and performances; and do not cry out, None but Christ, None but Christ. All
this we plead for, and preach; only we hold the Law as a rule still to walk by,
though not a Covenant of works to be justified by.

4. The Antinomian distinction of the Law abolished as a Law, but It is an
absurd contradiction to say the matter of a Law binds, but not as a Law.
still abiding in respect of the matter of it, is a contradiction. This is a
rock, that the adversary has daily refuge unto. The Law (says the Antinomian)
in the matter of it, so far as I know, was never denied to be the rule,
according to which a believer is to walk and live: Therefore I take the
contrary imputation to be an impudent slander. Asser. of grace, page 170.

But to reply, if they hold the matter of the Law to be a rule, how can they
shelter themselves from their own argument; for, if the matter oblige, then,
when a believer walks not according to his duty, he sins, and, to sin
the curse is due: so that this evasion will no ways help them; for still an
obligation or bond lies upon them, which, if broken, they are made obnoxious
unto the Law of God. Again, to say the matter of the Law binds, but yet not
as a Law, is a mere contradiction; for, what is a Law, but such an object held
forth by the command and will of a superior? Then I demand, whether [love to
God] being the object, or matter held forth, have not also Gods will passing
upon it that it should bind. According to the Antinomian asserttion, it should
be true, that love to God should bind us, because the matter it self is good;
but not because God wills us to love him: Nay, they must necessarily deny the
will of God obliging us in the Law to love him; for a law is nothing but the
will of the Lawgiver, that such things should be obeyed, or avoided. And if
there were any color for that distinction between the matter of the Law
binding, and not the Law, it would only hold in that matter which is
perpetually and necessarily good; as, To love God, To honor parents: but in
that matter which is only good by some positive divine institution; as, Keeping
of the Lords Day, there we must say, that the Law binds vi, as a Law, and not
merely from the matter of the Law.

5. The Law is no more abrogated to a believer under the Old Testament The Law
equally abrogated to believers under the Old and New Testament.
then to one under the New. This assertion will much discover the falsenesse of
the adversaries opinion: for they carry it, as if the Law were abrogated only
to the believers under the Gospel. Now how can this ever be made good? for
either they must deny that there were any believers under the Old Testament;
or, if they were, then they are freed from the Law as much as any now. Indeed
if you take the Law for the whole administration of the Covenant in the Old
Testament, we grant that it was pedagoricall, and more servile; so that a
believer under the Old Testament, did not meet with such clear and evident
dispensations of love, as a believer under the Gospel: yet in respect of
justification and salvation, the Law was the same to them as to us, and to us
as to them.

We do not deny, but that the administration of the later covenant is far
more glorious then that of the former, and that we enjoy many privileges which
they did not then: but whatsoever is necessary and essential to justification
or salvation, they were made partakers of them, as well as we. The ordinary
resemblance of theirs, and our happiness, is by those two, spoken of Numb. 13.
23. that bare upon the staff the cluster of grapes from the land of Canaan; If
then we speak of the Law in regard of the essential parts of it, which are
directing, commanding, threatening, promising life upon perfect obedience: These
are either still equally in power, or else equally abrogated unto all
believers, whether under the Old or New Testament. Let them therefore consider
whether the arguments against believers subjection under the New Testament, be
not also equally as strong against those that are under the Old. Therefore it
is wild Divinity of an Antinomian (in Chap. 6. of the Honey-combe of free
justification:) who makes three different estates of the Church: one under the
Law, and another under John Baptist. and a third under the Gospel. Now he
compares these together, and shows how we under the Gospel exceed those of
the Law that were godly: and, among other things, there are two notorious
falsehoods; as first, That God indeed saw sin in the believers of the Old
Testament, but not in those of the New. But how absurd and contradictory to the
Author himself is this assertion? For was not that place which they so much
urge [God sees not iniquity in Jacob] spoken of the Church in the Old
Testament? And besides, if the godly were then in Christ, does it not
necessarily follow by his principles, that God must see no sin in them? This
I bring, not as if there were any truth in that opinion of God his seeing no
sin in believers, whether of the Old, or New Testament; but only to manifest
their absurd contradictions.

The second difference he makes is, That God seeing sin in those of the Old
Testament did therefore punish them and afflict them for sin; but he does not
this under the Gospel. Hereupon he shows, how Moses for a word was stricken
with death, and so Jonah, Vzzah, Eli: these had sudden punishments upon them.
Hence also (says he) came there terrible famines upon them. Now who sees not
how weak and absurd these arguments are? For, does not the Apostle 1 Cor. 11.
speaking of those under the New Testament, that some were sick, and some did
sleep, and that they were judged of the Lord? were not Ananias and Sapphira
stricken dead immediately? Are there not famines, pestilence, and the bloody
war upon men under the Gospel? Besides, these assertions are contradictions
to themselves: for if their arguments from Gods Law, and from Christ prove the
quite taking away of sin, and the punishments of it; then it holds as
firmly for all believers as for some.

6. The arguments of the Antinomian for the greater part, which Antinomian
Arguments mostly overthrow the use of the Law both to believers and unbeleevers.
they urge, do not only overthrow the use of it to believers, but also
unbeleevers. This also is good to be attended unto; for the Apostle in many
places, where he speaks of the Law as a Schoolmaster, and the continuance of
it for a time does not speak comparatively of a believer with an unbeleever,
but of the state of the Gospel, and the state of the Old Testament: so that, as
a wicked man may not circumcise, or take up the sacrifices, so neither may he
use the Moral Law, as commonly the Jews did, which was as distinct from
Christ, and as if that of it self were able alone to save. Therefore I wonder
why the Antinomians bring many of their arguments to prove that a believer is
freed from the Law; for, certainly, most of those places will infer, that
unbeleevers also under the New Testament are; for, the Apostle for the most
part does argue against that state of the Church, and administrations that were
used formerly; as in the 1 Cor. 3. when the Apostle makes the administration of
the Law to be death, and of the Gospel life. Here he speaks not of particular
persons, but of the general state under the Gospel: So in Gal. 2. and 3.
Chapters, he argues against the whole dispensation of the Law, and makes it
equally abrogated unto all. And it may probably be thought, that that famous
expression of the Apostle [ye are not under the Law but under grace] is not
only to be understood of every particular believer; but generally of the whole
dispensation of the Gospel under the New Testament.

7. We will grant, that to a believer the Law is as it were abrogated, The Law
to a believer is abrogated:
in these particulars:

1. In respect of Justification. Though, I say, mitigation might 1. In respect
of justification.
be properly here used, yet we will call it abrogation (with the Orthodox)
because to the godly it is in some sense so. And that which is most remarkable,
and most comfortable, is, in respect of justification; for now a believer is
not to expect acceptance at the throne of grace in himself, or any thing that
he does, but by relying on Christ. The Papists they say, this is the way to
make men idle and lazy; doing in this matter, as Saul did, who made a Law that
none should eat of any thing, and so Jonathan must not taste of the honey.
Saul indeed thought hereby to have the more enemies killed; but Jonathan told
him, that if they had been suffered to eat more honey, they should have been
more revived and enabled to destroy their adversaries. Thus the Papists, they
forbid us to eat of this honey, this precious comfort in Christ, as if thereby
we should be hindered in our pursuit against sin, whereas indeed it is the
only strength and power against them.

2. Condemnation and a curse. Thus still the condition of a believer 2. In
respect of condemnation.
is made unspeakably happy, Romans 1. There is no condemnation: And, Christ
became a curse for us: so that by this means the gracious soul has daily
matter of encouragement, arguing in prayer thus: O Lord, though my sins
deserve a curse, yet Christ his obedience does not: Though I might be better,
yet Christ needs not to be better: O Lord, though I have sinned away my own
power to do good, yet not Christ's power to save. Heb. 6. 18. you have a phrase
there [flying for a refuge] does excellently show forth the nature of a godly
man, who is pursued by sin as a malefactor was for his murder, and he runs
to Christ for refuge: and so Beza understands that expression of the Apostle,
Phil. 3. 9. [And be found in him,] which implies the justice of God searching
out for him, but he is in Christ. Now when we say, he is freed from
condemnation, that is to be understood actually, not potentially: There is
matter of condemnation, though not condemnation it self.

3. Rigid obedience. This is another particular, wherein the 3. In respect of
rigid obedience.
Orthodoxe declare the abrogation of the Law: but this must warily be
understood; for Christ has not obtained at Gods hands by his death, that the
Law should not oblige and tie us unto a perfect obedience: for this we maintain
against Papists, that it is a sin in believers, they do not obey the Law of
God to the utmost perfection of it: And therefore hold it impossible for a
believer to fulfill the Law: But yet we say, this mercy is obtained by Christ,
that our obedience unto the Law, which is but inchoate and imperfect, is yet
accepted of, in, and through Christ: for, if there were only the Law, and no
Christ, or grace: It is not any obedience, though sincere, unless perfect,
would be entertained by God: Neither would any repentance or sorrow be accepted
of, but the Law strictly so taken, would deal as the Judge to the malefactor,
who being condemned by the Law, though he cry out in the anguish of his spirit,
that he is grieved for what he has done, yet the Law does not pardon him.

4. It is not a terror to the godly; nor are they slavishly compelled 4. In
respect of terror and slavish obedience.
to the obedience of it. And in this sense they are denied to be under the Law:
But this also must be rightly understood; for there is in the godly an
unregenerate or carnal part, as well as a regenerate and spiritual; See Romans
7. 22, 25. with my minds I serve the Law of God, but with my flesh the Law of
sin. Now although it be true, that the Law, in the terrible compelling part
of it, be not necessary to him so far as he is regenerate; yet, in regard
that he has much flesh and corruption in him, therefore it is that the
Scripture does use threatenings as so many sharp goads to provoke them in the
ways of piety. But what godly man is there, whose spirit is so willing
always, that he does not find his flesh untoward and backward unto any holy
duty? How many times do they need that Christ should draw them, and also that
the Law should draw them? So that there is great use of preaching the Law even
to believers still, as that which may instrumentally quicken and excite them to
their duty. Qui dicit se amare legem, mentitur; and nescit quid dicat: Tam enim
amamus legem, quam homicida carcerem, said Luther: and this is true of us, so
far as we are corrupt.

5. It does not work, or increase sin in them as in the wicked. The 5. In
respect of the increase of sin.
Apostle, Romans 7. 8. complains of this bitter effect of the Law of God, that
it made him the worse. The more spiritual and supernatural that was, the more
did his carnal and corrupt heart rage against it: so that the more the Law
would damme up the torrent of sinful lusts, the higher did they swell. Now,
this sad issue was not to be ascribed to the Law, but to Paul's corruption: As
in the Dropsy, it is not the water or beer, if frequently drunk, that is to
be blamed for the increase of the disease; but the ill distemper in the body.
Now in the godly, because there is a new nature, and a principle of love and
delight in the Law of God wrought in him, his corruption does not increase and
biggen by the Law, but is rather subdued and quelled: although sometimes, even
in the godly, it may work such woeful effects: And this also take notice of,
that as the commandment of the Law, so also the Promises of the Gospel, do
only stir up evil in the heart totally unsanctified.

6. It is abrogated in many accessaries, and circumstantials. Even 6. In
respect of many Circumstantials.
the Moral Law, considered in some particulars, is abrogated totally: as in
the manner of writing, which was in tables of stone. We know the first tables
were broken; and what became of the last, or how long they continued, none can
tell: and this makes Paul use that opposition, 2 Cor. 3. 3. Not in tables of
stone, but in the fleshly tables of the heart: Although this you must know,
that the doctrine of the Gospel, as written with ink and paper, does no more
avail for any spiritual working, then the Law written in tables. Therefore
the Apostle uses in that verse this phrase, [Not written with inke] as well as
[Not in tables of stone.] And this is to be observed against the Antinomians,
who, to disparage the Law, may say, that was written in stones, what good can
that do? May we not also say, The doctrine of the Gospel that is written in
paper, and what can that do?

7. But Christ does perpetually continue as a rule and law to them. 7. Yet that
it continues to them as a rule, appears,
Which may thus appear:

1. From the different phrases that the Apostle uses concerning the
Ceremonial Law, which are no where applied to the Moral Law. 1. From the
different Phrases used concerning the ceremonial Law.
And these Chemnitius does diligently reckon up, (...), Ephesians. 2. 14. So again,
(...), Heb. 7. 12. (...), antiquare, (...), senescere, (...), evanescere. Heb.
8. ult. (...), abrogatio. Heb. 7. 18. Now, says he, these words are not used
of the Moral Law, that it is changed, or, waxes old, or, is abrogated; which
do denote a mutation in the Law; but when it speaks of the Moral Law, it
says, We are dead to it, We are redeemed from the curse of it: Which phrases
do imply the change to be made in us, and not in the Law. If therefore the
Antinomians could bring such places that would prove it were as unlawful for
us to love the Lord, because the Moral Law commands it, as we can prove it
unlawful to circumcise, or to offer sacrifices; then they would do something
for their purpose.

2. From the sanctification and holiness that is required of the 2. From that
holiness that it requires of the believer.
believer, which is nothing but conformity to the Law: so that, when we read
the Apostle speaking against the Law, yet that he did not mean this of the Law
as a rule, and as obliging us to the obedience thereof, will easily appear:
For when the Apostle, Gal. 5. 4. had vehemently informed them of their woeful
condition who would be justified by the Law, yet ver. 13. and 14. pressing them
not to use their liberty as an occasion to the flesh, he gives this reason,
For all the Law is fulfilled in one word, even in this: Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. What does the Apostle use contradictions in the same
Chapter? Press them to obey the Law, and yet reprove them for desiring to be
under it? No, certainly, but when they would seek justification by the Law,
then he reproves them: and when, on the other side, they would refuse
obedience to the Law, then he admonishes them to the contrary. As for their
distinguishing between the matter of the Law, and the Law, we have already
proved it to be a contradiction.

3. In that disobedience to it is still a sin in the believer: For 3 In that
disobedience is still a sin.
there can be no sin, unless it be a transgression of a Law, as the Apostle
John defines sin. Now then, when David commits adultery, when Peter denies
Christ, are not these sins in them? If so, is not David's sin a sin,
because it is against such and such a Commandment? As for their evasion, it is
a sin against the Law as in the hand of Christ, and so against the love of
Christ, and no otherwise, this cannot hold; for then there should be no
sins, but sins of unkindnesse, or unthankfulness. As this Law is in the
hand of Christ; so murder is a sin of unkindnesse: but as it is against the Law
simply in it self, so it is a sin of such kind as murder, and not of another
kind; so that the consideration of Christ's love may indeed be a great motive
to obey the commands of God, yet that does not hinder the command it self from
obliging and binding of us, as it is the will of the Lawgiver. But of this
distinction more in its place.

4. From the difference of the Moral Law, and the other laws, 4. Because it
differs from other Laws in respect of causes of abrogation. Three reasons why
the Ceremonial Law should be abrogated.
in respect of the causes of abrogation. There can be very good reasons given,
why the Ceremonial Law should be abrogated, which can no ways agree to the
Moral: as,

First, The Ceremonial Law had not for its object that which is perpetual,
and in it self holiness: To circumcise, and to offer sacrifice, these things
were not in themselves holy and good, nor is the leaving of them a sin;
whereas the matter of the Moral Law is perpetually good, and the not doing of
it, is necessarily a sin. I speak of that matter, which Divines call moral
natural.

Again, The Ceremonial Law was typical, and did shadow forth Christ to come.
Now when he was come, there was no use of these ceremonies.

And, lastly, The Jews and the Gentiles were to consociate into one body, and
no difference be made between them. Now to effect this, it was necessary that
partition wall should be pulled down, for as long as that stood, they could not
join in one.

LECTURE XXIII.
ROMANS 3. 31. Do we then make void the Law? yea, we establish it.
I Shall not stand upon any more arguments to prove the perpetual obligation
of the Moral Law, because this is abundantly maintained in that assertion
already proved, that the Moral Law, as given by Moses, does still oblige us.

I come therefore to those places of Scripture which seem to Places of
Scripture, seeming to hold forth the duration of the Moral Law for a time
only, answered.
hold forth the duration of the Moral Law for a prefixed time only; even as
the ceremonial Law does. I shall select the most remarkable places, and, in
answering of them, we shall see the other fully cleared. And I will begin with
that, Luke 16. 16. The Law and the Prophets were until John. It should
therefore seem, that the Law was to continue but until John's time. I will not
here stand to dispute whether John Baptist was to be reckoned under the Old
Testament, or the New; only take notice, that we cannot make a third different
estate, wherein the Covenant of grace should be dispensed, as an Antinomian
author does: for our Savior seems fully to conclude, that he did belong to
the Old Testament; therefore he says, The least in the kingdom of heaven is
greater then he Minimum maximi, est maju^ maximo minimi.
Although in this respect he was greater then any of the Prophets that went
before him, that he did not prophecy of a Messiah to come, but pointed with
his hand to him who was already come. And, as for the text it self, none can
prove that the Law was to be abrogated when John Baptist came; for, lest any
should by that expression think so, our Savior adds, Heaven and earth shall
sooner pass away, then that one title should fall to the ground. Therefore the
meaning is, that the Law, in respect of the typical part of it, as it did
shadow forth, and prefigure a Christ, so it was to cease. Therefore the Law and
the Prophets are put together, as agreeing in one general thing, which is, to
foretell of Christ, and to typifie him: And this will be clearer, if you
compare Matthew. 11. 13. with this of Luke, where it is thus set down, All the
prophets and the Law prophesied unto John: whereby it is clear, that he
speaks of the typical part of the Law; yet not so, as if the Ceremonies were
then immediately to cease, only from that time they began to vanish.

The next place of Scripture, is that famous instance, so much vexed in this
controversy Romans 6. 15. [For you are not under the Law, but under grace] Now
to open this, consider these things:

1. In what sense the Apostle argues against the Law; and what The Apostle
argues against the Law, in comparison of Christ.
was the proper state of the Question in those days. And that appears Act.
15. where you have a relation made of some believing Jews, that were of the
sect of the Pharisees, who pressed the necessity of Circumcision: and so would
join the ministry of Moses and Christ together. Now it seems, though the
Apostles in this Council had condemned that opinion, yet there were many that
would still revive this error; and therefore the Apostle in this Epistle to
the Romans, and in that to the Galathians does reprove this false doctrine, and
labor much against it. Stapleton, and other papists, they think that the
controversy was only about the Ceremonial Law; and this they do, to maintain
their justification by the works of the Law; when wrought by grace. But, though
it must be granted, that the doubts about keeping the Ceremonial Law were the
occasion of that great difference, and the most principal thing in question;
yet the Apostle, to set forth the fullness of grace and Christ, does extend his
arguments and instances even to the Moral Law: for, the Jews did generally
think, that the knowledge and observation of the Moral Law without Christ, was
enough for their peace and comfort. And if they could persuade themselves, that
the external performing of the Ceremonial Law was enough to make them
acceptable with God, though they lived in gross disobedience to the Moral
Law, (as Isai. 1. and alibi, it many times appears they did) how much more,
when they lived a life externally conformable to the Moral Law; must they
needs be secure of their favor with God? And in this sense it is that the
Apostle speaks seemingly derogatory to the Law, because they took it without
Christ. Even as he calls the ceremonies beggarly elements, when yet we know,
they were signs of an Evangelicall grace.

2. That the Apostle uses the word [Law] in diverse senses, which has been the
occasion of so much difficulty in this point. Now in most of those places,
where the Law seems to be abolished, it is taken in one of these two senses:
Either, first, synecdochically, The word Law taken in a twofold sense.
the Law put for part of the Law, to wit, for that part which actually
condemns, and accuses; as when the Apostle says, [Against such there is no
Law:] here he speaks as if there were nothing in a Law but condemnation;
whereas we may say, A Law is for a thing by way of direction and prescription,
as well as against a thing by accusation. Or, secondly, the word [Law] is put
for the ministry of Moses, which dispensation was far inferior unto the
ministry of the Gospel: And in this sense, the Apostle does much use it in the
Epistle to the Galathians, and in the Epistle to the Hebrews. So that here is
a continual mistake, when the Antinomians heap place upon place, which seem
to abolish the Law, and do not first declare what Law, and in what sense those
places are to be expounded.

3. Consider these Phrases, Of the Law, Without the Law, These Phrases, Of the
Law, Without the Law, Under the Law, and, In the Law, explained.
Under the Law, and, In the Law. Without the Law is two ways: First, he is
without the Law, that is, without the knowledge and understanding of it. Thus
the Gentiles are without the Law: And secondly, Without the Law, that is,
without the sense and experience of the accusing and terrifying power of the
Law; and thus Paul, Romans 7. said, when the Law came, he died. Now the godly,
though they are denied to be under the Law, yet they are not said to be without
the Law; for if the Moral Law were no more obliging believers now, then it was
Heathens or Gentiles before they ever heard of it, both in respect of knowledge
and observation of it, then might believers be said to be without the Law: And
to this Without the Law, is opposed In the Law, Romans 2. 12. (...), the vulgar
In legem: Beza, Cum lege; It signifies those that do enjoy the Law, and yet
sin against it. And much to this purpose is that Phrase Of the Law, Romans 4.
14. which sometimes is as much as, Of the Circumcision, to wit, those that are
initiated into the Ministry of Moses: but in other places it signifies as
much as (...) and the opposite to it is, (...), as in this 4. of the Romans and
ver. 14. where the Apostle declaring that the promise made to Abraham was not
of the Law, he cannot mean the Law of Moses, for all know, that was long
after; but he means what is done in obedience to the Moral Law so far as it
was then revealed. The Apostle uses also another phrase, (...), By the Law;
which is to be understood in this sense, by works done in conformity to the
Law: and in this sense the Apostle urges, that righteousness, or the promise,
are not by the Law: But all the difficulty in this controversy is about the
phrase, Under the Law: Therefore take notice,

4. There is a voluntary being under the Law, as Christ's was; and A twofold
being under the Law.
there is to be under it in an ill sense. A voluntary and willing obedience
unto the Law, is acceptable: And thus the Apostle 1 Cor. 9. 20. The Apostle
says, he was made to some as under the Law, though there indeed he says (...)
but that is added because of the ceremonial part of the Law. Therefore he
calls himself excellently, (...), though a godly man be not properly (...),
yet he is (...). And he adds to Christ, lest they should think that he spoke
of the whole Law, the ceremonial part of it which was abolished by Christ; so
that a godly man, in a well explained sense, may be said to be under the Law:
but yet, because the Apostle uses it for the most part in an ill sense, as
here in the text, and in that place, tell me, ye that desire to be under the
Law, (though Law there be used for the whole Ministry of Moses, and not of the
Moral Law) let us consider in what sense this is denied to the godly.

5. That interpretation of some, though of solid judgment, The commonly
received sense of that Phrase, Not to be under the Law, rejected.
who make the phrase [Not to be under the Law] to be as much as Not under the
curse of the Law; or, Not obnoxious to the guilt by it, seems not to agree
with the context. I know this is generally received as the sense of the place;
and there is this argument urged for it, because the Apostle makes an
objection from hence; Shall we sin because we are not under the Law, but
under grace? Therefore it should seem that the Law is taken for the condemning
power of it, and grace for pardoning and free justification: but because the
Apostle is here speaking of sanctification, both in this Chapter and the
Chapter following, I prefer Beza's interpretation, which makes the being
under the Beza's interpretation of the phrase approved*
Law, to be the same in sense with under sin; for the Apostle, speaking of
himself as carnal, Chap. 7. says, that the Law wrought in him all manner of
evil: and this indeed is the work of the Law in every unregenerate man; so that
the more the Law is applied to him, the more does his corruption break forth.
Now then this is the Apostles argument, Let not sin reign in you, for now
you are not under the Law stirring up sin, and provoking it in you, but under
grace; not justifying or pardoning, as properly and immediately meant here
(though they were under that also) but sanctifying and healing. And the Apostle
makes the objection following [What then, shall we sin, because we are not
under the Law?] because the phrase was ambiguous, and might be thought to have
such a sense, as the Libertines make it to have, to wit, to do every thing as
we please without any control by any Law: and in this explication, we shall
see a sweet harmony in the context.

The third instance is Romans 7. especially in the beginning of the Chapter: but
the answer to the former Objection, will also clear this, because the Apostle
continues in the same matter, explaining what it is to be under the Law, by a
similitude from a wife married to an husband, who is bound to him so long as he
lives; but when he dies, she is free. Now in the reddition of the similitude,
there is some difference among Commentators: but I take it thus, Sin, which
by the Law does irritate and provoke our corruptions, that is the former
husband the soul had, and lusts they are the children hereof; but when we are
regenerated, then Christ becomes the husband of the godly soul: so that they
are deceived who make the Moral Law the husband, but sin is properly the
husband: And if you will say, the Moral Law, you must understand it in this
sense only, as it does inflame the heart to all evil; therefore the Apostle (as
is well observed by the Learned) does not say, the Law is dead, but, we are
dead; for indeed the Law is never so much alive as in the godly, who do
constantly obey it, and live accordingly to it.

This will also serve for that place, Gal. 5. 18. If ye be led by the spirit,
ye are not under the Law; That is, under the Law forcibly compelling.

Austin distinguishes of four states of men; those who are Ante legens, and
these commit sin without knowledge of it: Sub lege, and these commit it with
some fighting, but are overcome: Sub gratia, and these do fight, and shall
overcome: and Sub pace, these we may make to be those in heaven.

LECTURE XXIIII.
DEUTERONOMY. 4. 13. And he declared unto you his Covenant, which he commanded you to
perform, even ten Commandments, etc.
I Have already handled the Law as it is a Rule, and now come to consider of it
as a Covenant, that so the whole Law may be fully understood. I shall not be
long upon this, though the matter be large and difficult, though the subject be
like the Land of Canaan, yet there are many Giants, and great Objections in the
way. I will rather handle it positively, then controversally; for I do not
find in any point of Divinity, learned men so confused and perplexed (being
like Abraham's Ram, hung in a bush of briars and brambles by the head) as here.
That I may methodically proceed, observe the context of this verse, and the
scope, Moses being to persuade the people of Israel to obedience Arguments used
by Moses to persuade obedience to the Law.
of the Law, uses several forcible arguments:

As, ver. 1. The good and profitable issue thereof, which is to live and
possess the land, not as if this mercy were only temporal, but by this was
represented eternal life in heaven.

A second argument is from the perfection of it, that nothing may be added to
it, or detracted from it.

The third argument is from the great wisdom and understanding they shall hold
forth hereby to all other Nations, there being no people under the sun, that
had such holy and perfect laws as they had, and if that be true of Bernard,
Sapiens est cui res sapiunt prout sunt, he is a wise man to whom things do
taste and relish as they are divine and holy things; as holy, earthy things, as
earthly and fading; then certainly, by this Law of God, there was true wisdom
prescribed. Other arguments Moses does bring, as, The great authority God put
upon the Law, The great mercy in giving it to them rather then another Nation.
And the verse I have read belongs to that argument which proves the dignity,
and glorious authority of the Law, from the manner of delivering it: Which Law
he declares to us by the name and title of a Covenant. Now this take notice
of, that the word Covenant (to omit other significations) is taken sometimes
synecdochically, for part of the Covenant, as it is here in these words.

The Doctrine I will insist upon, is, That the Law was delivered That the Law
God delivered to Israel was a Covenant, appears,
by God on Mount Sinai in a Covenant-way: Or, The Law was a Covenant that God
made with the people of Israel. This will appear in that it has the name of a
Covenant, and the real properties of a Covenant.

1. The name of a Covenant. 2 King. 18. 12. Because they obeyed 1. In that it
has the name of a Covenant
not the voice of the Lord their God, but transgressed his Covenant, and all
that Moses, the servant of God, commanded.

Deuteronomy. 17. 2. If there be found any -- that has worught wickedness -- in
transgressing the Covenant, which was the ten Commandments, as appears, ver.
3. And more expressly, 2 Chro. 6. 11. In it have I put the Arc wherein is the
Covenant of the Lord, that he made with the children of Israel. Yea, if we
would speak exactly and strictly, the books of Moses and the Prophets cannot
be so well called the Old Covenant, or Testament; as this doctrine that was
then delivered on Mount Sinai, with all the administrations thereof; as
appears Heb. 7. and chap. 8. Even as when the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 3. 6. God
has made us able ministers of the New Testament, he does not mean the
writings, or books, but the Gospel, or Covenant of grace. Take but one place
more, where the Law is called a Covenant, and that is Jer. 11. 2, 3, 4.

2. In the next place, you may see the real properties of a Covenant, 2. In
that it has the real properties of a Covenant.
which are a mutual consent consent and stipulation on both sides: See a full
relation of this Exodus 3. 24. from the 3d. ver. to the 9th. The Apostle
relates this history, Heb. 9. wherein learned Interpreters observe many
difficulties: but I shall not meddle with them.

In the words quoted out of Exodus, you see these things which belong to a
Covenant: First, there is God himself expressing his consent and willingness
to be their God, if they will keep such Commandments there and then delivered
to them ver. 3. Secondly, you have the peoples full consent, and ready
willingness to obey them, ver. 3. and ver. 7. Thirdly, because Covenants used
to be written down for a memorial unto posterity, therefore we see Moses
writing the precepts down in a book. Fourthly, because Covenants used to be
confirmed by some outward visible signs, especially by killing of beasts, and
offering them in sacrifice, therefore we have this also done, and half of the
blood was sprinkled on the Altar, to denote Gods entering into Covenant; and
the people also were sprinkled with blood, to show their voluntary
covenanting. Thus we have real covenanting when the Law is given.

So also you may see this in effect, Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12, 13. where it is
expressly said, that they stood to enter into Covenant with God; that he may
establish them to be a people unto himself, and that he may be a God unto
them. Again, you have this clearly in Deuteronomy. 26. 17, 18. where it is said, Thou
have avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways -- And
the Lord has avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people. So, that it is
very plain, the Law was given as a Covenant; yea, the Apostle calls it a
Testament: for howsoever some have disliked that distinction of the Old and New
Testament, especially as applied to the books and writings of the holy Penmen
of Scripture (thinking as Austin, they may be better called the Old and New
Instruments, because they are authentical, and confirmed by sufficient
witnesses: As Tertullian calls the Bible, Nostra digesta, from the Lawyers; and
others called it, Our Pandects, from them also) yet 1 Cor. 3. does warrant such
a distinction. Only the question is, how this Covenant can be called properly
a Testament, because Christ died not twice, and there cannot be a Testament,
without the death of a Testator. But the answer is, that there was a typical
death of Christ in the sacrifices, and that was ground enough to make the
Covenant to be called a Testament.

Having proved it is a Covenant, all the difficulty remains The judgments of
the Learned different in declaring what Covenant is here meant.
in declaring what Covenant it is; for here is much difference of judgments,
even with the Learned and Orthodoxe: and this does arise from the different
places of Scripture, which, although they be not contrary one to another, yet
the weakness of our understandings is many times overmastered by some places:
Some (as you have heard) make it a Covenant of works, others a mixed Covenant,
some a subservient Covenant; but I am persuaded to go with those who hold it
to be a Covenant of grace: and, indeed, it is very easy to bring strong
arguments for the affirmative; but then there will be some difficulty to answer
such places as are brought for the negative; and if the affirmative prove true,
the dignity and excellency of the Law will appear the more. Now, before I come
to the arguments, which induce me hereunto, consider in what sense it In what
sense it may be a Covenant of grace explained.
may be explained that it is a Covenant of grace.

Some explain it thus, That it was indeed a Covenant of grace, but the Jews,
by their corrupt understanding, made it a Covenant of works, and so opposed it
unto Christ: and therefore, say they, the Apostle argues against the Law, as
making it to oppose the promises and grace: not that it did so, but only in
regard of the Jews corrupt minds, who made an opposition where there was none.
This has some truth in it, but it is not full.

Some make the Law to be a Covenant of grace, but very obscurely; and therefore
they hold the Gospel and the Law to be the same, differing only as the acorne
while it is in the husk, and the oak when it is branched out into a tall tree.
Now if this should be understood in a popish sense, as if the righteousness of
the Law and the Gospel were all one; in which sense the Papists speak of the
old Law and the new, it would be very dangerous and directly thwarting the
Scripture.

Some explain it thus: God (say they) had a primary or antecedent will in
giving of the Law, or a secundary and consequent: His primary will was to hold
out perfect and exact righteousness, against which the Apostle argues, and
proves no man can be justified thereby: but then God knowing man's impotency
and inability, did secondarily command repentance, and promises a gracious
acceptance through Christ; and this may be very well received, if it be not
vexed with ill interpretations.

But, lastly, this way I shall go: The Law (as to this purpose) may be
considered more largely, as that whole doctrine delivered on Mount Sinai, with
the preface and promises adjoined, and all things that may be reduced to it; or
more strictly, as it is an abstracted rule of righteousness, holding forth
life upon no terms, but perfect obedience. Now take it in the former sense, it
was a Covenant of grace; take it in the later sense, as abstracted from Moses
his administration of it, and so it was not of grace, but works.

This distinction will overthrow all the Objections against the negative. Nor
may it be any wonder that the Apostle should consider the Law so differently,
seeing there is nothing more ordinary with Paul in his Epistles, and that in
these very controversies, then to do so: as for example, take this instance,
Romans 10. ver. 5, 6. where Paul describes the righteousness of the Law from
those words, Do this, and live, which is said to have reference to Levit. 18.
5. but we find this in effect, Deuteronomy. 30. v. 16. yet from this very Chapter the
Apostle describes the righteousness which is by faith: And Beza does
acknowledge, that that which Moses speaks of the law, Paul does apply to the
Gospel: Now how can this be reconciled, unless we distinguish between the
general doctrine of Moses, which was delivered unto the people in all the
circumstantiall administrations of it, and the particular doctrine about the
Law, taken in a limited and abstracted consideration? Only this take notice
of, that although the Law were a Covenant of grace, yet the righteousness of
works and faith differ as much as heaven and earth. But the Papists, they make
this difference: The righteousness of the Law (says Stapleton, Antid in hunc
locum) is that which we of our own power have and doc by the knowledge and
understanding of the Law; but the righteousness of faith, they make the
righteousness of the Law, to which we are enabled by grace through Christ: So
that they compare not these two together, as two contraries, (in which sense
Paul does) but as an imperfect righteousness with a perfect. But we know, that
the Apostle excludes the works of David and Abraham, that they did in
obedience to the Law, to which they were enabled by grace; so necessary is it
in matter of justification and pardon to exclude all works, any thing that is
ours; Toll te a te, impedis te, said Austine well. Nor does it avail us, that
this grace in us is from God, because the Apostle makes the opposition wholly
between any thing that is ours, howsoever we come by it, and that of faith in
Christ. Having thus explained the state of the Question, I come to the
arguments to prove the affirmative: And thus I shall order them;

The first shall be taken from the relation of the Covenanters; Arguments
proving the Law a Covenant of grace.
God on one part, and the Israelites on the other: God did not deal at this
time, as absolutely considered, but as their God and Father. Hence God says,
he is their God; and when Christ quoteth the commanders, Hear O Israel, the
Lord thy God is one. And, Romans 9. 4. To the Israelites belong adoption, and the
glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the promises. Now,
unless this were a Covenant of grace, how could God be their God, who were
sinners? Thus also if you consider the people of Israel into what relation they
are taken, this will much confirm the point. Exodus 19. 5, 6. If ye will obey
my voice, you shall be a peculiar treasure unto me, and ye shall be unto me a
kingdom of Priests, and an holy Nation; which is applied by Peter to the
people of God under the Gospel. If therefore the Law had been a Covenant of
works, how could such an agreement come between them?

2. If we consider the good things annexed unto this Covenant, it must needs
be a Covenant of grace: for there we have remission one showing mercy unto
thousands: and by showing mercy, is meant pardon, as appears by the contrary,
visiting iniquity. Now does the Law, strictly taken, receive any humbling and
debasing of themselves? no, but curses every one that does not continue in all
the things commanded, and that with a full and perfect obedience. Hence Exodus
34. ver. 6, 7. God proclaims himself in manifold attributes of being
gracious, and long-suffering, keeping mercy for thousands, and forgiving
iniquity; and this he does upon the renewing of the two Tables: whereas, if
the people of Israel had been strictly held up to the Law, as it required
universal perfect obedience, without any failing, they must also necessarily
have despaired and perished without any hope at all.

3. If we consider the duties commanded in the Law so generally taken, it must
needs be a Covenant of grace: for what is the meaning of the first
Commandment, but to have one God in Christ our God by faith? For if faith had
not been on such terms commanded, it had been impossible for them to love God,
or to pray unto God. Must not the meaning then be, to love, and delight in God,
and to trust in him? But how can this be without faith through Christ? Hence
some urge, that the end of the commandment is love from faith unfeigned; but
because Scultetus does very probably, by commandment, understand there, The
Apostles preaching and exhortation, (it being in the Greek (...), and not
(...), or (...), and the Apostle using the word in that Epistle in the same
sense) I leave it. It Is true, there is no mention made of Christ, or faith in
the first Commandment, but that is nothing, for love also is not mentioned;
yet our Savior discovers it there, and so must faith and Christ be supposed
there by necessary consequence. And can we think, that the people of Israel,
though indeed they were too confident in themselves, yet when they took upon
themselves to keep and observe the Law, that the meaning was, they would do it
without any spot or blemish by sin, or without the grace of God for pardon,
if they should at any time break the Law.

4. From the Ceremonial Law. All Divines say, that this is reduced much argue
against circumcision, and even all the Ceremonial Law, as the Moral; yea the
first rise of the controversy was from that. Now all must confess, that
circumcision and the sacrifices did not oppose Christ, or grace, but rather
included them. And this has been always a very strong argument to persuade me
for the affirmative. It is true, the Jews they rested upon these, and did not
look to Christ; but so do our Christians in these times upon the Sacraments,
and other duties.

5. This will appear from the visible seal to ratify this Covenant, which,
you heard, was by sacrifices, and sprinkling the people with blood: And this
did signify Christ; for Christ he also was the Mediator of this Covenant,
seeing that reconciliation cannot possibly be made with a sinner through the
Mediation of any mortal man. When therefore Moses is called the Mediator, it
is to be understood typically, even as the sacrifices did wash away sin
typically. And, indeed, if it had been a Covenant of works, there needed no
Mediator, either typical, or real; some think Christ likewise was the Angel
spoke of Act. 7. with whom Moses was in the wilderness; and it is probable.
Now if Christ was the Mediator of the Law as a Covenant, the Antinomian
distinction must fall to the ground, that makes the Law as in the hand of
Moses, and not in the hand of Christ: whereas on Mount Sinai, the Law was in
the hand of Christ.

6. If the Law were the same Covenant with that oath, which God made to Isaac,
then it must needs be a Covenant of grace: But we shall find that God when he
gave this Law to them, makes it an argument of his love and grace to them; and
therefore remembers what he had promised to Abraham, Deuteronomy. 7. 12. Wherefore it
shall come to pass, if ye hearken to these judgments, and do them, that the
Lord thy God shall keep unto thee the Covenant, and the mercy which he swear
unto thy fathers. And, certainly, if the Law had been a Covenant of works, God
had fully abrogated and broken his Covenant and Promise of grace which he made
with Abraham and his seed. Therefore, when the Apostle, Gal. 3. 18. opposes
the Law and the Promise together, making the inheritance by one, and not the
other; it is to be understood according to the distinction before mentioned of
the Law taken in a most strict and limited sense: for it is plain, that Moses
in the administration of this Law had regard to the Covenant and Promise, yea,
made it the same with it.

Now to all this, there are strong Objections made from those Objections
impugning the former Arguments answered.
places of Scripture, where the Law and faith, or the Promise, are so directly
opposed, as Romans 10. before quoted, so Gal. 3. 18. Romans 4. 14. so likewise from
those places, where the Law is said to be the ministry of death, and to work
wrath. Now to these places, I answer these things:

First, that if they should be rigidly, and universally true, then that
doctrine of the Socinians would plainly prevail, who from these places of
Scripture do urge, that there was no grace, or faith, nor nothing of Christ,
vouchsafed unto the Jews; whereas we read they had the Adoption, though the
state was a state of bondage.

In the second place consider that as it is said of the Law, it works death,
so the Gospel is said to be the savor of death, and men are said to have no
sin, if Christ had not come; yea they are said to partake of more grievous
judgments, who despised Christ, then those that despised the Law of Moses: so
that this effect of the Law was merely accidental through our corruption: only
here is the difference, God does not vouchsafe any such grace, as whereby we
can have justification in a strict legal way; but he does whereby we may
obtain it in an Evangelicall way.

Thirdly, consider that the Apostle speaks these derogatory passages (as they
may seem to be) as well of the Ceremonial Law; yet all do acknowledge here
was Christ and grace held forth.

Fourthly, much of these places is true in a respective sense, according to the
interpretation of the Jew, who taking these without Christ, make it a killing
letter, even as if we should the doctrine of the Gospel without the grace of
Christ. And, certainly, if any Jew had stood up and said to Moses, Why do you
say, you give us the doctrine of life; it is nothing but a killing letter, and
the ministry of death, would he not have been judged a blasphemer against the
Law of Moses? The Apostle therefore must understand it, as separated, yea and
opposed to Christ and his grace.

And lastly, we are still to retain that distinction of the Law in a more large
sense, as delivered by Moses; and a more strict sense, as it consists in
precepts, threatenings, and promises upon a condition impossible to us, which
is, the fulfilling of the Law in a perfect manner.

LECTURE XXV.
ROMANS 3. 27. Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By what law? of works?
Nay, but by the law of faith.
THe Apostle delivered in the words before most compendiously The words opened.
and fully the whole doctrine of justification in the several causes of it,
from whence in this verse, he infers a conclusion against all boasting in a
man's self; which he manageth by short interrogations, that so he might the more
subdue that self confidence in us: Where is boasting? says he. This is to be
applied universally both to Jew and Gentile; but especially to the Jew, who
gloried most herein. And Chrysostom makes this the reason, why Christ deferred
so long, and put off his coming in the flesh, viz. that our humane pride might
be debased: for if at first he had come unto us, men would not have found such
an absolute necessity of a Savior. The second Question is, by what Law
boasting is excluded; and this is answered, first negatively, not by the Law of
works. Secondly positively, by the law of faith.

The Apostle, by the law of works, means the doctrine of works, prescribing
them as the condition of our justification and salvation; and he says works,
in the plural number; because one or two good works, though perfectly done (if
that were possible) would not satisfy the Law for our acceptance, unless
there were a continual and universal practice of them, both for parts and
degrees: And he calls the doctrine of faith, the law of faith, either because
(as Chrysostom says) he would sweeten and indeare the Gospel to the Jews, by
giving it a name which they loved; or, as Beza, he speaks here mimetically,
according to the sense of the Jews, as when John 6. he calls Faith a work,
because the Jews asked, What should they do? Now we have in the Scripture two
lively comments upon both these parts of the Text. The Pharisee mentioning what
he did, reckoning up his works, and never naming the grace of God, is a boaster
by the Law of works: but the Publican, that looks upon himself only as a
sinner, and so judges himself, he excludes all boasting by the law of faith.

The Papists they mean by works here in the Text, those The Papists corruptly
gloss upon this Text.
which go before faith, and they quote a good rule out of Gregory, though to a
foul error, Non per opera venitur ad fidem, sed per fidem ad opera: We do
not come by works to faith, but by faith to works. But this gloss of theirs
corrupts the text, because the Apostle in this controversy instanceth in
Abraham, showing how he had not wherewith to glory in himself, and therefore by
believing gave glory to God. If you ask why works do imply boasting, though we
be enabled thereunto by the grace of God? The answer is ready, because we
attribute justification to that work of grace within us, which yet is
defective, that is wholly to be given unto Christ.

The doctrine I shall pursue out of these words, is, That al though the Law
given by God to the Israelites was a Covenant of grace, yet in some sense the
Law and Gospel do oppose and thwart one another. And this matter I undertake,
because hereby the nature of the Gospel and the Law will be much discovered. It
is an error, says Calvin, lib. 2. Instit. cap. 9. in those who do never
otherwise compare the Gospel with the Law, then the merit of works with the
free imputation of righteousness: and (says he) this Antithesis or opposition
is not to be refused, because the Apostle does many times make them contrary,
meaning by the Law, that rule of life, whereby God does require of us, that
which is his own, giving us no ground of hope, unless in every respect we keep
the Law; but, says he, quum de tota lege agitur, when he speaks of the Law
more largely taken, he makes them to differ, only in respect of clearer
manifestation: or, as Pareus says of the old and new Covenant, they differ not
essentially, but as we say the old and new Moon.

Therefore before I come to show the exact opposition, take The Law and the
Gospel may be compared one with another in a double respect.
notice of two things as a foundation: first, that the Law and the Gospel may
be compared one with another, either in respect of the grace God gave under the
Old Testament, and the New, and then they differ only gradually; for they under
the Law did enjoy grace and the Spirit of God, (though Socinians deny it)
although indeed in respect of the Gospel, it may comparatively be said, no
spirit, and, no grace; as when it is said, The holy Ghost was not yet given,
because it was not so plentifully given: Or, secondly, the doctrine of the Law
in the mere preceptive nature of it, may be compared with the doctrine of the
Gospel, having the grace of God annexed unto it, and going along with it. Now
this is in some respects an unequal comparison; for, if you take the doctrine
or letter of the Gospel without the grace of God, that letter may be said to
kill as well as the letter of the Law: only this is the reason, why we cannot
say, The Spirit of God, or grace, or life is by the Law, because whatsoever
spiritual good was vouchsafed to the Jews, it is not of the Law, but of the
grace of God, or the Gospel. Therefore, whenever we compare Law and Gospel
together, we must be sure to make the parallel equal, and to take them so
oppositely, that we may not give the one more advantage, or less, then the
nature of it does crave and desire.

In the second place therefore, in this controversy, still remember The
different use of the word [Law] carefully to be observed.
to carry along with you the different use of the word [Law] as to this point;
for if you take Law strictly, and yet make it a Covenant of grace, you confound
the righteousness of works, and of faith together, as the Papists do: but if
largely, then there may be an happy reconciliation.

For the better opening of this, consider, that as the word What meant by Law
taken largely, and what strictly.
[Law] so the word [Gospel] may be taken largely, or strictly. We will not
trouble you with the many significations of the word (or whether it be used any
where of a sorrowful message, as well as glad news, as some say in two places
it is used, 1 Samuel 4. 17. 2 Samuel 1. 10. according to that rule of Mercers, Non
infrequens esse, specialia verba interdum generaliter sumi.) It is enough to
our purpose, that in the Scripture it is sometimes taken more largely, and
sometimes more strictly: when it is taken largely, it signifies the whole
doctrine, that the Apostles were to preach, Mar. 16. 15. Preach the Gospel to
every creature: and so Mar. 1. 1. The beginning of the Gospel, i. e. the
doctrine and preaching of Christ. Or else it is taken most strictly, as when
Luke 2. 10. Behold, I bring you glad tidings, etc. In which strict sense it is
called the Gospel of peace, and of the grace of God: So that, as you see, the
word [Law] is taken differently, largely, and strictly; thus also is the word
[Gospel] Now it is a great dispute, Whether the command of repentance belong
unto the Gospel, or no? I find the Lutherans, Antinomians, and Calvinists to
speak differently: but of that, when we take the Law and Gospel in their most
strict sense. Bellarmine brings it as an argument, that the Protestants do
deny the necessity of good works, because they hold, that the Gospel has no
precepts, or threatenings in it, lib. 4. de Justif. cap. 2. And he urges
against them, that Cap. 1. ad Romans where the wrath of God is said to be
revealed from heaven in the Gospel; but (as is to be showed) he there does
mistake the state of the controversy, taking the word [Gospel] in a larger
sense then they intended. Thus on the other side, Islebius, the father of the
Antinomians, he taught that repentance was not to be pressed from the
Decalogue, but from the Gospel; and that, to preserve the purity of doctrine,
we ought to resist all those who teach, the Gospel must not be preached but to
those who were made contrite by the Law: whereas the right unfolding of the
word [Gospel] would make up quickly those breaches.

The Law therefore and the Gospel admitting of such a different acception, I
shall first show the opposition between the Law and Gospel taken in their large
sense, and then in the limited sense. And this is worth the while, because this
is the foundation of all our comfort, if rightly understood. Now the Question
in this larger sense is the same with the difference between the Old and New
Testament, or Covenant; wherein the Learned speak very differently, and, as to
my apprehension, much confusedly. I shall not examine whether that be the
reason of calling it Old and New, which Austin, Chemnitius, and others urge,
because it presses the old man, and condemns that; whereas the new
incourageth and comfort new: I rather take it to be so called, because the
old was to cease and vanish away, being before the other in time. Now in my
method I will lay down the false differences, and then name the true.

The false differences are first of the Anabaptists and Socinians, False
differences between the Law and the Gospel:
who make all that lived under the Law to have nothing but temporal earthly
blessings in their knowledge and affections. And for this they are very
resolute, granting indeed that 1. Of Anabaptists, and Socinians, affirming,
That they under the Law in the Old Testament enjoyed only temporal blessings.
Christ and eternal things were promised in the Old Testament, but they were
not enjoyed by any till the New Testament: whereupon they say, that grace and
salvation was not till Christ came. And the places which the Antinomians bring
for believers under the New Testament, they take rigidly and universally, as if
there had been no eternal life, nor nothing of the Spirit of God, till Christ
came. Hence they say, the Gospel began with Christ, and deny that the promise
of a Christ, or Messiah to come is ever called the Gospel, but the real
exhibition of him only. This is false; for, although this promise be sometimes
called Act. 7. 17. Act. 13. 32. the promise made to the fathers, yet it is
sometimes also called the Gospel, Romans 1. 2. Romans 10. 14, 15. And there are
clear places to confute this wicked error, as the Apostle instancing in
Abraham and David, for justification, and remission of sins, which were
spiritual mercies; and that eternal life was not unknown to them, appears
by our Saviors injunction, commanding them to search the Scriptures, for in
them they hope for eternal life, John 11. 39. Thus also they had hope and
knowledge of a resurrection, as appears, Act. 24. 14. therefore our Savior
proved the resurrection out of a speech of Gods to Moses. And howsoever Mercer
(as I take it) think that exposition probable about Jobs profession of his
knowledge [that his Redeemer lives, and that he shall see him at the last day]
which make his meaning to be of Jobs persuasion of his restitution unto outward
peace and health again; yet there are some passages, in his expression, that
seem plainly to hold out the contrary. Though therefore we grant that that
state was the state of children, and so carried by sensible objects very much;
yet there was under these temporal good things, spiritual held forth. Hence
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. makes the Jews to have the same spiritual matter and
benefit in their Sacraments which we partake of.

In the next place, let us consider the false difference of the Papists; 2. Of
Papists.
and they have the Socinians also agreeing with them in some things.

First, they make this a great difference, that Christ, under the 1. That
Christ has added more perfect Laws under the New Testament.
New Testament, has added more perfect Laws, and sound counsels then were
before, as, Wilful poverty, Vowed chastity: and the Socinians, they labor to
show how Christ has added to every precept of the Decalogue; and they begin
with the first, that he has added to it these things: 1. A command to prayer,
whereas in the Old Testament, though godly men did pray, yet (say they
impudently) there was no command: and then Christ (say they) did not only
command to pray, but gave a prescript form of prayer. The second thing added
(say they) is to call upon Christ, as a Mediator in our prayers, which they in
the Old Testament did not. And thus they go on over all the Commandments,
showing what new things Christ has added, Small. refut. These. page 228. But I
have already showed that Christ never added any moral duty which was not
commanded before.

The second difference of the Papists, is, to make the Law and 2. That the Law
and Gospel are capable of no opposite consideration.
the Gospel capable of no opposite consideration, no not in any strict sense,
but to hold both a Covenant of works, and that the Fathers under the Old
Testament, and those under the New, were both justified by fulfilling the Law
of God. And herein lies that gross error, whereby Christ and grace are
evacuated: But the falsehood of this shall be evinced (God willing) when we
speak of the Law and Gospel strictly, which the Papists, upon a dangerous
error, call the Old Law, and the New.

Lastly, the Papists make a third difference, that under the 3. That the
Fathers that died under the Old Testament, went not immediately to heaven.
Old Testament, the Fathers that dyed went not immediately to heaven; therefore
(say they) we do not say, Saint Jeremiah, or, Saint Isaiah, but after Christ's
death, then a way was opened for them and us: Hence is that saying, Sanguis
Christi, est clavis Paradisi: but this is sufficiently confuted in the Popish
controversies.

I come therefore to the Antinomian difference, and there I 3. Of Antinomians,
That God saw sin in the believers of the Old Testament, not of the New.
find such an one, that I am confident was never heard of before in the world;
It is in the Honeycomb of Justification, page 117. God. (says he) saw sin
in the believers of the Old Testament, but not in these of the New; And his
Reason is, because the glory of free Justification was not so much revealed,
the veil was not removed. What a weak reason is this? Did the less, or more
revelation of free Justification make God justify the less freely? It had
been a good argument to prove that the people of God in the Old Testament did
not know this doctrine so clearly as those in the New, but that God should see
the more or less, because of this, is a strange Consequence. The places of
Scripture which he brings, Zech. 13. 1. Dan. 9. 14. would make more to the
purpose of a Socinian, (that there is no pardon of sin, and eternal life,
but under the Gospel) rather then for the Antinomian: and one of his places he
brings, Jer. 50. ver. 20. makes the contrary true; for there God promises
pardon of sin, not to the believers under the Gospel, but to that residue of
the Jews which God would bring back from captivity, as the context evidently
shows: so the place, Heb. 10. 17. how grossly is it applied unto the believers
of the Gospel only? for, had not the godly under the Old Testament the Law
written in their hearts? and had they not the same cause to take away their
sins (viz, Christ's blood) as well as we under the Gospel?

His second reason is, God saw sin in them, because they were children, that
had need of a rod; but he sees none in us, because full grown heirs. What a
strange reason is this? for parents commonly see less sin in their children,
while young, then when grown up; and their childishnes does more excuse them.
And although children only have a rod for their faults, yet men grown up they
have more terrible punishments. Hence the Apostle threatens believers that
despise Christ, with punishment above those that despised Moses.

His third Reason is, because they under the Law, were under a Schoolmaster,
therefore he sees sin in them, but none in us, being no longer under a
Schoolmaster. But here is no solidity in this Reason: for first, the chiefest
work of a Schoolmaster is to teach and guide; and so they are said to be
under the Law as a Schoolmaster, that so they may be prepared for Christ: and
thus it is a good argument to Christians under the Gospel, that their lives
should be fuller of wisdom and grown graces, then the Jews; because they are
not under a Schoolmaster as children: As if one should say to a young man,
that is taken from the Grammar-schoole, and transplanted in the University,
that he should take heed he does not speak false Latin now, for he is not in
a Grammar-schoole now, but in an University. Thus you see, the chief notion of
a Schoolmaster is to prepare and guide, his correcting is accidental; yea, if
we may believe Quintilian, a master in this kind, he is against the
Schoolmasters beating of boys, as that which would make them of a servile
disposition. But Solomon gives better rules. Grant therefore that this is to
be understood of knockes and blows which they had, what can we say under the
Gospel, that we are children freed from the rod? though we have not a
Schoolmaster, yet we have a father to correct us. Heb. 12. 5, 6, 7, 8. Do we
not in that place find a plain contradiction of this doctrine? For the Apostle
does there allege a place of the Old Testament, to us now under the Gospel:
And, certainly, afflictions are as necessary to the godly now, as fire to the
drossy vessel, and filing to the rusty iron. As the scourging and beating of
the garment with a stick, beats out the mothes and the dust; so do troubles
and adversities corruptions from the children of God.

The fourth reason why God saw sin in them, was, Because they were not made
perfect according to the conscience, Hebr. 9. 13, 14. Who would not think that
the Author were some Papist, or Socinian? for if the Text prove any thing to
his purpose, it will evince that the godly then were made partakers of no more
then a legal bodily cleansing. But as for the place that is miserably
arrested; for the Apostle his intent is to show, that the godly then could not
obtain righteousness by any of those sacrifices, and therefore the good they
enjoyed was from Christ the true sacrifice: so that unless he will deny
Christ's blood to be effectual and operative in the Old Testament, this reason
must fall to the ground. Other reasons he brings, which are to the same
purpose, and therefore may easily be overthrown; as, That God saw no sin in
them, because their Preachers did not open the kingdom of heaven, but he
sees none in us, because the least of our Ministers do bring us into this
kingdom. Every one may see the weakness here; for it supposes that God did
not so fully pardon and forgive, because the doctrine of these things was not
so clearly preached. If the Authors arguments had been, that Christ dyed not
so fully for them, or that Christ his righteousness was not so fully imputed
unto them, then there had been some probability. Thus you see this false
difference also. I do not meddle with that opinion, Of seeing sin in the
believers, because it is not the proper place.

I find other differences between the Law and the Gospel, made by another
Antinomian, and they are in a Sermon upon the two Covenants of grace, where the
Author, having truly asserted, that God did transact with the Jews in a
Covenant of grace; yet he makes that Covenant, and this under the Gospel, 2.
That the Covenant God made with the Jews, and this under the Gospel are two
distinct Covenants.
to be two distinct Covenants: They are not (says he, page 45.) one and the
same Covenant diversely administered, but they are two distinct Covenants: His
arguments are, because they are called Old and New: But those names enforce no
essential difference. The Commandment of love is called an old Commandment,
and a new; yet it is the same for essence: so likewise the terms of a good,
and better, do imply no more then a graduall difference in their excellency.
But that which I shall especially animadvert upon, is, the differences he
gives between these two Covenants of grace so really distinguished, as he
supposes, and in this matter, the Author speaks much error in a few lines.

The first difference assigned by him is in respect of remission 3. That
Plenary remission of sins under the Gospel, not so under the Law, because no
sacrifice, save for sins of ignorance.
of sins; but he goes on other grounds then the Hony-combe does. They had
not (says he) a plenary remission of all sorts of sins: There were
sacrifices for sins of ignorance; but not for other sins that were done
presumptuously: and if no sacrifices were admitted, then consequently no pardon
obtained: but under the Gospel, Christ's blood cleanses from all sin, page 54.
Now here is an heap of falsehoods:

First, that all the legal sacrifices were only for sins of mere Confut. 1.
All Sacrifices were not only for sins of ignorance.
ignorance; (This is also an error among Sociniaus) but Levit. 6. 2, 3. there
is a sacrifice appointed for him that shall lie, and swear falsely in detaining
of his neighbors goods, and this could not be but a sin of knowledge. This
is also abundantly confirmed in Levit. 16. where the feast of expiation and
atonement is made for all the sins of the people, ver. 16. He shall make an
atonement, because of the uncleanness of the children of Israel, and because
of their transgressions in all their sins. So ver. 21. He shall confess over
the live goat all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their
transgressions in all their sins. Thus ver. 30. That ye may be clean from
all your sins before the Lord: and ver. 34. This shall be an atonement for
the children of Israel, once a year for all their sins. Thus you see the
Scripture speaks plainly for all their sins; yet the Antinomian speaks as
boldly, as if nothing were truer; that there were sacrifices for some sorts of
sins only. So that you are wisely to judge of such books, and not believe
every confident expression. It Is true, the Apostle calls these sins (...),
Heb. 9. 7. we translate it errors; for the Apostle does not mean sins
committed out of mere ignorance, but all kind of sins, as appears by
Levit. 16. but therefore are all sins called so, because omnis malus ignorant:
There being no sin which does not proceed from some error in the practical
judgment? for although a man sin wilfully and advisedly, so that there is
Nulla alia causa malitiae nisi malitia, (as Austin speaks of some of his
sins) yet there is even then an error in that man's conscience.

But in the second place, grant, that there were no legal sacrifices 2. No
legal sacrifice, therefore no remission of sin, inconsequent.
appointed for some sins, (as indeed particular sacrifices were commonly for
sins either of ignorance, or, if wilful, not of such an high and moral
guilt; particular (I say) for that feast of expiation was general) yet there
is no consequence in the world, that therefore there was no pardon to be sued
out. How foolish then were David and Manasses, in suing out pardon for their
bloud-guiltinesse, if there were no such thing allowed by God? How gross is
this error? If this doctrine were true, then most of those that are reckoned
as godly in the Old Testament could have no pardon, because many of them did
fall into such gross sins, for which there was no particular sacrifice
appointed.

3. Again, under the New Testament, is there not the sin 3. The sin against
the holy Ghost under the Gospel not cleansed by Christ's blood.
against the holy Ghost, for which no pardon is promised? Not indeed but that
Christ's blood is sufficient to take away the guilt of it; and Gods mercy is
able to pardon it, and to give repentance to those that have committed it; but
he has declared he will not.

But, says the Author, under the Gospel it is said, The blood of Christ
cleanses us from all sin. Now, if the Jews would have brought all their
estates to have been admitted, to bring a sacrifice for such or such a sin,
they could not have done it. I reply: What if they could bring no sacrifice,
could they not therefore have pardon? Why then does God proclaim himself to
them, a God gracious, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin? Why does he,
Isai. 1. call upon Jerusalem to repent of her whoredoms, murders, saying, If
their sins were as scarlet, they should be made as white as snow. This error
is such a dead fly, that it is enough to spoil the Authors whole box of
ointment. Besides, was not that true ever since Adams fall, as well as under
the Gospel [Christs blood cleansing from all sinne] I cannot see how any but a
Socinian will deny it.

4. Another difference that the Author makes about remission 4. That under the
old Covenant, God gave not remission of sins to any, but upon antecedent
conditions; not so under the Gospel.
of sins to them, and us under the Gospel, is as strange, and false as the
former: It is this, God did not give the grace of remission of sins to any
under the old Covenant, but upon antecedent conditions; they were to be at cost
for sacrifices. (How does this agree with his former reason, if he mean it
universally?) They were to confess their sins to the Priests, yea, in some
cases to fast: but now under the Gospel there is no antecedent doing of any
thing to the participation of the Covenant. But in this difference also there
is much absurd falsehood, and contradiction to himself: Contradiction (I say)
for he brings Ezekiel. 16. where God speaks to the Church, that while she was
in her blood, he said to her, Live; therefore there was no antecedent
condition. But what man of reason does not see that God speaks there of the
Church of the Jews, as appears through the whole Chapter? Therefore it makes
strongly against the Author, that she had no preparations; so that other place
Isai. 65. 1. I am found of them that sought not for me; grant that it be a
prophecy of the Gentiles, yet was it not also true of the Jews, before God
called them? Did the Jews first seek God, or God them? How often does God tell
them, that the good he did to them, was for his own names sake, and not any
thing in them?

Again, if these things were required as antecedent qualifications in them for
the remission of sins, then all those arguments will hold true upon them,
which they would fasten, as injuries to Christ and grace, upon us. If (say
they) we must repent, and humble our selves, and so have pardon, this is to
cast off Christ, this is to make an idol of our own righteousness, etc. It
seems the Jews under the Old Testament might do all these things without
blame: A Jew might say, My services, my sacrifices, my prayers will do
something to the remission of my sins: but a Christian may not. The Author
urges also that place, While we are enemies, we were reconciled to God: but
does not this hold true of the Jews? Did they first make themselves friends
with God? What is this but to hold the doctrine of free will and works in the
time of the Law; and the doctrine of grace under the new only? As for faith,
whether that be a condition or not, I shall not here meddle: only this is plain,
it was required of them under the old Covenant, in the same manner as it is of
us now.

A third difference made as to remission of sins, is this: Their 5. That
remission of sins under the Law was successively and imperfect, under the
Gospel at once and perfect.
remission of sins was gradatim, successively, drops by drops. If a man had
sinned, and offered sacrifice, then that sin was pardoned; but this did not
extend to future ignorance, that was not pardoned till a new sacrifice.
Therefore the Apostle says, there was a remembrance of sin; but Christ by
one sacrifice once offered, has perfected for ever them that are sanctified.
To this I answer, 1. That this difference grew upon this supposition, as if the
sacrifice offered did by its own virtue take away sin. For, if we suppose (as
we must) that Christ the true sacrifice was represented in every sacrifice, and
all the virtue and benefit to come from Christ's blood, and not the blood of the
sacrifices, then could that take away all sins as well as some sins:
unless the Author were a Socinian, denying the efficacy of Christ's blood at
all under the Old Testament, he can never expedite himself from this.

Again, this contradicts themselves; for the reason why they say, faith does
not justify, but evidence and declare it only, is, because Gods love and free
grace to justify, is from all eternity, and therefore no sins past, or future,
can hinder this. Now I ask, whether God did not justify David, and the godly
in those days from all eternity, (as they speak) and if he did, why should
not all their sins be remitted fully once, as well as the sins of believers
under the Gospel? Certainly, the Apostle brings David for an instance of
justification and remission of sins, as well under the New Testament, which
does suppose that we are justified, and have our sins pardoned in the like
manner.

In the mean while, let me set one Antinomian to overthrow another: for one of
that way brings many arguments to prove that we are justified, and so have all
our sins done away before we believe. Now, if all sins are done away, then
there is no successive remission. Well then, you shall observe most of the
arguments hold for the believers under the Old Testament, as well as New; for
they are elected as well as we, God laid their sins upon Christ as well as
ours: If God love us to day, and hate us to morrow, let Arminians hear and
wonder why they should be blamed that say, We may love God to day, and hate
him to morrow. Now all these reasons will fall foul upon this Antinomian,
whose error I confute, and he must necessarily hold, that the godly had but
half pardons, yea, that they were loved one day, and hated the next.

Again, consider that the place of the Apostle urged by him for his error,
viz. Christ offering himself once for all, to perfect those that are
sanctified, is of a perpetual truth ever since Adams fall: and it was as
efficacious to those before his death, as after; therefore he is called a Lamb
slain from the beginning of the world, although the Socinians would pervert
and wrest that place.

Lastly, I dony that even under the Gospel that all sins are forgiven to the
justified person at once. He is indeed put into a state of justification,
whereby no condemnation will fall upon him, yet his sins are not forgiven,
before they are committed, and repented of. And for this purpose we pray for
the daily pardon of them, which is not to be understood of the mere
declaration or assurance of the pardon, but for the pardon it self. But this
shall be on purpose spoken to in the matter of Justification. The forenamed
Author has some other differences, but they are confuted already for the
substance of them.

LECTURE XXVI.
ROMANS 3. 27. Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By what law? of works?
Nay, but by the law of faith.
We have confuted the false differences, and now come to lay down the true,
between the Law and the Gospel, taken in a larger sense.

And, first, you must know that the difference is not essential, or The
difference between the Law and the Gospel is not essential, but accidental
only.
substantial, but accidental: so that the division of the Testament, or
Covenant into the Old, and New, is not a division of the Genus into its
opposite Species; but of the subject, according to its several accidental
administrations, both on Gods part, and on man's. It is true, the Lutheran
Divines, they do expressly oppose the Calvinists herein, maintaining the
Covenant given by Moses, to be a Covenant of works, and so directly contrary
to the Covenant of grace. Indeed, they acknowledge that the Fathers were
justified by Christ, and had the same way of salvation with us; only they make
that Covenant of Moses to be a superadded thing to the Promise, holding forth a
condition of perfect righteousness unto the Jews, that they might be
convinced of their own folly in their self-righteousnesse. But, I think, it is
already cleared, that Moses his Covenant, was a Covenant of grace: and the
right unfolding the word Law, and Gospel, does easily take away that difference
which seems to be among the Learned in this point; for, certainly, the godly
Jews did not rest in the Sacrifices, or Sacraments, but by faith did really
enjoy Christ in them, as well as we in ours. Christ was figured by the
Mercy-seat: Now, as both the Cherubims looked to that, so both the people of
the Jews and Gentiles did eye and look to Christ. For although Christ had not
assumed our flesh then, yet the fruit and benefit of his incarnation was then
communicated, because of the decree and promise of God, 1 Pet. 1. 20.

2. This difference is more particularly seen, in respect of the degrees
Heavenly objects more clearly revealed in the N. Testament, then in the Old.
of perspicuity and clearness in the revelation of heavenly objects. Hence, 2
Pet. 1. 19. the light in the Old Testament is compared to the light in the
nightime; and that in the New, to the light of the sun in the day. The sum
of all heavenly doctrine is reduced to these three heads: credenda, speranda,
and facienda.

Now, if you consider the objects of faith, or things to be believed, 1. It is
so for the credenda.
they were more obscurely delivered to them: The doctrine of the Trinity, the
Incarnation of Christ, and the Resurrection; these things were but in a dark
manner delivered, yet, according to the measure of that light then held forth,
they were bound to believe those things: so that as Moses had a veil upon him,
thus also his doctrine had; and, as the knowledge we have here is (...), in
respect of that in heaven, so that in the Old Testament may be said to be
(...), in respect of that in the New.

As it is thus for the credenda, things to be believed, so it is also 2. For
the speranda.
for the speranda, things hoped for. The opinion of the Socinians and others is
very wicked, which makes them before Christ, only to hope in temporal good
things, and the notion of the Papists observing that the Church under the New
Testament is called ecclesia, but never synagoge; and the meeting of the Jews,
called always synagoge, but never ecclesia, does suppose that the Jews were
gathered together as so many beasts, rather then called together as men. But
this notion is judged false; and they instance Heb. 10. and James 2. where the
Church of the Christians is called synagoge; although Cameron, Praelect. de
eccles. page 66. does industriously labor to prove that the Apostles did
purposely abstain from the word synagoge in reference to Christians: but his
reason is not that the Papists urge; for howsoever the good things promised
were for the most part temporal, and carnal, yet these figured spiritual and
heavenly. It Is Austins observation, showing that the Jews should first be
allured by temporal mercies, and afterward the Christians by spiritual: As,
says he, first that which is animal, and then that which is spiritual: The
first man was of the earth, earthly; the second man was of heaven, heavenly:
Thus we may say of the Jew and the Christian, That which was animal was
first, and then that which is spiritual. Hence Heb. 11. 16. Abraham and others
are said to seek an heavenly country; so that although it be true which Austine
(as I remember) said, though you look over the whole book of the Old Testament,
yet you shall never find the kingdom of heaven mentioned there: yet we see
David making God his portion, and professing that he has nothing in heaven
but him; which argues, that they looked farther then mere outward mercies.
These good things promised to the Jews were figurative; so that as a man
consists of a soul and body, thus also does the promises; there is the
kernel, and the shell: but the Jews, for the most part, looked only to the
outward. Hence Christ, when he opened those things to his Disciples, did like
a kind father, that breaks the shell, and gives the kernel to his children.

In the third place, there are facienda, things to be done. Now, 3. For the
facienda.
although it be true, (as I have proved) that Christ has added no new command
to the Law of Moses; and whatsoever is a sin now in moral things, was also
then; yet the doctrine of these things was not so full, penetrating, and
clear, as now under the Gospel. There is a dangerous book, called, The
Practical Catechism, that venteth much Socinian poison, and in this
particular, among other things, that Christ added to the Law, and perfected it,
filled up some vacuities in it. Certainly, the Law of God being perfect, and to
which nothing must be added, cannot be said to have vacuities in it; and Christ
is said to fill the Law, in respect of the Pharisees, who by their corrupt
glosses had evacuated it. And one of his reasons, which he brings to prove his
assertion, makes most against him, viz. Except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, etc. This makes against him,
because our Savior does not say, Except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Law, and the Prophets; (which he must have said, if his
opinion were true) but, of the Scribes and Pharisees, who had corrupted the
text with their false glosses. I will not consider his other reasons; for they
are so weak, that he seems to be afraid of them: And, certainly, it would be
strange Divinity, to say, that a Jew might have lusted after a woman in his
heart, and not have sinned; but now it would be sin in a Christian.

The second particular difference is in respect of the measure of grace. The
measure of grace ordinarily greater in the Gospel, then under the Law.
Hence the Scripture speaks, as if they had under the Old Testament none at
all, merely because there was not such a plentiful effusion of his Spirit upon
them: not but that if we consider some particular persons, they might have
such degrees of grace, that few under the Gospel can be compared unto them, as
Abraham and David; but this was not according to the ordinary dispensation of
his graces then: So that as one star differs from another in glory, thus
did the Church of the Jews, from that of Christians. They had drops, but we
have the fountain; they had glimmerings, but we have the sun it self. Now,
as these are privileges, so they are also great engagements for more eminent
knowledge, and holiness then was in those days. But all that the Prophets
reproved in their people, ignorance, selfconfidence, resting upon external
duties, etc. the same may we in our hearers.

3. Their condition was more servile. All things did press The Jews under the
Law were in a more servile condition, then Christians under the Gospel.
more to fear, and bondage, then now among us. Hence the Apostle, Gal. 4. 30.
compares their condition to the sons of the bondwoman. Hence Austine makes
Timor, and Amor, the difference of the two Testaments; God met man sinning in
the Law, as he did Adam, with terror, charging sin upon him; but under the
Gospel, as the father did the prodigal son, coming home to him. See Hebr. 12.
this difference considered by Paul, Ye are not come to Mount. Sinai, etc.
Only you must rightly understand this. The Jews had a twofold consideration;
one, as being servile, and another of them, as sons, but under age: so that
they were not wholly excluded from the spirit of Adoption: yea, the Apostle
says, That the Promises, and Adoption did belong unto them; and David does
appropriate God unto himself, as his God, in his prayer, which argued he had
the Spirit of Adoption, inabling him to call, Abba, Father. Now, as they were
more obnoxious to an inward bondage, so they were under an outward bondage
also, opposite unto which is that Christian liberty Paul speaks of, whereby
the yoke of all those ceremonious burdens is taken off them; and Paul does
vehemently and fervidly dispute against those that would introduce them.

In the asserting of this difference, one scruple is to be removed, which is
this, How could the Jews be said to be in more servitude then the Christians;
merely because of those ceremonies and sacrifices? for, seeing they were
commanded by God, and had spiritual significations, they did thereby become
helps unto their faith, and were exercises of their piety. As under the Gospel
none can say that the Sacraments are a burden, and tend to bondage, because
they are visible signs: But rather God does hereby condescend in his great
love unto us; for, as Chrysostom observes, if we had been incorporeall, God
would not then have appointed visible Sacraments, (no more then he does to
Angels) but now consisting of soul and body, he does institute some things in
an accommodated way to help us, and to promote our faith.

But this may be answered, that although they were spiritual in signification,
yet, they being many, and requiring much bodily labor, they could not be
observed without much difficulty: and therefore no Priest, or Levite, that was
spiritually minded, in those days, but would rather choose to exercise the
ministry under the Gospel, then to busy himself in the killing of beasts, and
fleaing of them, which was their duty to do. Therefore well did Austine
observe the love of God in appointing for us Sacraments, fewer in number,
easier in observation, and more clear in signification. Again, those bodily
exercises did rather fit those that were children, and were more convenient to
that low condition, then unto the full age of the Church: and Sacraments,
though they be an help, yet they suppose some imbecility in the subject:
therefore in heaven there shall be none at all. Only take notice, that Popery,
having introduced so many ceremonious observations, and such a multitude of
Church-precepts, has made the times of the Gospel to be the times of noneage
again. This also discovers that such are not spiritual, that delight in
ceremonial ways: and the more men fix their heart upon sensible
observations, the less they partake of spiritual.

I will instance but in a fourth (because these differences are The
continuation of the Law was last, but till the coming of Christ.
given by most that treat on this subject) and that shall be the continuance
and abode of it. The Law, in that Mosaicall administration, was to endure but
till Christ the fullness came; and then, as the scaffolds are pulled down when
the house is built, so were all those external ordinances to be abolished,
when Christ himself came. A candle is superfluous when the sun appears. A
Schoolmaster is not necessary to those that have obtained perfect knowledge.
Milk is not comely for those who live on solid meat. The chafe preserves the
corn, but when the corn is gathered, the chafe is thrown away. And when the
fruit comes, the flower falls to the ground. And in this sense the Apostle,
Heb. 7. does argue against it, saying, it could bring nothing to perfection.
Neither could any of those purifications work any good and spiritual effect. It
behoved therefore that a Christ should be exhibited, which would work all those
spiritual mercies for us. Hence had there been no farther proceeding, but we
must always have stayed in such offerings, and sacrifices, it had been
impossible for ever that God should have been pleased with us. It is therefore
in this respect that it was to be antiquated, and a better covenant to come in
the room of it. The Apostle calls those things, Heb. 10. a shadow: Now a
shadow that does show a man, but yet the shadow that does not live, or eat, or
speak: so those sacrifices they shadowed out Christ, but yet they could not
exhibit the real benefits by Christ. As Elisha sent his servant with a staff
to raise up the Shunamites son, but he could do nothing; then comes the
Prophet himself, and raises him up: so it is here, Moses was like the Prophets
servant, he went with a staff to raise up those dead in sin, but could not
do it without Christ.

Here may be one Question made upon these things, and that is, Why God
appointed such various and different administrations? This providence of God
became a rock to the Marcionites, and Manichees, insomuch that they denied the
same God to be Author of both the Testaments. To answer this; certainly God, if
he pleased, could have as clearly revealed Christ, and poured out his Spirit,
giving eternal life as plentifully under the Law as under the Gospel. But to
ask why he did thus, would be as presumptuous and arrogant, as to ask, why
he created the world no sooner. If the Schoolmaster teach the new beginner in
another way, then he does the proficient in study, no man does blame his
wisdom. As in the Paschall Lamb, they were to eat the flesh, but to throw
away the bones; so in all matters of religion, those things that are revealed
and profitable we may feed upon, and whatsoever is abstruse and difficult, we
may let go. Praestat per Deum nescire, quia ipse non revelaverit; quam per
hominem scire, quia ipse praesumpserit, Tert. de Anima.

Now, to conclude, I come to give the difference between the Differences
between the Law strictly taken, and the Gospel strictly taken.
Law strictly taken, as requiring exact and perfect obedience, promising
eternal life upon no other terms: and the Gospel strictly taken, as a solemn
promulgation of Christ, and his benefits to a broken sinner.

And the first is this, The Law in some measure of it is made 1. The Law in
some measure is known by the light of Nature, but the truth of the Gospel must
be wholly revealed by God.
known by natural light, and so agreeable to a natural conscience. I say in
some measure; for there is much of the duty of the Law that is unknown to
natural consciences, yet the most external and outward duties are known, and
accordingly as the truth of them is discerned by natural light, so the will
does join with them as good to be done (though not in a godly way.) But it is
otherwise with the Gospel, for the very truth of it must be wholly revealed by
God, so that no natural acumen in the world, could ever have excogitated this
wonderful remedy, of justification and salvation by Christ. And as it is thus
above knowledge, so the heart is more averse from this way.

And by this you may see, why it is such an hard thing to believe, why the
people of God are so hardly persuaded, when laden with guilt, to roll their
souls upon Christ. The reason is, there is nothing in his natural conscience
to further him in this duty. Press a man against murder, theft, adultery, here
is natural conscience joining for this duty: but urge him to believe, this is
altogether above nature. Hence it is also, that naturally we seek to be
justified by the works we do; so that to be justified by faith is another
way, then corrupted nature in us, or right nature in Adam would have inclined
unto. Therefore let not the people of God be so discouraged in their agonies
and combats about their unbelief: Let them know, that a little degree of faith
is of great consequence. And if he said, that Christianity was perpetua naturae
violentia, a perpetual violence offered to nature, this is most sure in matter
of faith. We are as froward in rejecting of a promise, as stubborn in
refusing of a command.

The second difference is in the object matter: The Law holds 2. The Law
requires perfect righteousness, the Gospel brings pardon through Christ.
forth a perfect righteousness, and will not admit of any other; but the
Gospel that condescends, and brings pardon through Christ. And this is the
maine difference, and in which they can never be made one. Now the Papist,
Arminian, Socinian, and others, do overthrow this grand and maine difference,
holding justification by works under some notion, or other: whereas the Apostle
makes an immediate opposition, If of faith, then not of works. The Apostle
does not distinguish of works of nature, and works of grace, or works of grace
perfect and imperfect: but speaks absolutely, and so does also exclude that
subtle opinion, of making faith to justify as a work; for the Apostle, making
an opposition between faith and works, must necessarily take faith under such a
notion, as cannot be a work. And this truth is that which is the pillar of the
Church of God, and that which differenceth us from Jews, Turks, Papists, and
many heretics.

The third difference is from the manner of obtaining the good thing 3. If
righteousness were by the Law, eternal life were a debt, but the Gospel holds
it forth as Gods mere indulgence.
promised: He that shall obtain eternal life by the Law, has it of debt,
and by way of justice, Romans 4. 4. Not as if Adam in the state of innocence
could have merited at Gods hands; or as if God became in strict justice a
debtor; seeing Adam was beholding to God for all: but in some sense it would
have been so. Hence boasting would not then have been excluded: eternal life
being the reward of those holy works, which he should have done, but now all
is of grace, through Christ; our righteousness is merely Gods indulgence: not
the holiness that is in us, but the sin pardoned makes us acceptable. So
that the broken contrite heart can never sufficiently admire the grace and
goodness of God in the Gospel-way: And no marvel if so be that Paul is so
frequently ravished with the considerations thereof. This may well be called
good news, (...) And if our hearts were spiritually affected, we should say,
How beautiful are the feet of those that bring these glad tidings?

The fourth difference is in respect of the subject: The Law, strictly 4. The
Law is only for those that have a perfect nature, the Gospel for broken hearted
sinners.
taken, is only for those who have a perfect and holy nature: therefore it is a
Covenant, (as you heard) of friendship, and not of reconciliation, so that
there is no necessity of any Mediator. Indeed, there is good use of urging it
to proud Pharisaicall men, to bring them out of love with themselves; to gross
sinners, that their hearts might be broken, seeing the curses belong to them;
yea, to the godly also, to teach them the fair copy they are to write after:
but, in respect of justification by it, and eternal life, there is none can
have that benefit but such who shall be found perfectly holy: It was not Moses,
but the serpent that did heal; so it is not the Law, but Christ that can
comfort broken hearts stung with sin. The Priest, and the Levite, they pass
by, not pitying of him. But now the Subject to whom the Gospel is given, is a
broken hearted sinner, one that feels himself ready to be covered over with
all confusion, one that lies wounded in conscience, crying for some oil to be
poured into his wounds. Oh! what miserable comforters then must all Popish and
Socinian Doctors be, who will advise the sinful tempted man to seek out works
for the Law; which is as uncomfortable, as to bid a sick diseased man get some
of the Philosophers stone, or to eat a piece of a Phoenix, and then, and not
till then, he shall be in ease?

Lastly, The Law differs in the form of it from the Gospel: The 5. The Law
conditional, the Gospel absolute.
Law is conditional, but the Gospel absolute. I find this Question a very
troublesome one, Whether the Gospel be absolute or no? Whether Gospel be a
doctrine of works? Whether it has precepts, or threatenings? Now the meaning
of this Question is not, Whether the Gospel be so absolute that it requires
not faith as a condition: Or, Whether it be so absolute, as that it excludes
all repentance and holiness; he is an infant in Scripture that thinks so:
But, Whether the Gospel does promise eternal life to a man for any dignity,
intention, merit, work or any disposition in us under any distinction or notion
whatsoever; or only to faith apprehending Christ. Now the Answer is, that if we
take the Gospel largely, for the doctrine of Christ and the Apostles, there is
no question, but they pressed duty of mortification and sanctification,
threatening those that do not so: but if you take the Gospel strictly, then it
holds forth nothing but remission of sins through Christ, not requiring any
other duty as a condition, or using any threatening words thereunto. But then it
may be demanded, To which is repentance reduced? Is it a duty of the Law, or a
duty of the Gospel? Of the Law, strictly taken, it cannot be, because that
admits none. Must it not therefore be of the Gospel? And I find in this
particular different either expressions or opinions; and generally the Lutheran
Divines do oppose the Antinomians upon this very ground, that the Gospel is
not a Sermon of repentance, nor does exhort thereunto; but it must be had from
the Law, which does prepare them for Christ. I shall therefore, because this
was the foundation of Antinomianisme, and it had its rise from hence, handle
the next day this Question, Whether the Gospel does command repentance, or no.
Or, Whether it be only from the Law.

LECTURE XXVII.
ROMANS 3. 27. Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By what law? of works?
Nay, but by the law of faith.
I Proceed to the handling of this Question, Whether the Gospel preach
repentance or no: seeing this made the great commotion at first between the
Orthodoxe and Antinomians. I shall despatch this in few words,

1. The word [Repentance,] is taken sometimes largely, and sometimes Repentance
strictly taken, is distinguished from Faith.
strictly: when it is taken largely, it comprehends faith in it, and is the
whole turning unto God, Rev. 2. 5. sometimes it is used strictly, for sorrow
about sin, and so distinguished from faith. Thus they repented not, that they
might believe, and faith and repentance are put together. Now all the while a
man has trouble and sorrow for sin, without faith, it is like the body
without the soul; yea, it carries a man with Cain, and Judas, into the very
pit of despair; when a man sees how much is against him, and not how much is
for him, it cannot but crush, and weigh him down to the ground. The tears of
repentance are like those waters, very bitter, till Christ sweeten them.

2. Consider this, that the Law was never merely and solely administered, The
Law and the Gospel are inseparably united in the Word and Ministry.
nor yet the Gospel, but they are twins, that are inseparably united in the
Word and Ministry. Howsoever strictly taken, there is a vaste gulf of
opposition between each other; yet in their use they become exceeding
subservient, and helpful mutually. It is not good for the Law to be alone, nor
yet the Gospel. Now the old Antinomians, they taught repentance by the Gospel
only, that so the Law might be wholly excluded: thus they did not consider
what useful subserviency they had to one another. The Law directs,
commands, and humbles: The Gospel, that comfort, refreshes, and
supporteth. And it is a great wisdom in a Christian, when he has an eye
upon both. Many are cast down, because they only consider the perfection of
the Law, and their in ability thereunto: On the other side, some grow secure
and loose, by attending to free grace only. I do acknowledge, that free grace
will melt the heart into kindness, and the fire will melt, as well as the hammer
batter into pieces; but yet, even this cannot be done, without some use of the
Law.

3. Therefore, being there is such a near linck between both these Faith and
Repentance are wrought both by the Law and the Gospel.
in their practical use, we need not, with some Learned men, make two
Commandments of the Gospel only; to wit, the Command to believe, and the
other Command to repent: neither need we, with others, make these Commands
Appendices to the Gospel, but conclude thus, that, seeing Faith and Repentance
have something initiall in them, and something consummative in them, therefore
they are both wrought by Law and Gospel also: so that as they say, there is a
legal repentance and an evangelicall; so we may say, there is a legal faith,
which consists in believing of the threatenings, and the terrors of the Lord;
and there is an evangelicall faith, which is in applying of Christ in the
Promises. So that legal faith, and repentance, may be called so initially; and
when it is evangelicall, it may be said to be consummate. If therefore you
ask, Whether Faith and Repentance be by the Law, or by the Gospel; I answer,
It is by both, and that these must not be separated one from the other in the
command of these duties.

Hence, fourthly, unbelief is a sin against the Law, as well as against
Unbelief a sin against the Law, as well as the Gospel.
the Gospel. Indeed the Gospel that does manifest, and declare the object of
justifying faith, but the Law condemns him that does not believe in him:
Therefore Moses and the Law is said to bear witness of Christ, and to accuse
the Jews for refusing the Messiah. The Law, that requires belief in
whatsoever God shall reveal: The Gospel, that makes known Christ; and then the
Law, this as it were enlightened by the Gospel, does fasten a command upon us
to believe in Christ. This is true, if you take the Law strictly and separately
from Moses his administration of it: but if you take it largely, as it was
delivered by Moses, then faith in Christ was immediately commanded there,
though obscurely, because (as is proved) it was a Covenant of grace. You see
then, that as in the transfiguration, there was Christ, and Moses together in
glory; so likewise may the Law, and the Gospel be together in their glory; and
it is through our folly, when we make them practically to hinder one another.

Though all this be true, yet if the Gospel be taken strictly, it The Gospel
taken strictly, comprehends no more then the glad tidings of a Savior.
is not a doctrine of repentance, or holy works; but a mere gracious promise
of Christ to the broken heart for sin; and does comprehend no more then the
glad tidings of a Savior. It is true, learned men do sometimes speak
otherwise, calling Faith and Repentance the two Evangelicall commands, but then
they use the word more largely, for the doctrine of Christ and the Apostles,
but in a strict sense it is only a promise of Christ, and his benefits: And in
this sense we may say, the Gospel does not terrify, or accuse. Indeed there
are woeful threatenings to him that rejects Christ; yea, more severe then to
him that refused Moses: but this arises from the Law joined in practical use
with the Gospel. And in this sense also it is said to be the savor of death
unto many. This arises not from the nature of the Gospel, but from the Law,
that is enlightened by the Gospel: so that he being already condemned by the
Law, for not believing in Christ, he needs not to be condemned again by the
Gospel.

If you say, May not the sufferings of Christ make us to repent of sin, and
all the love he showed therein? Do not godly Ministers, to work people into
an hatred of sin, tell them the price of blood is in every sin committed?
Is it not said, that they shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and
mourn for their sins?

I answer, all this is true, but then these things work by way of an object,
not as a command; and it is from the Law, that we should show our selves kind
unto him who loved us unto death; so that the object is indeed from the Gospel,
but the command to be affected with his death, because of his kindness therein
manifested, does arise from Gods Law: Let therefore those who say, that the
preaching of the Gospel will humble men, and break their hearts for their
sins, consider how that it is true, by the Gospel as an object, by the Law,
as that which commands such affections to those objects.

Let the use of this doctrine be, to direct Christians in their practical
improvement of Law and Gospel, without hindering each other. There are many
things in Christianity that the people of God make to oppose one another, when
yet they would promote each other, if wisely ordered. Thus they make their joy
and trembling, their faith and repentance, their zeal and prudence, the Law
and Gospel to thwart one another; whereas by spiritual wisdom they might
unite them: take the Law for a goade, the Gospel for a cordial: from the one
be instructed, from the other be supported: when thy heart is careless and
dull, run thither to be excited; when thy soul is dejected and fearful, throw
thy self into the arms of the Gospel. The Law has a loveliness in it as
well as the Gospel: the one is a pure character and image of the holiness of
God; the other is of the mercy and goodness of God; so that the consideration
of either may wonderfully inflame thy affections and raise them up.

LECTURE XXVIII.
ROMANS 10. 4. For Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one
that believes.
AS the Physician, (says Peter Martyr) who intends to give strong physic
which may expel noxious humors in the diseased body, does prepare the body
first by some potions to make it fluide and fit for operation: so Paul, being
sharply to accuse the Jews, and to drive them out of their
selfe-righteousnesse, does manifest his love to them, sugaring the bitter pill
that they might swallow it with more delight. And this his love is manifested,
partly by his expression [brethren,] partly by his affections and prayers [my
hearts desire and prayer.] The occasion of this his affection is the zeal that
they have for God, but in a wrong way: As the skillfull husbandman, that sees
a piece of ground full of weeds, and brambles, wishes he had that ground,
which by culture and tillage would be made very fruitful. Amo unde amputem,
said the Orator, I love the wit that needs some pruning. The luxuriancy is a
sign of fertility.

This zeal was not a good zeal, partly because it wanted Zeal that either
wants knowledge, or puffs up, no good zeal.
knowledge, and therefore was like Sampson without his eyes; partly because it
made them proud, which the Apostle fully expresses in two particulars: 1. They
sought to establish their own righteousness. They sought, this did imply
their wilful pride and arrogance, and to establish, which supposes their
righteousness was weak and infirm, ready to fall to the ground: but they
would set it up for all that, as the Philistims would their Dagon, though he
was tumbled down before the Ark. 2. The Apostle expresses it signally, when
he says, They submitted not themselves to the righteousness of God: In the
original, They were not submitted, in the passive signification, which still
supposes the great arrogance that is in a man naturally, being unwilling to
deny his own righteousness, and to take Christ for all. This being so, take
notice by the way of a foul error of the Antinomian, who denying assurance
and comfort by signs of grace, labors to prove, that an unregenerate man
may have universal obedience, and sincere obedience, bringing this instance of
the Jews for sincere obedience.

But sincerity may be taken two wales: First, as it opposes Sincerity taken
two ways.
gross hypocrisy, and so indeed the Jews zeal was not hypocritical,
because they did not go against their conscience: or, Secondly, it may be
taken for the truth of grace, and so the Jews zeal was not a true gracious
zeal, for the reasons above named. Now my Text, that is given as a reason, why
the Jews did look to their own righteousness, and not that of Gods, because
they neglected Christ, who is here said to be the end of the Law for
righteousness. The word (...) does sometimes signify, The word (...) what it
signifies.
the extreme and last end of a thing: Thus Mark. 13. 7. The end is not yet; so
those who are against the calling of the nation of the Jews, bring that place,
1 These. 2. ver. 16. Weath is come upon them (...): as if there were no mercy to
be expected. But this may admit of another exposition. Sometimes the word is
used for perfection and fullfilling of a thing, according to the word (...)
Romans 2. 27. Shall not uncircumcision, (...), if it fulfill the Law? So James
2. 8. If you fulfill the royal Law. In this sense Aristotle called the soul
(...), (...), as that which did perfect: And the sacrifices before marriage,
which was the consummation of that near bond; or because of the cost then
bestowed, were called (...). Erasmus takes it in this sense here, and does
translate it perfection: for which Beza does reprove him, saying, he does not
remember that the word is so used any where. But that place, 1 Timothy 7. 5. The
end of the commandment is charity, may seem to confirm this sense; for,
certainly, that phrase is no more then that in another place, Love is (...),
the fullfilling of the Law. Therefore, I think, this is a great part of the
meaning here, Christ is the end, that is, the perfection, the fulness of the
Law. Yet, I shall take in also the end of intention, or a scope, unto which the
Lawgiver aimed, when he gave the Law: and this will be showed in the
particulars; The doctrine is, That Christ is the end of the Law for
righteousness to every believer.

For the opening of this consider, 1. That an end may be taken either for that
of consumption and abolition; or for that of perfection and confirming: Finis
interficiens, and finis perficiens, as Austine called it. Now, in the former
sense, Christ was the end of the Ceremonial Law, the end abolishing; although
that was also an end of perfection to them: and so some understand it of the
Ceremonial Law, and the Prophesies: They all shadowed out Christ, and ended in
him. And this indeed is a truth, but it is not pertinent to the scope of the
Apostle, who speaks of such a Law, that the Jews expected righteousness by
in the performing of it; which must be the Moral Law only.

Now, when we speak of the Moral Law, having Christ for the end of it, then in
the second place, that may be considered two ways:

1. Either rigidly, and in an abstracted consideration from the administration
The Law, as it is considered rigidly, and in the abstract, so Christ is not the
end thereof, unless it be by accident.
of it, as it does require perfect obedience, and condemning those that have it
not: now in this sense Christ cannot be the scope, or end of the Law, but it is
merely by accident, and occasional, that a soul abased and condemned by the
Law does seek out for a Christ: only you must know, that the Law, even so
taken, does not exclude a Christ, It requires indeed a perfect righteousness
of our own; yet if we bring the righteousness of a surety, though this be not
commanded by the Law, yet it is not against the Law, or excluded by it;
otherwise it would have been unjustice in God to have accepted of Christ our
surety for us.

2. Or else the Law may be taken in a more large way for the administration As
the Law is taken largely for the administration of it by Moses, so Christ was
intended directly.
of it by Moses, in all the particulars of it; and thus Christ was intended
directly, and not by accident; that is, God when he gave the Law to the people
of Israel, did intend that the sense of their impossibility to keep it, and
infinite danger accrewing thereby to them, should make them desire and seek out
for Christ: which the Jews generally not understanding, or neglecting, did
thereby, like Adam, go to make fig leaves for their covering of their
nakedness, their empty, external obedience.

According to this purpose Aquinas has a good distinction about an end; That
an End is twofold: Either such, to which a thing does naturally incline of it
self: Or secondly, That which becomes an end, by the mere appointment and
ordination of some Agent. Now the end of the Law, to which naturally it
inclines, is eternal life to be obtained by a perfect righteousness in us;
but the instituted and appointed end, which God the Lawgiver made in the
promulgation of it, was the Lord Christ: So that, whatsoever the Law commanded,
promised, or threatened, it was to stir up the Israelites unto Christ. They
were not to rest in those precepts or duties, but to go on to Christ; so that a
believer was not to take joy with any thing in the Law till he came to Christ,
and when he had found him, he was to seek no further, but to abide there. Now
this indeed was a very difficult duty, because every man naturally would be his
own Christ and Savior. And what is the reason, that under the Gospel believers
are still so hardly persuaded to rest only on Christ for righteousness, but
because of that secret self dependence within them.

Having premised these things, I come to show how Christ is Christ is the end
of intention in the dispensation of the Law.
the end of the Law, taken largely in the ministry of Moses. And in the first
place, Christ was the scope and end of intentention, God by giving so holy a
Law requiring such perfect obedience, would thereby humble and debase the
Israelites; so that thereby they should the more earnestly fly unto Christ,
even as the Israelite, stung by a serpent, would presently cast his eyes upon
the brazen Serpent. It is true, Christ was more obscurely and darkly held forth
there; yet not so, but that it was a duty to search out for Christ in all those
administrations. And this you have fully set forth in that Allegory which Paul
makes 2 Corinthians. 3. 7. I shall explain that place, because it may be wrested
2 Cer. 3. 7. opened.
by the Antinomian; as if, because that kind of ministry which was by Moses,
was to be done away and evacuated, therefore the preaching of the Law were also
to be abrogated: but that is The ministry of the Gospel more excellent then
that of the Law in three respects.
far from the Apostles scope; for the Apostle his intent there is to show the
excellency of the ministry of the Gospel above that of the Law, and that in
three respects.

1. In regard one is the ministry of death and condemnation, the 1. Because it
is the ministry of life and righteousness, the Law of death and condemnation.
other of life and righteousness: Therefore the one is called Letter, and the
other Spirit. Now this you must understand warily, taking the Law nakedly, and
in it self, without the Spirit of God, and the Gospel with the Spirit; for, as
Beza well observes, if you take the Gospel without Gods Spirit, that also is
the ministration of death, because it is as impossible for us to believe, as it
is to obey the Law by our own power: only life and spirit is attributed to the
Gospel, and not to the Law; because Christ, who is the author of the Gospel,
is the fountain of life; and when any good is wrought by the Law, it comes
from the spirit of Christ.

The second excellency is in regard of continuance and duration. The 2. Because
of its duration, it being to abide always, but the ministry of Moses to be
abolished.
ministry of Moses was to be made void and abolished; which is to be
understood of that Jewish pedagogy, not of every part of it; for the Moral, as
given by Moses, does still oblige us Christians, as has been already proved:
but the ministry of the Gospel is to abide always; that is, there is no new
ministry to succeed that of the Gospel, although in heaven all shall cease.

The third difference is in regard of glory: God caused some material 3.
Because the glory that comes by the Gospel is spiritual, that which shone
upon Moses but material.
glory to shine upon Moses, while he gave the Law, hereby to procure the
greater authority and majesty to the Law; but that glory which comes by the
Gospel is spiritual, and far more transcendent, bringing us at last into
eternal glory. So that the former glory seems to be nothing in comparison of
this: Even as the light of a candle or torch seems to be nothing (says
Theophylact) when the light of the Sun arises. Now the Apostle, handling these
things, does occasionally open an allegory, which had not Paul by the Spirit of
God found out, we neither could, or ought to have done it. And the
consideration of that, will serve much for my present matter. I know diverse men
have diverse thoughts about exposition of this place; so that there seems to
be a veil upon the Text, as well as upon Moses his face: But I shall plainly
understand it thus; Moses his face What signified by the shining of Moses his
face.
shining when he was with God, and coming from him, does signify the glory and
excellency of the Law, as in respect of Gods counsels and intentions; for
although the Law did seem to hold out nothing but temporal mercies, devoid of
Christ and heaven, yet, as in respect of Gods intention, it was far
otherwise. Now says the Apostle, The Jews were not able to fix their eyes
upon this glory; that is, the carnal Israelites did not behold Christ in the
ministry of Moses, because a veil is upon their hearts. The Apostle makes the
veil upon Moses to be a type of the blindness and hardness of heart in the
Israelite: so that, as the veil upon Moses covered the glory of his face, so
the veil of blindness and stupidity upon the heart of the Jews does hinder
them from the glory of the Law, which was Christ. And that this is so, does
appear, viz. where the Israelite is denied to look steadfastly, (...) (the word
in my Text) to the end of that ministry, which was to be abolished, and that
end was Christ: so that this Text does fully prove my intent, which is, that
Christ was in some measure a glorious object in the administration of the Law,
but the veil upon the Israelites heart hindered the sight of it. Now (says
Paul) when it shall turn (as we translate, or rather, when they shall turn,
for the word (...) is observed to be used always of persons, (and though the
word be in the singular number in the original, yet, according to the custom
of Scripture, it may be understood plurally, because he speaks of a collective
body:) When, says the Text, this turning shall be, the veil shall be taken
away: or rather, as Camero well observes, in the present tense, It is taken
away: for you cannot conceive that the Jews shall be first turned unto God,
and the veil afterward to be taken away; but they both are together. I will
give another instance, that Christ was the end of intention or aim in the
dispensation of the Law, from Galat. 3. 23, 24. We were kept under the Law,
till Faith came: Wherefore the Law was our Schoolmaster, to bring us unto
Christ. In which words, not the Moral Law simply taken, but the whole
dispensation of the Jews, is compared to the instruction of a Schoolmaster.
Now, as a Schoolmaster does not only beat or correct, but teach also and
direct: Thus the Law did not only severely curb and keep from sin, but did also
teach Christ. Hence we are said to be kept under the Law; which although some
make an expression from the strict keeping and watching which soldiers in a
garrison use to make, yet a learned man makes it to denote the duty of a
Schoolmaster, as one who is to give an account of such committed to his
charge: In which sense Cain said, Am I my brothers keeper? The Law then as a
Schoolmaster did not only threaten and curse, or, like the Egyptian
taskmasters, beat and strike, because the work was not done, but did show where
power and help was to be had, viz. from Christ only.

In the second place, Christ is the end of perfection to the Law: for, 2.
Christ is the end of perfection to the Law.
the end of the Law being to justify, and to bring to eternal life, this
could not be attained by our own power and industry; not by any defect of the
Law, but by reason of our infirmity. Therefore Christ he has brought about
this intent of the Law, that we should be justified, and have life. If the end
of humane laws be to make good and honest men, much rather is the end of the
Moral Law appointed by God himself: But the Law is so far from making us
good, as that it works in us all evil, which effect of the Law in himself
the Apostle acknowledges: so that as good food and nourishment received by a
diseased stomach, does increase the disease more, according to that rule,
Corpora impura, quanto magis nutrias, deteriora reddis; thus it is in every man
by nature: The Law, which is for holiness and life, becomes to cause sin
and death. Christ therefore, that the Law may have its end, he takes our
nature upon him, that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us.

3. Christ is the end of perfection of the Law, in that the mere 3. Christ is
the end of perfection of the Law, in vouchsafing as his Spirit, that we may
obey it.
knowledge of the Law, with the external obedience only to it, was not
available to any benefit. Therefore Christ vouchsafes his holy Spirit unto us,
regenerating of us, whereby we come in part to obey the Law of God: So that the
people of God have a righteousness or holiness of works, but it is imperfect,
and so not inabling us to justification; and in this sense it is, that the
people of God are said to keep Gods commandments. So then, whereas our
condition was so by sin, that we were neither able nor willing to obey the Law
of God in the least degree, Christ does give us grace, and cures us so far,
that we are said to walk in his Law. Now herein was the great mistake of the
Jews, they gloried and boasted of the Law, but how? of the knowledge of it,
and external observation, without looking to Christ; and this was to glory in
the shadow without the substance.

4. Christ is the end of perfection of the Law, in that his righteousness 4.
Christ is the end of perfection of the Law, in that his obedience to it is made
ours.
and obedience unto the Law, is made ours, and so in him, as our surety, we
fulfill the Law. I know this assertion has many learned and godly adversaries,
but as farae as I can see yet, the Scripture seems to hold it forth, Romans 5.
There is a parallel made of the first Adam and his offspring, with Christ the
second Adam and his seed; and the Apostle proves, that we are made righteous
by Christ, as sinners in him, which was partly by imputation, so 2 Corinthians. 5.
ult. as Christ is made our sin by imputation, so we his righteousness. So Romans
8. 3, 4. That which was impossible to the Law -- Christ sent his Son, that the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the
flesh, but after the Spirit. I know there are answers made to these places, but
the proper discussion of them will be in the handling of justification: only
here is an obvious Objection, If the righteousness of Christ be made ours, so
that we may be said to fulfill the Law, then we are still justified by a
covenant of works, and so there is no new covenant of grace. I answer, Learned
men, as Beza and Perkins, Do this and live, because of Christ's fulfilling the
Law as our surety; for the imputation of it does not make it cease to be our
real righteousness, though it be not our inherent righteousness. But I see
not why we need grant the consequence, [viz. Because Christ's fulfilling of the
Law is made ours, therefore we have eternal life by the Law:] and the reason
is, because this righteousness of Christ's is not ours by working, but by
believing. Now the Law in that command, Do this and live, did require our
personal working and righteousness; so that we cannot be said to have
salvation by that rule, because it is not the righteousness which we in person
have wrought: and this will fully appear, if you consider in the next place
the subject to whom Christ is made righteousness, and that is to him that The
believer is the subject to whom Christ is made righteousness.
believes: he does not say, to him that works, so that we have not eternal
life by our Do this, but by believing, or resting upon Christ his Do this.
And this phrase does plainly exclude Stapletons, and other Papists observations
on this place, as if the righteousness by faith, or of Christ, were the same
in kind with the righteousness of works, differing only gradually, as an
infant, and a grown man; for, if so, the Apostle would have said working, and
not believing. It is a great skill in Divinity to amplify this righteousness
of faith without works, so as neither the Papist, or the Antinomian may
encourage themselves thereby: but of that in some other place. As you take
notice of the subject [Beleever] so the universality, every one, which does
take in both Jew and Gentile: Therefore the Jew could not, or ought not to
think that those external rites and observations could bring them to a true
righteousness.

Lastly, consider in the Text, for what end Christ is thus the Righteousness is
the end for which Christ is thus the perfection of the Law.
perfection of the Law; and that is for righteousness. The proper seat of
handling this is in the doctrine of Justification, only let me briefly answer a
Question made by some, Whether the righteousness of faith, or that we have by
Christ, be the same in nature with the righteousness of works, and of the
Law? Stapleton says, They must needs be one, because the Law will direct to no
other righteousness then that of its own. It is true, the Law strictly taken,
will not properly and perse direct to any righteousness, but that which the
Law requires; yet by accident, and indirectly it may: yea, as it was given by
Moses, it did directly and properly intend Christ, though not primarily, as
some think; but finding us unable to attain to its own righteousness, did
then lead us unto Christ: Yet these two righteousnesses are diverse, rather then
contrary, (unless in respect of justification, and so indeed its impossible to
be justified by both those ways) otherwise they are both together in the same
subject, yea a righteousness of faith does necessarily draw along with it in
the same subject a righteousness of works, though it be imperfect, and so
insufficient to justify.

Use. Is Christ the end of the Law for righteousness? then The believer has
great cause to bless God, for providing such a righteousness for him.
let the believer bless and praise God for providing a righteousness, and
such a righteousness for him. How destitute and naked was thy condition? Had
justice taken thee by the throat, and bid thee pay what thou owe, thou
could not have returned that answer, Let me alone, and I will pay thee all.
Neither Angels nor men could provide this righteousness for thee. Do thou
thank God for providing clothes for thy body, food for thy belly, an house for
habitation? Oh, above all thank him that he has provided a righteousness for
thy soul. Thou troubled soul because of sin, thou think with thy self, Oh
if I had no sin, if I were guilty of no corruption, how well were it! O ye
glorious Angels and Saints, ye are happy, because ye have a righteousness! Why
do thou not consider, that God has found out for thee, even for thee, in
this world, a righteousness, whereby thou art accepted of him?

Again, consider it is such a righteousness that satisfies and pleases God.
Thy holiness cannot content him for justification, but that of Christ can. As
the light of the Stars and Moon cannot dispell totally the darkness of the
night, only the light of the Sun can do that.

LECTURE XXIX.
MAT. 5. 17. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments,
and shall teach men so, shall be called the least in the Kingdom of heaven.
OUr Savior being to vindicate the Law from all corrupt The Text opened.
glosses of the Pharisees, he does in the first place (as Chrysostom thinks)
remove the odium that might be cast upon him, as if he did indeed destroy the
Law; for it was then generally received, that only was Law, which the Pharisees
declared to be so. And this he does, ver. 17. Think not that I am come to
destroy the Law. The reason he gives, is from the perpetual nature of the
Law: heaven and earth, the whole world shall sooner fall into pieces, then any
tittle of that. And the Prophets are here joined to the Law, not so much in
regard of their predictions, as because they were Interpreters of the Law. The
second reason is from that evil which shall befall him, that does break it,
and here he names a twofold Antinomianisme; one in life and practice, the
other in doctrine: That in practice is aggravated, though it be one of the
least commandments. They are called least, either because the Pharisees
thought them so, or else indeed, because all the commands of God were not
concerning duties of the same consequence. The other in doctrine is expressed
in those words, And teach men so. I cannot consent to Beza's interpretation,
making this teaching to be by example and life, or else (...), to be put for
(...), although, as if the meaning were, He that does break in his practice my
commandment, although he do teach them in doctrine. There is no necessity of
offering such violence to the Text. But if we interpret it of doctrinall
breaking, it will very well agree with the Pharisees, who made void the
commandments of God by the doctrines of men. The evil that shall befall such,
is in those words, [He shall be called the least in the Kingdom of heaven.]
Called is put for is, or be; He shall be the least. By Kingdom of heaven, What
meant by Kingdom of heaven.
some understand that Kingdom of glory in heaven; and by least, mean nullus,
none: he shall not at all enter into the Kingdom of heaven.

Others by Kingdom of heaven do understand the Church of God, and so they
express it, when there shall be a reformation in the Church, and truth should
break forth, which was presently to come to pass, then those corrupt teachers,
who would poison men, should be discovered, and then they should be least, that
is, of no account; even as it fell out to the Pharisees, though for a while
they were highly esteemed among men. I forbear to touch upon that Question
hotly disputed with some, Whether our Savior do in this discourse mean only
the Moral Law, or the Ceremonial also, as being not to my purpose. That it is
meant chiefly of the Moral Law, appears by the instances which Christ
gives. From the Text thus opened, I observe, That any doctrine, which teaches
the abrogation or dissolution of the Law, is highly offensive unto God. The
doctrines of men may either directly or covertly overthrow the Law. Covertly,
three ways.


For the opening of this consider, that the doctrines of men may either
directly, and with an open face overthrow the Law, as the Marcionites and
Manichees did: or else interpretatively, and more covertly; and that is done
three ways.

1. When they make not the Law of God to be so full and extensive 1. When they
make it not so extensive in its obligation as it is.
in its obligation, as indeed it is; and thus the Pharisees they made void the
Law, when they affirmed outward acts to be only sins: and thus the Papists do
in part, when they make the Law no further to oblige, then it is possible for
us to keep it. These doctrines do in tantum, though not in totum destroy the
Law.

2. When men hold such principles, that will necessarily by way of 2. When they
hold principles by necessary consequence enforcing the abrogation of it.
consequence enforce the abrogation of the Law. And thus, though some
Antinomians do expressly and boldly assert the abolishing of it, at least to
believers; yet those that have more learning and wariness, do disclaim it,
and account it a calumny: but even at the same time, while they do disclaim
it (as it is to be showed presently) they hold such assertions, as do
necessarily infer the abrogation of it.

3. The Law may be doctrinally dissolved, by pressing such duties 3. When they
press such duties upon men, as will necessaitate them to break the
commandments of God.
upon men, whereby they will be necessitated to break the commandments of God.
Thus when the Pharisees taught, that whatsoever vow was made concerning any
gift, they were bound to do it, though thereby they were dis-inabled to honor
their parents. And this is most remarkably seen in the Church of Rome, who, by
the multitude and necessity of observation of their Church precepts and
constitutions, make men to break the plain commandments of God. Now I shall
briefly instance generally about those errors that dissolve Gods Law, and then
more particularly about the Antinomian doctrine.

The first Heretics that opposed it, were the Marcionites and The Marcionites
and Manichees the first oppugners of the Law.
Manichees. Marcion (whom Tertullian calls Mus ponticus, because of his
arroding and gnawing the Scripture, to make it serviceable to his errors; he,
among other errors, broacheth this, That the old Law (as he calls it) was
evil, and that it came from an evil god. To him in this opinion succeeded
Manes, (who truly might be so called, because of his madness, although his
followers, to take away that reproach, called him Mannichaus, as much as one
that poured forth Manna, as some affirm.) This man's errors, though they were
very gross, yet so propagated, that it was two hundred years ere they were
quieted. These and their followers all agreed in this, to reject this Law of
God. There were also Heretics called Anomi, (as it were sine lege) but their
error was, to think that they could by their knowledge comprehend the divine
nature: And they gave so much to this their faith, that they held, Whosoever
should embrace it, though he committed heinous and atrocious sins, yet they
should do him no hurt, Epiphan. lib. 3. Haeres. 36. But to let pass these, we
may say, Popery is in a great part Antinomianisme. And Antichrist he is called
(...), that lawless One: for, is not their doctrine, that the Pope may
dispense with the Laws of God, and that the Pope and Christ have the same
Consistory, Antinomianisme? And in particular, we may instance in their taking
away the second Commandment out of some Catechismes, because it forbids the
worshipping of Images. Hence Vasquez, one of their Goliahs, does expressly
maintain, that the second Commandment did belong only to the Jews, and so
not obliging us Christians, thinking it impossible to answer our arguments
against their Image Worship, if that be acknowledged still in force.

Is there not also a generation of men, who do by doctrine deny the fourth
Commandment? How many late books and practices have been for that opinion? but
has it not fallen out according to the later exposition of my Text, that they
are the least in the Kingdom of heaven; men of little account now in the
Church while reforming?

I might likewise speak of some Anabaptists, (for there are of that sect that
disclaim the opinion) who overthrow the fifth Commandment, by denying
Magistracy lawful for Christians.

But I will range no further: The Antinomians do more fall against this Text
then any, in that they do not only by doctrine teach the dis-obligation of the
least commandment, but of all, even of the whole Law. This does appear true
in the first Antinomians in Luthers time, of whom Islebius was the captain: he
was a Schoolmaster, and also Professor of Divinity at Islebia. It seems he
was a man like a reed shaken with every wind: for first he defended, with the
Orthodox, the Saxon Confession of Faith; but afterward was one of those that
compiled the Book called the Interim. When Luther admonished him of his error,
he promised amendment, but for all that secretly scattered his error; which
made Luther set forth publicly six solemn disputations against the
Antinomians, that are to be seen in his works: which argues the impudency of
those that would make Luther on their side. By these disputations of Luthers he
was convinced, and revoked his error, publishing his recantation in print: yet
when Luther was dead, this Euripus did fall into his old error, and publicly
defended it. Now how justly they might be called Antinomists, or, as Luther
sometimes, Nomomachists, appears by these Propositions, which they publicly
scattered about in their papers: as,

1. That the Law is not worthy to be called the word of God. Positions of
Antinomians.
2. To hear the word of God, and so to live, is a consequence of the Law. 3.
Repentance is not to be taught out of the Decalogue, or any Law of Moses, but
from the violation of the Son of God in the Gospel. 4. We are with all our
might to resist those, who teach the Gospel is not to be preached but to those
whose hearts are first made contrite by the Law.
These are Propositions of theirs set down by Luther, against which he had his
disputations, Vol. 1. Thusselberge, lib. contra Antin. page 38. relates more:
as,

1. The Law does not show good works, neither is it to be preached that we may
do them. 2. The Law is not given to Christians; therefore they are not to be
reproved by the Law. 3. The Preachers under the Gospel are only to preach the
Gospel, not the Law; because Christ did not say, Preach the Law, but Gospel to
every creature. 4. The Legal Sermons of the Prophets do not at all belong to
us. 5. To say, that the Law is a rule of good works, is blasphemy in Divinity.
Thus you see how directly these oppose the Law, and therefore come under our
Saviors condemnation in the Text: yet at other times, the proper state of the
Question between the Orthodox and Antinomists, seems to be, not, Whether a
godly man do not delight in the Law, and do the works of the Law; but,
Whether he does it, Lege docente, urgente, and mandante, the Law teaching,
urging, and commanding: As for the later Antinomians, Doctor Tailor, and Mr.
Burton, who preached, and wrote against them, do record the same opinions of
them. Doctor Tailor in his Preface to his Book against them, says, One
preached, that the whole Law, since Christ's death, is wholly abrogated and
abolished. Another, That to teach obedience to the Law, is Popery. Another,
That to do any thing, because God commands us; or to forbear any sin, because
God forbids us, is a sign of a moral man, and of a dead and unsound
Christian. Others deliver, That the Law is not to be preached, and they that
do so, are Legal Preachers.

Master Burton also in his Book against them affirms, they divided all that
made up the body of the Church of England into Hogs or Dogs: Hogs were such
that despised justification, living in their swinish lusts; Dogs such, who
sought to be justified by their works. He tells of one of their disciples,
that said, Away with this scurvie sanctification; and that there is no
difference between godly here, and in their state of glory, but only in sense
and apprehension. Many other unsavory assertions are named by those Authors,
but these may suffice to give a taste of their opinions; for it is elegantly
spoken by Irenaeus, in such falsehoods as these are, lib. 2. c. 34. adversus
Haereses. We need not drink up the whole sea, to taste whether the water be
salt; but, as a statue that is made of clay, yet outwardly so gilded, that it
seems to be gold, if any man take a piece of it in his hand, and discover
what it is, does make every one know what the whole statue is: so it is in this
case.

For my part, I am acquainted with them no other ways but by their Books which
they have written, and in those every error is more warily dressed then in
secret. There I find, that sometimes they yield the Law to be a rule of life,
yea, they judge it a calumny to be called Antinomists; and if so, their
adversaries may be better called Antifidians. And it cannot be denied, but that
in some parts of their Books there are wholesome and good passages; as in a wood
or forest, full of shrubs and brambles, there may be some violets and
primroses: yet for all this, in the very places where they deny this assertion
as theirs, they must be forced to acknowledge it. The Author of the Assertion
of Free Grace, who does expressly touch upon these things, and disclaimes the
opinion against the Law, page 4. and page 6. yet he affirms there such
principles, from whence this conclusion will necessarily follow.

For first, he makes no real difference either in Scripture, or use of words,
between the Law reigning and ruling; so that if the Law rule a man, it reigns
over him. Now then, they deny that the Law does reign over a believer (and so
do the Orthodox also) therefore they must needs hold, that it cannot be a rule
unto him. And then, page 5. whereas Doctor Tailor had said, The Apostle does
not loose a Christian from the obedience to the Law, or rule thereof (he
adds,) He dare not trust a believer without his keeper, as if he judged no
otherwise of him, then of a malefactor of Newgate, who would rob and kill, if
his Jailer be not with him. Again, this is most clear by what he says, page
31. he refuteth that distinction of being under the mandatory power of the
Law, but not the damnatory: he makes these things inseparable, and as
impossible for the Law to be a Law, and have not both these, as to take the
brains and heart from a man, and yet leave him a man still. Now then, seeing
he denies (and so do all Protestant Writers) that a believer is under the
damnatory power of the Law, he must also deny, he is under the mandatory,
because (says he) this is inseparable.

I will in the next place give some Antidotes against this opinion, Antidotes
against Antinomian errors.
and the Authors thereof. Luther calls them, Hosts Legis, Organa Satanae: he
says, their doctrine is more to be taken heed of, then that of the Papists;
for the Papists, they teach a false or imperfect repentance, but the
Antinomians take all away from the Church. Rivet calls them, Furores
Antinomorum.

In the first place, awe thy heart with a fear against errors in 1. Be afraid
of entertaining errors in doctrine, as that which may damn thee.
doctrine, as that which may damn thee, as well as an open gross sin.
Consider that place, Galat. 5. 20. where heresies are reckoned among those sins
that are very gross, and do exclude from the Kingdom of Heaven: and that he
takes heresies there in a religious consideration, is plain, because it is made
to differ from seditions, strifes, and variances. Neither do thou please thy
self in that Question, What is Heresy? Tu Haereticus mihi, and ego tibi; for,
the Apostle makes it there a manifest work of the flesh, and 2 John 10. see how
much afraid the people of God ought to be of any evil doctrine; and there the
Apostle calls evil doctrine, evil deeds.

2. Look to all the places of Scripture, as well as some only. That 2. Look
upon those places of Scripture, where duties are commanded, as well as those
where Christ and grace are spoken of.
is a perpetual fault among the Antinomians, they only pitch upon those
places, where Christ and his grace is spoken of; but not of those Texts, where
duties are commanded, especially those places of Scripture, where the Law of
God is wonderfully commended, for the many real benefits that come by it;
where likewise the perpetuity and eternity of it is much celebrated. Lex Dei in
aeternum manet; vel implenda in damnatis, vel impleta in beatis, said Luther.
What a curb would it be unto this error, if they would consider, with what an
holy passion and zeal the Apostle does deny, that he destroys the Law,
making this very objection to himself, Do we then make void the Law? God
forbid. Now can we think that the Apostle, who in the third Chapter to the
Romans, does so vehemently deny, that he destroys the Law, should so much
forget himself, as in the fourth Chapter to abolish it? No ordinary man would
fall into such a contradiction.

3. Do not affect applause among people, as having found some 3. Beware of
affecting applause among the people.
new nigher way about Christ and grace, then others have. I have observed this
itching humor in the Antinomian Sermons printed; where they will call upon
their hearers to mark, it may be they shall hear that, which they have not
heard before, when the thing is either false; or, if it be true, is no more
then ordinarily is taught by others. But now, when men desire to be applauded
in the world, they suggest to their inward disciples, as if they had found out
some new unheard thing; and their followers broach it abroad, and so they come
to be exalted. Thus they do like Psaphon the Libyan: It Is reported of him,
that he kept ten tame birds at home, and taught them to sing, Magnus deus
Psaphon; and when he had done so, he let these birds fly into the woods and
mountains, where all the other birds learned the same song of them: which the
Libyans perceiving, and thinking it no plot, but a divine accident, decreed to
sacrifice to Psaphon, and to put him in the number of their gods. 4. Get to be
well grounded in the principles of Religion.


4. Do thou diligently study fundamentalls, and the principles of Religion. As
the child grows crooked, for not being well looked to at first; and many
errors do now spread themselves, because men are not well catechized. They
build without a foundation. It was a grave complaint of Maximus an
Ecclesiastical Writer, (...). It is a great matter to have a sound and
accurate knowledge in matters of Religion. It was a wise speech of Aristides,
who being demanded by the Emperor to speak to something propounded ex tempore,
answered, Propound to day, and I will answer to morrow, (...), We are not of
those who vomit or spit out things suddenly, but take time to be diligent, and
considering.

5. When thou do begin to incline to an opinion, that differs 5. Be not
rash in publishing any new opinion.
from the learned and godly, be not too rash and precipitate in publishing it.
The Apostle gives a good rule, Romans 14. Have thou faith? have it to thy self.
He does not there command a man to equivocate, or dissemble, and deny a truth;
but not needlessly to profess it, when it will be to the offense of others.
Cyprian reproving the rashness of those Christians that would go on their
own accord to the Heathen Magistrates, professing themselves Christians,
whereby they were put to death, has a good and elegant speech, Confiteri nos
magis voluit, quam profiteri: he does confess, that does it, being asked and
demanded; he does profess, that does it out of his own free accord.

6. Consider, that Antinomianisme is the only way indeed to overthrow 6.
Antinomianisme overthrows Christ and grace.
grace and Christ. For he sets up free grace and Christ, not who names it often
in his Book, or in the Pulpit, but whose heart is inwardly and deeply affected
with it. Now, who will most heartily and experimentally set up Christ and grace
of these two, i. Who urges no use of the Law, who takes away the sense or
bitterness of sin, who denies humiliation; or he, who discovers his defects
by the perfect rule of the Law, whose soul is inbittered and humbled because
of these defects? Certainly, this later will much more in heart, and real
affections set up free grace.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A.
THe Law abolished as a Covenant, not as a Rule. Page 204* The Law abrogated to
believers in six particulars. p. 209. 210. 211 Three causes of the abrogation
of the ceremonial Law, which agree not to the moral. p. 213 Six abuses of the
Law. p. 16. 17. 18. 19 Conversion and Repentance are our acts, as well as the
effects of Gods grace. p. 97 Whether Adam was mortal before his eating of the
forbidden fruit. p. 107 Whether Adam in his innocence can be considered in his
naturalls or supernaturalls, answered in two Positions. p. 129 Whether Adam
needed Christ's help. ibid* and p. 130. Whether God required less of Adam then
us. p. 135. Amorem mercedis a Godly man may have in his obedience, though not
amorem mercenarium. p. 13 What help the Angels had by Christ. p. 130 Calvines
two Reasons why Angels needed Christ's mediation. ibid. Some Antecedaneous works
upon the heart before grace be bestowed. p. 86 Four limitations concerning
those antecedaneous works. ibid. The first Antinomian. p. 38 Antinomian
Differences betwixt the Law and Gospel confuted. p. 234. 236 The Antinomian why
most inexcusable. p. 43 The Antinomian distinction of the Law being abolished
as a Law, but still abiding in respect of the matter of it, a contradiction. p.
206 The Antinomian Arguments overthrow the use of the Law to unbeleevers as
well as believers. p. 208 The opinion of the old Antinomians. p. 267 The word
[As] taken variously. p. 157 Antidotes against Antinomian errors. p. 269
Antinomianisme is the only way indeed to overthrow Christ and grace. p. 271


B
A Blaspheming Monk. p. 25 Blaspheming Papists. p. 26 The Lay-mans book is the
whole universe. p. 75 Master Burton his Report of Antinomians. p. 268


C
A Cordial for a broken heart. p. 21. 22 Contradictions of the Antinomians. p.
30 A Community of goods not taught by the law of Nature. p. 81 Christ's
Incarnation cannot be supposed but upon supposition of Adams fall. p. 132 It is
an hard matter so to set up Christ and grace as not thereby to destroy the law.
p. 202 The doctrine of Christ and grace in the highest manner does establish
not overthrow the law. ibid. God entered into Covenant with Adam, in giving him
a law. p. 119. 120 What a Covenant implies. p. 121 Why the Covenane of grace is
not still a covenant of works, seeing works are necessary. p. 46 A Covenant
of Friendship. p. 121 A Covenant of Reconciliation. p. 121 No Covenant properly
so called can be betwixt God and Man. p. 122 How God can covenant with man. p.
123 Five Reasons why God would deal with man in a covenant-way, rather then in
an absolute way. p. 124. 125 A vast difference betwixt the covenant in
innocence and in grace. p. 126 The moral law delivered as a covenant, proved.
p. 220 It has the real properties of a covenant. p. 221 In what sense the law
may be a covenant of grace, explained. p. 222. 223 Arguments proving the law a
covenant of grace. p. 224, 225, 226 Objections answered. p. 227 Doctor Crisp
confuted. p. 13. 14 Cursing taken two ways: 1 Potentially, so a law is always
condemning. 2. Actually, so a law is not ever condemning. p. 6


D
DEcalogue resembled to the ten Predicaments by Martyr, and why. The threatening
of death to Adam if he did eat, etc. was fulfilled, in that he became then
mortal, and in a state of death, not natural only, but spiritual and
eternal also. p. 106. 107 Determination to one, takes not away natural
liberty, nor willingness or delight in sin, which we are inevitably carried
unto. p. 88 Three general ways of proving the Deity of Christ. p. 130 Four
differences (not substantial but accidental) betwixt the law and the Gospel.
p. 241, etc. Five* Differences betwixt the Law and Gospel strictly taken. page
247. 248. 249, etc. All Doctrine reduced to three heads: credenda. speranda.
facienda. p. 242


E
THe Papists notion concerning Ecclesia, and Synagoge confuted. p. 242 If the
Antinomians end were only to put men off from glorying in themselves, to deny
the concurrence of works to Justification, it were more tolerable. p. 30. but
then their books and end were not reconciliable. ibid. Other ends which might
make the Antinomians more exousable. p. 30. 31 How Christ is the end of the law
for righteousness. p. 25. 257 End taken two ways. p. 256 Four ways Christ is
the perfective end of the Law. p. 260. 261 Aquinas distinction of end. p. 257
End^xus said he was made to behold the sun. p. 75 Exhortations, to what
purpose given to them who have no power of themselves to do them. p. 69
Errors in Doctrine damnable. p. 269


F
FAbles and fictions how used by the Fathers. p. 2 How Faith justifies. p. 42
Two acts of Faith. ibid. Faith and Repentance wrought both by the Law and
Gospel. p. 252 The same object may be known by the light of Faith and of
Nature. p. 70 Whether justifying Faith were in Adam at first. p. 117 Faith of
adherence and dependence in Adam in innocence, and shall be in heaven. p. 125
Adams faith considered as an act of the soul, not as an organ to lay hold on
Christ. p. 125 Finger of God. p. 149 Finis indigentie and assimilationis. p. 44
Free Will by nature. p. 82 Arguments for free will answered. p. 92. 93


G
GEnealogies how useful, and how vain. page 2 How the Gentiles are said to be
without a Law. p. 57 Who are meant by the word [Gentiles.] p. 56. 57 The Gospel
and Law may be compared in a double respect. p. 230 The word [Gospel] taken two
ways. ibid. Whether the Gospel be absolute or no. p. 249 Gospel taken strictly
is not a doctrine of Repentance or holy works. p. 252 All Good morally is good
theologically. p. 58 Good works, how taken. p. 37. 38 Four things required to
the effence of good works, p. 37. 38 The word [Grace] used sometimes for the
effects of grace, but more commonly for the favor of God. p. 20 Grace is more
then love. ibid. Grace implies indebitum and demeritum of the contrary, as
Cameron observes. p. 21 What grace the Pelagians acknowledge. ibid. Much may be
ascribed to grace, and yet the total efficacy not given to it. p. 88


H
A Twofold writing of the law in the heart. p. 58 The properties of holiness
fixed at first in Adams heart. p. 116 Humiliation comes by the Gospel as an
object, by the Law, as that which commands such affections to those objects.
page 253


I
IMage and likeness signific one thing. p. 111 An Image fourfold. p. 111. 112
Wherein the Image of God in man consists. page 112. 113. 114. 115 A Thing said
to be immortal, four ways. p. 107. The Injudicionsnesse of the Antinomians.
pa. 30 Whether Adams immortality in innocence be not different from that which
shall be in heaven. p. 136. Some things just because God wills them: other
things are just and therefore God wills them. page 4 The (...) credere
justifies no more in itself, then other acts of obedience. p. 15 Expecting
justification by the Law very dangerous. Fifteen evils which follow thereupon
mentioned. page 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26 I siebius, Captain of the
Antinomians in Luthers days. p. 266 How the justification of the Gospel may
stand with the good works of the Law done by grace. p. 37 Paul and James
reconciled in the point of justification. page 42


K
Kingdom of heaven] not mentioned in all the O. T. p. 243 How [Kingdome of
heaven] is taken in Mat. 5. 17. p. 264


L
HOw the Law is good in eight respects. p. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7* Four acts of the Law.
p. 5 The twofold use of the Law to the ungodly. p. 7. A fourfold use of the
Law to the godly. p. 8. 9 Cautions concerning the Law. p. 10 1. The word Law
diversely taken. ibid. and p. 139. 216 2. The Law must not be separated from the
spirit. p. 11 3. To do a command out of obedience to the Law, and out of love,
are not opposite. p. 12 4. Christ's obedience to the Law exempts not us from
obedience our selves, unless it be in respect to those ends for which he
obeyed. page 13 5. The Law condemns a believers sin, though not his person.
ibid. 6. Inability to keep the Law, exempts not from obedience to it. p. 14 7
Distinguish betwixt what is primarily, and what is occasionally in the Law.
ibid. That the Law has a directive, regulating, and informing power over a
godly man. p. 53 The derivation of the word [Lex.] p. 59 Two things necessary
to the essence of a Law. ibidem. How the Law becomes a Covenant. ib. The
division of Laws in general, and why the moral Law is so called. p. 140 The
Law of Moses differs from the Law of Nature in three respects. p. 140. 141 Why
the Law was given in the wilderness. ibidem* That the Law was in the Church
before Moses. p. 142 Three ends of the promulgation of the Law. p. 143 The Law
of Moses a perfect Rule. p. 144 Three differences betwixt the Judicial,
Ceremonial, and Moral Law. p. 147 General observations about the Law, and
the time of the delivery of the Law. page 147. 148. 149. etc. Three
observations concerning the preparation to the delivery of the Law. p. 148
Whether the law, as given by Moses, do belong to us Christians. p. 157. proved.
p. 159. Objections answered. p. 163 Though the Law, as given by Moses, did not
belong to Christians, yet the doctrine of the Antinomians holds not. page 156
Christ in the Gospel only interprets the old Law, and does not add new:
proved by four reasons. p. 169. 170 The Law is spiritual in the Old Testament,
as in the New: proved by eight instances. p. 171. 172. etc. The Law may be
isntrumental to work sanctification and conversion. page 187. 3. Cautions
about it. ib. and 188. proved by six reasons. p. 191. and 192. Objections
answered. p. 193 The Law is established three ways by the Gospel. p. 201 Three
affections belonging to a Law. p. 203 Three parts in the Law. p. 204 Those
phrases considered [of the Law.] and [without the Law.] and [under the Law.]
and [in the Law]. p. 216 A twofold being under the Law. p. 217 False
differences given by some betwixt the Law and the Gospel. p. 232 Law and Gospel
united in the Ministry. p. 251 Law opposed and oppugned two ways: Directly.
Interpretatively. page 264 Law opposed interpretatively three ways. p. 265 Law
by men abrogated or made void three ways. ibid. A threefold liberty. p. 87 A
threefold light. p. 112


M
Ministry of the Gospel more excellent then that of the Law in three respects.
p. 257 Moses in his zeal breaking the Tables, vindicated from rashness and
sinful perturbation. p. 151 The opinion of souls-mortality confuted. p. 108.
109 Adam was under the moral Law in innocence. p. 61 What Is meant by the word
[morall]. p. 140 Moral Law binds two ways. p. 158 That the moral Law
perpetually continues a rule and Law, proved by four Reasons. p. 212. 213
Objections against the continuance of the moral Law, answered. p. 214 Moral
Law having Christ for the end of it, may be considered two ways. p. 256
Marcionites, and Manichees the first Heretics that opposed the Law. p. 265


N
WHat is meant by the word [Nature] in Scripture. p. 58 There is a law of
Nature written in men's hearts. ibid. Wherein the law of Nature consists. p. 59
Four bounds of the law of Nature. p. 62 Light of Nature considered in a
threefold respect. p. 65. 68. 69 A threefold use of the light of Nature. p.
66 The light of Nature obscured three ways. p. 69 The light of Nature is
necessary (though insufficient) in religious and moral things. p. 69. It Is
necessary two ways. p. 70. See p. 83. 84. 89 The light of Nature no Judge in
matters of faith. p. 71 It Is no prescriber of divine worship. ibid. Natures
insufficiency described in three reasonings. p. 72 The Mystery of the Trinity
and Incarnation of Christ, cannot be found out by the light of Nature. p. 77
How far nature will reach in some other things. p. 79. 80. 81 Man by the
power of Nature wholly unable to perform good actions, proved by 3. arguments.
p. 84 Nature cannot dispose, or prepare a man's self for justification, or
sanctification. p. 85. proved by four reasons. ibid. All works of mere
Nature are sins before God, proved by four Reasons. p. 90 The Etymology of the
word [(...)]. p. 59


O
COrrupt glosses of the Pharisees concerning oaths reproved. p. 178 Promissory
oaths dangerous. ibidem. The obedience of the Saints implies obedientiam
servi, though not obedientiam servilem. p. 13 Christ's active obedience to the
Law imputed to believers. p. 261 The obligation of the law of Nature is from
God. p. 62 Gods promises are obligations to himself, not to us. p. 123 Why the
old Covenant is called old. p. 231 How an opinion may corrupt the life. p. 47
Whether Original sin may be found out by the mere light of Nature. p. 79


P
PAlemon converted from his drunkenness by Plato's Lecture, which he came to
deride. p. 67 Papists make three false differences betwixt the Law and the
Gospel. p. 233 Paul and James reconciled in the point of justification p. 42
The perpetuity of the obligation of the law of Nature. p. 63 A distinction of a
threefold piety confuted. p. 78 The Law of God by Moses is so perfect a rule,
that Christ added no new precept to it. p. 171 Different phrases used
concerning the Ceremonial law, which are never applied to the Moral law. p.
212 The opinion of the Pharisees concerning the Law. p. 170 Why, besides the
Moral law, a Positive law was given to Adam in innocence. Two Reasons. p. 103.
104 The Positive law did lay an obligation on Adams posterity. p. 105 The seven
Precepts of Noah: What the Thalmudists speak concerning* them. p. 137 It Is a
general Rule that the pressing of moral duties by the Prophets in the Old
Testament is but as an explanation of the Law. p. 172 The Primitive Christians
held it unlawful to kill in defense. p. 185 Capital punishments lawful in
the New Testament. p. 181. 182 To what purpose are exhortations to them who
have no power to obey. p. 69 Popery in a great part Antinomianisme. page 266


R
WHy a Reason is rendered by God for the fourth Commandment, rather then
others. p. 59 Remission of sins under the law plenary, as well as under the
Gospel, proved against the Antinomian. p. 236. 237. 238 Repentance how taken.
p. 250. 251 Resemblances of the Trinity confuted. p. 77 Every Rule has vim
praecepti, as well as doctrinae. p. 5 To do a duty because of reward promised,
is not slavish and unlawful. p. 124 Revenge forbidden in the Old Testament, as
strictly as in the New. p. 185 Righteousness of the Law and Gospel differ
much. p. 5 Whether we may be now said by Christ to be more righteous then Adam
in innocence. p. 134 The Law of Retaliation, Matthew. 7. 12. opened. p. 80 The
properties of the righteousness at first fixed in Adams heart. p. 116 Whether
righteousness were natural to Adam. p. 117


S
THe Sabbath in innocence not typical of Christ. p. 133 Satan cannot work
beyond a moral persuasion, as God does in conversion. p. 127 What the word
[Sanctifie] implies p. 194. 195 How the Jews were in more servitude then
Christians. p. 245 Sins outward which are majoris infamiae. inward which are
majoris reatus. page* 171 Sincerity taken two ways. p. 255 Socinians and
Papists make additions in the Gospel, besides what was in the Law. p. 233 Why
the shellfish was unclean to the Jews. p. 2 Law called spiritual in a
twofold sense: 1. effecti^^. 2. formaliter. p. 6 How the state of innocence
excelled the state of reparation in rectitude, immortality, and outward
felicity. p. 133. 134 The state of reparation excells the state of innocence in
certainty of perseverance. ibidem. Eudoxus said he was made to behold the sun.
p. 75 Sum of all heavenly doctrine reduced to three heads: credenda.
speranda. facienda. page 242 Symbolicall precept. p. 101


T
TEaching nova and nove. p. 2 Tully said that the Law of the twelve Tables did
exceed all the libraries of Philosophers, both in weight of authority, and
fruitfulness of matter. p. 3 The threatenings of the Gospel against those who
reject Christ, arise from the Law, joined in practical use with the Gospel. p.
252 Tree of knowledge. 102. 103 Whether the Tree of life was a Sacrament of
Christ to Adam or no. p. 130 No truth in Divinity does cross the truth of
nature. p. 70 Doctor Tailor his Report of Antinomianisme. p. 268


V
THe reason of the variety of Gods administrations in the two T. p. 246 A
twofold unbelief: Negative which damnes none. Positive which damnes many. p.
78 Unbelief a sin against the Law, as well as against the Gospel. How God
justifies the ungodly. p. 34. 35*


W
MInisters ought to be wary, so to set out grace, as not to give just
exceptions to the Papists, and so to defend holy works, as not to give the
Antinomians cause of insultation. p. 28. 29 War lawful under the Gospel. p.
183 Will, serious, and efficacious: the distinction examined. p. 105 How the
Word in general is the instrument of conversion. p. 188. 189. Two Rules about
it, proved. p. 190 Word* how used. p. 138 Works denied by the Antinomians to
be away to ho^ven. p. 31 There have been dangerous assertions concerning
works, even by those who were no Antinomians, out of a great zeal for the
grace of God against Papists. p. 29 The presence of good works in the person
justified, denied by the Antinomians. p. 32. They deny any gain or loss to
come by them. No peace of conscience comes by doing good works, nor lost by
omitting them. p. 33. which is confuted. ibid. They deny good works to be
signs or testimonies of grace. ibid^^. Confuted. page* 34 Upon what grounds
are the people of God to be zealous of good works. p. 37 The Antinomian erreth
two contrary ways about good works. p. 38 Distinction betwixt saying that good
works are necessary to justifie^ persons, and that they are necessary to
justification. p. 39 Good works necessary upon 13. grounds. p. 39. 40. 41. 42.
43. 44. 45*


A Table of diverse Texts of Scripture, which are opened, or vindicated by this
TREATISE.
Genesis.
Chap. Ver. Page. 1 25 110. 111 2 17 119 Exodus. 21 1 138 34 ^7. 28 153
Leviticus. 6 2. 3 236 16 16 237 Numbers. 13 23 207 Deuteronomy. 4 13 ^19 30 11
94 32 32 33 3 149 1 Samuel. 4 17 230 2 Samuel. 1 10 230 1 Kings. ^ 9 154 2
Kings. 20 3 44 Psalm. 1. and 19. and 119 8 68 18 36 50 2 49 Isaiah. 6^ 1 238
Jeremiah. 16 14. 15 114 50 20 234 Ezekiel. 1^ 234 Da^let. 9 14 234 Zechary. 13
1 234 Matthew. 5^ 17 45. 263 21. 22 166 7 17 32 12 80 12 28 149 Mark. 13 7 255
16 15 231 Luke. 11 20 149 16 16 214 John. 1 9 76 8 7 182 14 31 12 15 10 17 19
194 Acts. 7 37 12 38 199 Romans. 1 18 66 19 74 2 14. 15 56 27 255 3 27 228 31
193. 199 4 5 34 14 227 5 1 22 6. 8. 10 35 6 1^ 215 7 1. 2 218 6 205 8 per
^atum. 8 11 37 13 33 29. 30 35 13 12 42 12 1 43 14 22 271 1 Corinthians. 2 14
64 7 37 82 9 20 217 15 10 92 2 Corinthians. 3 7 257 3 11 202 6 16 37 Galat. 3 2
19^ 18 214 23 14 23. 24 259 4 24 1^9 5 23 53 5 5. 4. 13. 14 212 5 20 269
Ephesians. 1 10 137. 131 2 14 202 15 203 3 12 6 2 163 14. 16 41 Philippians. 3
9 210 1 Thessalonians. 2 16 ^55 1 Timothy. 1 8. 9 9 1 9 47 4 8 40 7 5 255 2
Timothy. 4 8 40 Titus. 2 11. 12 196 14 39 Hebrews. 6 18 209 9 4 155 7 237 13.
14 235 10 17 234 11 16 243 12 5. 6. 7. 8 235 ult. 33 Jam. 2 8 255 1 Peter. 3 1
45 2 Peter. 1 10 41 19 242 ^ 2. 15. 21 32

FINIS.

