A VINDICATION OF THE BOOK CALLED, Some Gospel Truths Opened; According to the
Scriptures, and the Opposition made against it by EDWARD BORROUGH, a professed
Quaker, (but proved an enemy to the Truth) examined and confuted by the Word
of GOD.

AND ALSO, The things that were then laid down, and declared to the world by
me, are a second-time born witness to, according to truth: with the Answer of
Edward Borrough to the Quaeries then laid down in my Book reproved. And also, a
plain Answer to his Quaeries, given in simplicity of soul; and is now also
presented to the world, or who else may read, or hear them; to the end (if God
will) that Truth may be discovered thereby.

By John Bunyan, Preacher of the Gospel of CHRIST.

I have found David a man after mine own heart (says God, Act. 13.22.) Of this
man's seed has God, according to his promise raised up to Israel a Savior,
Jesus (says the Apostle) ver. 23. And when they had fulfilled all that was
written of him, they took him down from the tree, and laid him in a sepulcher.
But God raised him from the dead. ver. 29. 30. And we declare unto you glad
tidings, how that the promise which was made unto the fathers, God has
fulfilled the same to us their children, in that he has raised up Jesus
again. ver. 32. 33. Be it known unto you therefore, men, and brethren; that
though this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins. ver. 38. And by
him all that believe are justified from all things, from which they could not
be justified by the law of Moses. ver. 39. LONDON, Printed for Matthias Cowley,
Bookseller in Newport, Anno Dom. 1657.

READER;
We, whose names are here underwritten, having (through grace) some blessed
Faith and experience of the Truths declared in this Book, and knowing them so
to be; having tried them by the Scriptures in the light of the Spirit, thought
it our duty to bear witness thereunto, together with our Brother, desiring the
blessing of God may go along with these endeavors of his, for the doing good
to our Christian brethren, or any other who may read it. Farewell.

Yours in the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, for which Faith we desire to
contend; Richard Spencly. John Burton. John Child.


TO THE READER.
SInce it has pleased the Lord to work in my soul by his holy Spirit, and has
translated me in some measure from darkness to light, I have seen and heard,
that such things have been done by those who did once pretend themselves to be
the servants of Jesus Christ, that it has made me marvel: Partly, while I have
beheld the vile conversation of some, and also the seeming legal-holinesse of
others, together with their damnable doctrine; which have, notwithstanding
their professions, made shipwreck of the Faith, both to themselves, and their
followers. I having had some in-sight into such things as these, was provoked
to publish a small treatise touching the fundamentals of Religion, supposing
that God might add his blessing thereto, both for the establishing of some,
and the convincing of others; which things I doubt not but they have been
accomplished; and will be still more and more. But as it was in former days,
so it is now: That is, some in all former ages have been on foot in the world,
ready to oppose the truth: So it is now, there are certain men newly start up
in our days, called Quakers, who have set themselves against the truth of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and do in very deed deny, that salvation was then obtained
by him, when he did hang on the Cross without Jerusalems gate. Now these men
do pretend, that they do verily and truly profess the Lord Jesus Christ; but
when it comes to the trial, and their principles be thoroughly weighed, the best
that they do, is to take one truth, and corrupt it, that they may thereby fight
more stoutly against another. As for instance: They will own that salvation was
obtained by Christ, this is truth, that salvation was obtained by Christ, but
come close to the thing, and you will find, that they corrupt the word, and
only mean thus much, That salvation is wrought out by Christ as he is within;
and by it (though not warranted by the Scripture) they will fight against the
truth: Namely, that salvation was obtained for sinners, by the man that did
hang on the Cross on mount Calvary, between two thievs, called Jesus Christ. I
say, by what he did then for sinners in his own person, or body, which he took
from the Virgin Mary, according to the Word of God.

Secondly, they will own the doctrine of Christ within. This is truth, that
Christ is within his Saints: But this doctrine they will take to fight against
the doctrine of Christ without, Ascended from his Disciples into heaven, by
whom salvation was obtained, neither is there salvation in any other, Act. 4.12.

3. They will own the Resurrection of the Saints, but their meaning is only
thus much, That the Saints are raised from the state of nature to a state of
grace, and herewith they will sight against this truth; Namely, the
resurrection of the bodies of Saints out of their graves, into which they were
laid, some thousands, some hundreds of Years before. And if they do say, they
do own the Resurrection of the Saints out of their graves, they do mean out of
the grave of sin only, and nothing else.

These things I am an ear witness to.
4. They will say, they do own the second coming of Christ to judge the world;
but search them to the bottom, and you will find them only to own him in his
coming in Spirit, within, in opposition to the glorious coming of the Lord
Jesus, the son of Mary, from heaven in the clouds, with all his mighty Angels,
to raise the dead, and bring them to judgment, according to the Scripture. And
so for the the Intercession of Christ, and the truth^ of the Gospel, they only
own them to be within; in opposition to the glorious intercession, and
mediation of the man Christ Jesus in his own person without, now in the
presence of his Father, between us and him, pleading and making intercession
for his children. These things, together with ma^^ more, I might mention, but
now I forbear, knowing that none sha^^ be lost, nor altogether carried away by
them, nor any Heretics, but the sons of perdition. Now that they might the
better make their doctrine take place in the hearers, they endeavor to make a
fair show in the flesh, that thereby they might now, as did their fathers in
time past, compel and constrain them who are not hy the Lord's right hand
planted into the truth of Jesus, to follow their covered errors, as it is
written, Galath. 6.12. For as many as desire to make a fair show in the flesh.
That is, according to the works of the Law; do with good words, and fair
speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple. Romans 16.18. And indeed it does
clearly appear, that those that are carried away, are such as are not able to
discern between fair speeches declared by heretics, and sound Doctrine
declared by the simple-hearted servants of Jesus.

2ly Now I shall lay down several grounds, not only why errors are broached
in the World; but also, why so many are carried away with them.

1. One ground, why so many errors do from time to time come into the world
is, because, those that are not indeed of the planting of the Lord's right
hand, might be rooted out. Mat. 15.13. Now these are many times carried away by
deceivable doctrines: And truly in this our God has both a care of his own
glory, and of his Churches welfare. For first, should they not be swept away by
some heresy or other, there might be great dishonor brought to his name by
their continuing among his people: And secondly, that he might take away such
grievances as such may bring, had they continued still in the society of his
children.

2. Another ground why the Lord does suffer such errors to come into the World
is, because, those that are Christians indeed, might be approved and appear. 1
Cor. 11.19. For there must be heresies among you, that th^se that are approved
may be made manifest. Should not the Lord go this way to work (sometimes)
there would be many that would make people believe that they are Christians,
and yet are not. And again that he might make it appe^r, that though there be
heretics, yet he has a people, enabled by his Spirit, to contradict, and
oppose them, and plead to the truth of our Lord Jesus Christ, and his glorious
Gospel against them.

3. Another ground why the Lord does suffer, yea, even send delusions among the
people, is, That those who were so idle and slothful, as not to seek after the
Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, might be taken away, and violently possessed
with error, and be made to run greedily after the same; That they might smart
the more for their neglect of the truth. For always, those who were lazy in
seeking after the truth when it was proffered, and afterward hasty after the
Doctrine of Devils, when that is declared to them, shall be sure to have their
latter behavi^ur to ri^e up in judgment against them, in that when the truth
was proffered to them they were Idle and did not receive it, and yet when
delusion did profer it self, they were industrious, and laboring. Now mark,
that they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness: because they received not the truth in the love of it, that
they might be saved. And for this cause God shall send them strong delusions,
that they might believe a lie, and be damned. 2 These. 2. ver. 10, 11, 12.

Now in the second place, why so many are so easily carried away with errors
in this day: The grounds are these ^^at follow.

1. Because men count it enough to be professors of the truth, without seeking
to be possessors of the same. Now because men are but only professors of the
truth, not having it in their hearts in reality, they are carried away with an
error, if it come in never so little power more then the truth they profess.
And this is the reason why so many are carried away with the errors that are
broached in these days; because they have not indeed received the Lord Jesus
by the Revelation of the Spirit, and with power, but by the relation of others
only: and so having no other witness to set them down withal, but the history
of the Word, and the relation of others concerning the truths contained
therein, (though the knowledge of the truth this way shall abundantly aggravate
their damnation) yet they having not had the Spirit of the Lord to confirm
these things effectually unto them, they are carried away with delusions.

2. Another reason why so many are carried away with delusions, is, those
differences that are among the Children of God about smaller matters. O
friends! how is the hand of the enemy strengthened by our carnality; while one
says, I am of Paul; and another, I am of Apollo; many apoor soul is carried
away with delusion. And why so? They are not satified that this is the truth,
because the Children are at disfference among themselves, about some outward
things. And again, it makes those that are not so desperately possessed with a
spirit of delusion, as are others, but are mere moral men, I say it makes
them to say within themselves, and one to another; There are so many sects and
judgments in the World, that we cannot tell which way to take. And therefore
you that have the spirit, pray that these things may cease, least you blush for
your folly, at the appearing of Jesus our Lord.

3. The pride, covetousness, and impiety of hypocrites, and carnal
professors, are great stumbling blocks to the poor World: And the cause why
many at this day do drink down so greedily a deluding Doctrine, and especially
if it come with a garment of pretended holiness: But as for these, they shall
go to their place in their time, with the curse of the Almighty pow ed out upon
them, for their casting of stumbling blocks before the simple by their loose
conversations, if they do not hastily repent of their wickedness, and close in
reality with our blessed Lord Jesus.

4. Another reason why delusions do so easily take place in the hearts of the
ignorant, is, because those that pretend to be their teachers, do behave
themselves so basely among them. And indeed I may say of these, as our Lord
said of the Pharisees in an other case, All the blood of the ignorant, from the
beginning of the World, shall be laid to the charge of this generation. They
that pretend they are sent of the Lord, and come, saying, Thus says the Lord;
We are the servants of the Lord, our commission is from the Lord (by
succession) and the like. I say, these pretending themselves to be the
preachers of truth, (but are not) do by their loose conversation, render the
Doctrine of God, and his Son Jesus Christ, (by whom the saints are saved)
contemptible, and do give the adversary mighty encouragement, to cry out
against the truths of our Lord Jesus Christ, because of their wicked walking.
Now shall not his soul be avenged on such a Nation as this, who pretend to be
teachers of the people in goodness, when as for the most part of them they are
the men, that at this day do so harden their hearers in their sins, by giving
them, even their hearers such ill examples, that none goes beyond them for
impiety. As for example; Would a Parishioner learn to be proud? he or she
n^ed look no further then to the Priest, his wife and family; for there is a
notable pattern before them. Would the people learn to be wanton? they may
also see a pattern among their Teachers. Would they learn to be Drunkards?
they may also have that from some of their Ministers; for indeed they are
Ministers in this, to minister ill example to their Congregations. Again, would
the people learn to be covetous, they need but look to their Minister, and
they shall have a lively, or rather a deadly resemblance set before them, in
both riding and running after great Benefices, and Pars^nages by night and by
day. Nay they among themselves will scramble for the same. I have seen, That so
soon as a man has but departed from his Benefice as he calls it, either by
death or out of covetousness of a bigger, we have had one Priest from this
Town, and another from that, so run, for these tithe-cocks and handfulls of
Barley, as if it were their proper Trade, and calling, to hunt after the same.
O wonderful impiety, Ezekiel. 13. read that whole Chapter, and you will find it
as it was a looking glass by which thou may notably see them with their
marks and discoveries,
and ungodliness! are you not ashamed of your doings? If you say no. It is
(perhaps) because you are given over of God to a reprobate mind. Read Romans 1.
toward the end. As it was with them, so (it is to be feared) it is with many
of you, who knowing the judgments of God, that they who do such things are
worthy of death, not only do the same, but have (as I may so say) pleasure
also in them that do them. And now you that pretend to be the teachers of the
people in verity and truth, though we know that some of you are not: Is it a
small thing with you, to set them you say are your flock such an example as
this. Were ever the Pharisees so profane; to whom Christ said, Ye vipers, how
canye escape the damnation of hell? does not the ground groan under you?
surely, it will favor you no more then it favored your forerunners.
Certainly the wrath of God lies heavy at your doors, it is but a very little
while, and your recompense shall be upon your own head. And as for you that
are indeed of God among them, though not of them; Separate your selves: why
should the righteous partake of the same plagues with the wicked? O ye children
of the harlot! I cannot well tell how to have done with you, your stain is so
odious, and you are so senseless, as appears by your practices But I shall at
this time forbear, having in some measure discharged my conscience according to
the truth against you; hoping if God do give me opportunity, and a fair call,
that I shall a second time in this world give testimony against your filthy
conversations, though now I shall say no more, only thus much; Be ashamed of
your earthly-mindednesse, if you can; and be converted, or else you shall never
be healed.

Here might I also aggravate your sin by its several circumstances, but I shall
rather forbear; supposing that you may entertain wrong and harsh thoughts of
me, though I have spoken the truth; therefore I shall at this time rather keep
silence, and wish you to amend, then to rake in your soars; for thereby would
your stink go more abroad in the world. Therefore I say, I forbear. And now to
the Reader; I beseech thee to have a care of thy soul, and look well to the
welfare of it: And that you may do so, have a care what doctrine it is that
thou receivest. Be not contented until thou indeed and in truth, in the light
of the Spirit of Christ, see thy sins washed away in the blood of that Lamb,
who did offer up himself a ransom on the Cross on mount Calvary for the sins
of thy soul and body, together with the rest of the Saints of God. And let not
the legal holiness of the one, nor the loose profane conversation of the
other, beat thee off from pursuing after the truths of Jesus, as the truth is
in Jesus, (and so laid down in this my discourse) Neither let the
plausiblenesse of the other beguile thy simple heart. And now to you that are
carried away with the delusions at this day broached in the World, by the
instruments of Satan; and that after a profession of the truth, I say to you,
turn again, (if you can) peradventure there may be hope, and that you may
escape that wrath which justly you have deserved: But if you shall still refuse
the Lord that speaks now from heaven in mercy to you, you shall not hereafter
escape the Lord, that in his own time will speak to you in his wrath, and
vex you in his sore displeasure.

And now a few words to you that have indeed closed in with the Lord Jesus
Christ, the Son of Mary, and they are these that follow. First, he of good
cheer, all your sins are forgiven you for his name sake. 1 John. 2.12.

2. Know, he that has begun the good work of his grace in you, will perfect
it, even to the second coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Phil. 1.6.

3. Know that though your Lord Jesus, who is in you by his spirit, be absent
from you t^uching his bodily presence, yet he is not forgetful of you, but is
preparing a place for you. Jo. 14.1. 2, 3.

4. Consider, That he is also at this very present, in his very person in the
presence of his Father now in the heavens praying, and making intercession for
you, that you may be brought safe to glory. Heb. 7.25. Father, I will (says
he) that those that thou have given me, may be where I am, that they may behold
my glory. John. 17.25.

5. Know also, that he has overcome in his own person (when he was in the
World) Devil, Death, Sin, Hell, the curse of the Law, the power of the Grave,
and all other evils, in the body of his flesh for you. Heb. 2.14.

6. Believe also, that while you are in the World, all things shall fall out
for your good at the end, whether they be Temptations, Doctrines of Devils,
workings of corruptions, all things shall fall cut for your good, who love our
precious Lord Jesus Romans 8.28.

7. Be assured, that all your enemies shall very suddenly be under your feet,
even Satan and all. Romans 16.20.

8. Consider; That there shall no temptation befall you in the days of your
pilgrimage but God will enable you to bear it; I, and make away also for you to
escape the destroying danger of it. 1 Cor. 10.13.

9. When the time of your dissolution shall come, your Jesus will deal with
you, as he did with Blessed Lazarus, that is, he will send his Angels to fetch
your souls away to glory, Luke, 16.23.

10. Believe also, and know assuredly, that at the last day, he will also raise
your bodies out of their graves, and make them also for ever vessels of his
glory Romans 8.23 compared with Joh. 5.28. 1 These 4.14.15, 16, 17, 18.

11. And lastly, consider, That though now by the world, and heretics, you be
counted as not worth the looking after: Yet you have your day a coming, when
as the Dives's of this and all other ages, would be glad if they might have but
the least favor from you, one drop of cold water on the tip of your fingers. O
you Despised begging Lazarus's (as in Luke 16.24.) For the world, for all their
stoutnesse, must be forced to come to judgment, before your Lord and you. 1
Cor. 6.23. This honor have all his Saints. Psalm. 149.

Now seeing that these things be so, I beseech you by (those) the mercies of
God, that you do give up your bodies, as hands, tongue, strength, health;
wealth, and all that you have and are, to the service of God, your God. Romans
12.1.

2. Let your moderation in every thing be known to all men, (for) the Lord is
at hand. Phil. 4.5.

3. Study to walk as like the Lord Jesus Christ, as ever you can for for your
lives. Mat. 11.29.

4. Let that you strive for, be the faith of the Gospel of your precious Lord
Jesus. Phil. 1.27. And not any earthly advantages.

5. Let your conversation be as becomes the Gospel. Phil. 27.

6. Let your hearts be always in heaven, where our Lord Jesus is. Col. 3.1, 2,
3.

7. Forbear and forgive one another, in love, and with all your hearts, as God
for Christ sake has forgiven you. Ephesians. 5.2.

8. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works and
glorify your Father which is in heaven. Mat. 5.16.

9. You are the Salt of the earth, have a care you loose not your savor. Mat.
5.13.

10. Be forward to distribute to those that are in want, for this is
well-pleasing to your most glorious loving Father. Heb. 13.16.

11. Learn all one of another the things that are good, for this is the command
of God, and also commendable in Saints, Phil. 3. ver. 17.

12. And lastly, O Brethren! consider what the Lord has done for you; he has
bought you, and paid for you with his blood, and he does now also make it his
business to pray for your safe conduct to glory, Heb. 7.25. He has delivered
you from those that would have been your ruin, and has promised to you
everlasting life. Let the love of Christ constrain you, let the love of God win
upon your souls. What! he that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for
us all: How shall he not with him freely give us all things. Hold out my
brethren, hold out, for you have but a little while to run: Hold fast unto the
death, and Christ will give you a crown of life, Revel. 2.10. Farewell, dear
brethren; The mighty God of Jacob preserve and deliver you from every evil
work; and all the days of our pilgrimage let us pray one for another, that our
God would count us worthy of this rich and glorious calling, and fulfill all
the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of Faith with power, to whom
be glory now and ever.

And now Reader, before I make and end of this discourse, I think it meet to
let thee understand, that though there has been a Book put forth by Edward
Borrough, in seeming opposition to that of mine called, Some Gospel Truths
opened according to the Scripture. Yet the substance of my discourse then
published by me, stands uncontrouled by Scripture, as from him or others. I
do not say, he does not wrangle with them, but I say, he does not by any one
plain Scripture contradict them.

As for instance: The First great thing that I do hold forth in that discourse,
is this; That that Babe that was born of the Virgin Mary, and that at that time
did give satisfaction for sin, was the very Christ of GOD, and not a type of
any thing afterward to be revealed for the obteining redemption for sinners
within them. Which thing my Adversary can find no ground in Scripture to build
an opposition upon, see his Book, page 12. but is forced to confess it in
word, though he do deny the very same in doctrine, see his Book p. 29. at his
sixth Quaerie. And p. 27. where in answer to this question of mine; Why did the
man Christ hang on the Cross on mount Calvarie? All the answer he gives, is
this; Because they wickedly judged him to be a blasphemer; and as in their
account (says he) he died as an evil doer. And this is all the ground he
giveih: See his Answer to my second Quaerie in this my book, taken word for
word as he laid them down.

2. The next thing I do prove in that book is, That that light which every one
has is not the spirit of Christ; because the Scripture says, some have it
not, Jude 19. But Edward Borrough says, it is given to every one, p. 18. of
his Book: and he says, they have it within them too, p. 26 of his Book, in
answer to my first question, though he have no Scripture to confirm the same,
as I have had to contradict it. See his book.

3. The next thing I prove, is, That Jesus Christ did fulfill the Law in his
own person without us for justification, and that his blood then shed, has
washed away the sins of the children of God, as aforesaid. Which thing he would
oppose, but finds no footing for his discourse. See his book, p. 12. where he
says, the Law is not fulfilled (Read the latter end of that page) contrary to
Scripture, Col. 2.14. Romans 10 4. which says, He did fulfill all the Law for
justification for every one that believes. Another thing I prove in that book
is, That Christ is ascended into that heaven without, above the clouds and
stars; and that I prove by eight several Scripture demonstrations, of which not
one is confuted by Scripture, though secretly in his book smitten against. Read
his whole book.

4. The next thing I prove, is, That the same Jesus that was born of Mary, laid
in the manger, who is the Savior, is at this day making intercession in that
body he then took of Mary; which thing also is not confuted by him, by the
Scripture; though cunningly smitten against in his discourse, where he says,
It is only necessary to salvation to preach Christ within, laying aside all
that Christ did when he was in his own person in the world. See p. 29 of his
Book, Qu. 6.

5. Another truth I prove, is, That the very same Jesus that was born of Mary,
that very man (that was also hanged on the Cross) will come the second time,
and that shall be to save his children, and to Judge the world at the last day,
that great day of Judgment. And though they will not own, that he shall so come
as he went away, which was a very man without; yet they could not at all by the
Scripture contradict it. But the very sum of his discourse is a wrangling
with the thing laid down, as a Dog with a bone; but has not, nor cannot by
Scripture overcome the same. This have I written, that the Reader into whose
hand this book may come, may have the more certain information concerning the
things before published by me, and also concerning the opposition made against
them by the Adversary. And here, because I am loath to be too tedious, I do
conclude, and desire thy prayers to God for me (if thou be a Christian) that I
may not only be preserved to the end, in the faith of Jesus, but that God
would enable me to be an earnest contender for the same, even to the last;
and rest,

The servant of the LORD JESUS. John Bunyan.

A VINDICATION OF THE BOOK CALLED, Some Gospel Truths Opened; According to the
Scriptures, and the Opposition made against it by EDWARD BORROUGH, a professed
Quaker, (but proved an enemy to the Truth) examined and confuted by the Word
of GOD.
IT is very expedient that there should be heresies among us, that thereby
those which are indeed of the truth might be made manifest; and also that the
doctrine of GOD, and his Son JESUS CHRIST, might the more cast forth its luster
and glory. For the Truth is of that nature, that the more it is opposed, the
more glory it appears in; and the more the adversary objects against it, the
more it will clear it self: which does give me and all that stand for it, and
does plead on its side in the wisdom of the Spirit, much boldness and
encouragement, to venture without any slavish fear upon those that have
already, or shall hereafter stand up to oppose it. I did some few weeks past
put forth a small Book, called, Some Gospel Truths opened, and so forth; and
the thing I looked for from them was, namely opposition from the adversary,
which has been accomplished in that; as I did look for it, so it did happen:
not that it daunted me, for had it so done, it might have made me kept those
Truths within my breast, which are now made manifest by me (as well as others)
to the world. Now I have not only met with some opposition from others face to
face in secret, but there is one Edward Borrough (as I heard his name is so, by
some of themselves) that has ventured to stand up against the Truth, with the
rest of his companions, and has published a book, called, The true Faith of
the Gospel of peace contended for; in which book of his, there is a very great
number of heresies cunningly vented by him, and also many things there falsely
reported of me; which things in this my discourse I shall very plainly
discover, and the way that I shall take, shall be First, by laying down some
of thy expressions, and also some of mine; and by inquiring into the truth of
one, and the error of the other, through the assistance of the Spirit of
CHRIST, and according to the Scriptures. Only by the way, I think good to mind
thee of thy clothing thy self with the words of the Prophets and Apostles,
against whom thou do fight (as will appear in my following discourse) and
also of thy endeavoring to wrest the sword out of the hands of the Saints, and
art fighting against them bitterly, with a parcel of scolding expressions. But
I wish thee to learn (if thou can) to be sober, and to keep under thy unruly
spirit, and do not so much appear (at least not so grossly) a railing Rabshakeh:
but contrariwise, if you would be looked upon to be holy, which (we know, and
believe, that) as yet many of you are not. Let, at the least some appearance of
moderation be manifest among you. After many words that are flung into the wind
by thee my adversary, in the 1. and 2. page of thy book, thou could not be
contented therewith, as being too few to vent thy self wi hall; but thou
breakest out in page 3. with a false testimony of John Burton, and his fellow,
saying, This is a tie, I bless God, spoken of the Adversary against me.
They have joined themselves with the broken army of Magog. -- And have showed
themselves in the defense of the Dragon against the Lamb, in the day of war
betwixt them. When alas poor soul we do know, and are bold to declare, in the
name of the Lord Jesus the son of Mary, that our God has owned us, with others
of his servants in his own work against the Devil, devices, and false doctrine;
as instruments, both for the comforting and establishing of his own, and also
for the convincing and converting of some of them, who afore-time were not
converted. And friend, why do thou say, that we join with Magog in the
defense of the Dragon against the Lamb, when thou see the whole drift both of
my Brothers Epistle, and also of my Writing, is to exalt and advance the first
born of Mary, the Lord of glory, and to hold on his side, notwithstanding there
are so many tempests go through the world: and the rather, because we know that
it is he, and he alone, that did bear our sins in his own body on the tree, 1
Pet. 2.24. for it is he that has taken away the sins of the world. Now I say
therefore, do not thou thus accuse the Brethren, for speaking good of the Name
of Jesus, least thou be troubled at thy end for thus spending thy beginning, in
taking part with the Devil to accuse God's children.

Then in the same page, thou say, thou have numbered up part of our work,
and the sum is, A corrupted grain of Babylons treasure, etc. Answ. Friend, the
sum of our discouse, is, of the birth, righteousness, death, blood,
resurrection, ascension, intercession, and second coming of the Son of Mary,
the Virgin, by which righteousness, blood, death, burial, resurrection,
ascension, and intercession we are saved. And do thou count this a corrupted
grain of Babylons treasure? Have a care what thou say, least thou utter that
with thy mouth now, which will lie heavy on thy conscience for ever.

Then, as though this thy unwise speaking were too little, thou breakest out
with a taunt, or a jeere, saying, A larger portion, and more to the purpose
might have been brought in, but with such as you had, or could procure from
your Neighbors are you come. Answ. Friend, Who has despised the day of small
things. But again, we desire not to bring to others, no nor to know our selves,
any thing else but Jesus Christ (the Son of Mary) and him crucified for our
sins. 1 Cor. 2.2. Then thou say further in the same page, That though thou
have not seen our faces, yet our spirit is tried, and we are clearly described
to thee, (say thou) to be of the stock of Ismael, and of the seed of Caine,
whose line reaches to the murdering Priests, etc. Answ. Friend, thou art
very censorious, and utterest many words without knowledge. We bless God, for
the most part of our line, we do labor to stretch it out either in building up
and exhorting the Saints of the most high, to cleave close to their Jesus, or
else much as in us lies, we labor to convince poor souls of their lost
condition, according to the word of God, and not to murder any. Nay
contrariwise, we desire through grace, if at any time we chance to see any of
Christ's lambs in the teeth of any Woolf or Bear, be they never so terrible in
appearance; I say, we desire, we labor, we strive, and lay cut our selves,
if it be possible, to recover the same, though with the hazard of our lives, or
whatsoever may befall us in doing our duty. Here is one false charge laid down
by the Adversary against me.
And whereas thou say in the 4. Page. That we are found enemies to Christ,
revealed in his Saints. Answ. Thou do us wrong, for we labor all that we
may to countenance the same, where he does indeed appear: and if at any time we
do see or discern, that any soul has any breathing after the knowledge of
the Lord Jesus Christ, we are so far from disowning or discountenancing of the
same, that we give, them all the encouragement we may: Nay, and we are so far
from discountenancing the doctrine of God, and his Son Jesus Christ, that we
say plainly, some have not the spirit of Christ in them and they are
reprobates, according to that Scripture, Romans 8 9. If any man has not the
Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. And again, Some are sensual, having not
the spirit. Jude. 19. And again, we are so far from being against the doctrine
of the Spirit of Christ in his saints, we bless God that we say, it is the
distinguishing Character of a true believer, from others: All which things do I
also affirm in my Book, and hold forth, as does also my Brother in his
Epistle. Therefore, I marvel, that you should be so overseene, as to utter so
many false things together in less than four sides of paper. I wonder what
will be the end, of your discourse.

Well, now thou do come and fall a wrangling with some of the words of my
Brother Burton, which are to this purpose (he speaking before of the Doctrine
of Jesus) And this is quite contrary (says he) to those commonly called
Familists, Ranters, Quakers and others, who on the other hand either deny
Christ to be a real man without them, blasphemously fancying him to be only
God manifest in their flesh, or else make his humane nature, with the fullness
of the Godhead in it, to be but a type of God to be manifested in the Saints.
Now first of all, the great offense thou take of some of these words, is,
because he does join in his discourse Fami ists, Ranters, and Quakers,
together. Friend, what harm is it to join a Dog and a Woolfe together? a
fawning Dog, and a Woolfe in sheep clothing; they differ a little in outward
appearance, but they can both agree to worrie Christ's Lambs But again,
Friend, let us a little compare the principles of a Ranter and a Quaker
together, and it will clearly appear, that in many of their Principles (at
least) they agree, or jump in one: As first, the Ranters will own Christ no
other ways, then only within: and, this is also the principle of the Quakers,
they will not own Christ without them. 2. The Ranters, they cry down all
teaching, but the teaching within: and so do the Quakers, (witness Thousands)
and yet condemn their principles by their practice, as the Ranters also did
and do. Now the Apostle says, the contrary saying, He that knows God
hears us, (meaning himself, with the rest of the Apost^s and servants of
Christ). He that is not of God hears not us. 1 John 4.6.

Again, 3. The Ranters are neither for the Ordinance of Baptism with Water,
nor breaking of bread. And are not you the same? 4. The Ranters would profess
that they were without sin; And how far short of this opinion are the Quakers.
5. The Ranters would not own the resurrection of the bodies of the Saints
after they were laid in the graves; And how say you, do you believe that the
very bodies of the Saints, as the very body of Abraham, and the body of Isaac,
with the bodies of all the Saints, notwithstanding some of them have been in
the graves thousands of years, others hundreds, some less: I say, do you
believe the Resurrection of these very bodies again, which were buried so long
since; or do you hold as the Ranters do, nothing but the Resurrection from a
sinful to an holy state in this life.

And really I tell thee (Reader) plainly, that for the generality, the very
opinions that are held at this day by the Quakers, are the same that long ago
were held by the Ranters. Only the Ranters had made them threadbare at an
Alehouse, and the Quakers have set a new gloss upon them again, by an outward
legal holiness, or righteousness. But again, why should you be so angry with
my Brother, for joining of a Sinner and a Liar together? Is there any great
harm in that? Surely no. And the joining Ranters and Quakers together, is but
so. The Quakers themselves confess, the Ranters ate to be disowned, page, 4.
Nay if they would not, yet God has disowned them in the open view of the
Nations. Now that the Quakers are liers I shall prove from their own mouth. As
first, from the several things that I did oppose even now, page. 1. 2. 3. 4.
Of his Book called, The true says of the Gospel of peace. etc. Now least they
should be slighted and set at naught, I shall show you clearly this man's lies
manifestly laid down in his book against me. As first, he says of me in his
book, p, 11. 12. That I said positively, the blood of Christ was shed before
the World began. Whereas I said only this. That in the account of God (mark
it, in the account of God) his blood was shed before the World was, according
to that Scripture, Rev. 13.8. The lamb slain from the foundation of the world,
in my Book, page. 3. Secondly he says, that I cry aloud against Christ
within, in p. 24. of his book. And again, he says, that all my work is an
obscure shooting against the manifestation of Christ within. Where he speaks
very falsely of me, for I confess and own Gods Christ within, as well as
without, as appears in my book page. 206. toward the end. And in the Epistle
to my Book you may find the same held out by me for 2. or 3. leaves together;
besides many other places of my book does testify of the same, therefore, does
not he lie miserably in this also?

Again, he says, that I am one of those that do preach for hire, through
covetousness, making Merchandise of souls. p. 23. of his book, which is also
an untruth, as I shall show further when I come to the place.

Again, he says, in page. 30. That I said, Christ's com^ing in the spirit was
no coming. Here also he utters falsehood. I never said so, as many of our
Brethren can witness. But of this also in it is place when I come to it, with
many other things which he has very untruly vented of me, which I fear not
but they shall be cleared, both now, and also at the second appearance of the
man Christ Jesus. And therefore friend (I say to thee) be not so Pharisaicall
as to say within thine heart, I am not as this Publican. Why am I reckoned with
the Ranters? Thou art, both thou and thy fellows of the same mind with them
in many things, and shall assuredly partake of the same plague with them, if
they and you repent not speedily. Again; in page. 7. Thou would make us
believe, that the Quakes do, Really and truly laythe Christ of God, God-man for
their foundation. Saying, We prise the Lord Jesus Christ God-man to be
precious to us, and to all that do believe, and have owned him to be the
foundation, etc. Now friend, this is fairly spoken; But by words in general we
may be deceived, because a man may speak one thing with his mouth, and mean
another thing in his heart; especially it is so with those that use to utter
themselves doubtfully; therefore, we will a little enquire, what it is to lay
Christ, God-man for a foundation. First then, To lay God's Christ, God-man for
a foundation, is to believe, that man that was borne of the Virgin Mary, to be
the Savior.

2. How he was and is the Savior; and therefore if you do indeed lay him for
your foundation, Then you do believe, that when the man Christ did hang on the
Cross on mount Calvary, that then your sins were satisfied for, 1 Pet. 2.2^.
at that time, as it is written, He bare our sins in his own body on the tree.

2. If the Christ of God, God-man be indeed your f^undation, then you do
believe, that that every man, in that very body, did fulfill all the Law in the
point of justification, as it is written, Christ is the end of the Law for
righteousness to every one that believes. So that now, believ aright in what
the son of Mary has done without on the Cross, and be saved.

3. If you have laid Christ that man aright for your foundation, then you do
believ, that when he was raised out of the Sepulcher into which Joseph had laid
him, then at that time was accomplished your justification, Romans 4.25. How say
you to these things, do you make an open profession of them without
dissembling? or do you not (notwithstanding your talk of Christ) in very deed
deny the virtue of the death and blood of Christ without, as for Justification
and Life; if so, you have not laid him for your foundation.

4. If you have indeed laid Christ God-man for your foundation, then you do lay
the hope of your felicity and joy on this, That the Son of Mary is now absent
from his Children in his person and humanity, making intercession for them and
for thee, in the presence of his Father, (2 Cor. 5.6.) And the reason that thou
can rejoice hereat is, because, thou have not only heard of it with thine
ear only, but do enjoy the sweet hope and faith of them in thy heart; which
hope and faith, is begotten by the Spirit of Christ, which spirit dwells in
thee (if thou be a believer) and shows those things to thee to be the only
things. And God having shown thee these things, thus without thee by the
spirit that dwells in thee, thou have mighty encouragement to hope for the
glory that shall be revealed at the coming again of the man Christ Jesus, of
which glory, thou have also greater ground to hope for a share in, because that
that spirit, that alone is able to discover to thee the truth of those things,
is given to thee of God, as the first fruits of that glory, which is hereafter
to be revealed, being obtained for thee by the man Christ Jesus, his death on
mount Calvary, and by his blood that was shed there, together with his
resurrection from the dead out of the Grave where they had laid him. Also, thou
believe that he is gone away from thee in the same body which was hanged on
the Cross, to take possession of that glory, which thou through his obedience
shall at his (the very same man's) return from heaven the second time have
bestowed upon thee, having all this while prepared and preserved it for thee,
as he sai h himself; I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare
a place for you, I will come again, and receive you to my self, that where I
am, there ye may be also. John. 14.2.3.

Again, 5. If thou have laid Christ, God-man for thy foundation, though thou
have the spirit of this man Christ within thee, yet thou do not look that
Justification should be wrought out for thee, by that spirit of Christ that
dwells within thee, for thou know that salvation is already obtained for
thee by the man Christ Jesus without thee, and is witnessed to thee by his
Spirit which dwells within thee. And thus much does this man Christ Jesus
testify unto us, where he says, he shall glorify me, Mark He shall glorify
me (says the Son of Mary) But how? Why, He shall take of mine (what I have
done, and am doing in the presence of the Father) and shall show it unto you
Joh. 16.14. I have been a little the larger in this, because it is of weight.

But again, thou say further, The rest of this first Epistle I shall say
little to; only thus much is the mind of the pen-man's spirit, Here again he
speaks falsely.
secretly smiting at the doctrine of true Faith and Salvation, (to wit) Christ
within. Answ. My friend, by saying that my brother does strike at the doctrine
of true Faith and Salvation, thou do him a great deal of wrong; for it is so
far from him so to do, that he tells souls plainly, that without true Faith
in the blood of the Son of Mary, who was crucified on Mount Calvary, there is
no remission; for says he, It is only through that one offering then given up
to the Father, that you must be justified. And that is according to the whole
stream of Scripture: For by one offering, What was that? Why, the offering up
of the body of Jesus once for all, ( Heb. 10.10.) he has perfected for ever
them that are sanctified. For this man when he had offered up one sacrifice for
sins for ever, sat down, Mark it: This man when he had offered up one
sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God, ver. 12.

And as for thy saying, that salvation is, Christ within; if thou mean in
opposition to Christ without; in stead of pleading for Christ, thou will plead
against him; for Christ God-man without on the Cross, did bring in salvation
for sinners: And the right believing of that, does justify the soul. Therefore
Christ within, or the Spirit of him who did give himself a ransom, does not
work out justification for the soul in the soul; But does lead the soul out of
it self, and out of that can be done within it self, to look for salvation in
that man that is now absent from his Saints on earth. 2 Cor. 5.6. Why so? For
it knows that there is Salvation in none other, Acts. 4.12. And therefore I
would wish thee to have a care what thou do, For I tell thee, That man who
is now jeared by some, because he is preached to be without them, will very
suddenly come the second time, to the great overthrow of those, who have
spoken, and shall still speak against him, Jude. 14, 15.

Thou say also the next thing thou mindest, is this in the second Epistle,
where a question is asked, Who are the men that at this day are so deluded by
the Quakers, and other pernicious doctrines, but they that counted it enough to
be talkers of the Gospel. etc. This man, says the Quaker, is of the same
spirit with his fellow, and will more abound in lies, etc. And why? because he
says the Quakers are those deceivers that at this day beguile poor souls by
their Doctrine. Alas poor man, why should thou be angry for my speaking the
truth, in saying: The Quakers are deceivers: this will easily appear. For
first, they deny the man Christ to be without them, and own Christ no
otherwise, but as he is within: contrary to that Scripture, which says. For
while we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord. This is touching
his bodily presence. And again, he was parted from them, And a cloud received
him out of their sight. And he was carried away from them, and so received up
into Heaven. Acts. 1.9.10, 11. Now he that denies this is a deceiver, as is
clear, in that he does speak against the truth laid down in the Scripture.

2. The Quakers are deceivers, in that they persuade souls that Christ is
crucified in them, dead within them, and kept down with some thing within them,
which was never taught by those that spoke the Scripture from the Spirit of
God. Show me a Scripture to confirm such a doctrine as this, which has been
avouched over and over by the Quakers.

3. The Quakers are deceivers, because they do persuade souls that that man
that was born of the Virgin Mary, is not above the clouds and the stars, when
the Scripture says, A cloud received him out of the sight of his Saints. And
again, that he is above the highest heavens, which must needs be above the
stars, for they are not the highest.

4. The Quakers are deceivers, because they persuade souls not to believe, that
that man that was crucified, and rose again flesh and bones, ( Luke 24.38,
39.40.) shall so come again, that very man, in the clouds of heaven to judgment
as he went away; and at the very same time shall raise up all the men and women
out of their graves, and cause them to come to the valley of Jehoshaphat;
because there will he, that very man, fit to judge all the Heathen round about.
I say, they strive to beat souls off from believing this, though it be the
truth of God witnessed by the Scripture, Joel 3.11.12. as also Acts 1.10, 11.
This same Jesus which is taken from you into heaven, shall so come (mark, the
very same) in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven. And his feet
shall stand in that day (the day of his second coming) upon the mount of
Olives, Zech. 14.4. Where is that? Not within thee, but that which is without
Jerusalem, before it on the East side. I say now, he that persuades souls not
to believe this, but makes them believe there is no such thing, as the Quakers
do, he is a deceiver. Again, the Quakers make no difference between that light
wherewith Christ, as he is God, has enlightened all; and the Spirit of Christ
he gives not to all, which I shall show by and by to be a deceit.

5. The Quakers are deceivers, because they say, That every one has that which
is like the spirit of Christ, even as good as the spirit of Christ, page 10 of
his book, which is desperate blasphemy. The Scripture says plainly, That some
are sensual, having not the Spirit. And yet though they have not that, They
have, says the Quakers, that which is as good as that. O wonderful deceit, as
I shall farther show by and by when I come to the place. But to cover himself,
and so his deceit, he does apply that to himself that should be applied for
the encouragement of the Children of God: saying, The Children of God was
always counted deceivers, we (says he) have a cloud of witnesses. Answer.
Friend, they were called deceivers, and were not so; but you are rightly called
so, as I have already showed, and shall show farther by and by. In the mean
time know, that the Devil knows how to take the Childrens bread, and cast it
to the dogs.

Then the next thing that he is grieved with, is, because I said, there are
none but a company of Light Notionists, Ranters, with here and there a
Legalist, that was shaking in their principles, that were carried away by the
Quakers, etc. When this appears in all men's sight that can see, though you
would not have it so (it is like) And as for your saying, Because all sorts of
people are brought to God, Another false thing spoken of me by the Quakers.
I am offended therewith; I Answer, No friend I bless God my soul can rejoice
that souls come into Jesus Christ, though it grieves me to see, how some with
a spirit of delusion are deceived, and destroyed, by it is coming unto them as
an Angel of light. And whereas thou say I am like the Pharisees, who said,
None believe, but a company of poor people, which know not the Law. Answ. I
bless God, I do know they are the poor that receive the Gospel; but Friend, I
must tell you, that you and your fellows may seek for justification from the
Law, and yet have no better a recompense, then to be condemned by the Law.

Now passing many raylings, I come to the next thing that thou do stumble
at, which is in that I say, Some of those delusions the Devil does deceive
poor souls withal; is first, in that he does persuade them, that Salvation
was not completely wrought out for sinners by the man Christ Jesus, though he
did it gloriously upon the Cross without the gates of Jerusalem. Now these
words, He did it gloriously on the Cross without the Gates of Jerusalem, thou
leavest out. Therefore I ask, Do you believe that at that time, when he did
hang upon that Cross on mount Calvary, that he did by that death he died
there, redeem all his elect from eternal vengeance? If not, what ever thou
say, thou will certainly see, that Satan has caught thee in his snare,
notwithstanding thy railing against the Lord Jesus. And Friend, thou may
call thy conscience, the man Christ Jesus, or the light (as thou call it) in
thy Conscience the man Christ Jesus; which if thou do, This is a delusion, and
a dangerous doctrine. For a Spirit has not flesh and bones, and so has the
man Christ Jesus. Now it may be, you think farther that the Church, with the
Spirit of Christ, is the man Christ Jesus, which is also a damnable heresy.
Therefore, speak plainly; Do thou believe that the man Christ Jesus is
ascended from his person, in his person, and again, do thou believ that he
which ascended from his Disciples, did bring in everlasting salvation for them,
in that his body which ascended from them? An answer to this might give great
Satisfaction to souls, if also it might be made in words easily to be
understood. Again.

Thou art also offended with the second deceit which I lay down in my Epistle,
which is, (say I) for the Devil to bid souls follow that light which they
brought into the world wi^h them, telling them, that that will lead them to the
Kingdom. Now thou seem gravelled, because I said, Which they brought into
the World with them. If thou art offended at that, show me when, and at what
time every soul receivs a light from Christ after it comes into the world. Now
this I say, That every man has not the spirit of Christ within him. J^d. 17.
And that there is nothing that can show the soul the things of Christ
savingly, but the spirit of Christ. 1. Cor. 2.11. Then will not you your self
confess, that he is deluded, that is persuaded to follow that light that
cannot reveal Christ unto him? But I must mind you of one filthy error also
which thou laiest down in page 10. Corrupting the Scripture to make it good,
but in vain; where thou say, That light which every man is lightened
withal, will lead unto the kingdom of peace and righteousness. And then thou
addest, for says Christ, I am the light of the World, he that follows me
shall not abide in darkness, or walk in darkness. Pray mark. First, thou
call it the light of Christ, wherewith he has lightened every one; And here
thou come a step higher, and call it, Christ himself; and then corruptest
that Scripture, where the Son of Mary says, I am the light of the World, etc.
Here thou would very willingly have room to broach thy folly, but it may
not be; for though Christ be the light of the world, yet he is not in every one
in the world. But secondly, I pray where was Christ when he spoke those words?
was he I say, within his Disciples, or without them, when he said, I am the
light of the World? He was without them, and walked up and down in the world
with them from place to place, a very man. Therefore, he did not mean at that
time, any light within, but himself, who was without. And indeed, they who
will follow Christ aright, must follow him without, to the Cross without, for
justification, on mount Calvary without, (that is, they must seek for
Justification by his obedience without.) To the grave without, and to his
asscention and intercession in heaven without; and this must be done through
the operation of his own holy Spirit, that he has promised shall show these
things unto them, being given within them for that purpose John. 16.14 Now the
Spirit of Christ that leads also, But whither? It leads to Christ without,
which said, being without, I am the light of the World, he that follows me
shall not abide in darkness, but shall have the light of life. Deny this, that
Christ was without when he spoke those words (I am the light of the World): If
you can.

But to come more close to the thing. That light wherewith Christ, as he is
God, has lightened every one that comes into the World, is the soul of man,
which is the life of the body, and yet it self is but a creature, and made by
the Creator of all things. Isa. 57.16. And is not the spirit, as some do think
it is. This creature has one faculty of its own nature, called, Conscience,
which has its place in the soul, where it is as a Judge to discern of things
good or bad, and judge them accordingly, as the Apostle says, speaking of the
heathens. Their Conscience either accusing or else excusing one another.
Romans, 2.14. This Conscience is that in which is the Law of Nature. 1 Corinthians,
11.14. which is able to teach the Gentiles, that sin against the Law, is sin
against God: And yet it is called but even Nature it self; as he says there,
Does not even Nature it self teach you? etc.

Now this Conscience, this Nature it self, because it can control, and chide
them for sin, who give ear unto it, therefore must it be Idolized, and made a
God of. O wonderful! that men should make a God and a Christ of their
Consciences, because they can convince of sin. But thou go ramping on, and
say, there is nothing but the light of Christ that will convince of sin, and
thou biddest me, mind that. Now do thou mean the Spirit of Christ? do
thou say that that which thou call the light of Christ, is the Spirit of
Christ? If so, then there is conscience which is not the Spirit of Christ, but
a poor dunghill creature in comparison of the Spirit of Christ; yet will
convince of sin, as is clear, from that 8. of John. where the woman is
mentioned, who was taken in adultery by the Pharisees, or others, who when they
had brought her to Christ, and began to accuse her, Christ said, He that is
without sin among you, let him cast a stone at her. And what then? When they
heard that, they were convicted by their own consciences. Mark, he does not
say, by the light of Christ in their consciences, as some would have it be; No,
but by their own consciences they were convinced, and went out one by one. And
were they all served so? Yea, from the eldest, even to the last; for they all
had consciences, though not the Spirit of Christ. So that friend, here is
something beside the Spirit of Christ that can and does convince of sin, even a
man's own conscience, the law of nature; nay nature it self, which no man will
say is as good as the Spirit of Christ, except they are guided by a deluding
spirit. Again, thou say, He that convince^h of sins against the Law, leads
up to the fulfilling of the Law. Friend, thy conscience convinces of sins
against the Law, follow thy conscience, it may lead thee under the curse of the
Law, through its weakness; but it can never deliver thee from the curse of the
Law by its power. For if righteousness come by the obedience to the Law, or by
thy conscience either, then Christ is dead in vain, Gal. 2.21.

Again thou say, That I and my generation would leap over the Law. Answ. For
Justification we look beyond it to the Son of Mary; yet we know that the Law is
good, if it be used lawfully; but if it be used unlawfully, as those do use it,
who seek to be justified by their obedience to it, it is made an Idol of, and a
Savior, though it were given to no such purpose: For if there had been a Law
given which could have given life, verily righteousness should have come by
(thy obedience to) the Law, Gal. 3.21. Now at thy conclusions, sometimes thou
do utter thy self in this wise, Learn what this means. Answ. Indeed thy
words are dark, and enough to deceive the hearts of the simple; but blessed be
God, he has given me to understand, that thou do all along in the drist of
thy discourse, disown Christ without, by pretending to a Christ within; whereas
had thou indeed the Spirit of Christ within thee, It would be thy great
business to extol and magnify the Son of Mary, the Christ of God without
thee, because it is the nature of the same spirit so to do, even to glorify
Christ without, who went away from his Disciples into heaven, Luke 24.50, 51.
to prepare a place for them.

Then thou further say (with a kind of disdaining spirit) Many things more
thou passest by in my book, as being not pertinent to the thing in hand. But I
believe they are so pertinent, that neither thou, nor thy friends or fellows
are able to contradict without blaspheming, in the view of all them that have
eyes to see: for if they could, it should have been don by thee. And whereas
thou say, Fools must be meddling. Answer, It must needs be, that the Saints
of God should be called fools by the enemies of the man Christ Jesus without,
because that the doctrine of the man Christ Jesus, crucified without for the
sins of poor sinners, is also held to be fooilshness by them; although it be
the wisdom, and also the power of God, unto every one that believes. 1 Cor.
1.23* 24.

And further, thou say, that the Pope can speak as much of Christ without,
as I. Answer, Friend, do thou put no difference betwixt the speaking of
Christ without, and believing in Christ without. I tell thee, though there may
be many that can speak of the Christ of God without, yet there are but very few
that can, or do believe indeed in him without, by the mighty operation of his
holy spirit within. Nay, you your selves do testify this, who deny that the
salvation of sinners was completely wrought out by that one offering of Jesus
Christ without upon the Cross on mount Calvary, and that he is ascended from
his Disciples above the clouds, touching his bodily presence, as in. 1 Cor.
5.6. compared with Acts. 1.9, 10, 11.

Then again, thou say, I do ask my self a question, and do also answer it my
self deceitfully. The question is, Do not the Scriptures make mention of a
Christ within? And thou say, I answer it deceitfully my self. But I answer
again, that I am not ashamed of that answer I then gave, because I know it is
truth; and whereas thou say it is deceitful, and yet can not find fault
with any point thereof, it confirms me, that had there been falsity in it,
such an enemy to the truth, as thou art, wou^dst have taken that advantage, as
to have discovered it, that thereby thou might have rendered the truth the
more odious. The answer I shall leave to the Christian Reader, which is so
indeed; yet am confirmed my self concerning it, and shall give thee an answer
to thy question, which is, Does not the Scripture (say or) witness, that all
that have not Christ within are Reprobates? Answer: Yes, the Scripture says
so, and it is true, they that have not the spirit of Christ in them, are
reprobates. But there are some that are reprobates, that you will confess.
Then by your own argument you must grant, that some have not the Spirit of
Christ in them. Pray take notice, they that have not the spirit of Christ in
them are reprobates There are some who are reprobates; therefore there are some
who are sensual, having not the spirit of Christ in them. (see thy folly how it
is made manifest) Jud. v. 19. The next thing thou art offended withal, is,
because I say, the Devil deceives poor souls by perswad ng them to follow
the light within (which all men have) Answer. Friend, I say again, and again,
That there is nothing less then the Spirit of Christ, that can give a soul a
sight of justification by the blood of the man Christ Jesus without, by
following of it. Now as thou say thy self, some are reprobates, and have
not the spirit of Christ.

Then is it any heresy to say, that it is of the Devil to persuade a soul to
follow that light which is no better then conscience, or Nature it self, which
are not able to lead to Christ his things, being foolishness to it. Romans 2.14.
or is conscience, which every one is lightened withal, the Spirit of Christ?
give an answer in sincerity.

Then thou say, that my whole purpose is a secret smiting at the light
wherewith Christ has lightened every man. I Answer. My whole design in my
book, is, and was, these following things.

First to show souls, where salvation is to be had. Namely, in Christ without.

2. To show souls how they should lay hold of this salvation; Namely by the
operation of the spirit of Christ, which must be given within.

And 3ly To forwarne poor souls, that they should not deceive themselves,
neither by conscience, nor the Law; which are both inferior, and much below
the Spirit of Christ; even as much as he that builds the house, has more
honor then the house. Heb. 3.

And 4. to show how poor souls should know, whether they had the Spirit of
Christ or not within them? or whether the spirit of the Devil had exalted
himself above the Spirit of Christ, by transforming himself into an Angel of
light.

Farther, thou think I contradict my self, because I admonish poor souls to
beg of God to convince them by his holy Spirit; and thou say, This is my
confusion. When alas, confusion is of, and from thy self, who would make a
defiled conscience; the Law and the Spirit of Christ to be all one, as I shall
further clear to the reader by and by.

But I tell thee friend, there are many who have not the Spirit of Christ, and
yet are convinced of sin by their own consciences. John. 8.9. He does not say,
by the light of Christ in their Consciences, that is a saying of your own,
without warrant from the Word of God, but by their own Consciences. Mark that:
Now I knowing, that a man may be convinced, and yet not by the Spirit of Christ
(for he may be without that) but by nature itself. 1 Cor. 11.14. I do admonish
every foul, if they love themselves, to beg of God for Jesus Christ his sake,
that he would not only let them he convinced by these poor low, empty,
beggarly things (their consciences) (in respect of the spirit of Christ) but
that he would convince them by that spirit of his effectually, which is not
only able to show their lost state because of sins against the Law, but also,
to lead them to the right Savior, and plant them into him, which all other
things are not able to do. And thus much in answer to thy scolding against my
Epistle, the truth of which I bless God through the strength of Christ, I
could be willing to seal with my blood.

And now friend, in love to thy soul, I say, have a care of thy self, that
thou do not satisfy thy self with any thing, until thou see by the
operation of the Spirit of Christ (which thou must have given thee from heaven,
as being without it before conversion) that the blood of that man Christ Jesus
that was crucified on mount Calvary, did at that same time, when it was there
shed, wash thee from all thy sins, and be not so stout, and so stern against
the truth, because it suits not with thy beguiled conscience. (Bear with me in
patience,) and seriously enquire into the truth of things according to the
Scriptures, For they are they that testify of Christ, and how salvation does
come by him.

In thy entering upon my Book, the first thing I find thee, wrangle with, is
First, by corrupting my words, and then by calling me liar.

Thou corruptest my words saying* That I said, The blood of Christ was shed
before the ^world began. Whereas I said, that in the account of God, (mark, in
the accoun of God) the blood of Christ was shed before the world began. Friend,
art thou not able to distinguish, betwixt a thing being done in God's account,
or according to his foreknowledge, and a thing that is reaslly and actually
don? Surely it was either thy folly to speak evil of the things thou know
not, or else thy madness does much appear, in that though thou understandest
these things, yet for to wrangle by corrupting my sayings here, as also in
other places, as will afterward appear. This is in page 11. of thine, page 3.
of my book.

Then thou go on page 12. and quotest the place where I say, p. 37. How
horribly are those deceived, who look on Jesus (but thou leavest out those
words, the Son of Mary) to be but a type; which thing you say, you know none
that do. And again thou say, that I say, he is of something afterward to be
revealed My words thou corruptest; thou would fain gather thus much out of my
words by corrupting them. Here my words are corrupted.
That though I denied Christ Jesus the Son of Mary to be a type, yet I my self
say, He was a type of something afterward to be revealed* Which thing, as there
in my book, so here again I do most positively deny, and I quote the same words
again, for a second confirmation of the same, saying as then I did; How
horribly are those deceived, who look on Jesus the Son of Mary to be but a
shadow, or type of something that was afterward to be revealed. Whereas the
Scriptures most lively hold him forth, to be the Christ of God; and not a type
or shadow of a spirit, or body afterward to be revealed, but himself was the
very substance of all things that did any way hold forth, or type out Christ to
come: And when he was indeed come, then was an end put to the Law for
righteousness or just^fication to every one that believes, Romans ^0.4 And
therefore friend, though thou have, or would corrupt my words, yet have a
care of corrupting Christ's words; least thou do even heap up wrath against
the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God. And whereas
thou say, Thou deniest not but Jesus is the substance. Answ. I doubt thou
do not speak thine heart plainly, but hidest thy self with so saying, as
with an apron; if we enquire into what it is to hold forth Jesus the son of
Mary to be the substance. Therefore he that holds forth Jesus the Son of Mary
to be indeed the substance, and not a type; holds forth and believes, that that
Jesus that was born of the Virgin Mary, did in his own body of flesh fulfill the
Law, and impute the righteousness of his obedience unto them that he
accomplished, then without them; and that his blood that was shed without on
the Cross does and has washed away all sin past, present, and to come, from
him that believes this; as it is written, For what the Law could not do in
that it was weak through the flesh, that is through our flesh; God sending his
own Son in the likeness of si^ful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the
flesh. That is, he was condemned in the flesh that he took on him of the Virgin
Ma y, Romans 8.3. And again, he bore our sins in his own body on the tree, which
was the Cross on mount Calvary.

Jesus also (says the Apostle) that he might sanctify the people with his own
blood, suffered: Where? Not in any believer, but without the gate of Jerusalem,
Heb. 13.12. How say you, do you really believe, that at that time when Jesus
did hang on the Cross without Jerusalems gate, even at that time he did give
the justice of God a full and complete satisfaction, for all the sins of all
believers, that have been formerly, or are now, or hereafter shall be? Or do
you look upon Jesus at that time to be but a shadow, or type of somewhat that
was afterward to be done within? Answer plainly, yea or no; that the simple
may understand you.

Now I come to answer thy Querie laid down page 12 in these words; Did Christ
Jesus put an end to the Law, for them who live yet in the transgression of the
Law? Or does he justify that which the Law condemns? Indeed a right answer
to this will be great satisfaction to some, though I think some trouble to
others. And therefore in answer to thy question I shall lay down these
following things:

First, Christ Jesus did put an end to the Law for righteousness, for all that
the Father has given him; as it is written, The body of Jesus was offered
once for all, for all that shall be saved; for he shall not be offered a second
time: No, but once for all, Heb. 10.10. Once in the end of the world has he
appeared, to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself; and he has done it once
by himself for all, Heb 9.26. Otherwise he must have often suffered since the
world began: But that must not be; for he dies no more, Romans 6.9. But say you,
Did he put an end to the Law for them who still live in transgression?

2. Answ. There are many poor souls that are given unto Christ, who yet live in
their sins. But Christ did at that time, when he hanged on the Cross, give a
full and complete satisfaction for them. In due time Christ died for the
ungodly: For scarcely for a righteous man will one die, but peradventure for a
good man some one would even dare to die. I, but God commends his love to
us-wards, in that while we were yet sinners Christ died for us. While we were
yet sinners, yet ungodly, Romans 5.6, 7, 8. Nay, he did not only die for those
who still live in sin, but he also makes intercession now at the throne of his
Fathers grace for them. And he made intercession for the transgressors, Isa.
53.12. He has ascended on high, he has led captivity captive, and received
gifts for men For what men? Even for the rebellious also, Psalm. 68.18. To what
end? That the Lord God might dwell amongst them.

And whereas thou ask; Does he justify that which the Law condemns,
before the work of the Law be finished? I answer:

That at that very time when Jesus Christ did hang on the Cross on mount
Calvary, was buried, rose again from the dead, and ascended above the clouds
from his Disciples, at that very time was all the law fulfilled for
righteousness. He is the end of the Law, mark; he is the end of the Law for
righteousness. But if there were any thing yet to be done for justification,
which was not then done; there could not be an end put to the Law for
righteousness, for every one that believes. But in that there is an end put
to the Law for righteousness by Jesus for all the elect of God, Christ having
once fulfilled it for them; It is manifest, that there was not anything then
left undone by Christ at that time, which was afterward to be done by his own
Spirit in his Children for justification, only believe what the man Christ, at
that time did do, and be saved; Acts* 13. from ver. 29. to ver. 39. And whereas
thou asks, whether Christ did justify that which the Law condemns?

I answer. Fourthly, That though Christ Jesus did not justify sins, or
ungodlynesse, yet he justifies the ungodly. Now to him that works is the
reward given, or reckoned; not of grace, but of debt: But to him that works
not, but believed on him that justifies the Ungodly (mark, the ungodly) his
faith is counted for righteousness. He is he that justifies, having finished
the righteousness of the Law in his own person for them. My own arm brought
Salvation, says he. But how? Even by his bleeding on the Cross. You have
redemtion through his bloud^ Ephesians. 1.7. which was shed without the gate* Heb.
13.12. I, and through the Law condemns a sinner, yet let but that sinner
believ in Christ, in what he ha^h done in his own person, and he shall be
justified from all things, from which he could not be justified by the Law of
Moses. Acts. 13.39.

And whereas thou ask me the meaning of that Scripture, Not one tittle of
the Law shall fai e till all be fulfilled. I answer, That the Law has already
been fulfilled for justification, for every one that believe h: And a believer
is to do nothing for justification, only believe and be saved; though that Law
be a rule for every one that believes to walk by, but not for justification.
But if you do not put a diffe^ence between justification wrought by the man
Christ without, and s^nctification wrought by the Spirit of Christ, within;
teaching believers their duty to their GOD, for his love in giving Christ. You
are not able to divide the Word aright, but contrariwise, you corrupt the Word
of God, and cast stumbling blocks before the people; And will certainly one
day most deeply smart for your folly, except you repent. Here is a plain answer
that may satisfy the simple. The Lord God grant that they may lay it to heart
effectually.

Now this I say further, that if God enable any to receive this Doctrine aright
(namely what I said even now) it will more engage the soul to God, then all
the threatenings, thunderclaps, and curses that come from the Law it self. And
a soul will do more for God, seeing it self redeemed by the blood of the
Lamb the son of Mary, John. 1.29. then if he had all the conditions of the
Law to fulfill, and might be sure to have heaven for the fulfilling of them.
Now as to the assurance thou speak of at the end of thy question. I know in
the first place, that though believers themselves do sin, yet they have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, 1 John 2.1, 2. And though
the doctrine of the Gospel be to abstain from all appearance of evil, yet our
Lord Jesus Christ is so pitiful, as not altogether to deprive his children of
an assurance of their salvation, For the proof of this, read the good love of
God to David, Peter, and others which did most woefully sin again after they
were converted.
though sometimes through weakness they do transgress. And whereas you would
lay an assurance on our obedience to the Law; I say, our assurance comes
through our believing, and our obedience to the Law is a fruit of our
believing; for every one that has this hope, that he is one of the children,
or sons of God, by faith in Jesus, 1 John 3.3. purifieth himself as he is pure.
Holiness of life, if it be right, flows from an assurance of our being
justified by Christ's death on the Cross, on mount Calvary; as it is written
again, that he might sanctify his people with his own blood, he suffered
without the gate.

But again, pa e 12. thou seem offended, because I say, They are deeeived,
who think to obtain salvation by following the Law, which they call Christ,
though falsely. Why should thou be offended at this, when the Scripture says
plainly, That by the works of the Law shall no flesh living be justified in his
sight; for by the Law is the knowledge of sin, Rom* 3.20 But this is thy
frothie argument, The Law convinces, and is our Schoolmaster to bring us to
Christ; therefore the Law is not taken away, say thou. Friend, what is this
to the purpose? Must we seek fot Justification by the works of the Law,
because the Law convinces; you may as well say, we must seek for justification
from our consciences, because they do convince: Now where the Scripure says,
the Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ; do you think it means, we
must be first fitted by purification of our selves by, or according to the Law,
before we can be saved by Christ from the curse of the Law? If you s^y, yea.
Then does not this f^llow, that Christ Jesus did not come to save sinners, but
to save the righteous; and if so, then you must say, that Christ, Peter, Paul,
and all the servants of the Lord are liers, who have testified that Christ died
not for the godly, but for the ungodly and sinners.

But where the Scripture says, The Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us to
Christ: I ask again, is it the Ceremonial Law, or the Moral Law that is meant
in this place? If you say the Moral, or the Ten Commandments. I answer; That
does not lead to life, and so not to Christ; but is properly the ministration
of condemnation, 2 Cor. 3. That is, the proper work of the Moral Law, or Ten
commandments, is to condemn, if it be not obeyed; and yet not to bless,
until it be every jot fulfilled, wh ch is impossible to be done by any man for
justification, in that exact and severe way which the Law calls for; which
makes the Apostle say, as many as are of the works of the Law, are under the
curse. Mark, he does not say, as many as are of the works of sin, are under the
curse, though that be true; but as many as are of the works of the Law, a^e
under the curse: for it is written, Cursed is every one that continues not in
all things that are written in the book of the Law to do them. But that no man
is justified by the deeds of the Law it is evident, For the just shall live by
faith, Gal. 3.10, 11.

If it be meant of the Ceremonial Law, as I am most inclinable to believe,
because he says it was our Schoolmaster; he does not say it is, but it was our
Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, being a Tutor or Governor; holding forth
Christ to come by its types and significations, until the time appointed of
the Father, which appointed time (and so that Law) was to have an end, when God
sent forth his Son made of a woman, Jesus the Son of Mary, who was made under
the Law, to redeem those that were under the Law.

Now the Ceremonial Law did bring or lead to Christ these two ways: First, In
that it did continue in full force until he did come into the world, and had
done that which was by it held out for him to do.

Secondly, in that the several types and shadows, as thc blood of Bulls and
Lambs, with diverse other services did lead to, or hold forth Christ that was
to come: but the Moral Law, or Ten Commandments, is so far from leading us to
Christ by our following it, that it does even lead those that are led by it
under the curse. Not because the Law has an evil end in it, but because of our
weakness and inability to do it; therefore it is forced, as it is just, to
pass a sentence of condemnation on every one, that in every particular
fulfills it not.

In the next place, thou art offended because I said, It is not of works, least
any man should boast, as those fond hypccrites, called Quakers would do.

Thou art offended, it seems, because I call you boasters. You need not, for I
do not know your fellows for boasting under heaven, In that you, (Pharisees
like) do cry up your selves to be the men, and condemn all others; when you
are the men that are the greatest enemies to the Christ of GOD without (who is
the Savior) of any man under heaven. And in that you pretend you are perfect,
when you are the notablest liars and corrupters of the sayings of the peopl of
God, yea, and of the Scriptures also, that ever I came near in all the days of
my life; And I doubt not but before I have done with you, I shall make it
appear to them that read or hear my lines aright. Thy Quaerie in page. 13. runs
thus. Will that Faith which is without works justify? I answ. No, Neither will
those works which are without faith sanctify. What then, Is it faith and
works together that does justify? No, it is only faith in the blood of the
man Christ, that did hang on the Cross on mount Calvary, that does justify in
the sight of God and the soul, and it is the fruits of faith, good works,
which do justify in the sight of men. So that when it is said, we are
justified by works; It is not meant that works will justify in the sight of
God. No, but show me (or show men) thy faith, or justify thy faith to be true
and right before men by thy works. Show men thy faith by thy works, it is in
the sight of men. So that we conclude a man is justified by faith without the
works of the Law in the sight of God, and so his own soul also, and his
faith is justified, or made manifest, to be indeed that which is right, both to
believers and to the world by it is works. Though I must confess, that both
Paul and Peter, and the rest of the Saints may sometimes be deceived in the
truth of the faith of others by their works.

Again in page 17. thou seem to be offended, because I say, Living by faith,
is to apply the Lord Jesus Christ his benefits, as birth, righteousness,
death, blood, resurrection, ascension, and intercession, together with the
glorious benefits of his second coming, to me, as mine, and for me. etc.

Friend, methinks thou should find no fault with this, but that the man
Christ Jesus, the son of Ma y* is not very pleasant to thee, because thou have
swallowed down secretly another doctrine: but friend, I speak of applying these
things, and thou speak of talking of them. I know that there are many who
talk of Christ, that will fall short of heaven and glory.

But tell me, what say thou to him tha^ does apply all these things to his
soul, is there not enough in them to justify him, that does really, and truly
in the power of the Spirit, believe this to be true which I have said? Or do
thou deny it, and preach another Gospel? And whereas thou say, The word of
the Gospel says not, who shall ascend, to fetch Christ from above for
salvation. Though there is never a scripture that says these words, word for
word; Yet the Scripture says, The word is mghthee, even in thy mouth, and in
thy heart; But mark, it is the word of faith, not the man Christ Jesus, but
faith which lays hold on him Romans 10.8, 9. Read the 9. verse, which is this,
Tbat if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus (who was borne of the
Virgin Mat, 1.21) And sha^t believe in thine heart, that God raised him from
the dead. thou shall be saved. These great and precious Scriptures, with which
by corrupting of them, the Quakers have beguiled many, have this meaning, That
if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus; that is, in profession
and practice own him and believ, him to be the Anointed Savior. And shall
believe in thine heart, there is the word of faith, if thou shall believe in
thine heart, that God raised him from the dead, thou shall he saved: for with
the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is
made unto salvation. But what should men believe with the heart? Namely this,
that God raised him (that is Christ) from the dead. ver. 10. And therefore, I
wonder thou should so scold, as thou do, against the truth: If this be
not truth blame the Scripture which do testify of these things for truth. For
I am ruled, and would be ruled by them thtough the Spirit.

But farther thou art offended that I should say, They are deceived who own
Christ no otherways then as he was before the world began. This Question I
briefly ask thee. Had Christ a body of flesh, before the World began? If you
say no, as you must, if you say true. Then, do not I say true? when I say, they
are deceived who own, Christ no otherwise then as he was before the world
began; because they own him not with that body of flesh which he took of the
Virgin Mary, and so are Antichrists, as the Scripture says. And how say you?
Do you believe, that the same Christ who was before the World, without a body,
did in time come into the world, and t^ke a body from the Virgin, and in that
body did obtain everlasting redemption for sinnesr, and is gone with that very
body into the presence of his Father above the clouds into heaven from his
Saints on earth, though in them by his spirit. A plain answer to this, would
unlock your double meanings. Again, thou say the Saints drank of the
spiritual Rcck that followed them

Friend, I confess, that that spiritual Rock that did follow the Fathers, and
long after, was from the same loins with them, even from the loins of Abraham,
and the rest of the children of the promise, according to the promise, was the
meat and drink of Saints Romans 9.4, 5. But to look upon Christ no otherwise then
as he was before the world was, which was a spirit only, and not to own him
now clothed with a body, absent from his children touching the same body, I
dare be bold to say, they are no Christians, but Antichristians; yea
Antichrists. He that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is
Antichrist, and of Antichrist. Again.

At this also thou wranglest, because I said, that every Spirit that confesses
not that Jesus Christ, who was with the Father before the world was, did in the
appointed time of the father, come into the World, take a body upon him, and
was very man as well as very God: and did in that very body suffer what did
belong to the sons of men, etc. So my book. page 42. 43. 44.

I answer, if thou did indeed believe the truth, thou would own these
things. But being deceived, rather then thou will let this pass for truth,
though thou dare not oppose it with open face, yet thou will put on a veil,
and venture upon it thus, saying; If every spirit were of God, which does
confess in words this, then is not the Pope himself Antichrist.

Answer. Friend, it is one thing to confess the things in words, and another
thing to believe them, and to make a life out of them; and therefore is thy
life made out of Christ without thee, by the operation of his spirit within
thee, yea or no?

Then in answer, to my bidding people receive no Christ, except God's Christ,
thou say thus, That Christ is a mystery, and unto him is light, and shall be
salvation where his person never came. Th^s Question I ask thee, did or does
Christ obtain salvation for any, without that ^^^y which he took of the
Virgin? And yet thou say, it cannot be said, here is the place where the Son
is not.

I answer: as the Son of God is also very man, so it may be said, here is the
place where he is not, and there is the place where he has not been, though as
he is God it is otherwise, let him that reads understand.

And now passing by many things that I might justly examine, and also many
unseemly expressions, I come to the next thing, and that is; where you say, you
wrest not the Scrripture in Joh. 1.9. But it is evident, that you do most
horribly wrest it, in that you, though you seem to take it in the plain words,
yet would hold, that that light is the Spirit of Christ, notwithstanding there
is no such thing mentioned in that Scripture. For mark, as I have sometimes
said, and now also will say, that that light wherewith Christ, as he is God,
has lightened every one with, is not the Spirit of Christ, as is clear, in
that some are sensual having not the Spirit, which they must needs have, if it
were given to every one that comes into the World, and therefore, in that you
say, I say you lay down that scripture false, I say again, that you say many
things which I do know to be blasphemy, as I shall prove clearly anon, as
also I have already. And therefore, to take thee off from this, I shall say,
that Christ as he is a mediator, a man between God and man, so he does not
lighten every man that comes into the World, though as he is God he does. And
that is manifest, where he often (as he was man) says, These things are spoken
to them that are without in parables; that seeing, they might not see; and
hearing, they might not understand, Luk, 8.10. And again, where Judas (not
Iscariot) said; Lord, how is it, that thou will manifest thy self to us, and
not unto the world? He says, If a man love me, he will keep my sayings, and my
Father will love him, and we (I as Mediator, and my Father as reconciled in
me) will manifest our selves unto him, Joh. 14.21.23. And again, No man knows
the Father but the Son: That is, no man knows him as a Father, but the Son;
and he to whom the Son will reveal him, Mat. 11.27. But above all, take that
Scripture where the Son says, I thank thee O Father, Lord of heaven and earth,
because thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed
them to Babes, ver. 25. Here the Son and the Father are speaking one to
another; the Father he hides the glorious things of the Gospel from the world,
Mat 11.25, 26, 27. and the Son he rejoices in so doing. At that same hour
Jesus rejoiced in Spirit, and said, I thank thee O Father, etc. Therefore
understand thus much, that though Christ as he is God, does give to every man a
light, which is Conscience, otherwise called Nature, Romans 2.14. 1 Cor. 11.14.
yet it does not follow, that every man has enlightening from Christ as he is
Mediator. No, Christ as he is Mediator does neither pray for the world, Joh.
17.9. neither does he give his Spirit to all that are in the world; for some
are sensual, and have it not. But now the argument that thou do bring to
color the contrary with, is this; For what the Father does, say thou, the
Son does also. Answ. Though this be true, that the Son does what the Father
does; yet it does not appear, that either the Father, or the Son has given the
Spirit to every one that comes into the world.

Again thou say, thou deniest those that say, That light which every ono
has as he coms into the world, is Conscience; though some call it Christ,
falsely. Jude 19.
Answ. Friend, What will thou have it called? Christ. No. If not Conscience,
then call it Nature it self; for all have not the spirit.

But another great argument thou bring in page 15, is, The light of Christ
does convince of sin. Now do you call conscience the light of Christ? that will
convince of sin, Joh. 8.9. And they being convinced by their own consciences,
etc. If thou do call the Law the light of Christ, that also will convince
of, or make known sin; For by the Law is the knowledge of sin, Romans 3.20. If
thou do^st call even Nature it self, the light of Christ; That also does show,
that sins are a shame, even those sins which some leap over, 1 Cor. 11.14. and
Ruffian-like they will wear long hair, which nature it self forbids, and is
commended for the same* by the Apostle. The Spirit of Christ also will convince
of sin. What, because these several things will convince of ^in, therefore will
they needs be the Spirit of Christ? Or do they altogether make but one Spirit
of Christ? Do thou profess thy self to walk in the light, and art no^ able
to know these things? Or if thou do know them, art thou so unfaithful, as
not to tell poor people of them, who are some of them at their wits end, by
reason they are not enlightened into these things*

Another of thy arguments, is, They saw the eternal power and Godhead, by that
which was made manifest of God in them.

Answ. The Scriptures say not so word for word, but thus; Because that which
might be known of God, was manifested in them. But how? For he has showed it
unto them. But how? Why the invisible things of him from the creation of the
world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made (which
words in thy charge against me thou did leave out) But mark: The invisible
things of God from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood
by the things that are made. But how then does it say, that the knowledge of
God is manifest in them? Why, because God has showed it unto them by the
things that are made, even by the creation of the world. So that this Scripture
holds forth thus much; that the invisible things of God, as his Power,
Holiness, and common goodness to the sons of men are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made. But how feeble an argument is this, to
prove such a doctrine as this: That every one has the Spirit, when this light
discovers God only by his works in the world. Friend; if they that know God,
because he does show himself to them by his works i^ the world, have the Spirit
of Christ, then the same argument will serve to speak thus much; that the Devils
themselves have the Spirit of Christ, which would be wonderful blasphemy once
to affirm. And Friend, the very Devils, both for the knowledge of sin, and also
for the knowledge of God's eternal power and Godhead, have more experience,
then all the unregenerate men in the world; and yet have not the least spark of
the Spirit of Christ in them.

Other lame arguments thou tumblest over, like a blind man in a thicket of
bushes, which I pass by; But one thing more thou have, and that is this; Thou
ask me, Whether I do know this light which God and Christ has given to
every man? First, I deny that Christ as he is Mediator, has given to every
man his Spirit; Romans ^.14. 1 Cor. 11.14.
And secondly I deny, that Christ as he is God has given to every one his
Spirit; but this I say, as I have often said, it is Conscience, or Nature it
self that every one has, take it in either of these Scripture terms, as I have
proved at l^rge. And whereas thou ask me, Whether that light, which Christ
as he is God has lightened every one with that comes into the world, be
sufficient in it self for life and salvation. I answer plainly, No, for then
Christ Jesus needed not to have come into the world to die for sinners* for
every one had that light before Christ did come into the world.

And secondly I answer, it is not able, for then it would have been a needless
thing for Christ to tell his Disciples of sending them his Spirit, to lead them
into all truth. They might have said, Why do thou talk of sending us thy
Spirit, who have that that can do the deed already, if that could have done it.

3. Because the Scripture says, Some are sensual, having not the Spirit. Now a
man cannot lay hold on Christ, nor believe in him savingly without the Spirit,
because faith is the work of the Spirit.

And 4ly. Because then it had been in vain for the Lord to have given the
Scriptures to teach men out of, either concerning himself, or themselves: Why?
Because without it they had a sufficient light to guide them: that thing must
not be so.

And whereas thou ask, whether the fault be then in God, or in that thou
call his light, or in the Creature? I answer; What if God, willing to show
his wrath, and to make his power known, endured with much patience the vessels
of wrath fitted to destruction; and that he might make known the riches of his
glory on the vessels of mercy, which he had before (before the world was, Ephesians.
1.4.) ordained unto glory? And secondly, O vain man! what is that to thee if
God should make some vessels to dishonor: has not the Potter power over the
clay, of the same lump to do therewith as he please, Romans 9. from ver. 16. to
ver. 22.

And where I say, Christ as he is God has lightened every one that comes into
the world: To it thou give a glavering answer; but having touched on this
before, I pass it by.

To the next thing, where I say, Men's neglecting this light, or law, will be
sure to damn them, though their obedience to the Law will not save them. Here
thou say I have confessed truth, (and I know it is true by experience) and
thou commentest on those things laid down by me thus: Then surely (say thou)
it is good not to neglect it; that is, not to neglect following the Law. To
which I answer; As their obedience to the Law will not save them, so their
neglect of obedience to the Law will be sure to damn them; these things thou
can not deny. But is this all the wit thou have? Because the neglect of the
Law will be sure to damn them; therefore would thou put poor souls to follow
that which will not save them? (O wonderful ignorance). Nay, but thou should
have said, Then surely the best course is, for a poor soul in this case, to
fly to the Lord Christ, even the man Christ Jesus, who was slain on mount
Calvary for the sins of poor sinners. And the rather, because he did so
willingly, of his own accord lay down his life for them. Me thinks, I say, thou
should rather have said, Then let us follow the Son of Mary, the man Christ
Jesus, the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, by his blood on
the Cross; who is now also at his Fathers right hand making intercession for
all those that do come to the Father by him; but they that are not for the
truth, will advance any thing but the truth. And as for that which thou call
the second clause, which is, The Law (say thou) must be obeyed.

I answer, Christ Jesus has done that, in his own person, and justified me
thereby; and for my part, I will not labor now to fulfill the Law for
justification, least I should undervalue the merits of the man Christ Jesus,
and what he has done without me: and yet will I labor to fulfill, if it were
possible, ten thousand Laws, if there were so many: and O! let it be out of
love to my sweet Lord Jesus, (2 Cor 5.14.) for the love of Christ constrains
me* and thus much to thy 16 page.

In the next place. Thou art offended with this, because I say, though Christ
does give a light to every one that coms into the world, yet it does not
therefore follow, that this conscience (or light) is the Spirit of Christ, or
the work of grace wrought in the heart of any be^iever. This I shall pass also,
as having spoken to it already, only mind thee of thy weakness, in that thou
should m^ke this conscience; that Christ has given to every man to be the
same with the Spirit of Christ. And thou say further, that the light, that
Christ has lightened every one with, is the same in narure with the Spirit of
Christ O wonderful! that a man should be so foolish, and so much besides the
truth, as to compare that nature, or conscience, that is given to every man;
equal to the Spirit of Christ: Nay, thou say that it is one with it in
nature. Did thou not blush when thou laydest it down? If thou did not,
thou might have done with shame enough. As I said before, because thy
conscience will convince thee of sin, therefore thou will call it Christ, or as
good as Christ. What! because the Law will convince of sin, therefore the Law
must be called Christ. What ignorance is this? Nay, nature it self, that must
have the preheminency, even as high as Christ Jesus, because it can tell a man
that it is a shame for him to wear long hair.

Then thou ask me, can there be a surer thing for the Creature to walk by,
than by the light of Christ, which thou confessest every one has, that comes
into the world. Answer; Friend, to the law, and to the testimony (sai h the
Scriptures), for they testify of Christ. And if thou or any else, shall leave
the Scriptures, to follow the convictions of their own conscience; ye are not
like to know Christ Jesus the Lord, for they may be defiled. And again, it is
through the promises laid down in the Scriptures, that we may partake of the
divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. and not by our following of the law, or conscience:
Gal. 3.1, 2, 3, 4.

But again, where I say, Heathens, Turks, Jews, Atheists, etc. have that which
does convince of sin, and yet are so far from having the Spirit of Christ in
them, that they delight to do iniquity; and to serve their lust. Upon this,
thou movest this Quaery; Do they, or I, or any other serve sin and lust,
because Christ has not given us light, or because we hate this light.

Answ. This I do really confefs, that every Heathen, Turk, or Jew in this
world, has a conscience within them, that does convince of sin; for the
Gentiles which have not the law, that is, not the law in tables of stone, or
written as we have; these do by nature, the things contained in the law; these
having not the law, are a law unto themselves; which show the work of the law
written in their hearts, their consciences also bearing them witness, etc. And
all men and women shall be left without excuse, even by the convictions of
their own consciences, or the law. But now that these things are the Spirit of
Christ, that I deny. For conscience is but a creature, a faculty of the soul of
man, which God has made. Neither is the law the Spirit of Christ; for the law
is not of faith. They that are of the works of the law are under the curse, but
they that have the Spirit of Christ, they are the children of God, and under
grace, and delivered from the curse, as it is written Gal. 3. As many as are of
the works of the law are under the curse. But what is it to be of the works of
the law, or under the law? Answ. Why to seek to be justified by their obedience
to the law. Israel which followed after the law of righteousness, Mark. They
that follow after righteousness, do not attain to the law of righteousness; if
they seek it not by faith: but as it were by the works of the law. But Christ
has delivered u^ from the curse of the law, Romans 9.30.31.
being (in our nature), made a curse for us. Gal. 3.10, 11, 12, 13.

But whereas thou say, this conscience, or law, which you would fain have
called the Spirit of Christ; works in all men either to justify, or condemn.
I do plainly deny, that either conscience, or the law can justify, though they
can condemn. Mark, the law is called the ministration of condemnation, but not
of life.

The Gospel is called the ministration of life, but not of condemnation; 2 Cor.
3.9.
the law was given that sin might be discovered. The Gospel was sent, that sin
might be taken away. The law works wrath; but the Gospel is a Gospel of
peace, Rom, 10. The law makes nothing perfect, Heb. 7.19. but Christ justifies
from all those things from which we could not be justified by the law of Moses,
Act. 13.39.

And whereas thou ask me whether any thing does convince of sin contrary to,
or besides the Spirit of Christ.

I answer, there is conscience, and the law, yea, and nature it self that does
convince of sin; as before I have proved at large. Yet neither is conscience,
the law, or nature it self the Spirit of Christ; no, but are much inferior to
it, as being things of no glory in respect of it.

And again, that something does convince of sin besides the Spirit of Christ, it
is evident: for the law says, 2 Cor. 3.10.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are written in it
to do them But the Spirit convinces men of their unbelief, together with other
sins. Now mark, the law also convinces to work for life, the Spirit convinces
to believe for life; the law says, he that does not fulfill me, shall be damned.
The Spirit says, he that believes in Christ shall be saved. Now observe the
terms of the law and of the Gospel, are different one from another as to
justification. If men seek for life by the law; then the law says, fulfill me
perfectly and thou shall live. The Spirit says that Christ Jesus came into the
world to save those that by transgession had broken the law. For, for this
cause says the Spirit he ( Jesus the son of Mary, the man Christ between God
and us, 1 Timothy 2.5.) is the Mediator of the New Testament. For what? That by
means of death for the redemption of the trangressions that were under the
first testament, they which are called might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance, Heb. 9.15. Now I would not be mistaken; I do not say, that the
Spirit of Christ does give the least liberty to sin; God forbid. But it is
convictions are of a more saving and refreshing nature than the convictions of
the law, and do more constrain the soul to holiness then that.

The Law saying, Work for life; the Spirit saying, Now to him that works not
(for life) but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is
counted for righteousness, Romans 4.5. as thus; If I should owe to two Creditors
ten thousand talents; the one should say unto me, thou owe me five thousand
talents, pay that thou owe; the other shoul say, thou owe me five thousand
talents, and I frankly and freely forgive thee all. Now these expressions are
contrary one to another. Even so is the end of the convictions of the Law not
according to the end of the convictions of the Spirit of Christ; the one
saying, Pay me that thou owe; the other saying, Thou art frankly and freely
forgiven all.

The next thing thou utterest is, where I say, Those that are alive unto sins,
have not the Spirit of Christ. But say thou, It is given to every man. Mark,
thou say, It is given to every man: The Apostle says, Some are sensual,
having not the Spirit, Jude 19. Who must we now believe, the Apostle, or you?
Certainly your doctrine is not according to truth, but a lie; as is clear, in
that you will affirm that which the Apostle does deny.

Then thou say, I bring other vain arguments to prove, that every one has
not the Spirit of Christ. This one is enough to prove it, that the Apostle
says, Some men have it not. But that which thou call vain, I am sure
neither thou, nor any of thy fellows are able to answer. One is to this
purpose; The Devils are so convinced of sin, that they did fear the torment
that was to come upon them for their sins; and did fear also that the Son of
man was come to torment them for their sins, and yet the Devils have not the
Spirit of Christ. So that it is evident, that we may be convinced of sin, and
yet not by the Spirit of Christ. A second argument which thou call vain, is
this, Man in his coming into the world has this Conscience given him, which
does convince of sin, Joh. 8.9. yet man in his coming into the world, or as he
comes into the world, has not the Spirit of Christ given him, for that must
be received ordinarily afterward by the preaching of the Word, which is
preached by the Ministers and servants of Jesus Christ, Act. 10.44* While Peter
yet spoke to the people, the holy Spirit fell on all them that heard the Word.

But farther, thou say, Until I prove the light of Christ contrary to the
spirit of Christ, thou will say, that every man has that which is one in
union, and like the spirit of Christ, even as good as the spirit of Christ in
its measure.

Answer. Friend, I have proved already that every man has not the Spirit of
Christ, though they have that which thou do call the Spirit of Christ, which
is conscience, and nature it self. And this I say again, that thou have laid
open thy weakness very much, to say that every man has that which is as good
as the Spirit of Christ. Friend, seeing the Scriptures say, some have not the
spirit of Christ, how durst thou so blaspheme, as to say, then it is as good as
the spirit of Christ in its measure. Was there ever such a deal of ignorance
discovered at one time by a man, as to say, that every man has the Spirit, or
that which is as good as the Spirit; though the Spirit says plainly, that some
have not the Spirit, as I have proved plainly. Jude, 19. Friend, what is there
besides the Spirit, that is as good as the Spirit? Be silent, and say no more
so, least thou do through ignorance, or presumption, set up thy conscience or
nature, as high and as good as the Spirit of Christ, when indeed they are not
worthy to be compared with it, being weak, and not able to do that which is and
has been done by the Spirit of Christ

Then thou art offended, because, I said, the Devil does deceive poor souls by
bidding them listen within, and see if there be not that which does convince of
sin. Friend, All men have not the Spirit, though they have that conscience that
does convince of sin John, 8.9. Now seeing all men have not the spirit, is it
not a great deceit of the Devil to persuade poor souls, that because they are
convinced for sin by their own consciences, therefore they have the Spirit of
Christ. Surely it is from the devil. First, because he would make thee
believe, that Conscience which is but a creature, is the Spirit of Christ, by
whom the world was made. Again, because the Soul being persuaded that it has
the spirit (when it has it not,) as all men naturally are without it, Ephesians.
3.13. If it kept off from s^eking and begging for it, being already persuaded
(falsely) that it has it.

And whereas thou say, the voice of the Gospel, is, to bid listen within the
heart, as Paul preaches. I deny that Paul bids listen within. But the
Scripture that you would feign make shelter for your error is this, where he
says, The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart. That is, the
Word of Faith which we preach. Now friend, Faith is that which lays hold of,
or believes the Gospel. And that this is the meaning, read the next verse,
That (says he) If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall
believe in thine heart that GOD has raised him from the dead, thou shall be
saved. So that it is clear that the Word of faith, is to believe assuredly from
the very heart, that God has raised up Jesus from the dead, out of the grave
into which he was laid by Joseph: And that he was raised again for my
justification. Romans 5* 25. as it is written^ 1. Cor. 15. Moreover Brethren,
says he, I declared unto you the Gospel which I preached unto you at the
first, which also you have received, and wherein you stand, by which also you
are saved, if you keep in memory, or assuredly believe, what I preached unto
you, unless you have believed in vain: But what was that Gospel you preached?
Why, says he, ver. ^. I delivered unto you first of all, that which I also
received; How that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures: And
that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day according to
Scripture, and that he was seen of the brethren after his resurection, etc. The
Word of the Gospel, my friend, is Christ died for our sins according to the
Scriptures, and that he rose again according to the Scriptures: And that he is
ascended from his Disciples, to prepare a place for them according to the
Scripture.

That he ever lives to make intercession in his own person without, as
Mediator be^ween God and man, according to the Scripture. Heb. 7.25.

That he will come again in the Clouds with all his mighty Angels, 1 These. 4.16,
17
and before him shall all Nations be gathered according to the scriptures, Mat.
25.31.32. after which time, his Saints shall be ever with him, according to the
Scriptures.

Again, thou art offended in that I said. Now the poor soul finding this to be
so (that it is convinced of sin) all in haste (if it be willing to profess)
through ignorance of the Gospel, Here my words are corrupted.
claps in with the motions of it is own conscience, which does command to
abstain from this evil, and to practice that good. Which words of mine thou
corruptest, and wrestest, and layest down in another form, as are to be seen in
thy book p. 18. But now friend; is not he ignorant of the Gospel, which thinks
his own conscience will lead him to eternal life, by commanding to abstain
from this evil, and practice that good? Surely, if salvation coms by our
conscience, or by the convictions or commands thereof, Christ Jesus died for
nothing, Gal. 2. last ver.

And whereas thou ask, what, and how does the light of the Gospel work, if
not in the conscience. I answer, though the light of the Spirit of God and the
Gospel be in the hearts of the Elect of God; yet the Gospel light is hid, and
does not shine so much as unto, much less into the consciences of some of them
that be lost, 2 Cor. 4.3.4. that though the light of the Gospel does shine; and
that gloriously too in the hearts of Gods Elect, yet it does not follow, that
the convictions of Conscience is the Gospel; no, nor the convictions of the law
neither. And again, though every one of Gods Elect have the light of the
glorious Gospel shining in them, what argument is this to prove all men have
the light of the Gospel shining in them. No says Christ; I thank thee O
Father, rhat thou have hid these things (the things of the Gospel) from the
wise and prudent, and have revealed them to babes. And whereas thou say (as
I gather by thy words) that I call conscienee the light of Christ. I say, if
thou mean by these words (the light of Christ), the Spirit of Christ, I do deny
that every man has it: but if thou call conscience the light of Christ, or the
highest light that is in an unconverted man the light of Christ; then I say,
that the highest light that is in a natural or unconverted man, (which you
call the light of Christ) is not able by all its motions and convictions, not
yet, by all the obedience that a man can yield to these convictions; I say,
they are not able to deliver him from the wrath to come; for deliverance from
that is obtained by the blood of Jesus, which was shed on the Cross, without
the gate of Jerusalem (as I have often said) Ephesians. 1.7. compared with Heb.
13.12. And not any light within a natural man.

And whereas thou say, that I said, the Devil counterfeits the new birth,
by persuading to follow the light of the world: I answer, bear is another of
his false accus^tions of me*
thou have most naughtily belied me. The words that I said (speaking of the
Devil before) are these. Now he counterfeits the new birth (said I) by
persuading them that it is wrought by following the light that they brought
into the world with them; as is clearly seen in my book page 76. Friend, I
wonder that you should so boldly profess your self to be led by the Spirit of
Christ, when you make it manifest that you are guided by the spirit of Satan.
Was not he a liar? and have not thou been led by a lying spirit also, in
wresting of my words as thou have done?

But I do freely declare again, that Satan does deceive those souls, whom he
perswads the new birth is wrought in, by following the light they brought into
the world with them; for men as they come into the worid, do not receive the
Spirit, for it is given the Elect afterward; neither have all men the Spirit.
And he that has the new birth, must have it by, and through the Spirit; as it
is written, except a man be born of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of heaven. Therefore, if men do not bring the Spirit into the
world with them; and if nothing without the Spirit, or nothing but the Spirit
will or can work the new birth in a man: It must needs follow, that they who
think the new birth is wrought by that light or conscience which they brought
into the world with them, must needs be beguiled by Satan.

I do pass by many of thy raging expressions, which I might justly charge with
much unrighteousness; but I know the time is but short, and then whatsoever
thou have done in secret, shall be laid open upon the house tops, therefore I
forbear them.

Again, thou art offended because I said, now Satan makes the soul believe he
is its friend, and that he is a Gospel Minister, 2 Cor. 11.14. and if the soul
will be led by what shall be made known to it, from the light or conscience
within, it shall not need to fear, but it shall do well, page 76. of my book. I
said it then, and I say it now; and I know that he that does think to be born
again by following his conscience, or any other light that is in an
unregenerate man, will be deceived, and shall one day know, that there is a
difference between conscience and Christ; between the light of nature, and the
Spirit of God. But you may say, how can you prove that conscience is not of the
same nature, of the Spirit of Christ. Answ. They that are unbelieving, even
their conscience is defiled, Titus 1.15. But so cannot be the Spirit of Christ.

2. Conscience is not of the same nature with the Spirit of Christ, for
conscience may be hardened or seared with an hot iron: as it is written 1 Timothy
4.3. But so cannot the Spirit of Christ.

3. Our consciences naturally are evil, having (says the Scripture) our hearts
sprinkled from an evil conscience, Heb. 10.22. But so is not the Spirit of
Christ.

But again, whereas you said, that I said, they will not speak except the
Spirit move them, etc. thou do falsely speak of me, and again do corrupt
my words; This is another of his false accusations of me.
for I said, now they will not speak except their spirit move them, (I do not
say the Spirit of Christ) (said I) friend; if you can be led to life by your
own spirit, if your own spirit will learn you the things of the Spirit of God;
and if you can speak them with and in your own spirit, in that demonstration
that they are spoken, when they are spoken in the Spirit of Christ; (which all
men have not) then say that I speak false things; but till that time hold your
peace. Thus I pass by thy 19. page, leaving many of thy scolding terms to thy
self.

The next thing thou say, is, that I did run but was not sent, like unto my
forefathers: and therefore say thou, I do not profit the people at all.
Another false accusation.
Answ. Which accusation of thine, I shall leave to be taken notice of by the
people of God in the Country where I dwell, who will testify the contrary for
me, setting aside the carnal ministry, with their retinue; who are as mad
against me as thy self.

But farther, thou art somewhat distempered, and discontented that I said, Many
sad and horrible doctrines are vented by you. And you faid, I named nothing.
Answ. I need not, thine own speech bewrays thee, that thou art one of them,
that do such things; and I need go no further then thy own mouth and doctrine.
But if it will be more satisfaction to tell you wherein, they of your society
do hold sad doctrine, I shall.

First; therefore your society do hold and affirm, that that man which was
hanged on the Cross between two thieves, called Jesus; in his person is within
you, contrary to the Scripture, Acts 1.11.

Secondly, you say that Christ is crucified within, dead within, risen and
ascended within; which also you have no word of Scripture to prove.

Thirdly, your society affirm, that the coming of the Spirit into the hearts of
believers, is Christ his second coming. When the Scriptures do plainly hold
forth, that the coming of Christ in the Spirit was before his coming in the
Flesh; as in 1 Pet. 1.10, 11. where the Apostle speaking of the Prophets
inquiring into the great salvation which was afterward to be accomplished,
says, Searching what, or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in
them did signify; when it testified before hand the sufferings of Christ, and
the glory that should follow.

Mark, here is the Spirit of Christ in the Prophets, long before the first
coming of Christ ln the Flesh, which was when he was born of Mary the Virgin.
The Spirit of Christ, says he, did testify before hand the suffering of
Christ, to the Prophets, which were before Christ came in the Flesh, as the
Scriptures hold forth plentifully.

But again, you deny the second coming of that very man, with that very body,
which was born of the Virgin Mary; and say, his second coming ls not his coming
again personally, but his coming in the Spirit only; and that is all you look
for, when the Scripture says; That same Jesus (who appeared to his Disciples
after his Passion, Acts 1.3.) shall so come, even as they did see him depart
from them into heaven; which was a very man, as well as very God. And will come
again a very man, as well as very God at the end of world. For it is that man;
namely, he that was crucified, whom God raised again, that must be the judge of
quick and dead, Acts 10.39, 40, 41. seriously compared.

Again, you say, that every man has the Spirit of Christ, which is a sad
doctrine, because contrary to the Scripture Jude 19. And you say, there is that
in every man which is as good as the Spirit of Christ; which is a blasphemous
doctrine. Besides many other things which they of your own spirit have most
sadly spoken; which I shall not mention, being so commonly known to the Saints
of the Lord, before whom you have openly, and without fear (at least in show)
spoken. Which will doubtless belaid open ^o your sorrow and great amazement, at
the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Then thou art offended because I said, I wonder that the Lord does not either
cause the ground to open her mouth, and swallow you up; or else suffer the
Devil to fetch you away, to the astonishing of the whole world. Certainly,
Cora^^, Dathan, and Abiram did not so horribly transgress, as you have done.
Yet his hand on them (no question) was as it were the astonishment of the
world. Therefore, I may well wonder that you are not served so. Only this I
consider, it may be you have not yet filled up the measure of your wickedness,
therefore is not the hand of God, as yet upon you.

The next thing I take notice of, is, that thou find fault with mine answer
to this question. But does not the Scripture say, that it is the Spirit of
Christ that does convince of sin? Thou say, it is a good question, but I
have confounded it in the answer, and not answered plainly. Wherefore I shall
not at all stick at the pains to give the reader in brief, some of the heads of
the answer I then gave to it, word for word; or to the same purpose. The answer
was. Yes, the Spirit does convince of sin; but for the better understanding of
this place, I shall lay down this (said I). That there are two things spoken of
in Scripture, that do manifest, or convince of sin. First, the law, Romans 3.20.
For by the law is the knowledge of sin. Secondly the Spirit of Christ does also
the same, as it is written; And when he is come, he will convince the world of
sin, Joh. 16.7, 8, 9. Now say I, sometimes the law it self by its own power does
manifest sin, as in the case of Judas, who was so far from having the Spirit of
Christ; that the Devil had very great possession of him. Which things my
adversary does wrangle at, yet dares not affirm the contrary: only says this,
he had the righteous law of God written in his heart; which thing is not the
Spirit of Christ. The law is not of faith. The law is not the comforter, but
rather a tormentor; yet the Spirit of Christ is a comforter. Again, say I, the
Spirit of Christ does take the law, and does effectually convince of sin etc.
Then I put forth another question, saying; But how should I know whether I am
convinced by the law alone, or whether the law be effectually set home by the
Spirit? To which I answer, when the law does convince by its own power, it does
convince only of sins against the law; as lying, swearing, stealing, etc.
pronouncing an horrible curse against thee if thou fulfill it not, and there
leaves thee, but gives thee no power to fulfill it completely and continually,
which thou must do, if thou be saved thereby. With which my adversary is much
offended; also saying, that I am confounded in my discourse, and so leaves me,
confuting none of my words by holy Scripture, but falls a railing, because I
reckon Pharisees and Quakers together.

Only thus much he says; That I make it a light thing to be convinced by the
law, and then brings in that Scripture; This is the condemnation, that light is
come into the world, and men love darkness rather than light; cunningly
corrupting of it, and would fain have you understand it as spoken of the law,
when the Son of Mary speaks it of himself, which was not the law, but the
Savior. And that he might the better go away undiscerned, he says, and the
law is light, therefore the light is the law (says he). But I perceive that he
does not yet understand the difference between the light of the law, and the
light of the Gospel; but would fain make the law and Christ one Savior: the
one being but only a condemning light, and nothing else; the other a saving
comfortable light. And whereas thou say, I make it a light thing to be
convinced by the law, I answer; the law is good, if a man use it lawfully, and
I honor it in its place; yet if they make a Savior of it, they make an Idol
of it, and wrest it out of its proper place. Also, if they think that it is
Christ, they are much deceived.

But farther, he put me to prove any such distinction in Scripture, as that
there is any thing made mention of therein that does convince of sin, besides
the Spirit of Christ: which thing I have already answered, where I said the
Scripture says, By the law is the knowledge of sin, Romans 3.20. and again, does
not even nature it self teach you, that it is a shame for a man to wear long
hair, 2 Cor. 11.14. and also conscience, which are neither of them the Spirit
of Christ, but much inferior to the same: yet this also convinces of sin,
Joh. 8.9.

But to the other thing, which is the answer that I give in my book to this
objection: But I am not only convinced of my sins (may some say) but have also
some power against my sins; so that I do in some measure abstain from the sins
forbidden in the law. And because I say, this thou may have and do, as thou
think, perfectly too [ as thou thinks, mark that] as those fond Hypocrites,
called Quakers [think] that they also do, and yet be but a natural man. Here my
Adversary is very much offended, and calls me Perverter of the right way of the
Lord; and says, Show me any natural man in the Scripture that has done it.
Whereas had he been but willing to have laid down the Scripture I brought to
prove it, he needed not to have looked for a second answer. But because he
would have it again, I will therefore show you, that natural men merely by
nature may be convinced, and abstain from those things forbidden in the Law,
and think they do it perfectly; nay, they do the things contained in the law.
For says the Apostle Romans 2.14. When the Gentiles which have not the law, do
by nature [mark, do by nature] the things contained in the law; these [the
Gentiles] having not the law, are a law to themselves. Mark; the Gentiles do by
nature the things contained in, or held forth, or made mention of by the law;
the light also that they have, it is themselves, being a law to themselves;
that is, their consciences (being of themselves) bearing them witness, and
their thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing one another, though
they cannot be saved thereby, ver. 15. Again, when Paul was a natural man, and
a persecuter of Jesus Christ, he says of himself, that then he was, touching
the righteousness of the law, blameless, Phil. 3.6. And whereas thou say,
thou had rather choose to be one of those who abstain from those things
forbidden in the law, and to have power over sin, than to live in the
transgression of the law; this is fair spoken, and it does show that thou art
under the convictions of the law; and if it be no worse, I fear thy state the
less, though it be bad enough; yet this I say, if thy soul be not saved
freely, by the blood of that man who was crucified on mount Calvary, and by his
merits alone done by himself in his own person, thou, notwithstanding wilt fall
short of eternal life. For by the works of the law, shall no flesh living be
justified, Romans 3.20. though by it be the knowledge of sin, and a command to
abstain from the same. And thus have I spoken to thy 21. page.

But farther thou say, that thou fear I worship the name Mary, because I
mention her name so much.

Answ. If thou had said, I worship her Son, thou had said truly (I hope).
But is not thy spite more against her Son, There are more offended as this
besides the Quakers.
then her? I doubt it is; for neither thou, nor thy companions can endure that
one should say, he is still the same that was born of Mary, flesh and bones, a
very man, now absent from his people, though in them in his Spirit.

Again, thou say I said, That as he is God, Christ lightnetb every man that
coms into the world; which thing again I say. What then? Then say you, I will
mind you of one Scripture which you your self have quoted, which says, The Law
is light, Prove. 4.23. Therefore say thou, The light is the Law. Give me
leave here to t^ke thy words in twain: First, if when thou say, then the law
is light, thou mean, the light of the law is the light of the law, and no more,
thou say right. But if thou mean, the light of the law is the light of the
Gospel, or the Spirit of Christ, I must needs reprove thee. For I tell thee
again, the law is not of faith, the law makes nothing perfect, Hebrews 7. ver.
19. The law is but a weak and unprofitable thing, as to justification, Hebrews
7. ver. 17. though as I said before, it is good if it be used lawfully; which
is, not to seek or look for justification thereby, nor yet to say, it is the
Spirit of Christ.

Then farther thou art offended, because I said, When the Spirit of Christ
convinces, it convinces of more sins than the sins against the law. Friend,
will the law show a man that his righteousness is sin and dung? No. For
though the law will show a man that his failing in the acts of righteousness
is sin; yet I question, whether the law will show, that a man's own
righteousness is sin. For there is in Scripture says, it does, or can.
Secondly, show me, if thou can, that the sin of unbelief is spoken
against in all the Ten Commandments, or that called the Moral law. But now
the Spirit of Christ convinces of unbelief, that is; it shows, that if men
do not believe, that they have redemption by the obedience of that man who was
laid in the manger, hanged on the Cross etc. I say, it shows that those who
do not lay hold on what he has done and suffered without them in his own body
on the tree (through the operation of his Spirit, which he has promised to
give to them that ask him) or else they have not yet been convinced of the sin
of unbelief, and so are still in a perishing condition; notwithstanding their
strict obedience, to the light within them, or to the law. And now tell me, you
that desire to mingle the law and the Gospel together, and to make of both one
and the same Gospel of Christ. Did you ever see your selves undone and lost,
unless the righteousness, blood, death, resurrection and intercession of that
man Christ Jesus (in his own person) was imputed to you? and until you could
by faith own it as done for you, and counted yours by imputation, yea, or no?
Nay, rather have you not set up your consciences, and the law, and counted your
obedience to them better, and of more value, than the obedience of the Son of
Mary without you, to be imputed to you? and if so, it is because you have not
been savingly convinced by the Spirit of Christ, of the sin of unbelief.

Other things thou do quarrel against, but seeing they are in effect the
same with the former; I pass them by, and shall come to the next thing thou
do think to catch me withal, and that is; because I say, that God only is
the Savior, there is none besides him. Therefore say thou, how contrary is
this to that in page 24. where I say, how wickedly are they deluded, who own
Christ no otherwise then as he was before the world began. Now this is no
contradiction as thou would have it; for though I say there is none but God
our Savior. Yet I did also then in my book, show how he was our Savior,
namely; in that he came into the world, being born of a Virgin, made under the
law, that he might redeem them that were under the law, by his obedience in
that nature, by suffering in that nature, by his rising again in that nature,
and by carrying that nature into heaven with him, as the Scriptures at large
declare; and therefore though I say God is our Savior, and none besides he;
yet they that own him to be the Savior no otherwise then as he was before the
world began, are such as deny that he is come in the flesh, and so are of
Antichrist, 1 John 2. For before God could actually be a Savior, he must
partake of another nature then the divine; even the nature of man, Heb. 2.14.15.

Again thou say, it is a slander put upon the Quakers, to say, they slight
the resurrection: Answ. What say you, Do you believe the resurrection of the
body after it is laid in the grave? Do you believe that the Saints that have
been this four or five thousand years in their graves shall rise, and also the
wicked, each one with that very body wherein they acted in this world; some to
everlasting life, and some to everlasting contempt. Answer plainly, and clear
your selves, but I know you dare not, for you deny these things.

But if you speak doubtfully, or covertly in answer thereunto; I doubt not but
God will help me to find you our, and lay open your folly; if I shall live till
another cavil by you be put forth against the truth.

The next thing thou cavillest at is, that Quaery raised from Ephesians. 4.10. and
thou say I have not answered it. You should have answered it better, or else
have confuted that answer I gave unto it, and then you had done something: but
the great thing that troubles thee is, because I say (further in my book) he
that ascended from his Disciples, was a very man, For handle me and see, says
Christ, a Spirit has not flesh and bones as you see me have. Now let the
adversary show by the Scripture (said I), that there is in them any place
called heaven, which is able to contain a man of some four or five foot long
(or a competent man of flesh and bones) for the space of fifteen or sixteen
hundred years, but that above the clouds, which troubles thee so, that it makes
thy tongue run thou can not tell how. But know, that when the Son of man shall
come from heaven to judge the world in righteousness, that which thou call
foolishness now, thou will find a truth then to thy own wrong, if thou close
not in with him, who said, handle me and see, for a Spirit has not flesh and
bones as you see me have, Luke 24.38, 39, 40.

Another thing that thou art troubled at, is, in that I do reckon the Quakers
to be of the deluding party; when alas, all men that have eyes to see, may
easily discern, that you are of that generation, as will appear in part by your
own expressions, both now, and also at other times. But that you may take off
the brand from your selves, you say, that the false ptophets and Antichrist were
in the Apostles days, as though there should be no false prophets now, when the
very time we live in does manifestly declare, and hold forth, that there are
many, who at this day seek to beguile unstable souls, of which sort you are not
the least, though for ought I can learn as yet, you are the last, (that are
come into the world) but that you may the better shift it from your selves, you
say, that in those days there was not a Quaker heard of; namely, in the days of
John. Friend, thou have rightly said, there was not a Quaker heard of indeed,
though there were many Christians heard of then. By this you your selves do
confess, that you are a new upstart sect, which was not at other times in the
world, though Christian Saints have been always in the world. Friend, here
like a man in the dark, in seeking to keep thy self out of one ditch thou art
fallen into another; instead of proving your selves no false prophets, you prove
your selves no Christians, saying there was not a Quaker heard of then. But if
Quakers had been Christians, then they would have been heard of to the glory of
God, and his Christ.

Again, to defend thy self thou throwest the dirt in my face, saying; If we
should diligently trace thee, we should find thee in their steps, meaning false
prophets, through famed words, through covetousness making merchandise of
souls, loving the wages of unrighteousness.

Friend, do thou speak this as from thy own knowledge, Another of his false
accusatons
or did any other tell thee so? However, that spirit that led thee out of this
way, is a lying spirit. For though I be poor, and of no repute in the world, as
to outward things; yet through grace I have learned by the example of the
Apostle to preach the truth; and also to work with my hands, both for mine own
living, and for those that are with me, when I have opportunity. And I trust
that the Lord Jesus, who has helped me to reject the wages of unrighteousness
hitherto, will also help me still, so that I shall distribute that which God
has given me freely, and not for filthy lucres sake. Other things I might
speak in vindication of my practice in this thing. But ask of others, and they
will tell thee, that the things I say are truth: and hereafter have a care of
receiving any things by hearsay only, least you be found a publisher of those
lies which are brought to you by others, and so render your self the less
credible; but be it so.

And as for your thinking, that to drink water, and wear no hat-bands, is not
walking after your own lusts; I say, that whatsoever men do make a religion out
of, having no warrant for it in the Scripture, is but walking after their own
lusts, and not after the Spirit of God. Thus have I passed thy 23 page.

And least you should think that the Quakers are not such, as condemned me and
others for preaching according to the Scriptures; as you would fain clear your
selves of this charge laid against you in my book, by your saying, you deny the
accusation to be true upon any of the Quakers. I shall therefore tell you of
your sister Anne Blackly, who did bid me in the audienee of many, To throw away
the Scriptures. To which I answered, No; for then the Devil would be too hard
for me. And again, because I said, The man Christ Jesus was above the clouds
and the heavens, now absent from his people in the world, touching his bodily
presence: She said, I preached up an Idol, and used conjuration and witchcraft.
Which things I should rather have desired her to repent of, then to make her a
public example for others to take warning by; but that it is expedient that
your folly be laid open, that others may fear to do as you have done.

But farther, thou chargest me with a loud This is anoth^r of his false
accusations of me.
crying out against Christ within. This is thy throwing of dirt in my face
again; for I have said it often, that if any man have not the Spirit of Christ,
he is none of his.

Again thou say, that in page 203, I do take in hand to prove or discover,
that the doctrine of Christ within, Here is another lie made of me.
is a false opinion.

Thou do also here speak falsely of me; for all that I take in hand to prove,
is this, That they hold a false opinion (and principles too) who hold up a
Christ within, in opposition to Christ without, who is the Savior; as does
plainly appear by my following discourse, if you read from page 203. to the end
of my book.

But in the next place, after much railing, thou come to the place where I
again ask this question. Does not the Scripture make mention of a Christ within?

To which I answer; Yes, and he that has it not, is none of his. But to lay
open thy folly at last thou sai'st, does not the Scripture say, Christ is
within you, except you be reprobates? and is not this thus much, are not all
they reprobates (say you) but they in whom Christ is within?

Answ. They are indeed reprobates who have not Christ within them; but now, how
is thy folly manifest? that in one place thou should confess some are
reprobates, who have not Christ within; And yet in page 18. of thy book thou
sai'st, it is given to every man. And in page 26. of thy book, thou say,
that a measure of the Spirit is given to every man, and is given within him
too, though the Scripture declares the contrary, and thy self also now at
last. It is well thou do recant so much, as to eat thy first words at the
last, or at least to show thy self unstable in judgment. Friend, thou may
see, the more thou do fight against the truth, the more thou foilest thy
self: Partly by helping of it, and partly by contradicting thy self.

One thing more thou do befool thy self with, and that is; In that thou in
the first place say, thou ownest the words in my book, and yet have spent
some four sheets of paper to vent thy thoughts against them.

But peradventure thou will say; those words that I own are not those that I
spoke against, but the other, To which I answer. There are many things in my
book spoken of by me that are truth, which if you own, you must leave
professing your self a Quaker.

As first, That that man that was born of the Virgin Mary, called Jesus, (I say
you will not own) that he in his own person, by himself without us, did
completely bring in everlasting life for us, by offering up himself once for
all upon the Cross.

Secondly, that Christ who wrought out redemption for his Children, did after
he had wrought it out, go away from them, and not into them in his person.

Thirdly, that he ever-liveth, that very man to make intercession in his
person, in the presence of his Father without, until the end of the world.

Fourthly, that that very man who did go away from his Disciples into heaven,
will come again personally the same man the second time, and before him shall
be gathered all Nations, and he shall judge them for their sins; and take his
to himself, who shall soul and body be with him to all eternity; these things,
(I say) thou could not own, though they are the truth of God. But leaving
thee to the great God, who will give the according thy works, in this as in
other things: I shall come to thy Answers to my Quaeries.

The first Quaery that I propounded is, if thou say that every man has a
measure of the Spirit of Christ within him, why say the Scriptures, some are
sensual, having not the Spirit. And when Christ tells his Disciples, of
sending them the Spirit, he says, the world cannot receive it. Here in the
first place thou have not only answered deceitfully, but have also corrupted
my words, in laying down the Quaery, in that thou did leave out some words;
for thou did lay it down thus: If thou say that every man has a measure
of the Spirit of Christ within him, why say the Scriptures, Some are sensual,
having not the Spirit, and Christ says, the world cannot receive it. (Reader,
compare them both together).

Now thy answer is, Some are sensual, having not tbe Spirit, because they
receive it not, and some cannot receive it, because they believe not on him
from whence it comes. Yet say thou, The measure of the Spirit is given to
every man to profit withal, as the Scriptures say: When there is no Scripture
says, a measure of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal. But
again, see here thy strange confusion. 1. To say, some have it not. 2. To say,
every man has it. But you would make a difference between having and
receiving: but I tell thee, he that has it has received it, Gal. 3.2. and he
that has not received it, has it not, Jude 19.

My second Quaery was, What is the Church of God redeemed by from the curse of
the law? Is it by something done within them, or by something done without
them? If you say, it is redeemed by something that works in them, then why
did the man Christ Jesus hang on the Cross on mount Calvary, without the gate
of Jerusalem, for the sins of his children? and why do the Scriptures say, That
through this man is preached to us the forgiveness of sins?

The answer thou give is, The Church of God is redeemed by Christ Jesus,
which is revealed in all believers. And Christ Jesus wrought in them mightily;
And it was he that wrought in them to will and to do.

This is plain Scripture, and the man Christ Jesus (sai'st thou) hanged on the
Cross on mount Calvary; because, they wickedly judged him to be a blasphemer,
and through their envy persecuted him to death; because, he bare witness
against them, and as in their account he died, and hanged on the Cross for an
evil doer. And this is one ground (at least) why he hanged on the Cross, etc.

Ha friend? I had thought thou had not been so much hardened; art thou not
ashamed thus to slight the death of the man Christ Jesus on the Cross; and
reckon it not effectually for salvation, but say, the Church is redeemed by
Christ Jesus which is revealed within. And to confirm it, thou do also
corruptly bring in two Scriptures.

The one says, whereunto I also labor according to his working, which works
in me mightly. By which words, Paul signifies thus much, That as God was witb
him in the ministry of the Word, so did he also strive according to his working
which wrought in him mightily. What is this to the purpose? See Col 1.26, 27,
28, 29. And also, the other Scripture makes nothing to prove, that the Church
of God is redeemed by Christ within, as he is within. Only you must corrupt
the Scriptures, and be transformed (though ministers of darkness) into an
Angel of light, if you will do any mischief.

And now, that thy answer is false, I shall clearly prove. First; because thou
deniest, that redemption was wrought out for sinners by the man Christ Jesus on
the Cross, or tree, on mount Calvary; when the Scripture says plainly, that
when he did hang on the tree, Pet. 2.24.
then did he bear all our sins there, in his own body.

And secondly, in thy saying it is redeemed by Christ within, by being within;
when the work of the Spirit of Christ in believers, is to make known to the
soul by dwelling within; which way and how they were redeemed by the man Christ
Jesus on the Cross. And this I prove farther, because, when thou art forced to
answer to these words. Why did the man Christ Jesus hang on the Cross on mount
Calvary, for the sins of his Children?

Thou say, because they wickedly judged him to be a blasphemer. Friend, I
did not ask thee why the Jews did put him to death? but why was he crucified
there for the sins of his Children? But thou willing to cover over thine
error, go on cunningly saying, and through their envy they persecuted him
to death, for an evil doer, This is one ground at least, etc.

Friend, but that thou art ashamed to own the Gospel of Jesus Christ, thou
would have said, he was crucified there for the sin of the world, and by his
offering up of himself upon the Cross, he did for ever perfect them that are
sanctified. Nay, thou would have studied to exalt his dying there; first, by
showing what a sad condition we were in without it; secondly, by holding forth
the manifold and great privileges that we have by his dying for us there. But
thou art at enmity against the things of God, as is clearly seen by those that
have indeed the Spirit of God in them, and are enabled thereby to discern you.
And though you say, there is no other that can forgive sin, nor the blood of
any other that can take away sin, but the blood of God. Yet thou deniest, that
the blood of him, who was, and is truly God as well as man, Christ Jesus: I
say, thou deniest that his blood that was shed without Jerusalems gates, does
wash away sin from the Saints of God: and cunningly (though not at this time
uttered) concluding that the blood of God was shed for sin on a Cross within.
If it be not so, then call me liar; but it will clearly appear so to be in your
answer to my third Quaery.

3. Quaery is, What Scripture have you to prove, that Christ is, or was
crucified within you, dead within you, risen within you, ascended within you?

Thy answer is, There is no Scripture that mentions every of our names in
particular. And thy Quaery (say thou) is raised from a misunderstanding of
us, so I judge. But Christ is within us, that we do dot deny, and he is the
Lamb that was slain in the streets of the great City, which is spiritually
called Sodom, and Egypt (mind Spiritually) and he is now risen, and ascended,
this we know, and leave thee to receive a farther answer from them that are led
by a spirit of delusion.

Friend, how do thou run about the bush, seeking to scrable up an answer,
but find not a right one, and would also fain hold out, that Christ is,
or was crucified within, dead within, risen and ascended within; but seeing
thou can not with or by the Scriptures give an answer; then seeing thy self
left of them, through the strength of carnal reason, thou go about this
way. Is there any of our names made mention of in Scripture, or to that
purpose, and would fain infer from thence, that because we have names,
though not mentioned in Scriptures, therefore, Christ is and was crucified
within, though not mentioned in the Scriptures. Friend, thy sophistry deceives
thee.

The second argument which is like the first, is this. He is the Lamb slain in
the streets of the great City, Spiritually called Sodom and Egypt. Now from the
word (spiritually) thou would willingly infer also, that Christ is and was
crucified within, dead within, and risen within you, and therefore thou say,
mind spiritually. Friend, I may well mind thy spiritual wickedness, by which
thou would willingly cover thy heresy, but it will not be. Though thou dare
not speak plainly in so many words, yet the thoughts of thy heart are made
manifest, by the words that flow from thee.

Ah friend! that thou could but close with the truth, and venture thy soul
upon what was done by Jesus on the Cross without the gates of Jerusalem: for
it is by and through that blood that was there shed, that we have redemption,
Heb. 13.12. compared with Col. 1.20. and remission of sins Ephesians. 1.7. and 1 Pet.
2.24.

My fourth Quaery was, is that very man that was crucified between two thieves,
whose name was Jesus, the Son of Mary, is he the very Christ of God, yea, or no?

Thy answer is, Yes, he is the very Christ of God, which was before the world
was, by whom the world was made, who was made manifest from Mary's womb, and
was persecuted to death by the Scribes and Pharisees, in whose steps thou
treadest, in asking subtle questions to ensnare the innocent, as they did.
Read thy example (say thou) and thy self to be an enemy to God's Christ.

This answer is doubtfully given. I did not ask thee whether he was the Christ
of God, that was before the world was; but I asked thee whether he was the
Christ of God that did hang between two thievs on mount Calvary. Now I know,
the Christ of God was before the world was; but thou art afraid to look upon
him, as suffering on the Cross on mount Calvary, between two thievs for our
sins. But contrariwise, would willingly own him to be no otherwise, but as he
was before the world, which thing is very dangerous; for he that does so, does
lay aside all things, that in his own person he did in the Flesh, that he took
from the Virgin Mary, as to justification and salvation; only supposing him to
be but an example. and so bespatters all his merit and righteousness by your
false conclusions, which in his own person he accomplished for our
justification.

And friend, had thou not been afraid of thy self, thou would have been so
far from calling these my Quaeries, subtle Questions, that thou would have
owned them, and have given a sober Christian answer to them, in stead of a
railing accusation. But it matters not, it has but made thee show thy self the
more, which peradventure for a time might otherwise have lien hid.

My 5, Quaerie was, Is that very man with that very body within you, yea, or
no? To which thou answerest: The very Christ of God is within us, we dare not
deny him, and we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, as
the Ephesians were: they that are led with a spirit of delusion, shall answer
the rest of this thy Quaery, if they will.

Thy answer is nothing to the question; for I did not ask, whether the Spirit
of Christ was in thee? (though I question the truth of that). But I asked you
whether that very man, with that very body, (or the body of Christ that was
hanged on the Cross) be within you? But I see you are minded to famble, and
will not answer plainly. But thou answerest, saying; We are members of his
body, of his flesh, and of his bones, as the Ephesians were. This is nothing
to the purpose neither; for it is one thing for a man to be a member of the
flesh and bones of Christ, and another thing to have the flesh and bones of
Christ within him. What, because believers are members one of another, must
they therefore be also one in another? No. Even so, though a believer be a
member of the body, flesh and bones of Christ; it does not therefore follow,
that Christ, flesh and and bones is within him. But thou art loath to discover
thy self in plain terms, though thou art made manifest full sore against thy
will; for thou do here also, though very cunningly, signify, that thou
ownest Christ no otherwise, but as he is within. And to own him no otherwise,
is still against the Gospel and faith of the Apostles, who said, they were
absent from him while they were at home in the body, or here below, 2 Cor. 5, 6.

My 6. Quaerie was this; Was that very Jesus, that was born of the Virgin Mary,
a real man of flesh and bones after his resurrection out of Joseph's sepulcher,
yea, or nay. The Scriptures say he was: And if so, then did that man go away
from his Disciples, and not into them, as the Scriptures declare; or did he
with that body of flesh go into his Disciples, as some fond dreamers think.

Thy Answer is; What the Scriptures speaks of Christ, we own to be truth, and
own him to be what the Scriptures speaks of him; and all men's imaginations of
him we deny, and their false interpretations of the Scripture concerning him.
And let the fond dreamers, who err in their thoughts, be reproved: for we dare
own nothing, but what the Spirit of the Lord bears witness of according to the
Scriptures. And thus far I answer in the behalf of the Quakers: And let them
that are led with a spirit of delusion answer the rest, which concerns
themselves.

This answer has some pretended fairness in it. But yet we know you, that you
can wrest the Scriptures to your own destruction; and that is clear, in that
though you say you own him as the Scriptures speak of him, yet you deny him as
the Scriptures spe^k of him in part. And if at any time you plead one truth, it
is that you might by your corrupt dealing with that, clash again another; as
for instance:

You profess you own Christ within, but withal, with that doctrine you will
smite against the doctrine of Christ Jesus in his person without, and deny
that, though that is a truth, as is also the other.

2. You do use that truth of the resurrection of Saints from a state of nature,
to a state of grace, to fight against that truth, of the resurrection of the
bodies of saints out of their graves; together with other things that I might
add, as your holding forth the intercession of the Spirit of Christ within, in
opposition to the intercession of Christ in his person without in the heavens.
Which things being thus done, they show forth a great deal either of ignorance,
or presumption, knowingly to fight against the truth. And in this that thou
answerest so generally, and not particularly to the question, it is evident,
that thou do not plainly declare thy mind, but do keep that in thy
bosom which thou dare not manifest to the world.

My 7. Quaerie was; Has that Christ, that was with God the Father before the
world was, no other body but his Church? If you say, No; as it is your wonted
course: Then again I ask you, What was that in which he did bear the sins of
his children? If you say, in his own body on the tree. Then I ask, Whether that
body n which he did bear our sins, was, or is the Church of God, yea, or no?
Again, if you say he has no other body but his Church; then I ask, What that
was, that was taken down from the Cross? But here thou put a stop to the
rest of my words, with an etc.

Thy answer is, In this thou have not only quaeried, but slandered; therefore
thy slander (say thou) I do remove. It is our wonted course, say thou, to
say, that Christ has no other body but his Church. Thou art here a false
accuser. But we say, the Church is Christ's body; and it is sufficient for
salvation to know Christ Jesus to be head in us, and over us, and our selves to
be members of his body, which thou say, is his Church. And what thou
intendest by making so many foldings in one quaery, say thou it may be
judged it is to ensnare; and in that thou answerest, thou answerest thy self
for us in some things, that thou might have a further ground to lay a deeper
snare; we do deny thee and thy spi it, and see thee to be only feeding in thy
imaginations upon the report of things, without the life: And thy Religion
stands in Disputes and Controversies, and Quaeries, and many words. But our
Religion stands in the exercise of a pure conscience toward God, and toward
man; whether we speak, or be silent: These are thy words.

Answ. Now in my Quaery thou say I slander, in that I say, You Quakers allow
of no other body of Christ, but the Church of Christ; yet do thou not clear
thy self at all, only thou would say something to dazzle the eyes of the
ignorant. But friend, if thou would have made it appear that I slandered, in
saying, you own no other body but the Church; you should have said, Yes, we do
own this, That Christ has a body that is now in glory, ascended from his
Disciples, according to the Scripture, Act. 1.3. compared with ver. 9, 10, 11.
But thou do only fling up a few words into the air, that thou might
thereby puzzle thy simple Reader. But I bless God, for my part I do see thee,
that thou do like a beguiled man, seek by all means to beguile others. And
whereas thou say, It is sufficient to salvation, to know Christ Jesus as
head in us, and over us. To this I answer, whatsoever thy meaning is by these
words, yet there is none shall be saved, but those who through the mighty
operation of the spirit of Christ, are enabled to apply what the man Christ
Jesus the son of Mary has done and suffered, and is now a doing for sinners
and saints, (and for him) in the presence of his Father, now ascended in his
body of flesh and bones, from his children which are alive in this world. I
say, there is none shall be saved, but those that are thus established, or shall
be so, as is clear from these (1 Pet. 1.18, 19. and 2.24. and 3.18, 22. and
4.1. 2 Pet. 1.17. Heb. 7.24. and 10.7, 9. and 7.24, 25. and 13.12. 1 Timothy
2.5.6. Ephesians. 1.7. Act. 12 37, 38, 39.) with many other Scriptures. And again,
when you say, I answer you in something, if you mean, that the body in which he
did bear the sins of his children, is his Church (for that is partly my
Quaery), then do I say, that your doctrine is desperate and divelish; and you
do thereby undervalue the death, blood, resurrection and ascension,
intercession and second coming again of that man for salvation: and therefore
for a better satisfaction to all who may read your book, I entreat you to
answer, Did he bear our sins in that body which is his Church, or did he bear
our sins in that body that did hang on the Cross on mount Calvary? Answer
plainly I beseech you.

And now friend, passing by the rest of thy bawlings, I shall come to thy
several Quaeries, and shall answer to them in the simplicity of my soul, not
laying down any doubtful expressions, but in all plainness, and not as you do;
for the better understanding of them, by those that read them.

These be the Quakers Quaeries, and my Answers to them.
1. Quaer. Is any man justified in the sight of God, but he that follows
Christ; and is it not a work to follow Christ, yea or nay; and what is the
sight of God?

Answ. He that follows Christ aright, must first believe in Christ; for how
shall they follow him, in whom they believe not. Now then the Scripture says,
He that believes on the Son has everlasting life, Joh ^^.16, 17, 18. so then
we are justified by believing; and if so, than to follow Christ, is rather a
fruit of our be^ieving, than justification it self. And whereas you ask, What
is the sight of God? I answer, To be justified in the sight of God by Jesus
Christ, is for God to look on such poor creatures as we are; as complete,
without spot or wrinkle, in the obedience of the man Christ Jesus; who
otherwise could not behold them in love, because of their iniquity, Hab. 1.13.

2. Quaer. Whether will that faith justify a man which has not works, seeing
the Scripture, or the Apostle says, faith witbout works is dead, and what is
that which works faith? and where is it, within, or without?

Answ. That faith that has not works is dead, being alone. Yet it does not
follow, that all that have works, have faith. No; but contrariwise, men may
have works, yea, the works of the Law of God too, and yet be under the curse;
which they could not be if they had saving faith. So then, if faith without
works is dead; Gal. 3.10, 11, 12, 13.
and again, if men may have works, and yet no faith, no saving faith, I mean.
Then it will be good to enquire, what it is to have a right faith, which does
bring forth right good works; and who have works without a right faith.

And first, a right saving faith, is, for a man to be enabled of God's holy
Spirit, to lay hold on what the man Christ has done in his own person, when he
was in the world; as his birth, righteousness, death, blood, resurrection,
ascension and intercession; and to apply the virtue and merit thereof to
himself, so as to see himself saved thereby, Romans 3.24, 25. Being justified
freely by his grace: How? Even through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus.
Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, or reconciler, through faith in
his blood, etc. Again, Be it known unto you, that through this man is preached
unto you the forgiveness of sins, and by him all that believe: mark, all that
believe (namely, in his blood which was shed on mout Calvary) are justified
from all things, from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses.
Act. 13.38, 39.
If the faith that applies these thing be of the operation of God, it is very
much accompanied with good works. For the love of Christ constrains us: because
we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead. And that he died
for all, that we which live (namely by the faith of this, that Christ died for
all, Gal. 2.20.) should not henceforth live to our selves, but to him, that
died for us, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15.

But secondly, they that deny the merits of the birth, death, righteousness
blood, etc. of the man that was born of Mary, which he fulfilled in his own
person, by himself, Heb. 1.2. I say, they that do not venture their souls on
these glorious, mysterious truths, but deny the belief of them to be sufficient
of themselves to save from hell, and all other things, and does expect that
salvation should be obtained by something that works in them by working in
them. It is impossible that these, though they may be, touching the
righteousness of the law blameless, ( as Paul was while he was a persecutor,
Phil. 3.) to be saved hereby. Wherefore? because they seek it not by the faith
of Christ, but as it were by the works of the law, Romans 9.30, 31.

And whereas you ask me, what is that which works faith? And where is it,
within or without? I answer; That which works saving faith, is the holy
Spirit of God, which is renewed through the hearing of the Word, preached by
the Apostles or Ministers of Jesus Christ; Now the Spirit when it does work, it
enters into the soul, and as I said before, does enable the soul to believe,
and lay hold on the merits of the Son of Mary, Jesus Christ. For says he, when
he is come he shall glorify me, for he shall take of mine, and show it unto
you, Joh. 16.14.

3. Quaer. Whether any be justified but he that is born of God? And whether
does he that is born of God commit sin? And is that within the Creature, or
without, that works the new birth?

Answ. Justification may be taken two ways, either in the fight of God, or in
the fight of the soul, or creature; My meaning is, that all that are or shall
be saved, are justified in the sight and foreknowledge of God before the
foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us in him
before the foundation of the World etc. Having predestined us to the adoption
of children by Jesus Christ unto himself. And again, Moreover whom he did
predestinate, them he also called: and whom he called, them he also justified:
and whom he justified, them he also glorified. Romans 8.30. Mark, all these
things are spoken as being already done; predestined, called, justified,
glorified. He does not say, they shall be, but he has done it, that is in, and
according to the fore-ordination of God.

2. Saints are said to be justified in their own sight or knowledge, as when
God does make manifest to the soul, what he had determined before should be
done. Be of good Cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee. This is justification in
the sight of the creature. And whereas you ask me, do they that are born of God
commit sin. To this I answer.

They shall never commit the sin against the holy Ghost, as is the meaning of
that place, 1 John 3.19. There is a sin unto death, and there is a sin not unto
death. -- He that is born of God sins not, but keeps himself; and that
wicked one, mark, that wicked one, the sin unto death, touches him not: But
they that are born of God, notwithstanding, do daily sin, as it is evident,
Jam. 3.2. In many things we offend all, says he, I and you, all of us. And
again, If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and (instead of having
no sin) the truth is not in us, 1 John 1.8. And who can say, my heart is clean?
Eccle. 7.20.
There is none righteous, no not one. And again, There is not a just man upon
earth, that does good, and sins not. And I am confident, that while some
would persuade others that they have no sin, their own consciences tell them
they lie; and if it be not so in the rest, it is because they are hardened, and
given to believe a lie.

As to the latter part of your Quaery, I answer; The new birth is wrought
through hearing of the Word preached. And yet not by conscience, nor by the
obedience to the Law, or dictates of nature; but by the Spirit, coming into the
soul, and showing its lost condition without the obedience of the Son of Mary,
the Son of God; and his freeness and willingness to communicate, or give
himself, and all his things unto it; which being done, the man is thereupon
given up to God, and is become a new creature. I might spend much time in
speaking to this, but I forbear, because of it self it is enough to fill up a
small volumne,

4. Quaer. If Christ has lightened all men as he is God (as thou confessest)
then has he not lightened all men as he is the Son of God? and is not the
light of God sufficient in it self, to lead to God all that follow it, yea or
nay?

Answ. Christ as he is God, does lighten every man that coms into the world,
which light is conscience, or otherwise nature it self, which does also
convince of sin, Joh. 8.9 Yet Christ as he is God, does not give unto every man
that Spirit that does lead to eternal life, for all men have it not, Jude 19.
Secondly, Christ as he was and is the Son of God before the world was, being
one in power, and being with his Father; has lightened every one that coms
into the world, as aforesaid; but has not so neither given them his Spirit.
Some are sensual, etc.

3. Christ as God-man, or as he came into the world to die for those whom
before as God he knew and loved; I say, he does not in this way neither lighten
every man with the saving light of life, or give unto them his holy Spirit. No,
they that have been, and now are believers; do know and can remember, that all
the time of their unregenerate state, they were without Christ Ephesians. 2.12. So
that here is no way or room for your doctrine, take it how you will, Christ
has not given to every one his Spirit.

2. part of the Quaer. Is not the light of God sufficient in it self, to lead
to God all that follow it? yea or nay.

Answ. First, as I said before, some are sensual, and have not the Spirit of
Christ. Secondly, no man can come to God as a Father by adoption, but by Jesus
Christ; then it must needs be, that all men, though they do follow that light
which is given to every man, it is not able to lead to God as a Father in the
Lord Jesus Christ. Yet this light that every man has, will show a man there is
a God, and that this God is eternal; and also will clear out something of him
to them by the things that are made. But now, if this light would lead to
everlasting life, then might the Devils also be delivered from everlasting
damnation, seeing they also do know God as a Creator, and revenger of sin, more
perfectly then any natural man in the world, though not as a Father by adoption.

But you say, does it not lead to God all that follow it? Answ. Not to be
saved, though to be condemned, through the weakness and unprofitableness of
that light, or conscience, or the law, call it either, and I clear it thus.
Because, if that light that every man receives, were able by our following it,
to save us, then Christ needed not to have suffered, seeing all men had that
light.

2. If that light that every man has, which is conscience, were able to lead a
man to justification by following it; that promise was made in vain by Jesus
the son of Mary, when he said, I will send you; mark, I will send you the
Spirit, and he shall lead you into all truth: for they had a light before. But
it is evident, that that was not sufficient, because they must have another
sent them by Jesus Christ, and that must be the Spirit.

5. Quaer. Whether is not the same light in him that hates it, as it is in him
that loves it, Joh. 3. If there be a difference in the light, show it wherein;
whether in the nature, or otherwise?

Answ. First, that Scripture quoted in Joh 3. Light is come into the world,
etc. is not meant of that light, or conscience, that every man has; but the
man Christ Jesus is speaking there of himself, as God-man, come into the world,
born of the Virgin, if thou compare ver. 19, 20, 21. with ver. 14, 15, 16, 17,
18. of the same Chapter, it is clear, for they all do speak of the same thing;
namely, the son of Mary, And again, says he, I am the light of the world. Now
the man Christ, though he was then in the world, and walked up and down in the
same, yet he was not within any man in the world as man, (though he calls
himself the light thereof) though he was in some; I say, in some, as God by his
Spirit. Now the light, which was the man Christ, was the very same, whether
loved by some, or hated by others; but if you conclude every man has Christ,
or that light spoken of there, Joh. 3. within him; That I deny, having proved
the contrary. But secondly, Whether is there a difference in the light? Answ.
First, there are more lights than one; there is a light that may be suspected
to be darkness, where he says, If the light that is in thee be darkness,
etc. Again, there is the light of the Law, Prove. 6.23. Again, conscience also
will convince of sin. Now there is none of these that can save a sinner from
the evil of his ways. Take the best of them, which is the righteous law of
God, that cannot. For had there been a Law given, which might have given life,
then verily righteousness had come by the Law: But if you conclude that
righteousness, or everlasting life comes by the Law, you must conclude this
again, that Christ did die in vain, Gal. 2.21. So then these things being not
able to save the soul, the next thing is, the Son of God, the son of
righteousness, arising with healing under his wings, he is also a light, and
indeed the saving light, far surpassing all the other mentioned.

Now though Christ does not differ in himself, yet there is a difference in the
power of these lights, the law and Christ the one not being able to save, the
other being able. And again, there is also a difference in the nature of them;
the one being a condemning light, the other a saving light. It is Moses that
accuses you (says Christ) even Moses in whom ye trust: But do not think,
says Christ, that I will accuse you to the Father: No, says he, it is Moses,
or the Law given by him. But again, where Christ speaks for himself as a
Savior, he says, God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world,
but that the world through him might be saved, Joh. 3.17. so that I say, First,
that light spoken of Joh. 3. which is the man Christ, is not in every man that
coms into the world. Secondly, that the man Christ, or the light spoken of
there, is not against himself. Thirdly, there is the light of the Law,
conscience, and nature it self, which are in all men, which things are
altogether insufficient to save a man from death, by his seeking of
justification thereby. Again, there is Jesus Christ he is the Savior, but not
in all men. And again, neither is the man Christ Jesus the condemning light.

6. Quaer. Whether is it possible, that any can be saved without Christ
manifested within. If no; then whether is not the doctrine of salvation, wbich
is only necessary, to preach Christ within: and is it not the whole mystery of
salvation, God manifest in the flesh

Answ. There can none be saved, but they that have the Spirit of Christ given
unto them. But it is not the Spirit of Christ given to the Elect, that does
work out the salvation of their souls within them, for that was obtained by the
blood of the man Christ Jesus on the Cross, Hebrews 9.12. compared with Heb.
13.12.

Again, every one that is, or shall be saved, must, and shall have the Spirit
of Christ within them; yet does it not follow, that to preach Christ (only)
within; is the only doctrine of salvation. For then also the preaching of the
blood of Christ shed on the Cross, as I said before, must be of none effect.
But he that does preach the doctrine of salvation aright, must first begin to
preach that doctrine that Paul preached in 1 Cor. 15.1, 2, 3, 4. For I
delivered unto you (says he) first of all how that Christ died for our sins
according to the Scriptures: and that he was buried, and that he rose again
according to the Scriptures. Now Christ, or the Spirit of Christ, is received
by such preaching as this is, as is clear from that Scripture, Act. 10.38, to
44. where Peter speaking of the word that was published throughout all Judea.
How God anointed Jesus of Nazareth (or which dwelt at Nazareth) with the holy
Ghost, and with power, who went about doing good, and healing all that were
oppressed of the Devil: for God was with him. And we are witnesses of all
those things which he did, both in the land of the Jews, and in Jerusalem
(says Peter), whom they slew, and hanged on a tree: Him God raised up the
third day, and showed him openly; not unto all the people, but unto witnesses,
chosen before of God; Even to us who did eat and drink with him, after his
resurrection from the dead. And he commanded us to preach to the people, and to
testify that it is he which was ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and
dead. And is that all? No. But to him give all the prophets witness, (to him,
even Jesus of Nazareth whom the Jews crucified on the tree), that through his
name, whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission, or forgiveness of
sins. Now mark. And while Peter yet spoke these words, the holy Ghost fell on
all them that heard the Word. While Peter spoke these words, that by Jesus of
Nazareth forgiveness of sins was preached to them that believe in his name,
the holy Ghost fell on all them that heard the word. Namely, which Peter spoke:
this is the way in which the Spirit is given? Namely, by preaching a crucified
Christ.

But now, no man can be saved without Christ, or the Spirit of Christ be given
to him, because he cannot be able to lay hold savingly of, and to hope for that
glory that Christ as he is God-man has accomplished in his own person without,
unless he have the Spirit. But farther, thou say; It is not the whole
mystery of salvation, God manifested in the flesh?

Answ. Truly to know that God out of love to poor sinners, did in the fullness
of time send forth his only begotten Son, who is equal with his Father, to be
born of a woman, and made under the law, to redeem them that are under the law,
that he might receive the adoption of sons; this is to know the mystery of
godliness. Therefore, when the Scriptures say, God was manifested in the flesh,
they mean, God sent forth his Son, which was and is the Word of God, God
himself, and he was made flesh, Joh 1.14. And so in the nature of man he did
become the Lamb of God, or the sacrifice of God, that does take away the sins
of the world, ver. 29 Now here I might enlarge abundantly, but that I would not
be tedious.

7. Quaer. Whether is it not possible, that many may profess as much of Christ
Without, as thou have said of him, and yet be damned; and if this be the faith
to profess him born, dead, risen and ascended without; then is there any
unbeleever in England? seeing all in the outward sound believes, and professes
as much as thou have said. Yea, or nay?

Answ. I know there are many that do profess in word, that Christ was born,
dead, risen, and ascended without, and yet may be damned. Yet he that does
really, with the faith of the operation of God believe these things, and does
also apply the virtue and merit of the same to themselves for justification and
life, shall be saved. If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus: and
shall believe in thine heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be
saved, Romans 10.9. And also 1 Cor. 15.2. By Which ye are saved, if ye keep in
memory What I preached unto you. What was that? Why, how that Christ died for
our sins according to the Scriptures, that he was buried, and rose again, etc.

2. It is not faith, only to talk of him with the mouth, but as I said before,
to beleev the same by the operation of the Spirit in our hearts.

If this be faith (say thou) to profess him born, dead, risen and ascended
Without, then, is there any unbeleever in England?

Answ. All that profess this do not truly believe it, for to profess in word
alone, and believe in heart, are two things. Secondly, if to profess this were
the faith, yet were there a good many unbeleevers in England, for the Quakers
will not profess him ascended without, neither making intercession without,
but contrariwise strike at this doctrine.

8. Quaer. Whether has that man faith in Christ that is not changed in the
nature, and is not the liar and slenderer an unbeleever, and of the cursed
nature, yea or no?

Answ. He that has faith in Christ is a new Creature: and the liar and
slanderer is an unbeleever: and if he live and dye in that condition, his state
is very sad, though if he turn there is hope for him; therefore repent and turn
quickly, or else look to your selves, for you are the men, as is clear by your
discourse.

9. Quaer. Whether any receive Christ, Who receive him not into him? if not,
show how Christ can be received, and whether many profess him not which never
receive him?

Ans. Christ as he is man, as he was a sacrifice for sin, cannot be received
really and personally into any, but yet, he that does indeed receive the
Gospel, and believe that he was a sacrifice upon the Cross for his sins, does
and has also received his Spirit into him, which gives him the comfort of
these things, John 14.26. And secondly, there are very many that profess him,
that at the day of judgment will fall short of eternal life, notwithstanding
all their profession; for as I said before, it is not the professor, but the
sound believer, that shall be saved by him. But let the Reader mark, how thou
condemnest thy own doctrine by this Quaery, for thou grantest many profess
Christ that never receive him. How then has every man Christ, or the light of
Christ within him? If it be within him, either he must receive it, or snatch it
by force against the will of another, however the Scripture says, what is it
that thou have not received; (yet all men have not received that) Jude 19.

10. Quaery, Whether to preach for hire, for gifts and rewards, and to divine
for money, and to make merchandise of the people for so much a year for
preaching to them, be not true marks and signs of false prophets? or can any
give truer signs of false prophets than Isaiah and Micha give, yea or nay?

Ans. There are a company of dumb dogs that are crept into the Nation, that
love, give ye, and desire to bear rule by their means; and they are every one
for his gain from their quarter. Secondly, there are a company of wolvs crept
out also, having warpped themselves about with sheeps clothing, and these are
both alike abominable to the Lord Neither can a man give a more right
description of a false prophet, than the Prophets and Christ with his Apostles
did give, therefore examine your selves.

11. Quaer: Whether must not the Devil be chained before Christ reign, and
what is that which chains him, and whether art thou come to one of the days of
the thousand years, yea, or no?

Answ. Christ has two several times wherein Satan must be bound by him, one
is at the conversion of sinners, the other when he shall come the second time,
and personally appear, and reign, in the world to come.

Again, whether I am come to one of the days of the thousand years?

Ans. No, because he that does reign, with Christ one of these days, shall live
and reign with Christ a thousand years, Rev. 20.4. But there is never a
believer in the world, that does, or in any likelihood shall live half so
long, before they die or be changed at the coming of the man Christ Jesus.

12. Quaer. Whether do thou know any Christ, preach or profess any Christ,
who has not lightened every man that coms into the world with the light of
life, or of condemnation, And is he not a deceiver that exhorts people for
salvation to any other thing then the light of Christ. Yea, or no? And how has
Christ lightened every man if not within him?

Ans. That Christ I preach, is the Christ of God, who as he is God has
lightened every man that coms into the world wi^h conscience, and the law,
which is the light of condemnation, but nor of life; for the law is the
ministration of condemnation 1 Cor. 7.8. And all men have the law and
conscience: but these will not save them. Again, there are some that do indeed
enjoy the light of life. And whereas thou ask'st, is not he a deeeiver, that
exhorts people to any thing else than the light of Christ? Answ. He that
tells any man, that the ministration of condemnation will save him, which is
the law, he is a lier, and a deceiver: but he that exhorts people to lay hold
on what the man Christ Jesus has done in his own person for sinners, and
presses souls to venture upon that for salvation, preaches the truth.
Thirdly, Christ has given to every one the law, and conscience within him: yet
these are not able to save him, but let him follow the righteousness of the
the law never so much, yet if he be not directed of God, to fly to Jesus the
Son of Mary, and to what he has done in his own person for them, he shall
never be saved, Act. 4. verse 12.

Friend, thus have I with all plainness of speech answered thy Quaeries, and I
fear not at all but I have spoken the truth as it is in Jesus. And as for
committing them to the judgment of others, as thou would have me; set others
say what they will, I am sure I have spoken the truth of God; and I make no
question, but at the second coming of my Lord Jesus from heaven to judge the
world, these things I shall not be ashamed of; Neither am I now, but am ready
if God shall give me life to speak the same things to any man, face to face,
and I desire thee, and all, even as many as shall read or hear this Treatise,
to consider, and look to themselves, least they sin against God so much in their
life time by rejecting these truths, that it shall never be forgiven them to
all eternity, though they repent them of their rejecting the same. There is one
thing more to which I shall speak a few words, and that is to a few words
written at the end of thy book, which is called the postscript, wherein, is
several charges against my self and some others, which I shall speak somewhat
to.

The first is against John Burton, thu^; John Burton said in a discourse with
some friends, that Christ had two bodies, and one of them is out of the sight
of the Saints. Answ. My Brother Burton being absent, I shall answer for him
concerning the charge laid against him. And therefore, that Christ, who is and
was before the world began,, God equal with his Father, did in the fullness of
time take upon him a body from the Virgin Mary, which was so prepared by God
his Father, it is evident in Scripture; and in it after he had lived a while in
the world, he did hang on the Cross, was taken down thence again, and laid in
Joseph's sepulcher, was raised again, and ascended away from his Disciples
therewith into glory, Act. 1.3, 9, 10, 11.

Again, he has another body, and that is his Church, Ephesians. 1. ver. the last.
Now that he is out of the sight of his Saints in one of the bodies; namely that
which did hang on the Cross, it is also evident, 1 Timothy 6. where Paul speaking
of that very Jesus, who did bear a faithful witness before Pontius Pilate,
says in ver. 16. Who only has immo^tality, dwelling in the light which no
man can approach unto, whom no man has seen, nor can see. That is not with
their mortal e^es, in that glory as yet. If you say still, notwithstanding
this, that Christ as he was before the world began, has but one body, and that
to be his Church, I ask you what that was, that was taken down from the Cross,
and laid into Joseph's sepulcher, Luke 23.52.53.

The second charge is against my self, and is this; John Bunyan said, Christ
second coming is not his coming in Spirit, for his coming in Spirit is no
coming. This is a false thing spoken of me.


The former part of the words; namely, Christ's second coming is not his coming
in Spirit, those I own. But the other, namely, * For his coming in spirit is
no coming, is a lie, made of me by the Author, Edward Borrough.

The former words were spoken at a meeting in Bedford, some Quakers being
present contradicting and blaspheming: And now they could not be content with
that; but they must make up all with a lie, and publish it in print. Quaker
there and I had some discourse concerning Christ's second coming, and he would
affirm, that his coming in Spirit was his second coming, spoken of in
Scripture. Then I asked him, which was his first coming? He answered, when he
was born of the Virgin, and took flesh upon him from her. Then said I, I shall
easily prove, that his coming in the Spirit is not his second coming, for I
will prove that his coming in the Spirit was before that which the Scripture
and you also do call his first coming; and proved it by that plain Scripture,
where Peter speaking of the Prophets, saitb, searching what, or what manner of
time the Spirit of Christ which was in them (the Prophets) did signify, when
it testified before hand of the suffering of Christ, and the glory that should
follow, 1 Pet. 1.10, 11. and 3, 18, 19. where speaking of Christ's being put to
death in the flesh, but quickened in the Spirit. By which Spirit he preached to
the spi its (now) in p^ison; but when was this, only when once the long
suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, ver. 20. Which was long before the
first coming of Christ, so called in Scripture, for that was, as I said, when
he took a body from the Virgin Mary.

But secondly, it seems clearly by these words, that you do look for no other
coming but his coming in Spirit. O! how suddenly and unexpected of you, will
the Son of man break down from heaven, with all his mighty Angels in flaming
fire, and call you together, with all Nations to judgment. And though now
peradventure you are ready to slight the personal appearing of the Lord Jesus
Christ, that man to judgment, only looking for a judgment within, yet you will
I am certain, very suddenly be made to pass under another judgment, which will
be more exceeding great then any judgment you shall have here, and more
terrible. As for the latter part of the charge, which is a very lie; though I
shall not trouble my self to lay it to your charge (you have so manifestly
declared your selves already what you are). Yet I beseech you, that hereafter
you would not be so ready to receive lies from others, and publish them to the
view of the world, least you appear to all men (as you do to some) to be such
as are of an accusing lying spirit.

But farther, That Christ's coming in the Spirit is not his second coming, it
is evident; partly, in that the coming of Christ in Spirit, was before that
called in Scripture, his first coming. Secondly, he that comes the second time
is he that came the first time. Now he that came the first time was very God
and very man, and not a Spirit only; for handle me says he, a Spirit has not
flesh and bones, as ye see me have, Luke 24. Now this same Jesus that was very
God and very man, so born of Mary, says, I go and prepare a place for you; and
I, the very same (as also Act. 1.10, 11.) will come again, and take you to my
self; that where I am, there ye might be also, Joh. 14.1, 2, 3. Here I might
spend many words, but it needs not, the whole current of Scriptures do confirm
this thing; and therefore I shall forbear, and content my self with this, He
that will be filthy let him be filthy, for the day is at hand.

The 3. Charge is also against me, saying, I said, there was nothing in me, nor
any man, to be taken notice of.

Though in some sense I do not deny these words, yet I know, and am sure, that
directly in this form of words, I did never lay them down, but I pass that.
Now in this sense I do not deny them; There was nothing in me, as I was in my
unregenerate estate; nor in any man else in the same estate, that is worthy to
be taken notice of for justification. First, because every unregenerate man is
without Christ, before he be converted, Ephesians. 2.12. Wherefore remember, that ye
being Gentiles in the flesh (unconverted) that at that time ye were without
Christ. Now a man that is without Christ, and has not his Spirit in him, as
some, yea most men are, Jude 19. What is there in that man, that is worth the
taking notice of to justify him.

Also converted Paul says, I know that in me, that is in my flesh, dwells
no good thing, Romans 7.18.

As for others that are charged with things, because their names are not also
mentioned, I shall pass them by; only thus much I shall say further to the
last charge, That there is nothing in any man by nature, before he be
converted, that is worth the taking notice of, as to seek justification
thereby. And that that light which every man has, being at the best but
Conscience, Nature, or the Law, let a man take notice of it, follow it, obey it
never so much, it is not able to justify the soul: for if righteousness come
by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain. And as I said before, every man has
not Christ to take notice of, though every man has conscience, or the light of
nature in him, which is also able to convince of sins against the law of God,
yet is not able to deliver from that curse pronounced by the Lord, against them
that disobey the law. Nay the law it self is not able to save them that do
follow it, being too weak for such a thing: And indeed God did not give it to
that end, that Saints should have life by it. No; compare Gal. 3.21. with Romans
5 20. you may clearly see why God gave the law; namely, that sins or offenses
might abound. But how? By discovering sin by its workings. Now then you that
follow the Law, and seek life by it, this is all you are like to have of it:
First, you shall see your transgression against it, made known to you by it,
Romans 3. ver. 20. and an horrible curse pronounced against you, because you
cannot give a complete continual obedience to every tittle of it.

And now friend to thee, who have taken in hand to answer my Quaeries laid down
in the end of my book; I say, thou have only wrangled and quarrelled at them;
but have not given one plain and right answer to any one of them. Therefore I
shall leave them still to be answered by you, or others of your spirit. You shall
find them at the end of this discourse: And I beseech you to answer them in
all plainness of heart, and with as moderate a spirit as you may. It is like
there may be some addition to them: but as I have dealt plainly and sincerely
with yours, so do you deal uprightly and plainly with mine, for the
satisfaction of those who shall read them. And here I shall draw toward a
conclusion, only speak some words to those who unawares to themselves may be
carried away with the doctrines of the Quakers: And I shall be brief in
speaking to it. The way that I shall take, shall be very plain to be
understood: for I shall not lay down any doubtful sentence in my speech to
them, nor others.

And first I shall show you that the doctrine of the Quakers is an error, and
how.

2. Who they are that are carried away with it, and why.

3. The way Satan takes to make this delusion, or filthy doctrine to take
place in the soul.

That the doctrine of the Quakers is false, or an error, I shall show, first,
by discovering the doctrine it self. Now the Doctrine of the Quakers is plainly
this; Namely, that every man that comes into the world, has the Spirit of
Christ in him. Now that this is an error is clear, because the word of God
says plainly, That some are sensual, having not the Spirit, Jude 19. And
again, Tbe unregenerate man, in the time of his unregenerate state, is without
Christ, Ephesians. 2.12.

2. He that will but observe the motions of that light which every man has
within him (say they) so as to obey and close in with it to follow it, shall
undoubtedly be saved from the wrath to com. Now this is clearly a gross
error; for first, If all men have not Christ, as they have not; then is it not
an error to press men to seek for life, by following that which is not able
to give life. Yet this they do, who labor to persuade men, yea the souls of
men, that it is no less then the very Spirit of Christ in every man, that does
convince of si^, when the Scriptures say plainly, the Law, Rom 3.20.
Conscience, Rom, 2.15. and Nature it self, Romans 2.14. 1 Cor. 11.14. will and
does convince of sin; yet none of these is the Spirit of Christ. And the great
argument that they bring to prove that it is the spirit of Christ, is, because
the Spirit does also convince of sin. Now what a poor argument is this, to say,
That because the Spirit of Christ does convince of sin, therefore whatsoever
does convince of sin, must needs be the Spirit of Christ As much as to say,
because the Saints are called the light of the world, Joh. 8.12.
Mat. 5.14. therefore the Saints are the Savior of the world; seeing Christ
also does call himself the light of the world. Or because the Moon has, or is
light, therefore the Moon is the Sun. This is but sophistical arguing, and does
beget most damnable errors and heresies in the world: but this is the way that
they take, to entangle poor souls with their sad and erroneous doctrine; see
page 22. of his book, line 12. and 13. They say, that it must be Christ within
them, that must within them work out justification for them; when it is evident
from the whole current of Scripture, that the Son of Mary was delivered to be
crucified for our offenses, and his Resurrection, through faith in it, is our
justification; as all along through grace I have declared and cleared. And the
work that the Spirit does in point of justification, is, to show us what the
Son of Mary has done and suffered in his own body on the tree, and is now
doing in the presence of his Father, in the highest heaven.

Jude 19. Ephesians. 2.12.
And to help us to apply this to our souls by faith now, for a preservative
against these and the like delusions, observe. First, as I said before, All
have not the Spirit of Christ.

2. That the law, with all our obedience to it, is not able to save, or
justify any poor soul, Romans 3.20. For by the works of the law shall no flesh
living be justified, though it gives the knowledge of sin.

3. That there is none other way to be justified in the sight of God, but by
laying hold of what the Son of Mary (Jesus) did do and suffer in his own
person, when he was in the world. For it is by him (and what he has done in
his own person by himself, Heb. 1.2.) that any man is justified from his sins,
and the wrath of God due to the same, by believing that his blood was shed for
their sins; as it is written, By his stripes we are healed, Isa. 53.5. as if
their own blood had been shed for their own sins; and that his righteousness
is theirs by imputation, as if they themselves had actually fulfilled all the
law of God for their own justification, Romans 10.4.

The second thing is, who are they that are carried away with this delusion?
and why?

Answ. First, not one of God's elect whom he foreknew, shall be utterly
destroyed thereby (I do not say, they shall not be led away for a time; but
they shall not be utterly destroyed); for they are kept by the mighty power of
God through faith unto salvation. But they are such as are not indeed the elect
of God, not chosen in Christ before the world began. Though Hymeneus and
Philetus fall away, and overthrow the faith of some, yet the foundation of God
stands sure, having this seal, The Lord knows them that are his 2 Timothy 2.
ver. 18, 19.

Secondly, they are such as in time past; for the generality of them were
either but light frothie professors, or else were shaken in their principles,
and unstable therein, as says the Scriptures, They that are deceivers do
beguile unstable souls. Or if they were such as were in appearance sober and
serious in the account of others, it was either from those convictions they had
from the Law, or else from high notions they had of the Gospel; which have both
such influence at some time on the foul (though not savingly) that the soul will
go very far in obedience to them; as for example, Herod who was an enemy to
the truth, yet for a time had such heart-workings, being convinced by the
preaching of John the Baptist, that he feared him, and observed him, and when
he heard him, he did many things, and heard him gladly, Mark. 6. ver. 20.

Now the reason why such people are carried away with such heresies as these,
or the like, is,

First, that as they were not of the elect of God, so God by suffering them to
be carried away finally, may make it appear, that they were not of his elect.
They went out from us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of us,
they would no doubt have continued with us. But they went out from us, that it
might be made manifest (or that men might see) that they were not all of us, 1 John 2.9.

2. Because God will not have his Church so disturbed always, with such as are
not of the truth. Now there are some men that have their time to walk with the
Church of God by permission; and these men are ever and anon ready to broach
their errors, even while they are among the Saints, to their trouble. Now God
having a care of his Church, has a time to suffer the Devil to run through the
world with some erroneous doctrine or other, which when these men taste, being
spirited before hand for that purpose, do presently close in with the same, to
the purifying of the Church, and the manifestation of hemselvs. And thus every
branch which the Lord's right hand has not plantd, shall and must have a time
to be rooted up, Mat. 15.13.

3. Because others that are of the right graffing in, may notwithstanding not
resume, but fear, least they also fall, through the same example of others who
re already fallen, or may fall hereafter, Heb. 4.1, 2, 11.

4. Because others may see, that it is not by their own strength that they do
stand, but f^eely by the grace of God, and his power and love toward them in
the Lord Jesus Christ. God has chosen some before the foundation of the world.
Now to manifest this, though they are even as bad as the worst by nature; yet I
say, because God will show his power and his love, he does preserve some to
eternal life, though others fall into eternal damnation. Of all that thou have
given me, says Christ, have I lost none, but the son of perdition, that the
Scripture might be fulfilled, Joh. 17.12. Many other reasons might be given
why these things must and shall be; but I rather choose to forbear. Only thus
much I have spoken, because I know it is my duty to speak a few words unto you,
that you may either close in with the truth, or else the more clearly be left
without excuse at the great day.

The third and last thing, is the way that Satan takes, to make those delusions
take place in the soul.

Now the way whereby he makes these, or any other delusions to take place in
the soul, is, first, to persuade the soul that they are the truth; and
secondly, to to stir up in the soul an enmity to any thing or person that
shall declare the contrary.

First, they are given over to believe a lie; that is, To believe false
doctrine to be the doctrine of God, and of Christ. And that he might bring this
to pass, he goes about to change the names of things; and because the Law,
Conscience, and Nature it self can convince of sin, therefore he calls them
Christ, or the light of Christ: Saying to a natural man, one that is not yet
converted, Mind the light wihin you. If they ask what light? say they, That
which does convince of sin. If they farther ask, Why, what is that? They say,
It is the light of Christ, the light of life, or Christ within.

Now these things are nothing else but conscience, nature, or the law, for a
natural man has nothing else that dwells within him to convince him of sin:
only these things have a new name put upon them. And poor Creatures heating
the name Christ, being ignorant of the nature of Christ, do presently close in
with these things, supposing, nay, verily believing that these are the Spirit
of Christ. Which things being thus received, if at any time one come and oppose
them, and tell them that it is an error that they have taken up, to think that
that which is in an unregenerate man is the Spirit of Christ, and contrariwise
tells them plainly, that it is but their own conscience that does convince
them, or the law written in their hearts by nature. Nay, say they, it is the
light of Christ in the conscience, when there is no Scripture has any such
manner of exp^essions, only a fancy of their own, taken up without ground from
the Word. But the soul being possessed with this doctrine, presently its heart
rises against any thing that does contradict it, and is filled with a secret
enmity against it. Now the way that Satan takes to bring this about, is to
persuade poor souls, that all these thoughs that do any wise contradict the
Principles received, is but a temptation of the Devil. And if at any time
there be the doctrine of Jesus, held forth in truth; his death, burial,
resurrection, ascension, and intercession; now without in the presence of his
Father for sinners, and that there is salvation no where else but in the merits
of the first born of Mary, which is Jesus Christ, without the works of the Law,
Romans 3.28. Presently with envy they are enraged, and cry; Do thou not know
that every man has a measure of tbe Spirit given to him? Follow that, listen
to that, turn thy mind to that, and walk in the light of that. When alas there
is no such thing as the Spirit of Christ in every man: as I said, and proved
before at large; only the Devil has gotten this way to call conscience
Christ, the law Christ; and hereby to entangle the soul with the name of a
thing, without the thing it self.

But now, the soul is set down in its principles, and he that does any way
confute that Spirit, presently it falls a raging, and cries out, Se^pent, Li^r,
Wolf, Dragon, Devil; be silent with thy serpentine wisdom, and smoke of the
bottomless pit. Now in this the Devil is wonderful cunning: for least he
should indeed be discovered, he does set the face hard against the truth, and
counts it such a deadly enemy, that he will not, cannot bear it; but lets
fly against it all the hellish words, and madness he can; And now he begins
first to cry, avoid Satan. All which is only to harden him, in whom he does
dwell, more and more against the truth. Now he does also harden souls in
delusions, by presenting the ugly, and base conversations of a company of
covetous wretches, who do profess themselves to be the Ministers of the Gospel,
but are not; now poor creatures being shaking and doubtful what way to take,
seeing the conversation of these men to be wicked, and the doctrine of these
deluders, co^ered with a seeming holiness; they presently embrace it, saying;
surely these men are in the right way; they cry down the Priests, whose lives
we also see to be profane, they are very strict in their ways, and if such be
nor good men, who are? But yet that which is most taking, is (through the
corruption and pride that is naturally in the heart of man) these men propose
such a way to salvation, as is in the compass of a man's owe ability, even
works of righteousness done by him, which is very agreeable to man's nat^re,
which would willingly be saved, but would not be altogether beholden to God for
it: and these works not being wrought by the Priests, or National Ministers,
but by the other, though in opposition to the righteousness of Christ, the
Messiah God-man, poor souls not only suck in these erroneous principles, but
are hardened in them against the doctrine of God, and his Son Jesus Christ, by
their ungodly conversation, and thus dishonor the Son of God. But come
brethren, let us be patient, stablish our hearts, wait but a while, and I doubt
not, but you will see that those who dishonor our Jesus, shall soon be brought
down, both Ranters, Quakers, P^iests, and people also, that shall continue in
opposing him either in doctrine or practice; for our God has said, Ah! I will
ease me of my adversaries.

Now, a few words more to those who do believe in Christ aright, and lay him
for their foundation.

First, bless God that you are not carried away with the delusions that are on
foot in this generation.

Secondly, see that you are laborers after a more experimental knowledge of
our Lord Jesus Christ; fly more to his birth, death, blood, resurrection,
ascension and intercession; and fetch refreshing for your souls more and more
from him without, through the operation of his Spirit within: and though the
fruits of the Spirit be excellent, and to be owned where they are found; Yet
have a care you take not away the glory of the blood of Christ shed on the
Cross, without the gates of Jerusalem, and give it them; which you will do, if
you do content your selves, and satisfy your consciences, with this; that you
find the fruits of the Spirit within you, and do not go for peace and
consolation of conscience, to the blood of Jesus, shed on the Cross.

Therefore learn of the Saints, or rather of the Spirit, Revel. 5. who teaches
to sing this song. Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open the seals
thereof, for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood.

And as for you that cannot yet well endure to think you should be justified by
the blood of the Son of Mary shed on the Cross without the gate, I say, to you
Kiss the Son least he be angry, and you perish from the way, when his wrath is
kindled but a little, blessed are all they tbat put their trust in him, Psalm.
2.12.

FINIS.
Some Questions put forth to them commonly called Quakers, for to answer,
whether in London, or elsewhere. Be always ready to give an answer to every man
that asks you a reason, of the hope that is in you, 1 Pet. 3.15. And I
beseech you do it in sincerity.
1. IF thou say that every man has a measure of the Spirit of Jesus Christ
within him, Why say the Scriptures; Some are sensual, having not the Spirit,
Jude 19. And when Christ tells his Disciples of sending them the Spirit, he
also says, The world cannot receive it, Joh. 14.17.

2. What is the Church of God redeemed by, from the curse of the Law? Is it by
something done within them, or by something that is done without them? or by
something that works in them? Gal. 3.3. Act. 13.38. 1 Pet 2.24. Col. 1.20.
etc.
If thou Answer, It is redeemed from the curse of the law by something that
works in them; then I ask, Why did the man Christ Jesus hang upon the Cross
on mount Calvary without the Gates of Jerusalem for the sins of the people? and
why do the Scriptures say, that through this man is preached unto you the
forgiveness of sins; that is, through his blood, Ephesians. 1.7. which was shed
without the Gates of Jerusalem, Heb. 13.12

3. What Scripture have you to prove, that Christ is or was crucified within
you, dead within you, risen within you, and ascended within you.

4. Is that very man that was crucified on mount Calvary be-between two
thieves, whose name is Jesus the Son of Mary; I say, is he the very Christ, yea
or no?

5. Is that very man, with that very body within you, yea or no?

6 Was that Jesus that was born of the Virgin Mary a real man of flesh and
bones, after his resurrection from the dead out of Joseph's Sepulcher, yea or
no? for the Scripture says he was, as in Luke 24.39. If so, then did that man
that said, Handle me and see, for a Spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see
me have; I say, did that man go away from, and not into them, as these
Scriptures declare; Luke 24. ver. 39.40. compared with chap. 5. ver. 50.51.
also Act. 1. ver. 9, 10, 11. Or did he with that body of flesh go into his
Disciples, yea or no?

7. Has that Christ that was with the Father before the world was, no other
body but his Church? If you say no, as it is your wonted course; Then again, I
ask you, what that was, in which he did bear the sins of his Children; if you
answer, It was in his own body on the tree, for so says the Scriptures, 1 Pet.
2.24. Whether that body in which he did bear our sins (which is called his own
body), was, or is the Church of God, yea or no?

Again, if you say, he has no body but the Church, the Saints; then I ask,
what that was that was taken down from the Cross, and laid into Joseph's
sepulcher, Luke 23.51.52.

Now I know that as Christ is the head of his Church, so the Church is the body
of the head, which is Christ; but as Christ is Mediator between God and men; I
say, as he is a Mediator, so he is a man, 1 Timothy 2.5. Is absent from his
Saints in the world, as is clear, 2 Cor. 5.6.

Luke 24.51. Act. 1.9.10.11. Luk, 23.26. and 3^.53. Luke 24.3. and 6, and 15,
and 41 and 42, and 39, and 50. Act. 10.41.
Therefore as he is Mediator, and a man, so he has a body that is absent from
his Church, which is ascended from his Discipls above the clouds into heaven.
If you say, no; then I ask you, did he leave the body behind him which was born
of the Virgin Mary, which he walked up and down in the world with his
Disciples, was afterward hanged upon the Cross, buried, rose again from the
dead; with which body he did eat, drink, and likewise walk up and down with his
Disciples, after his resurrection from the dead: and did bid his Disciples see,
if he were not flesh and bones: I sa^, did he leave that body of flesh and
bones behind him, when he went away from his Disciples, yea, or no?

John Bunyan.

FINIS.
The Errata.
Page 8. Line 42. from his person in his person, Read from his people in his
person, page 18. line 45. for day r. body, p. 25. l. 14. for if it r. it is p.
48 for Quaker r. a Quaker, p. 55. at the second Quaerie r. is it by something
done within them, or something done without them; if thou answer, cand.


