AN HUMBLE EXAMINATION OF A PRINTED ABSTRACT OF The Answers to Nine Reasons of
the House of Commons, AGAINST The Votes of Bishops in Parliament.

Printed by order of a Committee of the Honorable House of Commons, now
Assembled in Parliament.



LONDON, Printed for P. Stephens and C. Meredith. 1641.

AN HUMBLE EXAMINATION OF A Printed ABSTRACT of the ANSWERS given to Nine
REASONS of the HOUSE of COMMONS, Against the Votes of Bishops in Parliament.
I. REASON of the House of Commons.
BEcause it is a very great hinderance to the exercise of their Ministerial
Function. To this Reason a fourfold Answer is sent abroad.


ANSWER.
1. Is is not so much hinderance as their convening to General Councels,
Synods, Convocations, Assemblies, Classes, and the like, in all the Churches
Reformed, or otherwise. EXAMEN.
Convening to General Councels, Synodes, etc. when need requires, is a proper
part of their Ecclesiastical Office, and so cannot rightly be termed any
hinderance to their Ministerial Function at all. For then, although they be
enforced to be absent from their particular Congregations, they do still move
within their own proper Orb, for the more public Service of the Church: and
so they may with more reason expect a blessing on it. But when they Vote in
Parliament, as Peers, in Civil and Secular Affairs, touching Trade,
Merchandise, and other particulars of State policy, they be Eccentrick, and out
of their own Sphere, and Calling. This therefore must needs be not only some
hinderance, but, a very great hinderance to the exercise of their Ministerial
Function: because, to qualify them to give such Votes, with judgment, they
must necessarily bestow themselves most, if not altogether upon the study of,
and searching into all those Secular matters which in Parliaments be, or may be
debated and voted, and in the inquiry into all those principles and deep
mysteries of State, wherein, all that vote in the House of Peers, ought above
all others to be most conversant; which cannot ordinarily be attained, without
spending most of their time and study thereupon: Si enim velit Episcopus, ut
caelesti pariter and terreno Regi placeat, ad utrumque se officium dividere,
certe Rex caelestis, qui sibi vult ex toto cord, tota anima, tota virtute
serviri, ministerium divinum non approbat, non diligit, non acceptat. Nam nec
terreni Principis ratiocinia quisquam dimidius sufficienter administrat; Matthew.
Parker Antiq. Britanni. in Huberto ex Will. Nubrig.
as a learned Archbishop of Canterbury, out of another grave Author, has
observed.

And sithence, to be able to give a Vote in the Lords House of Parliament
judiciously, and for the benefit of the public, requires such constant
industry, daily observation, and no small experience of all kinds of secular
affairs, with their several casual turnings, and vicissitudes: I cannot see
how Bishops; voting in that House, can avoid one of these three evils, either
they must give their votes ignorantly (and ignorance usually runs wrong;) or
corruptly, to serve other men's turns, be they right or wrong, or else they must
necessarily bend most part of their lives to secular studies and employments,
to which they were never bred, from which their Ministerial Function should
exclude them, and for which many godly Bishops and others, beside sundry
Councels, in all ages have condemned them; many of those Ancients having
alleged that Scripture, in 2 Timothy 2.4. (Nemo militans Deo, implicat se
negotiis secularibus, etc.) to this very purpose.

For more expedition, I shall only name some of those Authors and Councels.
Cyprian. Epist 66. juxta Pamel. Can. 6. Apost. apud Zonaram. Council. Carthag.
4. Can. 16. Council. Chalced. Oecum. Sess. 15. Can. 3. August. Epist. 110. Greg.
Magn. Dial. lib 1. Praefat. Excerpt. Egberti Can. 16. and Can. 57. Council.
Calchuth. Can. 10. Anselm. in Council. Westminster. ut videre est in Gulielm. Malmsb.
de Gestis Pontif. l. 1. Mat. Par. Hist. Angl. in the Cases of Walter B. of
Durham, in time of Will. the Conq. and of Hubert Archb. of Cant. in Ric. 1.

Yea, we shall find this sharply condemned by popish Prelates themselves. Corp.
Iur. Can. did. 88. And Othobone the Popes Legate here, in Hen. 3. his time,
censured it, and provided against it, as vitium horrendum. Constable. Legate. cap.
Cum honest. But I leave them.

See also Tindall in his Tract of Obedience of a Christian. B. Hooper, on 8.
Command. B. Latymer, Sermon called the Plough. B. Jewel, defense of Apol. par.
5. chap. 4. divis. 2. Mat. Parker, Archb. of Cant. Antiquit. Brit. in Huberto,
where he is very large, sharp, and solid in this point. Take a passage or two,
because his Book is not in every hand. Neque enim, si verum judicare volumus,
in Republica Christiana quicquam sani atque integri seculum illud (Richardi
primi) tulit. Fictaque and adumbrata Religionis specie proposita, totus Clerus
in sceleribus, muneribus, honoribus, and rapinis, neglecto penitus verbo,
impune volutabat. Hujus mali origo ab hoc profluxit, quod contra Orthodoxorum
Patrum decreta, Clerus nimium mundanis se negotiis immiscuit. Then he goes on
to show a fearful example of Gods vengeance upon one of them, who had been
advanced to a very high Office in the State, which Relation he thus closes up;
Cujus generis exempla idcirco proferenda sunt, ut deterreatur a vectigalibus
Regiis, and Civilibus publicisque occupationibus Clerus, and Evangelio
propagando praecipue studeat ac incumbat. And how ever he after takes notice
of somewhat which happened in the beginning of Henry 3. wherein he seems to
prefer the fidelity of the Clergy to that of the Laity in administering of
Civil Offices, yet he does it not as allowing the Clergy to be so employed,
but rather as secretly taxing the Nobility of that time for being so
unfaithful to the King and Kingdom, which surely is no warrant for the
Clergy to step out of their own Calling.

It is true that anciently Bishops have been allowed to intermeddle in some
Civil affairs, at sometimes. Constantine made a law to that purpose, in case of
voluntary appeals from civil Iudicatories, Sozom. li. 1. cap. 9. And Valens
added to it, in cases of Hospitals and Schools. Hist. Counc. of Trent. Yet the
mischiefs of such intermedling, were soon felt and groaned under. Hence
Honorius and Arcadius made a Law against it, and Valentinian afterward put it
in execution even in Rome it self. So did other Emperors, as appears by the
Corpse of the Civil Law, in many places. Indeed some succeeding Emperors, gave
relaxations, and enlarged the power and pre-eminence of Bishops so far, that
at length there was no reducing them to their ancient limits, till that once
glorious Scepter was become so inglorious as to be wholly at the devotion,
command, and dispose of the Mitre, to the perpetual ignominy, and irreparable
undoing of that puissant Empire.

And whereas some urge that Statute De Provisoribus in 25. Edward 3. for
Bishops intermedling in Civil Affairs, because it is there said, That the
holy Church of England was founded in the estate of Prelacy within the Realm
of England, by the Kings Ancestors, and other of the Nobility, to inform them
and the People of the Law of God, and to make hospitalities, alms, and other
works of Charity in the places where the Churches were founded, etc. and for
this end, their Lands, revenues, etc. were assigned by the said founders to the
Prelates, etc. And the said Kings in times past, were wont to have the greatest
part of their Council, for the safeguard of the Realm, when they had need, of
such Prelates, and Clerks so advanced etc. This last Clause does only prove de
facto, that so it was used; but does not legitimate the use; all stories of
those times being full of complaints against the mischiefs which arose out of
it. And that very Statute declares the prime end of advancing the Clergy into
an Hierarchy, was to counsel the Kings and others in the Law of God, not in
Civil and Martial matters. And so far is such intermedling in Secularibus,
from being countenanced by the Laws of this Kingdom, that by the common Law;
(which is the most fundamental Law of the Realm) all in holy Orders are so
carefully exempted from such encumbrances, that if any Clergy man happen to be
put into a temporal Office, he must, upon the pleading of his Orders, have a
Writ awarded him out of the Chauncery to discharge him. Regist. 187.6.

Therefore it was far from the intention of the first Founders of our
Hierarchy, to employ them in Civilibus, but only to make use of their counsel
in Spirituals.

There is yet one thing more, much insisted upon by some of the Prelates, to
prove the lawfulness of their intermedling in Secular Matters. And it is a
passage of Saint Augustine, De opere Monachor. Cap. 29. where he says, It
were far more profitable for him to spend his time in reading and praying,
Quam tumultuosissimas perplexitates causarum alienarum pati de negotiis
secularibus, vel judicando dirimendis, vel interveniendo praecidendis; 1 Cor. 6.
quibus nos molestiis idem afflixit Apostolus, non utique suo, sed ejus qui in
eo loquebatur arbitrio. Ergo, say some Bishops, they have warrant so to do,
yea a command from the Apostle, and from the Spirit of God himself.

To this it may be answered. 1. That in that very place St. Austin does bemoane
this, as being Ecclesiarum quibus servit consuetudo the custom of those
Churches: and the practice began, after Constantine made a law to warrant it;
for S Aust. there says that Paul never submitted to it, nay rather he gave
order to make them Judges that were meanest, and had least to do. And albeit
St. Austin there adds that this toil he undertook, non sine consolatione
Domini in spe vitae aeternae, ut fructum feramus cum tolerantia. Yet this was
not spoken, as rejoicing in the employment, but as bearing it with more
cheerfulness in hope of eternal life after it. 2. As for the employment it
self, he complains, violenter irruptum est, and non permitter ad quod volo
vacare ante meridiem, post meridiem occupationibus hominum teneor. Epist. 110.
Possidon. in vit. Augustini ca. 19.
and Possidonius that lived with him many years, bears him witness that hanc
suam a melioribus rebus occupationem, tanqua^ angariam deputabat. Therefore it
was, that (in Ep. 110.) he desired the people that they would suffer him to put
over all those businesses to Eradius whom he had chosen to be his successor in
his Bishopric, which when the people had granted, the good old Father
presently unburdened himself, Ergo fratres quicquid est quod ad me
perferebatur, ad illum perferatur, ubi necessarium habuerit consilium, meum non
negabo auxilium.

3. If this be not enough, let me answer Bishops, Treat. Of Christian
Subjection and Antichristian Rebellion. par. 3.
by a Bishop, viz: by Bishop Bilson, who, being pressed with that place of
Saint Austin, de opere Mon: by the Popish crew under the name of Philander a
Jesuit, returns this answer under the veil of Theophilus an Orthodoxe
Divine; a Truth it is, the Bishops of the Primitive Church were greatly
troubled with those matters, And I have showed before upon what occasion.
Prefat. in Dial.
not as ordinary Judges of these causes, but as Arbiters elected by consent of
both parties. And I could requite you with Gregory's own words of the same
matter in the same place, quod certum est nos non debere, which it is certain
we ought not to do. But yet I think so long as it did not hinder their
Vocation and Function, though it were troublesome unto them, they might neither
in charity nor in duty refuse it, because it tended to the preserving of peace
and love amongst men. And the Apostle had licensed all men to choose whom they
would for their Judges, no doubt meaning that they which were chosen should
take the pains to hear the cause, and make an end of the strife. But it is
one thing to make peace between brethren, as they did, by hearing their
griefs with consent of both sides; and another to claim a judicial interest
in those causes, in spite of men's hearts.

Thus he, and how home this comes to our Bishops, that will needs still contest
and strugle to retain their Votes in Parliament in all civil causes
whatsoever, undervaluing all the Reasons of the House of Commons, and contrary
to the just desires of the whole body of the Kingdom, I need not use more
words to declare.

To finish this point. All that has been said against the Clergies
intermedling with Civil and Temporal affairs (other than for necessary and
comfortable provisions for Lively hood) drives to this Conclusion, that if it
be so great an hinderance to the exercise of the Ministerial Function to be
employed in temporal matters which are but ordinary, it must needs be a far
greater hinderance to that holy calling, for Bishops to Vote in Parliament,
because they cannot do it as it ought to be done, without so much skill and
dexterity in secular affairs of all sorts that possibly can come within the
debate and resolution of a Parliament, as must needs take up the greatest part,
if not the whole of a man's time, study, strength and abilities be they never
so great and many, to fit him for that great service altogether beside (I might
add inconsistent with) his Calling of the Ministry.

2. ANSWER to the first REASON.
It is propter majus bonum Ecclesiae. EXAMEN.
Cujus contrarium, etc. What good they have done in Parliament, for the Church
(unless to uphold the Synagogue of Rome,) let all Histories speak, that have
taken any notice of the acting and carriage of matters of Religion debated, and
Voted in Parliament, since the first entrance upon a Reformation in this
Kingdom.

It is true that in the Reign of King Henry the eight, one Cranmer was active
in the cause of God, against those six bloody Articles, which cost so many
their lives. But, of all the Hierarchy, not one was found to join with him,
but all opposed, and he alone for three days together was feign to stand to
it, and at length, by the malice, practice, and potency of the Prelates, he
was overcome, and the cause carried against him, Acts and Monuments par. 2.
page 1037. edit. 1610. This was in the year 1540.

When about four or five years after, Cranmer, in two several Parliaments
used his best endeavors to get that bloody Law repealed, and had before hand
(as he thought) drawn over to his side the Bishops of Worcester, Chichester,
and Rochester, who promised to assist the cause in Parliament; yet when it came
to the trial, all the Bishops forsook him and the cause again. In so much as
the King himself, and the Nobility stood to him so far, as to give way to a
moderating of the former Law, when the Bishops would not abate the least part
of the rigor thereof. Antiq. Britanni. in Cranmero.

In King Edward the sixth his Reign, it is true, a blessed Reformation was
happily begun; but, by whom? By the Bishops? No verily, Cranmer only excepted.
For he and the Protector were the men that advised the King, and went through
with the work. As for the great Bishops, Gardener of Winchester, and Tonstall
of Duresme, Bonner and others, they served to fill prisons, and diverse ran
away. And in all Letters of the Lords for more particular Reformation, it was
only Canterbury and the Nobility that did promote the business. See Acts
and Monuments in King Edward the sixth.

But in Queen Mary's days, who but Bishops for the Mass, and all the gross
body of Popery, both in Convocation and Parliament? Cranmer, and the rest of
the Orthodox Bishops were soon persecuted, and at length committed to the
fire; while the Popish Prelates, being restored to their places, spared no
diligence to promote Popish Idolatry throughout the Kingdom, and that by their
Votes in Parliament, whereby they might more plentifully shed blood by a Law.

When GOD delivered this Kingdom from those Marian flames, and set up blessed
Queen Elizabeth, it cannot be denied, but that in the Bill for restoring all
ancient Jurisdictions to the Crown and for reestablishment of Religion and
ejection of Popery, the Lords Spiritual are named in the Act, because the bill
being carried by the greater number of Votes, the dissenting party which was
the less, are included in the rest, and it becomes the Act of all, in common
repute, and esteem of Law.

But little thanks to the Bishops for any of that Reformation which was then
restored. We find the Bishops of Winchester, Litchfeild, Chester, Carlisle and
Lincoln appearing in open defense of Popery while that Parliament was sitting.
Act and Monuments par. 2. page 1619. edit. 1610. But these were not all that
stood for that cause: Witness the deprivation of Heath Archbishop of York,
Tunstall Bishop of Durham. White of Winchester, Thyrlby of Ely, Watson of
Lincoln, Baines of Coventry and Litchfeild, Bourne of Bath and Wells,
Christopherson of Chichester, Oglethorp of Carlisle, Scot of Chester, Morgan of
Saint David's, beside Bonner imprisoned, Pates of Worcester, Goldwel of Saint
Asaph in exile, for the same Pseudo-Catholike cause. None of all which can with
any probability of reason be imagined to have Voted for the restoring of the
Truth, they being by virtue of that Statute deprived for opposing the Truth.

And albeit, I know nothing but by hearsay of the general carriage of
Bishops in Parliaments sithence, and so do not charge them: yet how often they
have with-stood bills against Non-residency, In 31. Elizabeth a Bill against
Non-residents passed the House of Commons, and being in the other House greatly
approved of and much spoken for by many of the Temporal LORDS, yet, through
the earnest laboring of the Bishops, it could have 10 passage there. Another
Bill for reforming Ecclesiastical Courts in King James his time, passed, till
it fell among the Bishops, and there was stayed.
Pluralities, and other evils and defects in the Reformation of Religion, and
of their Courts, the world has been sufficiently informed; insomuch as the
House of Commons has already declared and resolved at a General Committee of
the whole House, June eleventh, 1641. That the Bishops have been found by long
experience to be great hindrances of a perfect Reformation, and of the growth
of Religion. En majus bonum Ecclesiae produced by the Vote of Bishops in
Parliaments!

And as their voting in Parliament, in matters of Religion, is ad detrimentum,
potius quam ad utilitatem Ecclesiae; so it cannot be imagined how their Votes
there, in Civilibus, should conduce more ad majus bonum Ecclesiae: Except the
wilful and incorrigible continuing in a course foreign and contrary to their
proper Calling, and such as (being duly performed) is a very great hinderance
to the exercise of their Ministerial Function (as has been before declared)
can redound to the greater good of the Church, which they seldom look after,
unless to receive the profits of it, and to plague those who are profitable in
it, that themselves may more splendidly and securely (in Parliament; and every
where else,) Lord it over the whole heritage of God.

3. ANSWER, to the first REASON.
The Apostles unnecessarily put themselves to more hindrances, to work for
their livelihood, Acts 20.24. 1 Thessalo. 2.9. 2 Thessalonians. 3.8. EXAMEN.
Unnecessarily? Boldly spoken: and were I sure that one of my fellows or
equals had written it, I should without breach of good manners, pronounce it
sauciness little short of blasphemy. Was it not necessary that the Apostles
should have a livelihood? And was the procuring of it by laboring with their
hands (although I know none but one, after CHRIST'S Ascension, that was put unto
it) to avoid the oppression of poor converts, or to prevent scandal among
either poor or rich, converted or unconverted, an unnecessary thing? This may
be a strain of Policy passable enough among Spiritual Lords of Parliament,
but was never known to be good Divinity among such as desire to approve
themselves unto GOD.

I have bin taught that Necessarium is put sometimes pro utili and pro congruo
and convenienti, as well as pro naturali seu debito, or pro violento sua
coacto. And I have learned among the Schoolmen, that there is a necessity
not only absolute and simplicite sic dicta, but also ex suppositione and
condition, when a thing not simply necessary in it self, becomes such in
regard either of end, means, circumstances or otherwise. When Saint John (1
Epist. 2.27. tells the Christians, ye need not that any man teach you, was his
writing to them to instruct them further, unnecessary? When Saint Paul's abiding
in the flesh was more needful in regard of the Philippians, for their
furtherance and joy of faith, Philip. 2. Shall any man be so hardy, as to
avouch his abode in the flesh to be unnecessary, which yet was not simply
necessary in it self, or unto him?

So, circumstances of time, place, and person, may make that necessary in some
places, at some times, and among some persons, which yet of it self is not so.
Thus was it in some of those particulars which are called these necessary
things, Acts 15.28. yet were it no small presumption for any man to call those
things, in reference to that very Text, without some distinction expressed,
unnecessary. So it is here.

When Saint Paul says, these hands have ministered unto my necessities, Acts
20.34. shall any man say, that ministration was unnecessary? If it be said, it
was so, in regard of his right to maintenance; it is true; but, when it is
pronounced without such limitation, it is a contradicting and thwarting of the
Apostles expression, as if he wanted skill or care to express himself as
became him, and a misleading of an uncautious Reader, to swallow down an
error inferred from it. For what is hence intended to be inferred, but this;
That, as the Apostles did unnecessarily labor with their hands when they might
have avoided it: So Bishops may according to that example, vote in Parliament,
although the thing be found unnecessary to a Bishop? Now this is a
corrupt-inference from ambiguous premises, and the ambiguity lies in the word
unnecessarily: for if the word be spoken absolutely and without all
limitation, it is absolutely false: if a limitation be intended, it ought to
have been expressed, and then any intelligent Reader would soon have been led
to consider and compare that act of the Apostle, with the present
unnecessarinesse of Bishops votes in Parliaments; and thereby have been
enabled to discover the weakness and unsufficiency of this unnecessary
impertinent Answer, because he would easily have found great and wide
differences between those two cases. 1. Working for a livelihood is a matter
of necessity, when it cannot otherwise be so well obtained without oppression
or scandal, which was the Apostles case: But Bishops voting in Parliament,
when no necessity at all, either of maintenance or scandal can be feared, is
a work of supererrogation, and an unnecessary sinful neglect of their own
Function. 2. The Apostles working with his hands might better consist with the
exercise of his Ministerial Office, Mat 10.19, 20 Ioh. 16.13, 14
because he had his furniture thereunto by divine inspiration, Gal. 1.11, 12.
whereas all men now must continually and industriously apply themselves to
their Books and Meditations, to make them workmen that need not to be
ashamed. 1 Timothy 4.13. 2 Timothy 2.15.
3. The Apostles working with his hands was but for a season while the present
necessity lasted, but the Bishops would willingly Vote in Parliament to the end
of the world, although there be no necessity of it at all, but great
inconvenience and scandal accruing to the Church thereby, and a Bil
transmitted by the honorable House of Commons to the Lords against it, as many
ways inconvenient and intolerable.

It were easy to add more differences, but these may suffice: So also may
that which has been already said, 1 These. 2.9. 2 These. 3.8.
for the clearing of those other two Texts that remain.

4. ANSWER, to the first REASON.
What hinderance can it be to their Calling, that once in three years, when
they must necessarily attend the Convocation, they divide some part of that
short time to the attendance of Parliament? EXAMEN.
This is not an Answer, but a Question; and such as, if the first Answer be
true, little needed. But that which has been said in examination of that
first Answer, may also suffice to satisfy this Interrogation. The hinderance
lies not so much in the expense of a short space spent in the Parliament House,
as in the long time requisite to fit a Bishop for such multiplicity of weighty
businesses as are proper for a Parliament: except he think it enough to vote
Bills by rote, according to the impetuousnesse of his friends, or the loudness
of the cries made for or against them.

Besides, Times and other Circumstances may, and often do so alter the State of
the same matters; that, if even the ablest and most vigilant Satesman be not
more aware, Bills may be offered, which are perhaps most plausible in present
appearance, and might be very profitable too, at some other season, that would
prove most pernicious in the issue, if now they were suffered to pass. Now, he
that has not his eyes in his head, or his head not constantly at work (even
out of Parliament) to observe and ponder the several changes and windings of
affairs and seasons, can never be a judicious Peer in Parliament; but (at his
best) an Emperick, who, when his total is cast up, is ever found more hurtful
than profitable, yea a very pest to the public; unless, laying all other
business aside, he double his industry to make future recompense for his
present insufficiency, and by his diligence to supply the defects of his former
education, as to this Calling, he having been first intended and molded for
another profession.

And, if Bishops take this course, 1 Chro. 12.32
to become like the children of Issachar, men that have understanding of the
times to know what Israel ought to do, and to enable themselves for
Parliaments indeed; it is easy to conclude, what hinderance this not only may
be, but cannot but be to their Ministerial Function. For, if the Levite take
upon him Issachars Office, and fall to tampering so high in Temporalls, Genesis
49.14.
he will soon prove an Issachar in Spirituals, and become couchant between
his two burdens.

Again, I hope it will very shortly appear, that it will be far from being
necessary for Bishops once in three years, to attend the Convocation, as the
frame of both yet stands among us. Our Convocation is but a mere shadow, a
plain mockery. Synods were ordained for more use and activity, than to patter
over a latin Let any upon Wednesdays and Fridays, and to give so many
Subsidies as it pleases his Grace to propound to the engaged and enthralled
Clergy; or to pass a few illegal, seditious, Anti-parliamentary Canons, first
cast in the mould of some brain sick Incendiary, that would needs be the
Dominus fac totum, and the head of a pragmaticall, Papisticall, Atheistical
Sanction.

And, if Synods were (as I trust they will be) restored to their pristine
course and extent, agreeable to the Word (without which, better we never saw
Convocation more; as, I hope, we shall not) there would be so much work to
do in them, as would even tire out the most indefatigable spirits of the
ablest men, to consider of errors in doctrine which daily creep in to corrupt
the truth; of explanations of Doctrine already established, when perverse men
make use of the generality or ambiguity of the terms wherein they be couched,
to countenance their fancies and fanaticke opinions; of preparing platform of
Discipline agreeable to the will of God, and useful for his people; of
censuring such as be too great for lesser Assemblies; and of Appeals from
inferior Synods to that higher Judicatorie.

Then, would godly and conscientious Bishops find so much to do in
Convocations or Synods, as would leave them little leisure for attendance in
Parliaments, where the Peers do, or should sit every day (or they have little
reason to Vote in those Bills and Causes there agitated, when they have not
heard the debates;) and soon let them see, that all the time they could
redeem (although they sat every day, and sat out the day) would be much too
little maturely to discuss, and deliberately to determine all businesses of
Synods. Ergo, it must needs be a very great hinderance to the proper work of
their Calling, when, once in three years they must necessarily attend the
Convocation (reformed, and restored to the truly Primitive nature, and use) if
they divide any part of that short time to the attendance of Parliament. Thus
far the Examination of all the Answers, to the first Reason, which being the
Principal, I have been the longer in it, as well for the asserting of the
Reason it self, as for examining the strength of the Answers that would, but
cannot enervate or abate the vigor of it.

II. REASON of the House of Commons.
BEcause they do vow and undertake it at their Ordination, when they enter
into holy Orders, that they will give themselves wholely to that Vocation.

I. ANSWER.
This Vow and undertaking in Ministers Ordination is quite mistaken: The words
are in the Bishops Exhortation, not in the Ministers Answer. To this a three
fold Answer is given.
EXAMEN.
Mistaken, and quite mistaken? Why so? Because the words are in the Bishops
Exhortation, not in the Ministers Answer. But where has the House of Commons
yet said, that the words are in the Ministers Answer? Surely not in their
second Reason, against which this Answer is directed. Therefore, this branch of
the Answer to that Reason might have well been spared.

The words are confessed by the Answerer to be used at the Ministers
Ordination. This is enough to justify the House of Commons, and their Reason.
And, what though it be spoken by the Bishop, not by the Minister at that time?
this does not disprove his Vow. Little children utter no words in Baptism;
yet, do they not enter into a Vow, when the Minister declares upon what terms
they be admitted, and the whole action is managed by others?

The Bishop speaks these words at the Ordination of Ministers; We have a good
hope that you have well weighed and pondered these things with your selves,
long before this time, and that you have clearly determined by Gods Grace, to
give your selves wholly to this Vocation, whereunto it has pleased God to call
you, so that (as much as lies in you) you apply your selves wholly to this one
thing, and draw all your cares and studies this way, and to this end.

All this the Ministers hear when they enter into holy Orders. The Bishop
takes it for granted that they have done all this; that they have fully
resolved, and decreed it, (as the Latin has it) long before, and that by
invocating of Gods Grace for performance; which decree beforehand, with
invocation supposed, and consent at present to be admitted into Holy Orders
upon this condition, by their silence witnessed, makes it to amount
(materially, if not formally, quoad omnia) to a Vow, that is, to such an
obligation as engages them to undertake and make good what in this Reason is
affirmed of them. For, I have learned so much out of Calvin, the Civilian, that
sometimes Votum ponitur pro consensu. and no man denies silence, in such an
action, Lexic. Incid.
to be consent. And more than this, the House of Commons say not: for they
speak not of a formal Vow vocally pronounced by the Minister, in that action.

Howbeit, if I may utter my private opinion freely of this point, without
prejudice to the House of Commons, and without engaging them further than
themselves intended, I humbly conceive, that the Church of England, in her
fifth Question propounded by the Bishop in the ordering of Ministers, does
fully intend as much as is contained in those words of the Exhortation before
rehearsed: and, to that Question, the Minister positively answers, I will
endeavor my self so to do, the Lord being my helper. Ergo, he formally
voweth at his Ordination, what is contained in the Second Reason of the House
of Commons.

To clear this, I shall first set down the words of the Question; Will you
be diligent in prayers, and in reading of the holy Scriptures, and in such
studies as help to the knowledge of the same, laying aside the Study of the
World and the Flesh? To this, the party to be ordained answers, I Will
endeavor my self so to do, the Lord being my helper.

Next, I must pray the Readers to consider, that the surest exposition of these
words must needs be found in that Book from whence the words were taken, and
set into the Book of Ordination more briefly than in the Original they be
expressed. All the learned know, that Bucer was the chief man, who at the
request of Cranmer, censured the first Public Leiturgie of Edward 6. whereupon
it was reduced to a better form.

In that first Book, there was no form of Ordination prescribed: but in the
5. 6. Edward 6. it was added. This Exhortation and the Questions and Answers to
them, in our present Book of Ordination, were not borrowed (as some suggest)
out of the Roman Pontifical, but were Verbatim taken out of that grave and
learned Treatise of Bucer entitled, De Ordinat. Legitima Ministrorum Eccles.
Cap. ult. extant in his Script. Anglican. Ergo, the full meaning and latitude
of this Question must be taken thence.

Now the Question is there propounded thus; Tempus omne quod vobis a sacris
Ministeriis publicis and privatis, ac necessaria and frugali corporis cura
superfuerit, id omne precibus and lectione Divinarum Scripturarum, iisque
studiis quae cognitionem Scripturarum, and docendi facultatem adjuvant and
ornant, rejectis a vobis cunctis mundi and carnis studiis and negotiis, feriis
and ludicris, impendetis? The Answer, Impendemus, juvante nos Domino.

So then, the full latitude of the Question (which is contracted in the book
of Ordination) extends to a solemn vow and undertaking on the Ministers part,
when he enters into Holy Orders, to bestow all his time, either in the
exercise of his Office, or fitting himself further for it; and, to lay aside
not only the vanities and pomps of this wicked world (as he vowed to do in
Baptism;) but all secular businesses and employments; necessary provision for
himself and family (which God himself imposes upon all) excepted. And all
this, in his solemn Answer made to the Bishop at his Ordination, the Minister
formally covenanteth and voweth by Gods grace to perform. Which being so,
there can no scruple remain in any impartial man, but that the second Reason
of the House of Commons is true, solid, and concluding against the Bishops
Votes in Parliament, quod erat demonstrandum.

2. ANS. to the second REASON.
The Bishop hopes they will give themselves wholely to that, and not to any
other Trade or Vocation. EXAMEN.
And hope so he cannot, if Bishops may still vote in Parliament. Because they
cannot do that, with profit or safety to the Common wealth, without giving
their minds not to some one other single trade or vocation only, but to every
trade and course of life, so far as to make them complete Satesmen, as has
been showed before. For, what Trade or Vocation is there to be found, which
sometime or other makes not business for the Parliament? And how shall he
give a Vote in it with judgment, that has not a good insight into all the
Mysteries of it.

If it should (as possibly it may) be objected, that by this strict rule, many
of the Nobility, should be excluded? I answer, that if they be not thoroughly
qualified and furnished for that work, the more the pity, because the more the
Common wealth suffers by their insufficiency. Howbeit the ingenuousnesse of
their nature and education, will make them less forward in speaking, and more
diligent in hearing their ancients and men of more gravitie and experience. Nor
is it fit that for such insufficiencies they should be turned out, but rather
remain there as in a School (as we see some of the sons of the Noblemen
do) to train them up to do service there to the King and Kingdom, it being
an honor to which they were borne; whereas Bishops sit there but Precario, and
are out of their Callings all the while.

But, is that all that the Bishop hopes, namely, that the persons to be
ordained will not take another Trade or Vocation upon them? Then belike, if a
Minister do not profess the Trade of a Tailor, he may yet spend part of his
time in Tayloring. He may sometimes give himself to Brewing, so he set not up
a Brewhouse, etc. But surely our Law is so strict in such cases, that it
forbids Ministers to have so much as a Brewhouse or Tan-house, although managed
by others, further than for the necessaries of house keeping; nor otherwise, to
take to Farm or Lease, any Lands or Tenements, albeit the same be occupied by
some other persons, if it be to the Ministers use. 21. Hen. 8 13.

And why so? Is it because the Laws do envy the wealth of Spiritual
persons? That were an uncharitable surmise. The end was, that Ministers might
have no occasions of a vocation from their Studies and Ministerial Function,
but have more opportunity to bestow themselves wholely thereupon, according to
what they promised and undertook at their Ordination, for the more quiet and
virtuous increase and maintenance of Divine Service, and preaching and teaching
of the Word of God, etc. as the entrance into that Statute does express it.

So then, if we consider Bishops, according to what the Common wealth expects
from them in her Laws, as well as what the Church binds them unto in their
Ordination, as Ministers of the Church of England, they may not regularly, give
themselves not only wholly to any Trade, but not at all to any employment but
the Ministry, and to that which is necessarily required to fit them for it,
and support them in it.

3. ANS. to the second REASON.
Wholely in a Moral, and not in a Mathematical sense, that will admit no
Latitude: else there might the same exception be taken against their just care
of provision for their household affairs. EXAMEN.
If they by their Ordination be bounded Morally; the House of Commons will
never, I presume, trouble themselves about the Mathematicality of the Vow. Nor
will I be so bold, to say of this distinction, of the words of the Exhortation
in question, as the Author of the Holy Table, Name, and Thing, does of a like
subtle interpretation of a Rubric, newly minted by his Antagonist, praying
him to remember, Page. 54.
that the Rubric was written for the use of the English, not of the Gypsies or
Egyptians. Yet this I suppose I may freely and truly say, that neither Learned
and Pious Martin Bucer, nor the plain meaning Church of England, which
borrowed that Exhortation from Bucer, ever so much as dreamt of the
Mathematickes, or of that distinction here given, in those words of the
Exhortation; but meant honestly and plainly to let all Ministers know, that,
without distinctions or tricks, they are to bind themselves wholly and
absolutely, Mathematically as well as Morally, to that Vocation of the
Ministry; further than the necessity of livelihood enforces them to spend
some time to supply the wants and necessary occasions of them and theirs. And
to this I may, I hope, without offense make bold to add (because I have learnt
it from the same Author, of the Holy Table, etc. page 52. as he out of
Aristotle, Anal. Post. Lib. 1. Cap. 12) (...). You must not dispute in terms
of Geometry; with those that verse not in Geometry; otherwise you will show
your self but a foul and sophistical disputant, as that Author has it.

But let the distinction be as it will; thus much is clearly gotten by it,
that the Answerer hereby yields, that, Morally Bishops cannot vote in
Parliament, without crossing the expectation of, and condition propounded by
the Church, in admitting them to Holy Orders; and that they vote there and
employ themselves in secular affairs Mathematically only. Surely, if their
voting there (for that we know is the thing to be asserted by him in his
Answers, because that is it which is opposed in the Reasons of the House of
Commons) consist not with the Rules of Morality, it is no great credit for them
to retain that honor, nor will it at length bring in much comfort to them,
when they must yield up their accounts to God, that they were never forbidden
it according to the strict Laws of the Mathematickes, although indeed Morally
they were bound from it.

And what, must they needs be debarred from the just care of provision of
their household affairs, if denied votes in Parliament, and liberty unto
secular employments, to enable them so to vote? Nay, God himself not only
allows, but imposes upon all men a care of their family-businesse and
government, Prove. 27.23. and he that is negligent herein, is pronounced worse
than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8. God has not divided this from any Calling, in
ordinary course. And what he has joined, no man may separate. Therefore, both
the Church in her Ordination (as appeared by the larger expression thereof
before out of Bucer) and the Kingdom, in her Laws (as is also manifest in the
Statute before alleged) excepteth this care of provision for their households,
when yet both Church and Kingdom bind them to give themselves (in all other
particulars) wholly to the Calling, study and exercise of the Ministry, which
they have received in the Lord, Collos. 4 17
that they may fulfill it.

III. REAS. of the House of Commons.
BEcause Councels and Canons in several ages do forbid them to meddle with
Secular Affairs.

I. ANSWER. To this 3. Reason a five fold Answer is directed.

Councels and Canons against Bishops Votes in Parliament, were never in use in
this Kingdom, and therefore they are abolished by the Statute, of 25. Hen. 8.
II. ANSWER.
So are they by the same Statute, because the Lords have declared that the
Bishops vote hereby the Laws and Statutes of this Realm; and all Canons that
cross with those, are there abolished. III. ANSWER.
So are they by the same Statute, as thwarting the Kings Prerogative to call
Bishops by summons to vote in Parliament. IV. ANSWER.
So are they by the Vote of the House of Commons. 21. Maii 1641. because they
are not confirmed by the Act of Parliament. EXAMEN.
I put all these Answers together, because they will not need distinct
Examinations, they being much what coincident, at least in the maine scope,
which is; to keep this third Reason out of the Court, as being no sufficient
evidence in Law, to eject the Defendants out of their holds in Parliament,
against some of their desires.

It is acknowledged, that no Councels or Canons, not confirmed by Parliament
have, here in England, any power to bind the subjects either of the Clergy, or
of the Laity; as has been clearly Resolved upon the Question, this
Parliament, in both houses.

But whether the House of Commons refer to any Canons so confirmed, I may not
take upon me to affirm or deny; because they have been pleased to forbear
to cite those to which they do refer. Nor can it be, I think, denied, that
any Canons were in use within forty years before the Statute of 25. Hen. 8.19.
(to which I conceive the Answerer has relation) against Bishops votes in
Parliament: and so, Bishops be shot free from such Canons, if urged against
them in that capacity, as binding Laws.

But what need the Answerer to have taken all this pains of multiplying of
Answers to show that no Councels or Canons not ratified by Parliaments, be
binding to Bishops, in this or any case whatsoever? For, where has the House
of Commons so urged them? Surely, not here. They have not vouched them as Laws
to thrust the Bishops out of the House of Peers, as sitting there against the
Laws already in being; but, as rational Arguments and prudentiall Grounds, to
induce the Parliament to use their Legislative power to abrogate the Laws (if
any be) for their sitting there; seeing that many godly Bishops in former Ages
have made diverse religious and wholesome Constitutions and Provisions against
such exorbitant usurpations of the Clergy. For however those Canons be not
formally obligatory here, yet are they really worthy the Consideration of those
who have a power to reduce Bishops by a binding Law to that which heretofore so
many learned and pious men of their own Coat and Calling, have pronounced and
decreed to be just and necessary.

Further than this the House of Commons be not engaged. And who knows not that
the Bishops and their Officers have, and still do urge diverse Canons of
foreign Councels and domestique too, that never were confirmed by Parliament)
upon both Clergy and Laity, when such Canons make for the Bishops or their
Officers. And these must take effect, like the Laws of the Medes and Persians.
And yet now, when they see such Canons turned upon themselves, although not as
Laws, but as rational arguments only, how witty they be in putting off all by
the Statute of 25. Hen. 8. which makes nothing at all against the House of
Commons, or this Reason produced by them!

And what offense, or incongruity was it in the House of Commons, to urge
Canons and Councels against the Bishops in this particular, when no Divine that
ever complained of such usurpations of the Clergy has held it incongruous to
press the very same against them? I will not trouble my self or others with
many instances; that alone shall suffice, which has been before Exam. of the
first Answe to the first Reason.
alleged out of Matthew Parker Archbishop of Canterbury. That Prelate taxing
the excessive exorbitances, and scandalous courses of the Clergy, in the
reign of Richard 1. was not afraid to give this as the chief (if not the
only) reason of all that prodigious breaking out, Quod contra Orthodoxorum
Patrum decreta etc. that contrary to the decrees of the Orthodoxe Fathers, the
Clergy did too much intermeddle in worldly businesses.

If then, so great a Prelate did well in laying this home to the charge of the
Clergy, that their not regarding the Decrees and Canons of former Councels,
was the maine cause of all the evils committed by them; it cannot unbecome the
House of Commons assembled in Parliament, and passing a Bill against Bishops
Votes in Parliament, to produce and use the Canons and Councels, of Bishops
themselves against such courses, held on and maintained by our Bishops against
the judgment, and solemn determinations of their own Predecessors, in the
Prelacy in all the Churches of Christ.

As for the Declaration of the Lords, that the Bishops Vote in Parliament by
the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, I meddle not with it, because as I am
ignorant of the Laws and Statutes by which they vote, so am I not acquainted
with what the Lords have declared thereupon. Only I have heard, that diverse
Abbots voted as anciently in Parliament as Bishops, yet are taken away. Yea,
this Answerer, has informed me, Answer to Reason 7.
that anciently the Bishops were assisted in Parliament; with a double number
of Mitred Abbots and Priors. But Sir Edward Cook could find no more in the
Parliament Rolls but twenty seven Abbots and two Priors, Commentary on
Littleton Institutes Sec. 138. Nor do I know the difference of the Tenures of
the one or of the other; or why in regard of original right, Bishops should
rather vote in Parliament than Abbots and Priors, so long as those Orders
continued in being. That great Master of Law, before named tells us, that both
Abbots and Bishops were called to Parliament by the Kings Writ, else, they came
not there, Ibid.
although they held of the King Per Baroniam. Witness the Abbot of the
Monastery of Feversham founded by King Stephen, who albeit he held by Barony,
yet for that he was not called by Writ he never sat in Parliament. And
perhaps, it is not simply a Barony that gives all the Bishops a right to fit
there, for I have read somewhere, that all the Bishops of King Henry 8. his
foundation have not Baronies annexed to them. Yet they are called by Writ, and
vote as Peers in Parliament.

But, be their right what it will, I hear nothing from the Answerer how far
this right extended. The Lords have, I believe, declared, in this very
Parliament, that the Bishops have no votes in causa Sanguinis; and, I think
the Bishops have found it to be so. And to my ignorance it is a scruple,
whether they had originally any liberty of Votes in Civil and State affairs,
and were not restrained merely to matters of Religion.

Ibid
The reason of my scruple is, because I find in the same Commentaries of Sir
Edward Cook (for I confess, I aspire not so high as to look into the Roll
it self) a transcript of an ancient Record forbidding them to intermeddle,
Roll. Pat. de An 18. H. 3. 1 16 17.
upon pain of forfeiting their Baronies, with any matters concerning the
Crown, the person of the King, his Estate, or the State of his Council: the
words are these; Mandatum est omnibus Episcopis qui conventuri sunt apud
Gloucestriam die Sabbati in Crastin' Sanctae Katherinae, firmiter inhibendo,
quod sicut Baronias suas quas de Rege tenent, Vide Pol. Virg. in H. 3.^
diligunt, nullo modo praesumant Concilium tenere de aliquibus quae Coronam
Regis pertinent, vel quae Personam Regis, vel statum suum, vel statum Concilii
sui contingunt; scituri pro certo, quod si fecerint, Rex inde se capiet ad
Baronias suas. Test Rege apud Hereford, 23. November. etc. This was in the 8. of
Hen. 3. and, in a great Council or Parliament; In Hen. 3 ad an. 1234.
not in a private Council of Domestics of his own Court, as Polydore Virgil,
and Matthew of Westminster would insinuate.

Touching the Kings Prerogative, it is too sacred to be handled by common or
private hands. Far be it from me to set bounds to it, or to wade far in it.
Only, I believe that the Kings Prerogative is for the good of his people: and,
if any person unworthy and altogether unfit (and therefore incapable) should,
by the Prerogative Royal, be called to, and employed in any place or office of
trust, wherein the whole Kingdom is interressed, this were an abuse of the
Prerogative, caused by Him that did misinforme the King; and there is no doubt,
but a just King who should be so abused, would soon upon better information,
recall such a Grant, or Writ. If then the Bishops shall be found to be persons
altogether unfit for such high honor and trust (wherein all the Kingdom is so
deeply concerned) I only ask (I determine not) what thwarting of the Kings
Prerogative it could justly be said to be, to pass an Act with the Kings
Soit fait, etc. unto it, that no more such Writs shall henceforth issue to any
Bishop of the Kingdom.

5. ANS. to the third REASON.
This Argument was in a manner deserted by Master Perpoint, and confessed to be
but an Argumentum ad hominem. EXAMEN.
It is very true, that Noble Gentleman, after he had faithfully and like
himself discharged the trust committed to him by the House of Commons in
writing, he added a few words, in the close of that Conference with the Lords
to this effect; that how ever he was commanded to urge this Reason taken from
Councels and Canons, yet the House did only borrow these Arrows out of the
Bishops own Quivers, to use them as weapons against themselves; not with any
purpose to bind the House of Commons or other the subjects by them.

This was not in any sort a desertion of the Argument, but a seasonable
explanation of the House of Commons in what sense they used it. And were it but
Argumentum ad hominem, yet was it ad illos homines whom it chiefly and most
nearly concerned, to wit the Bishops themselves, and had force enough in my
apprehension, to silence them, if they should offer to open their mouths in
defense of holding their places and votes in Parliament, any longer. For, if
they would but consider what so many famous Bishops and Councels have said, and
decreed against Clergy men's interposing in, and mingling themselves with
Civil and Secular affairs (which yet be not of that import and consequence,
as these in question be) common ingenuity would make them to lay their hands
upon their mouths, and leave the discussion and determination hereof to others
who are not interessed in it, and therefore more likely to be less partial in
resolving of it.

IV. REASON of the House of Commons.
BEcause the twenty four Bishops have a dependency upon the Archbishops, and
because of their Canonical obedience to them.

1. ANSWER.
They have no dependency upon the Archbishops, but in points of Appeal, and
Visitation only. And owe them no obedience, To this Reason a two fold Answe is
framed.
but in these two points. None at all in Parliament, where they are pares their
Equals: And, as Bracton tells us, Par in Parem non habet imperium. What has
Canonical obedience to do with a vote in Parliament, declared in this Bill to
be no Ecclesiastical, but a secular affair? EXAMEN.
The Reason consists of two branches, dependency and obedience; both which
render Bishops unmeet to vote in Parliament. For, where these two relations
meet, make but the Archbishops of a side, and it will be easy to draw the rest
the same way. The Answer endeavors to take off both at one pull, because there
is neither dependence upon, nor obedience due to the Archbishops but in two
points, Appeals, and Visitations, which no way concern Parliaments or the
dispose of their votes therein, where they be all Equals, and where the Vote
is only a Secular Act.

To examine the truth of the Answer so far as it denies all dependency or
obedience, but in Appeals, and Visitations, were not altogether impertinent;
if it were a time of leisure, because it is with so much confidence denied. Be
there no reserved Cases pertaining to the Metropolitan, no Prerogative wills,
no Inhibitions that may run, and command in the Diocesans Territories and
Jurisdiction, save only in Cases of Appeals, and during the time of
Metropoliticall Visitations? Does not the Archbishop command the several
Bishops, upon diverse occasions, to publish diverse things, whether decreed in
Synodes, or received from supreme Authority?

Has the Metropolitan no power to correct and censure the delinquencies of the
Bishops of his Province, and to command them, by virtue of their Canonical
Obedience, to be more vigilant and diligent, when he finds them slack in
their Office; to enjoyne them silence and obedience, if they contest and ruffle
with his Grace etc. to give other senses and interpretations of Rubricks and
other matters contained in the Liturgy, than the Bishop does, so he expound
nothing contrary to the Book; and is not the Bishop to be concluded by it? It
were easy to add many more particulars, which cannot be reduced to Appeals
or Visitations. Therefore here the Answerer came short in his reckoning.

But he that desires to look abroad and to see more of this, may consult
Lancelott. Perusin. Institut. Iur. Can. Lib. 1. Tit. 5. De Episcopis and summo
Pontif. Cap. Ad hos. in the addition of Io. Bapt. where it is said, in
multiplicibus casibus Archiepiscopus in subditos Episcopos ordinariam habet
jurisdictionem, ut in C. pastoralis de offi. ordin. and Sylvest. ponit
duodecim. And if these be not enough, he may also see Hostiensis sum. li. 1. de
offic. ordin. where there be more cases (even eighteen in number) expressed in
certain verses, which are there likewise interpreted by the same Author of
those sums Henricus de Segusio.

Officium varium, forus, appellatio, crimen
Peccans, non parens, res, consultatio, deses
Praesul, Canonici tumidi, sententia nequam.
Visitat, indulget Custos quia Papa dat usus,
Permutat socijs suspectum cumque remittit.
Casibus his Primas Subjectos, forsan.
subjectio Prasules arcet.
I forbear to mention our own Lindwood, and many more. These may suffice to
show in how many things Bishops have dependence upon, and may be obnoxious to
their Metropolitan, and how many ways the Archbishop can meet with them, if
they go not his way in all things that he is set upon.

And were it true, that there is no dependency upon, nor obedience due to the
Archbishop, but in Appeals, and Visitations, as it is a truth that these have
in themselves no reference to Votes in Parliament: yet, who knows not what
influence an active and pragmaticall Archbishop has into the Votes of all his
Suffragans, whom he can pleasure or displease as he lists, as they Vote with
him, or dissent from him, after intimation or insinuation of his mind in
private to them?

Indeed, if we could imagine Bishops and Archbishops to be so complete in
sincerity and sanctity as their high Calling bespeaks them, there were little
strength in this Reason of the House of Commons. But, as the Prelates be men,
and not free from that which is humane, so the House of Commons conceived it
not undecent or uncharitable to insinuate something more than is plainly
expressed to such an Honorable and Intelligent Assembly of Lords: which reason
as it is, has force enough in it to weigh with rational men; however, for the
reverence they bare to the Ministerial function, the House held it fitter to
leave somewhat to be tacitly understood, than to speak all out that is
couched under it.

2. ANSWER to the fourth REASON.
This Argument reaches not the two Archbishops, discharged in the Rubricke
from this Oath: and therefore is no reason for the passing of this Bill. EXAMEN.
No Reason? I am sure it reaches twenty four Bishops home enough although
two Archbishops should slip Collar, which one of them cannot, and I think the
other shall not. And the Answerer may be pleased to remember that the House of
Commons brought up Reasons, Why Bishops ought not to Vote in Parliament.

It cannot be denied but that in the maine body of their Reasons they included
Archbishops too. And it is true, this argument reaches not to them. What
then? did the House undertake to strike home even unto Archbishops, in every
one of their Reasons? Where does that appear? It is enough that they have
sufficiently done it in all the rest foregoing. If the Answerer think
otherwise, he shall be sure to meet with more Arguments against them, in the
Reasons following. Here indeed he has sufficiently confuted this fourth
Reason, as to Archbishops; but it was not their good hap to get ought by the
bargain, because the House of Commons thought not fit to include them within
the compass of the Argument, which is bent directly against Bishops only: and
it is the unhappiness of the Answerer, to go without his Trophee, even where
he made himself sure of the Victory; for he has fought with a shadow.

5. REASON of the House of Commons.
BEcause they are but for their lives, and therefore are not fit to have
Legislative power over the honors, inheritances, persons, and liberties of
others.

I. ANSWER.
Bishops are not for their lives only, To this Reason a 5. fold Answer is
shaped.
but for their successors also, in the Land and Honor that pertain to their
places, as the Earls and Barons also are for their successors, in their own
Lands and honors: And, holding their Lands in fee simple, may with as good
Reason Vote in the Honors, inheritance, persons, and liberties of others, as
others may and do in theirs. EXAMEN.
When the House of Commons says, that Bishops are but for their lives, I
conceive the House to mean, that Bishops have no right to place in Parliament
but what dies with them, (as to their heirs,) without hope that their sons
shall after succeed them in that dignity by virtue of their birthright, or of
the fathers sitting in Parliament before them. And that therefore, In the
fourth of his Reign, Case of Tenures. 35. a.
Bishops being at first but casually mounted to that height and extent of
power, by William the Conqueror, the more to endeere and oblige them upon all
occasions to serve him and his successors in Parliament, they cannot
(rationally and according to the principles of Policy and State) be hoped to be
so careful and resolute in disposing of their Votes, and in maintaining the
privilege, and honor of Parliaments as Temporal Lords may well be presumed
and expected to be. For these being by birthright and the fundamental Laws
of the Kingdom, Lords of Parliament, and one of the Estates of the Kingdom
(without whom a Law regularly cannot palse) they will be more active and
zealous for the good of their posterity that are sure to succeed them in the
same place and Honor, and to share in the benefit of the prudent and faithful
dispose of their present suffrage.

But now the Answerer, denying the Bishops to be for their lives only, and
affirming them to be for their successors, also, etc. waives the sense and
intention of the House of Commons, and diverts his Reader from the strength of
their Argument. For, he tells us, that Bishops are for their successors, as a
kind of Corporation in Law. It is true that a Bishop is a Corporation to some
uses, but that he is so, in respect of his place and Vote in Parliament, the
Answerer has yet neither made nor offered any proof at all. The Bishop is
called thither by Writ to counsel the King, upon presumption of his personal
sufficiency and fidelity: but ubi gentium, does it appear, that by virtue of
the fundamental laws of the Kingdom, the Bishops must needs sit there as a
Corporation, without which the Lords House cannot be full? Is it not only from
Grace that Bishops were first allowed place there? And if so, they are not
immovable out of their places, and therefore they do not necessarily take up
those places for their successors.

But suppose they sit there for their successors, yet will it be very hard to
suppose the next thing too, that Bishops are in the same manner there for their
successors, in the Land and Honor that pertain to their places, as the Earls
and Barons are for their successors in their own Lands and Honors. For, is
there no difference between Successors that usually have no natural
legitimate relation to the present Bishops in any degree of consanguinity or
affinity; and those of Earls and Barons, which are their proper heirs at Law,
and may claim and must enjoy the same Honor which their Ancestors have held
before them, if not tainted in blood? No difference between those that can no
more be denied place in Parliament (without confusion of all,) than the
fundamental Laws of the Kingdom and the government thereof can be turned up
by the Roots; and those who first crept in by favor, to serve a Conquerors
turn, by taking off their dependence upon the Pope and fastening it upon
himself, and can derive no higher for sitting (as now they do) in the House
of Peers, than an Act of Parliament, if so high: and therefore by another Act
of Parliament, may be discharged?

Now, where the difference of the Title is so great, between a Bishop and an
Earl or Temporal Baron, both to their Lands and Honors, and Votes in
Parliament; I much fear that the Nobility and Temporal Lords will hardly in
their House allow this doctrine, which yet is fitter for them to consider of,
than for me to confute: and therefore I leave it: only with this; that, if the
Lords shall find cause to reject this position as heterodox, and deny the
Bishops to be in Parliament for their successors in Lands and Honors in the
same manner, or upon as good and immovable title as the Nobility be for
theirs; then, the Reason of the House of Commons does stand yet good, as to
Earls and Barons, and it is no way fit that Bishops should have the same
Legislative power over the Honors, inheritances, persons, and liberties of
Earls and Barons, as these have, or ought to have, over those of Bishops.

As for Bishops holding their Lands in Fee simple, I can say little to it,
because my skill is very simple in Tenures. Only I have been told that
Fee-simple, Littletons Instit. l. 1. c. 1. 5. 1. Cokus in Little. ibid. Sect. 5.
is called in Latin foedum simplex, and idem est quod haereditas legitima vel
hareditas pura. So that to speak properly, Every man that has a lawful estate
in Fee-simple has it either by descent, or purchase: neither of which ways,
for ought I know, can the Bishop derive his Title.

But perhaps in some sense, wherewith I am not acquainted, the Bishops may be
said to hold in Fee-simple, as the word may be taken in a larger and less
proper acception: Viz. Because he holds Lands in fee in right of his Church:
but this is not properly Fee-simple, because he holds them not in his own
right; and the right he has in them, dies with him as to his heirs. But I
have heard, that ordinarily, he that is seized of any Lands in Fee, in right of
his Church, his tenure is either that which the Lawyers call Tenure per divine
service, when the Lands are given upon condition that the Donee perform some
divine Service certain expressed in the Gift, or the Lands to revert: or else,
it is Littl. Institut. li. 2. cap. 6.
en Frank annoigne, when Lands are freely given, without any divine service
certain to be performed for them.

And further; albeit the Bishops are usually said to hold of the King per
Baroniam: yet this happily may be meant rather of the Honor affixed to their
place, which works it up to a Dignity, than of the Lands pertaining to them,
which they also hold in Frank almoigne, as well as the inferior Clergy. Sir
Henry Spel. Not. in Council. v rolam. sub Ossa.


Hereupon it is, that in our Municipall Laws, our Bishops, for that they enjoy
their means and maintenance by the bounty and Alms of Kings, are called
Barons Regis Eleemosynarij, The Kings Lords Almesmen, or Barons of the Kings
Almoignry, as the Almesmen at WINDSOR are called The Kings poor Knights: and
the Reason is rendered out of Ranulphus de Glanvill, (that famous Judge in Henry
the second his time,) quia eorum Baroniae sunt de Eleemosyna Domini Regis and
Antecessorum ejus, De Legib. Angl. l. 7. ca. 1. in Calic.
Because their BARONIES are of the Alms of the KING and his Ancestors.

Which being so, my conceit is that (what Reason so ever they have on their
side, yet) at this time especially, this free and high language, (that they
holding their Lands in Fee-simple may with as good Reason Vote in the Honors,
inheritance, persons and liberties of others, as others may and do in theirs)
might have well been forborne without prejudice to their Cause. For, if
Almesmen be admitted to Vote in Parliament, it will be their wisdom, I take
it, not to be so much elated as to enter into terms of comparison with the
highest; not excepting their Benefactors, or Founders themselves, even in one
of the highest points of honor and power.

2. ANSWER to the fifth REASON.
Many Peers have been created for their lives only, and the Earl of Surrey
for the life of his Father, who yet voted in this House. EXAMEN.
But have any (except Bishops) been created Peers for life, or otherwise,
that were not men of great estates and inheritance, or at least of
extraordinary birth and sufficiency? Of such eminency were the Earls of
Surrey. But when you mention an Earl of Surrey, whom do you mean? Is it
intended of the Noble Family of the Howards descended from the Mowbrayes? If of
these, you will hardly find any such, that being an honor not so frequently
communicated in former times. Indeed I I find it mentioned that John Lord
Mowbray (Son of John, Grandchild to Thomas Duke of Norfolk) was, by King
Henry the sixth in the life time of his Father, created Earl of Surrey, and
was, after his Fathers death, Duke of Norfolk: but that he was a Peer of
Parliament for, or in the life of his Father, I find not. And I have been
told by a Noble branch of that Renowned stem, and now a Peer, that there was
no Earl of Surrey, made a Lord of Parliament upon such terms. But whether so
or so, it matters not much; this being but one single instance.

And how ever you may perhaps instance (when you please) in others not so
highly descended, who have had the honor to Vote as Peers in Parliament, yet
they were such whose interests in the public, and share in posterity must
needs weigh down any of those that the House of Commons desire to have removed
out of the Lords House. For however, diverse of them be well lined with
wealth, yet the House of Commons are in Parliament to look upon them, as the
Laws do; to wit, as upon Almesmen that are but for their own lives: and
surely I believe it will be very hard for the Answerer to give so much as any
one instance of an Almesman that has been allowed to Vote in Parliament. Not,
that my purpose is hereby to disparage any of that Order, in reference to their
function, or present honors, but only to speak of them as the Law it self
does, merely and only for bolting out of the strength of this branch of the
Answer to the Reasons of the House of Commons against the continuance of the
Bishops place and Votes as Peers in Parliament.

3. ANSWER, to the fifth REASON.
The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, are chosen for one Parliament only, and
yet use their Legislative power. Nor will their being elected difference their
Cause; for the Lords use that power in a greater eminence, who are not elected.
EXAMEN.
The Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, sit not there as single men, but as the
representative body of all the Commons of England; each of them give their
Votes with reference to all those from whom they are sent. Besides, they are by
the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom to be there, qua tales, however the
Election of the particular persons be arbitrary and contingent. And although
those very persons may never (perhaps) serve again, yet the right and
inheritance of the Commons of England (whence every member of that House
deriveth) never dies, so long as the Kingdom lives. Therefore who ever, for
the time has the honor to be a Member of that society, Voteth in right of
the Kingdom, not of a particular man.

As for the LORDS, although they neither be elected, nor do Vote for any but
for themselves and their own posterity, yet they have this privilege from an
higher Original, than the Bishops can prove themselves to be descended from;
namely (as we said before) not precario from Grace and favor, but from the
fundamental Laws and Constitutions of the Kingdom. Besides, their blood,
breeding, interest in the public, and care for their posterity borne to so
high places, must needs assure us more of their wise, careful and zealous
managing of their Votes in Parliament, than can, by any prudentiall or moral
grounds, be hoped from the Prelates.

4. ANSWER to the fifth REASON.
A Burgess, that has a Freehold, but for term of life only, may Vote and
assent to a Law in Parliament. EXAMEN.
Cokus in Litt^. Instit. Sect. 133.
The Free hold of a Burgess, is not by the tenure of Frank almoigne, (of which
the present debate is) for no Layman can hold any Land in that tenure. He is
therefore in that regard somewhat more capable.

But however this may be, yet that which was but a little before said to the
next precedent Answer, will serve here also. A Burgess does not Vote in the
House of Commons as a Freeholder (although happily none but Freeholders or
Freemen be eligible) but as a person chosen by and for a Borough which has
right to send Burgesses to Parliament; and being there, he Votes by the
fundamental Laws of the Realm. Therefore it is not material whether his
Freehold be for life, or for longer time. When Bishops show the like warrant
and Commission, or the like fundamental constitutions of the Kingdom for
their Voting in Parliament; then, this Answer may be welcome to the House of
Commons.

5. ANS. to the fifth REASON.
No such exception was ever heard of in the Diets of Germany, the Corteses of
Spain, or the three Estates of France, where the Prelates Vote in all these
points with the Nobility and the Commons. EXAMEN.
What exception has been taken to Bishops in other Kingdoms, is unknown to
me, and perhaps to the Answerer also: Unless he have seen all the Records and
Journals of all those Kingdoms. Nor do I believe that the House of Commons
had any Reference to other Nations, nor do intend to be presidented by them.
As if, because Bishops have this privilege elsewhere, therefore this must be
a Reason sufficient for the continuing their possession of it here. Nay, every
Nation has its proper Laws and Customs, and though it be no shame to borrow
any thing that is better than our own, for the public Weal; yet it is no
Answer to a Reason drawn from experienced inconveniency at home, to say that
this Reason was never heard of in foreign States.

But yet I think, if the matter were thoroughly examined, it will appear that
in those Kingdoms, Bishops have a kind of Sovereignty over their several
Territories, and are Temporal Governors as well as spiritual Pastors. And,
by the fundamental Constitutions of those several Empires or Kingdoms, those
Bishops do make one of the Estates of the Kingdom without which a Law cannot
pass: Sure I am, it is so in Germany, and I believe so or the rest, although
with some difference: for they may make a third Estate, and yet not be secular
or sovereign Governors over their several Ditions.

Now, all know that it is far otherwise with the Bishops of England: and
therefore this plea will not be of any force to break the strength of this
Reason of the House of Commons, till the Prelates can translate our Laws and
Government into that of those Kingdoms from whence these presidents are
impertinently borrowed.

6. REASON of the House of Commons.
BEcause of Bishops dependency and expectancy of Translations to places of
greater profit.

I. ANSWER.
This Argument supposes all Kings, and all Bishops to be very faulty, if they
take the tune of their Votes in Parliament, from these dependencies and
expectances. EXAMEN.
This Argument taxes not Kings, but medles only with Bishops. It is true,
Kings bring them in, and can be wise enough to serve themselves, if they meet
with men that will put themselves to sale for preferment. And to speak
plainly, the receding from the ancient way of Electing Bishops by the Church
is no small occasion and means to byas them, and to engage them still to go
that way, which they perceive him that has the power of electing, and of
advancing them higher, to be inclined, so that, if a King should desire to
draw them into a wrong course, they scarce know how to deny him, nor would many
of them stick much at it; for they being men, and sometimes none of the best,
are not only subject to like temptations and failings that others be, but more
ready and officious to serve turns than many times Princes do require.

And although the House of Commons do not always take the tune of Bishops
Votes in every Parliament from these dependances and expectances; yet, when
they see how much Bishops, that have but mean Bishoprics, do continually
labor to obtain greater, and to get up higher; and then compare these
ambitious practices with the tunes of their Votes in most things which concern
the more perfect Reformation of Religion and the Clergy, and the promoting of
the power of Godliness, etc. they cannot but find to their grief that Bishops
Votes in Parliament, and their ambitious practices elsewhere, do too often
consort and come too near a perfect harmony; and that therefore, there is
little cause to pronounce them faultlesse.

But wherein lies the pith of this Answer, or, how takes it off the strength of
the Reason? Must the Reason needs be false because it supposes that, not which
is impossible, but which in Civility is not fit to be spoken out in plain
language? The Answerer himself does not deny the thing to be possible:
therefore he does not Answer or overthrow the Reason, but only elude it by
starting up a Captious supposition which he thinks none will dare to own. The
Reason then is never the worse for this evasion. Let us try his next.

2. ANSWER to the fixth REASON.
This may be said of all the Kings great Officers, of all the Noble Members of
both Houses, who may be conceived, as well as Bishops, to have their
expectances, and consequently to be deprived by this Reason of Voting in
Parliament. EXAMEN.
Yet this answers not the Argument, but only endeavors to render it odious
to those that were to be Judges of it, and so to do what may be to bring a
prejudice upon it. It is not, I confess, impossible that the Nobility should
be liable to the same temptation: Laudabilis enim vena suam servit originem,
and fideliter posteris tradit quae in se gloriosae transmissione promenuit.
Cassiodor.
yet it is not probable they should so soon be borne down before it. For,
first, their Estates, generally are better, and so they have not that need to
snatch at such beggars baits.

Next, their blood and Honor mounteth their minds higher and fixes their eyes
on more Noble prize, not without disdain to stoop at flies. Lastly, their
large share in the Public, and the strong desire they have to lay a foundation
for future glory to themselves, and happiness to their posterity, will make
them scorn such poor and base mercinarinesse, unworthy of men borne to honor
and striving to purchase more by generous ways, not by the sale of Nobleness
and conscience. Nobiles praemium, haud pradam petunt.

3. ANSWER to the sixth REASON.
This Argument reaches not at the two Archbishops, and so falls short of the
Votes, which are to be taken away by this Bill. EXAMEN.
If it had appeared that this particular Reason was intended against the
Archbishops, The Answer had been pertinent. But seeing the House had no
meaning, to reach so far at every blow, but contented it self that only
some of the Reasons came home to both of them also, that which was said before
in examining the last Answer to the fourth Reason, is abundantly sufficient to
hold up the reputation of this Argument against the aspersion cast upon it by
this elusory Answer. And yet it does reach one of the Archbishops, by the
Answerers good favor. An Archbishop of York would perhaps do somewhat, in
hope of a Translation to Canterbury.

7. REASON of the House of Commons.
THe several Bishops have of late much encroached upon the Consciences and
properties of the Subject. And they and their successors will be much
encouraged still to encroach, and the Subject will be much discouraged from
complaining against such encroachments, if twenty six of that Order be to
be Judges upon these complaints. The same Reason extends to their Legislative
power, in any Bill to pass for the reformation of their power upon any
emergent inconvenience by it.

ANSWER.
This Argument fights not against Bishops Votes in Parliament, but against
their Votes in Convocation, where (if any where) they have encroached upon the
Consciences and properties of the Subject: Nor yet at the Vote of such Bishops
there, as are not guilty of this offense. Nor need the subject to be
discouraged in complaining against the like grievances, though 26. of that
Order continue Judges. For they shall not Vote as Judges when they are legally
charged. And if they should Vote, what were that to the purpose when the lay
Peers are still four to one? The Bishops (assisted with a double number of
Mitred Abbots and Priors) could not hinder the Laws made against the Court of
Rome, the Alien Cardinals and Prelates, the Provisors, the Suitors to the Popes
Consistories under Edw. 3. Rich. 2. and Hen. 4. Much more may those emergent
exorbitances of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction be soon curbed and redressed
in this inequality of Votes between the Temporal and Spiritual Lords. So as
this Argument does not so much hurt the Votes, as it quells the courage of the
Bishops, who may justly fear by this and the next Argument, that the taking
away of their Votes is but a kind of forerunner to the abolishing of their
jurisdiction. EXAMEN.
I know not the Reason, but so it is, that the Answerer has here thrust
together all he had to say, into one Answer; although the particulars whereof
it consists be many, and of various kinds: whereas before he was pleased to
branch out one Answer into many, when yet most of the branches were coincident.
Not troubling my self to find out the Mystery, I shall make bold a little to
change my Method also to follow him, or rather to distribute his Answers for
him, and then to take a distinct view of the several limbs thereof a part.

ANSWER.
This Argument fights not against Bishops Votes in Parliament, but against
their Votes in Convocation, where (if any where) they have encroached upon the
consciences and liberties of the Subjects. EXAMEN.
If this Argument fights not against Bishops Votes in Parliament, why then is
it said, in the end of this Answer, that Bishops may justly fear, by this and
the next Argument that the taking away of their votes is but a kind of
forerunner to the abolishing of their Jurisdiction? For, what Votes are here
meant, but those in Parliament? and what need any fear of that here, when it
is confessed, that this Argument fights not against Votes in Parliament?

But, I p sse this, because contradictions in such a cause, and in an Answer of
so much length, dropping out of some men's pens, need be no matter of any
admiration, or of much stay upon it.

But what will it avail the Bishops that this Argument meets not with them in
the Parliament House, so long as by his own confession (although a modest [if]
would a little modifie it) it finds them out so palpably in Convocation.
There, indeed, their guilt is of a double dye, for which they are now (upon
examination and resolution of both Houses of Parliament) condemned as having
voted and determined many matters contrary to the Kings Prerogative, Ex Archi.
Parl.
to the fundamental Laws and Statutes of the Realm, to the right of
Parliaments, to the property and liberty of the Subjects, and matters tending
to sedition and of dangerous consequence; And as for encroaching upon and
invading the conscience, let that absurd, amphibolous, injurious, excerable
Oath enjoined in the sixth Canon of their late Holy Synod stand for a
monument, to the eternal infamy of the Composers of it, and factors, in it.

Now, the Bishops do or ought Nulli sacerdoti liceat Canones ignorare did. 38
cap. Nulli.
to know that if a Judge be once taken tardy and guilty of corruption and
wicked judgment, he is for ever presumed to be corrupt, and therefore unmeet
to be trusted in another Court any more.

For, it is in Maxim both in the Civil, and Canon Laws, which holds in all
Laws, Reg. juris. 8.
Semel malus semper praesumitur esse malus. And this presumption is not only
praesumptio hominis, or praesumptio facti, but praesumptio juris too, quia jus
sic praesumit ex facto, says the Gloss upon that rule. So that, if Bishops
have thus encroached upon the consciences and properties of the Subject, in
Convocation, as it is now declared they have, they are unmeet and unworthy to be
trusted any more with Votes in Parliament, where they may do as much again, or
more, if opportunity be offered: and therefore this Reason of the House of
Commons is invincible.

But have they not done as much in Parliament also? What meant the Statute of
2. H. 4.15. against the Lollards procured by Thomas Arondel Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the rest of the Prelates against diverse of the Nobility; for,
they are not at all mentioned in that Act? What meant their struggling for the
six Articles in 31. H. 8. 14. first concluded in their Holy Synod in spite of
CRANMERS teeth? What meant their Conspiracy to pull down Religion in 1. Mar.
after it had happily in great part been reformed in King Edward the sixth his
time? What need we any further proof? Habemus confitentem, this Answerer
himself has confessed as much in the close of his Answer to the next Reason
following, where he roundly acknowledges the opposition of all the Bishops to
the Reformation of Religion in 1. Eliz. But I must on to the rest of the Answer.

ANSWER.
Nor yet at the Votes of such Bishops there, as are not guilty of that offense.
That is, of passing such Canons in Convocation.

EXAMEN.
This Exception may save the Credits of those men who were present, and
protested legally against such illegal and wicked proceedings; so as, they may
have peace within, and without too, if after by post-fact they contracted not
the guilt of Accessories, by administering those Canons: But yet, in the account
of Law, and in the estimate of Lawmakers, before whom such lewd Canons be
arraigned, the Bishops do know that it is another Maxim and Rule in Law,
Refertur ad universos quod public fit per majorem partem, That is justly
imputed to all that was publicly done by the Major part. If they who dissented
not, did not protest, in due form of Law, or absented themselves because they
disliked the business, but had not the courage and fidelity to oppose it as
became their duty; they are justly involved within the number of the guilty, at
least so far, as to be held unworthy to be any further trusted to Vote either
in that place, or in an higher much more, because through negligence,
incogitancy, cowardice, and the like, they did not their utmost to help the
Lord against the mighty, and to oppose those wicked Canons with all their
might. I pass on to the next branch of the Answer.

ANSWER.
Nor need the Subject to be discouraged in complaiing against the like
grievances, though twenty six of that Order continue Judges. For they shall
not Vote as Judges in their own Cause, when they are legally charged. EXAMEN.
What encouragement shall one, or some few private subjects hope to find, when
the whole House of Commons, by the laboring of some Prelates (less in number
than twenty six,) cannot get passage for a necessary Bill grounded upon so
many solid and weighty Reasons, against the Votes of Bishops in Parliament? And
who can be assured that hereafter they shall not vote as Judges in their own
Cause, when even now de facto, they have already done it?

Perhaps there is a secret in that clause [When they are legally charged] which
I cannot discover. But surely, I think the meaning of it to be, that the Bill
came not home to a legal charge that might exclude them from votcing in it,
because the House of Commons would needs be so civil toward the present
Bishops, as not to name them in the Bill; whereby, not their persons, but their
Order only was charged. And if this were the error upon which the first Bill
miscarried, the House of Commons are wise enough to make use of this close wipe
of the Answerer, and to find out a way to avoid the like fault in the next.
The Answerer goes on.

ANSWER.
And if they should vote, what were that to the purpose, when the Lay-Peeres
are still four to one? EXAMEN.
If the Lay-Peeres (as he terms them) were ten to one, yet if but a few of
those twenty six Bishops have a mind to be active (which, in their own cause,
is not unlikely) they know ways enough how to draw over to their party Noble
and ingenuous natures apt to be more taken with reverence of their function and
gravity, than willing to suspect their ends or to dispute their grounds, how
often so ever themselves or their Ancestors have been circumvented and
misguided by them.

But he will give you instances to the contrary, which may put all out of fear.

ANSWER.
The Bishops (assisted with a double number of Mitred Abbots and Priors) could
not hinder the Laws made against the Cou t of Rome, the Alien Cardinals, and
Prelates, the Prove sors, the Suitors to the Popes Consistory under Edw. 3. Ric.
2. and Hen. 4. much more may those emergent exorbitancies of the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction be soon curbed and redressed in this inequality of
votes between the Temporal and Spiritual Lords. EXAMEN.
The Bishops (so assisted) could not hinder? Nay rather they could not hinder
the Laws made against the Pope, and Strangers. For, the more the Pope
encroached, the more our Bishops smarted under those Usurpations, and groaned
under the many and continual heavy taxes whereby all the Clergy of England
were impoverished in their Estates, and the Bishops much curbed in their
Jurisdictions. He should show himself an egregious Ignaro to the Stories of
those times, that should require Instances hereof, there being so many, much
elder than Edward the third: Matthew Paris and sundry other Historians abound
herein. Therefore I will content my self with only one instance in the reign
of Hen 3.

In his time the exactions and pollings of the Clergy and Kingdom were found
to be yearly 60000 Antiq Britan. ex Mat. Paris. in Bonifac.
Marks, which, at that time, exceeded the Kings own Revenues. No benefice, or
dignity belonging to the Nobility, Clergy, or Gentry, not many pertaining to
the King himself could be void, but the Popes Provisors were ready to seize
on it instantly for some of his Creatures, Italians and other forraigners. The
Bishops fretted, but durst not complain. When the King saw their timorousnes,
and the whole Kingdom heightened up to such a degree of discontent, that they
threatened to cast off their obedience to the King, if he took not order to
case them; The letters Articles are set down at large in Math. Paris. in Hen.
3. page 927. etc. edit. Land. Anno. 1571.
a Parliament was called; the King, the Nobility, Prelates, Commons, all
complained of the unsupportablenesse of the burden; drew up their greivances
into seven several Articles; four letters were conceived and sent with these
greivances to the Pope; one from the Bishops, a second from the Abbots, a third
from the Nobility and Commons, and the fourth from the King himself; but, to
little purpose. The Pope still went on, although sometimes more favorably, and
other times more violently, as the times would suffer.

No marvel then, if Bishops and Abbots in Parliament were so willing to be
over-borne by the votes of the temporal Lords in passing the Statute of
Provisors of benefices, in 25. Edw. 3. and against suitors to the Popes
Consistory, and receiving of Citations from Rome in 38. Ed. 3 And against the
farming of any Benefices enjoyed by Aliens by the Popes Collation, or conveing
of money to them. 3. Ric. 2, 3. And against Going out of the Realm to procure a
Benefice in this Realm in 12, Ric. 2.15. And for confirmation of the Statute
de provisoribus among the Statutes called Other Statutes made at Westminster.
in 13. Ric. 2. ca. 2. The like may be said of the Statute of Provision in 2.
Hen, 4.4 of first fruits to Rome more than usual. 6 H. 4.1 Of moneys carried
to Rome, and confirmation of all Statutes against Provisors etc. 9. Hen. 4 8.
To say nothing of that famous Statute in 26. Hen. 8.21. which gave the Pope a
deeper wound than all the Acts that had been before.

Now, alas poor Bishops that they were so over-voted that they could not
hinder such Laws as those, made in their favor, and for the rescuing of them
from the Italian horse-leeches! No doubt the Bishops labored stoutly to
withstand these Acts: and therefore no marvel that they be so carefully
instanced in, or pointed unto by the Answerer, to show how easily Bishops may
be over-voted in Parliament and how soon emergent exorbitancies of their
Jurisdiction may be there curbed and redressed. Or rather indeed to show how
unable Bishops be to withstand the passing of a bill which they desire with
all their hearts may be enacted, or which they know the King will have to be
enacted. But otherwise, I cannot understand his reason in vouching of them:
unless he meant to make his Readers some mirth. See now how he winds up this
long Answer.

ANSWER.
So as this Argument does not so much hurt the votes, as it quells the courage
of the Bishops, who may justly fear, by this and the next Argument that the
taking away of their Votes is but a kind of forerunner to the abolishing of
their Jurisdiction. EXAMEN.
Indeed, if we take the scantling of the hurt done to their Votes, by the
instances produced in this Answer, the hurt is so little, that the adventure
will not be great, if they meet with other Bills in Parliament of like nature,
wherein the Temporal Lords shall happen to over-vote them. In those Statutes
before mentioned, I do not find the Clergy so much as named. It is probable,
they durst not appear for those Acts, for fear of the Pope; but rather
suffered them to pass, by the Temporal votes, that they might the better
excuse it at Rome, and enjoy the benefit with more security at home, when the
Temporalty alone were so ready to do it to their hands.

Just so it was in Henry the thirds time, when the Pope had compelled the
Bishops to ratify all the Grants of payments to Rome made by K. John, whereby
the Bishops were so cast between the mil-stones, as to be ready to be ground
to powder, yet durst not appear against their oppressor, they (Good men) were
forced by the King and Parliament much against their wills (Si placet) to be
rescued out of his hands without any labor of their own; when, first the King
professed se contra infirmos illos et timidos Episcopos pro Regni liberate
staturum, Antiq. Britan. in Bonif.
nec censum deinceps ullum Romanae curiae praestiturum. And afterward, when the
whole Parliament ordered the Bishops and Abbots to write to his Holiness that
which with all their hearts they would, if they durst, have done of themselves,
for obtaining ease of the burdens that lay upon them, as has been touched
before.

So that now, this Argument does little quell their courage, if they meet with
no greater discouragements than by the answerer has been set forth. Rather the
Answer teaches them the way how to prevail by being overcome, and to bring
about their own ends and yet sit still, or seem to be the greatest opposers
of that which in secret they most desire, and underhand do most labor for.

But truly, it is to me no less than a riddle, that there should be any just
cause of fear (unless unto them who are apt to fear where no fear is) that
there is any thing in this Argument tending to the Abolishing of Episcopal
Jurisdiction; when the Reason expressly supposes no more, but a Bill to pass
for the Regulation of their power upon any emergent inconvenience by it. Verily
there is more cause of fear on the other side, that if the mention of a bill
for regulating the power of Bishops shall be interpreted a plot to ruin their
Jurisdiction, which now is so exorbitant, their Case comes very near to that
of old Rome, Live. Hist Dec. 1.
which (as Livy observes) could noe longer stand under the vices committed in
it, nor endure the remedies applied to it.

8. REASON of the House of Commons.
Because the whole number of them is interessed to maintain the jurisdiction
of Bishops; which has been found so grievous to the three Kingdoms, that
Scotland has utterly abolished it, and multitudes in England and Ireland have
petitioned against it.

ANSWER.
This Argument is not against the Votes of Bishops, but against Episcopacy it
self, which must be removed, because Scotland has done so, and some in
England and Ireland would have it so; And yet peradventure ten times as great a
sum as these desire the contrary. Against this a 2 fold Answer is offered.
EXAMEN.
This Argument is expressly against their votes for maintaining their
Jurisdiction, (to which by their Order they are all bound, as all other
societies be, to maintain their Privileges;) and it is not bent against
Episcopacy it self. And yet this suggestion is a witty invention, both to
wind out of the strength of this Reason, and to cast a blurre upon it at the
farewell.

The House of Commons could not but see even an impossibility of reforming by
bill the excesses and intolerable exorbitancies of the present tyranny of many
Bishops (who dishonestly call it by the honest name of Jurisdiction,) so long as
the Bishops be suffered to vote in Parliament. For the Bishops be themselves
the greatest Offenders therein, either acting in it, or else (as Galba)
wittingly permitting those to usurp whom they ought to bridle, or willingly
ignorant of what they ought to know. Therefore it was desired that their Votes
in Parliament might be taken away, to make passage for another Bill that might
regulate their Jurisdiction, as in the former Reason was plainly intimated.
But the Answerer was willing to slide over that which was the life of the
present Reason, (viz. the engagement of Bishops to maintain their
jurisdiction, id est, as now it stands) and Lap-wing like to carry his
Readers from the nest, to gaize upon the destruction of Episcopacy it self,
which on my conscience was not then intended by the House of Commons, had that
first Bill been quietly yielded by the Bishops in the House of Peers.

Nor did the House of Commons, I presume, by the instance of Scotland, and of
those in England and Ireland intend, in this Reason, a purpose of Abolition of
the Calling, but only made use of it as an Argument a majore ad minus: to this
effect: That, if the Jurisdiction of Bishops (as now they term it) be found so
grievous, that, in Scotland they would endure Episcopacy it self no longer;
and, many in England, and Ireland have petitioned for the abolishing of it in
these other Kingdoms; it cannot be thought unreasonable and immodest for the
House of Commons to pass a Bill for a lesser matter, to wit, for taking away
the Votes of Bishops in Parliament; without which there is little or no hope
that the Bishops will ever suffer an other Bill to be enacted for the thorough
Reformation and regulating of their Jurisdiction, so as to give ease of the
many Greivances that still ly upon the subjects of both Kingdoms of England,
and Ireland, and to satisfy the Petitioners with Reason worthy of such a
Parliament, at such a time of general discontent, chiefly caused by the
usurpations of sundry Bishops and of their domineering party.

What is in the Answer (with show of modesty) said, that peradventure ten times
as many desire the continuance of Episcopacy, as there be Petitioners against
it, It might peradventure be so, before the Bishops procured that first bill
grounded upon these Reasons, to be rejected above; and before the world was
made acquainted with that Abstract of the Answers given to them. But I dare
say, that now, without all peradventure, (if we may judge of men's desires by
their expressions) there is, scarce one of ten, who before were for Episcopacy
reformed, but are now against it: the reason is, because they see there is no
hope, that ever the Bishops will cheerfully yield to a perfect Reformation of
themselves and their Order, and that if hereafter the Prelates should happen
(against their will) to be over ruled in it, such a forced Reformation will
never do good, nor secure the Kingdom against the Evils too long sustained
under them, if the Calling it self be continued.

And verily, no one thing has more alienated and exasperated the hearts of all
sorts, than the apprehended insufficiencies of these printed Answers to the
Reasons of the House of Commons. So that, if Episcopacy happen to miscarry, I
am persuaded, the Bishops will find Cause to ascribe the opening of so speedy a
way to their destruction, not to any thing so much as to the unhappy Answers
given to these Reasons of the House of Commons; if those Answers offered to the
House of Lords were no other, or better than they are presented to public view
in that more unhappy Abstract most unhappily printed.

2. ANSWER to the eighth REASON.
There will be found Peers enough in the Upper House to reform any thing
amiss in the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, although the 26. Prelates should
be so wicked as to oppose it: As there were found Peers enough in that Noble
House to curb the Court of Rome, and the Revenues of the Cardinals under Edw.
3. To meet with the Provisors under Rich. 2. To put all the Clergy into a
Praemunire under Hen. 8. And to reform the Religion 1 Eliz. notwithstanding the
opposition of all the Bishops. EXAMEN.
Mark here his Plea in Bar against the Bill, There were Peers enough to curb
the Court of Rome, in Edw. 3. and Rich. 2. when none were more glad of the
curbing of that Court, than our Bishops themselves. Ergo there will ever be
found Peers enough to reform the Bishops jurisdiction. I will not say of this
putting our Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and the Court of Rome so near
together, Pares cum parihas facillime congregantur. But it will perhaps make
sport to some to find them in this Abstract so close one by another: yet can
it not secure wise men, that because the Peers curbed the Pope, Ergo there
will ever be enough to curb our Bishops; unless the Bishops will yield
themselves to hold of the Pope, or to be of the same stamp, and resolve to rise
and fall with him.

As for those Cole-worts in Edw. 3. and Rich. 2. now a second time heated, I
refer the Reader who desires a fresh taste of them, to the Examination of the
former Answer. In the case of Praemunire, in Hen. 8. who knows not that (if any
such had passed in Parliament) the Clergy were not so much overborn by the
Nobility, as overawed by that stern and stout King, with whom the proudest
Prelate durst not to contest? But when will it be proved that this passed in
Parliament? Surely Holinshed and others tell me that the Bishops were called
into the Kings Bench about it, but before their day of appearance, there was a
Convocation, wherein it was concluded that the Clergy of the Province of
Canterbury should offer 100000. pound for composition, which was accepted, and a
pardon promised to pass in Parliament to free them of the Praemunire. So in 7.
Hen. 8. the Convocation incurred a Praemunire for citing one Standish to appear
before the Convocation, when they had not jurisdiction: which yet was
compounded and no Act of Parliament passed on it: Nor needed there an Act for
it, for the Bishops themselves confessed the thing and so it could not come to
a contest in the Parliament. This is all that I know of this matter. And if the
case be thus this instance is not to the purpose. But the last is of all other
the most impertinent, and scandalous.

Impertinent, because all the world knows that the Reformation of Religion was
the design of the Queen whom the Prelates might not cross; such as did
thwart were duly rewarded for their pains, as has been formerly touched.
Therefore until it can be found that the Bishops were over Voted in a Cause
wherein the PRINCE went with them, or expected their assistance, to Vote for
him, the force of the Reason is not abated.

Next, what a scandal to Bishops is it, that even since the Reformation begun
in Edward the sixth his time, the Bishops, all the Bishops should oppose the
restoration thereof in the beginning of Queen ELIZABETH, after an
interruption of scarce five years and an half! Surely, if Bishops can so
far degenerate in so short a time, they are hardly to be trusted with Voting
in Parliament for any long continuance, especially in an age of such a
postatising of the most, and warping of the best.

IX. REASON of the House of Commons.
BEcause Bishops being Lords of Parliament, it sets too great a distance
between them and the rest of their Brethren in the Ministry, which
occasioneth pride in them, discontent in others, and disquiet in the Church.

ANSWER.
This is an Argument from Moral Philosophy, which affords no Demonstrations.
All are not proud that Vote in Parliament, nor discontented which are not so
employed. This Argument fights only against their Title of being LORDS, which
is not the Question at this time. And were those Brethren so wise and well
affected as they might be, they would rejoice rather that some of their own
profession are advanced to those places wherein they may be capable, upon all
occasions, of doing good offices to them, and to this whole Church. EXAMEN.
The first note is but a piece of mirth, which is but little Demonstration of
any great Morality, in a Cause so serious. If all be not proud that vote in
Parliament, they have the more cause to be thankful to God that keeps them
humble in so great a temptation. Yet, usually, all be not humble who say they
are not proud. Proud men of all others will be least known of Pride. The
Reason does not say, that all are proud who Vote, but only that such high
dignity (not meet for them) occasioneth pride, and I hope it will not be
denied by a Bishop to be a rule of Divinity as well as of Moral Philosophy,
that apparent and experienced occasions of sin must be avoided as well as
the sin it self.

Besides, this Answerer takes no notice of the maine basis of the Argument,
which is, that this sets too great a distance between the Bishops and the
rest of their Brethren. And to say truth, there was no great Reason why he
should, considering the Principles of Prelates, which will never suffer them to
subscribe to the truth of such a Proposition. They never think the distance to
be too great, between themselves, and the inferior Clergy. And the nearer to
parity, the nearer to Heresy. Yet, because this is an opinion not very fit to
be spoken out, it was good policy to pass over this branch in silence: and,
it were superfluous, to labor in the asserting of that which the Answer does
not gainsay.

And though, all be not discontented, that are not so employed: for some of
them are Chaplains, Dependants, Expectors, Pretenders to the like places, and
so cannot but rejoice to see them on Cock-Horse, who will, they hope, one day
give them the hand to lift them up behind them. Yet there be many more who have
more cause of just discontent at the infinite clation, intolerable pride, and
boundless passions of some of the Bishops, who looking up to their own Lordly
Titles, do take it for a part of their honor to look down upon their poor
brethren with so much superciliousnesse, as if they were not brethren but
servants, yea slaves, ad servitutem natos, Tiberius, Tacit
as He said of his subiugated fellow Senators of Rome.

Before this Lording in Parliament came up, the old Rule among Bishops was,
Con. Carthag. 4. ca. 34.
Episcopus in quolibet loco sedens stare Presbyterum non patiatur. But that
Canon is now 1240. years old, and so may well be forgotten. Now, it is well if
he may after long atttendance be admitted into the presence of a Bishop, where
he must stand bare headed, while the Bishop sits, or perhaps lies along in
State. And whereas before, they were not ashamed to call and honor them as
Brethren, now they have other names for them, Dunce, Ass, Fool, Jack, Rogue,
Scottish spirited rascal, any thing that a tongue set on fire of Hell can belch
out.

Lo here the goodly fruit of Episcopacie advanced to the height of Peerage in
Parliament! and well were it for many of them and their poor Clergy, if this
were the worst and greatest cause of grief and discontent administered by the
Bishops to many grave, Godly, painful, peaceable Ministers, whose heavy
burdens are presented in multitudes of Petitions to the present Parliament, and
therefore I forbear to relate them.

But where it is said that this Argument of the House of Commons fights only
against their Title of Lords: the Answer misreports it: For it marches (not
fights) against them as Lords of Parliament: now, if to be a Lord in
Parliament, and to Vote as Peers there be not the same thing, the Answer is
worthy of Consideration: otherwise, it can expect no entertainment, but
neglect. The House of Commons did purposely use this phrase here, because the
very Reason it self is grounded, partly upon the Title, yet so, as that they
consider a Bishop as a Peer admitted to Vote in Parliament. These two are
convertible and equipollent expressions; He is a Lord of Parliament, Ergo, he
Votes. He Votes in Parliament, Ergo, a Lord of Parliament. And this Lordship in
Parliament is that which lifts him up so high above his brethren, as makes him
to be, and they to fare the worse all days of his life.

Wherefore, to conclude all; such is my folly that I know not what wisdom, or
good affection it were, for those Brethren to rejoice much, to see any of their
own Profession to be exposed to so great temptations, by being advanced to
that place, which is so far from rendering them capable or apt to do good
offices to either Church or State, as that it makes them more unapt unto, and
incapable of doing any good at all, either in Parliament, Pulpit, or
Consistory. For it puts them out of their Calling, unapts them for the proper
work of it, and is, not seldom, secretly followed, by the just judgment of
GOD, with a spirit of coldness and benumdnesse of those excellent parts
wherewith many of them before abounded, with a spirit of giddiness in point of
judgment, with a spirit of contempt of those Ordinances which formerly they
prized, in point of affection, with a spirit of pride over their brethren in
point of behavior, with a spirit of persecution of the power of godliness in
point of jurisdiction, and with a spirit of opposition to the perfect
Reformation of this whole Church, See the close of last precedent Answer.
in point of Legislative power in Parliament.

ERGO, Bishops ought not to Vote in Parliament.

FINIS.
Page 2. l. 28. after acceptat, there should be a short line, thus; -- as
implying some words omitted which in the Author be interposed p. 4. l. 7. r.
indicare, p. 26. l. 5. r. avocation, p. 34. l. ult. r. 18. ibid. in Mar. dele
1317. and r. M. 17. p. 63. l. 14. r. could, p. 75. l. 25. r. nati.


