A VINDICATION OF THE Ministers of the Gospel in, and about London, from the
unjust Aspersions cast upon their former Actings for the Parliament, as if they
had promoted the bringing of the KING to Capital punishment.

WITH A short Exhortation to their People to keep close to their
Covenant-Ingagement.

Isaiah 62.1. For Zions sake I will not hold my peace, and for Ierusalems sake
I will not rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and
the salvation thereof as a lamp that burns.

Prove. 24. 21, 22. My son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with
them that are given to change.

For their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them
both?

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Th. Underhill at the Bible in Woodstreet. 1648.

A VINDICATION OF THE MINISTERS OF THE GOSPEL in, and about London, from the
unjust Aspersions cast upon their former Actings for the Parliament, as if they
had promoted the bringing of the KING to Capital punishment.
IT cannot be unknown how much we, and other Ministers of this City and Kingdom
that faithfully adhered to the Parliament, have injuriously smarted under the
scourge of evil tongues and pens, ever since the first eruption of the unhappy
differences and unnatural war between the King and Parliament, for our
obedience to the Commands and Orders of the Honorable Houses, in their
contests with his Majesty, and conflicts with his Armies.

We are not ignorant of the over-busie entermedlings of Prelates and their
party heretofore, in overruling civil affairs to the great endangering of
Kingdoms, and of this in particular, when private interests, ambitious
designs, revenge, or other sinister ends, engaged them beyond their sphere.
Howbeit, it cannot reasonably (as we conceive) be denied, that Ministers, as
subjects, being bound to obey the Laws and to preserve the Liberties of the
Kingdom, and having an interest in them and the happiness of them, as well as
others, may and ought, (without incurring the just censure due to busiebodies
and incendiaries) to appear, for preserving the Laws and Liberties of that
Commonwealth whereof they are members, especially in our case, when it was
declared by the Parliament, that all was at stake, and in danger to be lost.
No, nor as Ministers ought they to hold their peace, in a time wherein the sins
of Rulers and Magistrates as well as others, have so far provoked God as to
kindle the fire of his wrath against his people. And yet, for this alone, the
faithful servants of God, have in all ages, through the malice of Satan and
his instruments been traduced as Arch-incendiaries, when only their accusers
are indeed guilty of both laying the train, and of putting fire to it, to blow
up a Kingdom.

An Ahab and his sycophants think none so fit to bear the odium of being the
grand Troubler of Israel, as Elijah. Thus, the popish device was, to charge the
Gunpowder Treason (had it taken effect) upon the Puritans: And, if you believe
Tertullus, even a Paul is a pestilent fellow, a mover of sedition throughout
the world, a ringleader of a sect, and what not, but what he is? Yea, Christ
himself (though a friend to Monarchy, even of heathenish Rome.) is proclaimed
an enemy to Caesar, to open a way to his destruction, by their malice, who
never cared for the interest of Caesar.

Wherefore, although with us, who have had experience of like usage, it be a
small thing to be thus judged of men, when we regard only our own particular
persons: For, if they call the master of the house Beel-zebub, how much more
those of his household? yet when we consider how much it concerns the honor of
our Master, and the good of all, to preserve our ministerial function
immaculate (our good names, being in that relation, as needful to others, as a
good conscience to our selves) we dare not but stand by and assert the
integrity of our hearts, and the innocence of all our actings (in reference to
the King and Kingdom) for which we are so much calumniated and traduced.

This we are compelled to at this time, because there are many who very
confidently (yet most unjustly) charge us to have been formerly isntrumental,
toward the taking away the life of the King. And because also there are others
who in their scurrilous Pasquils and Libels (as well as with their virulent
tongues) present us to the world as a bloody seditious sect, and traitorous
obstructors, of what all the godly people of the Kingdom do earnestly desire
for establishing of Religion and Peace, in that we stick at the Execution of
the King, while yet we are (as they falsely affirm) content to have him
convicted and condemned: all which we must, and do from our hearts disclaim,
before the whole world.

For when we did first engage with the Parliament, (which we did not till
called thereunto) we did it with loyal hearts and affection toward the King,
and his posterity. Not intending the least hurt to his Person, but to stop his
party from doing further hurt to the Kingdom; not to bring his Majesty to
justice (as some now speak) but to put him into a better capacity to do
justice: To remove the wicked from before him, that his throne might be
established in righteousness; not to dethrone, and destroy him, which (we much
fear) is the ready way to the destruction of all his Kingdoms.

That which put on any of us at first to appear for the Parliament was, The
Propositions and Orders of the Lords and Commons in Parliament (Jun. 10. 1642.)
for bringing in of money and plate, etc. wherein they assured us that
whatsoever should be brought in thereupon, should not be at all employed upon
any other occasion, then to maintain The Protestant Religion, The Kings
Authority, his Person in his royal dignity, the free course of justice, the
Laws of the Land, the Peace of the Kingdom, and the Privileges of Parliament,
against any force which shall oppose them.

And in this we were daily confirmed and encouraged more and more, by their
many subsequent declarations and protestations, which we held our selves bound
to believe, knowing many of them to be godly and conscientious men, of Public
spirits, zealously promoting the common good, and laboring to free this
Kingdom from tyranny and slavery, which some evil instruments about the King,
endeavored to bring upon the Nation.

As for the present actings at Westminster, since the time that so many of the
Members were by force secluded, diverse imprisoned, and others thereupon
withdrew from the house of Commons (and, there not being that conjunction of
the two Houses, as heretofore) we are wholly unsatisfied therein, because we
conceive them to be so far from being warranted by sufficient Authority, as
that in our apprehensions they tend to an actual alteration (if not
subversion) of that which the honorable House of Commons, in their Declaration
of April 17. 1646. have taught us to call the Fundamental constitution and
government of this Kingdom, which they therein assure us (if we understand
them) they would never alter.

Yea, we hold our selves bound in duty to God, Religion, the King, Parliament
and Kingdom, to profess before God, Angels and men, That we verily believe
that which is so much feared to be now in agitation, the taking away the life
of the King, in the present way of Trial, is, not only not agreeable to any
Word of God, the principles of the Protestant Religion (never yet stained with
the least drop of blood of a King) or the fundamental constitution and
government of this Kingdom; but, contrary to them, as also to the Oath of
Allegiance, the Protestation of May 5. 1641. and the solemn League and
Covenant: from all, or any of which Engagements, we know not any power on
earth, able to absolve us or others.

In which last, we have sworn (with hands lifted up to the most high God) That
we shall with sincerity, reality, and constancy, in our several vocations,
endeavor, with our estates and lives, mutually to preserve and defend the
Rights and Privileges of the Parliaments, and the liberties of the Kingdoms,
and to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's Person, and Authority, in the
defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms: That the world
may bear witness with our consciences of our Loyalty, and that we have no
thoughts our intentions to diminish his Majesty's just power and greatness.

And we are yet further tied by another Article of the same Covenant; Not to
suffer our selves, directly or indirectly, by whatsoever combination,
persuasion or terror, to be divided or withdrawn from this blessed union and
conjunction, whether to make defection to the contrary party, or to give our
selves to a detestable indifferency, or neutrality in this Cause which so much
concerns the glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and honor of the King:
but shall all the days of our lives, Zealously and constantly continue therein
against all opposition, and promote the same according to our power against all
lets and impediments whatsoever. And this we have not only taken ourselves, but
most of us have by command of the Parliament administered it to others, whom we
have thereby drawn in to be as deep as our selves in this public engagement.

Therefore, According to that our Covenant, we do in the Name of the great God
(to whom all must give a strict account) warn and exhort all who either more
immediately belong to our respective charges, or any way depend on our Ministry,
or to whom we have administered the said Covenant (that we may not by our
silence suffer them to run upon that highly provoking sin of Perjury) to keep
close to the ways of God, and the rules of Religion, the Laws, and their Vows,
in their constant maintaining the true Reformed Religion, the fundamental
Constitution, and Government of this Kingdom, (not suffering themselves to be
seduced from it, by being drawn in to subscribe the late Models, or Agreement
of the people Declared by both Houses (for the substance of it) to be
Destructive to the being of Parliaments, and to the fundamental Government of
the Kingdom, in December. 1647* yea, condemned heretofore by the General, and his
Council of War, and one of the soldiers shot to d^a^h for promoting it.
, which directly tends to the utter subversion of the whole frame of the
fundamental government of the Land, and makes way for an universal toleration
of all heresies and blasphemies (directly contrary to our Covenant) if they can
but get their Abettors to cover them under a false guise, of the Christian
Religion) as also in preserving the Privileges of both Houses of Parliament,
and the Union between the two Nations of England and Scotland: to mourn
bitterly for their own sins, the sins of the City, Army, Parliament and
Kingdom, and the woeful miscarriages of the King himself, (which we cannot but
acknowledge to be many and very great) in his Government, that have cost the
three Kingdoms so dear, and cast him down from his Excellency into an horrid
pit of misery, almost beyond example. And to pray that God would both give him
effectual repentance, and sanctify that bitter cup of Divine Displeasure, that
the Divine providence has put into his hand; as also that God would restrain
the violence of men, that they may not dare to draw upon themselves and the
Kingdom the blood of their Sovereign.

And now, we have good reason to expect that they who brought us under such a
bond, and thereby led us into the necessity of this present Vindication and
manifestation of our judgments and discharge of our consciences, should defend
us in it. However, we resolve rather to be of their number that tremble at his
Terrors who is a consuming fire, and will not fail to avenge the quarrel of
his Covenant, upon all that contemn it, then to be found among those who
despise the Oath by breaking his Covenant (after lifting up the hand) although
it had been made but in Civil things only, Lev. 26. Ezekiel. 17. 2 Samuel 21.
and that with the worst of men.

C. Burges, D.D. Preacher of the Word in Paul's Land. Will Gouge D.D. Pastor of
Blackfriars. Edm. Stanton D.D. Pastor of Kingston. Tho. Temple D.D. Pastor of
Battersey. Geo. Walker Pastor of John Evang. Edm. Calamy Pastor of
Aldermanbury. Jer. Whitaker Pastor of Mag: Bermunsey. Dan. Cawdrey Minist. of
Martins in the Fields. William Spurstow Minist. of Hackney. La. Seaman Pastor
of Alh. Breadstreet. Simeon Ash Min. of Michael Basingshaw. Tho Case Minist.
of Magd. Milkstreet, Nich. Proffet Minister at Fosters. Thom. Thorowgood
Minist. of Crayford. Edw. Corbet Minist. of Croyden. Henry Roborough Pastor of
Leonards East-Cheap. Arthur Jackson Pastor of Michaels Wood-street. Ja Nalton
Pastor of Leonards Fosterlane. Tho Cawton Past. of Bartholomewes Exchange.
Charles Offspring Pastor of Antholins. Sa. Clark Minister of Bennet Fynk. Jo.
Wall Minister of Michael Cornhill. Fran. Roberts Pastor of the Church at
Austins. Mat. Haviland Pastor of Trinity. John Sheffield Minister of Swithins.
William Harrison Minister of Gracechurch. William Jenkyn Minist. of
Christchurch. John Viner Pastor of Buttolph Algate. Elidad Blackwell Pastor of
Andrew Undershaft. John Cross Minister at Mathews Fridaystreet. John Fuller
Minister at Buttolph Bishopsgate. William Tailor Pastor of Stephens
Colemanstreet. Peter Witham Pastor of Albanes VVoodstreet. Fran. Peck Pastor of
Nich. Acorne. Christopher Love Pastor of Anne Aldersgate. John Wallis Minister
of Martin Ironmongerlane. Tho. Watson Pastor of Stevens VValbrook. Tho. Bedford
Pastor of Martins Outwich. William VVickins Pastor of Andrew Hubbard. Tho.
Manton Minister of Stoke Newington. Thomas Gouge Pastor of Sepulchers. William
Blackmore Pastor of Peter's Cornhill. Robert Mercer Minister of Brides. Ra
Robinson Pastor of Mary Woolnorth. John Glascock Min. at Vndetshaft. Thomas
Whately Minister at Mary Wool-Church. Jonathan LLoyde Pastor of James Garlic
Hithe. John Wells Pastor of Olaves Jury. Benjamin Needler Pastor of Margaret
Moses. Nath. Staniforth Minister of Mary Bothaw. Steven Watkins Minister of
Mary Overies. Jacob Tice Pastor of Buttolph Billingsgate. John Stileman
Minister at Rotherhithe. Josias Bull Pastor of North Cray. Jonathan Deverux
late Minister at Andrews Holburne. Paul Russell Preacher at Hackney. Iosuah
Kirby Minister of the Word. Arthur Barham Pastor at Hellens.
FINIS.

