IVDGEMENTS REMOVED, WHERE JUDGMENT IS EXECUTED.

OR A SERMON PREACHED to the Court Marshall in Lawrence Jury, London, the 5th
of September. 1644. Being the day of their solemn seeking of the Lord for his
blessing upon their Proceedings.

By ANTHONY BURGES, sometimes Fellow of Emmanuell College in Cambridge; Now
Pastor of Sutton-Coldfeild in Warwickshire; a Member of the Assembly.

LONDON: Printed by M. Simmons for Thomas Underhill, at the Bible in
Woodstreet. 1644.

TO THE HONORABLE The Commissioners OF THE COUNCIL OF WAR, now sitting by an
Ordinance of PARLIAMENT.
HONORABLE;
HOwsoever the fear of God be not thought necessary to human Judges by men of
the world, yet the Scripture does much press it, Exodus 18.21. 2 Chronicles. 9.7.
Yea, some Heathens have acknowledged the necessity of it, therefore amongst the
Ancients the court of Judgment was near the Temple, that so the reverence of
their gods might bend the minds of Judges to Justice. And they report that in
Aethiopia, the Judges sitting in their Court, leave twelve seats in the highest
place empty, which (they say) are the Angels seats. Therefore he was the unjust
Judge in the Parable, that did not fear God, nor respect man; Such an one was
Agesilaus, who wrote to a Captain for a prisoner in these words; Release Nicias
the prisoner without fail; for if he have not offended, in Justice you are to
dismiss him; but of he have hainously offended, and deserved punishment, then
dismiss him for my sake. Here he mingled private affections in public
administrations, which is very sinful. Therefore that you may avoid such
rocks, especially consider, that Argument of the Scripture, It is the Judgment
of the Lord; Iudicium Dei est, (says a Schoolman) ideo Iudex in tribus Deo
debei conformari, in potestate, in bonitate, and in veritate; It is the
Judgment of the Lord; therefore the Judge ought to resemble God, while he
judges in power, in goodness, and in truth. All which if you do, the
Kingdom may be freed from guilt, truth and peace may kiss each other, and you
deliver your own souls; Which is the earnest prayer of him who desires to
serve you in the Lord;

ANTHONY BURGES.

JUDGMENTS REMOVED, WHERE JUDGMENT IS EXECUTED.
PSALM. 106.30, 31. Then stood up Phinehas, and executed judgment, and so the
plague was stayed; and that was counted unto him for righteousness unto all
generations for evermore.


THe Text is a clear mirror, and glass of justice, wherein you have all the
necessaries requisite to a righteous action; There is Justus, the person
righteous; justum, the matter and fact righteous; and jus^e, this righteous
fact done righteously.

The righteous person is described, by his name Phinehas; It is not worth the
while to meddle in the dispute amongst Popish Authors, whether because of the
promise made to him, Numb. 25. to wit, A Covenant of peace for ever, that
therefore Phinehas be yet alive, and kept till the day of judgment; as they
conceive of Enoch.

Secondly, The just Actions are two; First, He stood up; howsoever this word be
used for those that minister and serve; therefore the Angels are called ( Zach.
3.) Standers; yet in other places it does denote Firmness, and Stabilitie;
Hence the word that signifies a Pillar, comes from this root. Ezekiel 22. Can
thy heart endure? in the Hebrew, Can it stand? And thus here it implies, the
Courage, the Fervency, and Zeal of Phinehas. The second just Action is, he
executed justice. Some read, he prayed; and so the Chaldee Paraphrase; the root
in the Original does indeed in one Conjugation signify to praise, but in the
other which is here in the Text, it signifies to adjudge, and to condemn; for
so Phinehas did both judge, and execute this judgment! therefore Gregory
Nyssen calls him, both the Judge and the Executioner. What the Delinquents
were, you may read Numb. 25.

Lastly, That this was just, righteously done, appears by a twofold effect,
or reward; First, Public, the plague ceased; the plague, the word signifies
any kind of striking; and therefore what this plague was, is not recorded. The
other Effect, is private and personal, It was imputed to him for
righteousness; Not as Faith was to Abraham; for that was a righteousness of
the person, and universal for justification; but this is of a fact, and
particular; and the sense is, it was approved of by God for a just act; whereas
otherwise it might have been doubted of; Although some think, what he did
here, was done by command of the Elders, and Judges.

The Doctrine: When men execute their just judgments, then God removes his.

First, We will show the necessity of Justice, and that flows from diverse
streams.

First, From God, who (besides those many commands for justice) shows that all
their other religious Sacrifices, were rejected for want of this. Isaiah 1. As
long as their hands were full of blood, how does he loath their Ordinances?
therefore it is not enough to reform, nor to set up a good Ministry, to
abolish corruption, unless also the just judgments of the Lord be executed:
The will of the Lord is to be done, not only in the Assemblies for Worship,
but also in Judicatories: And you may observe in the Prophet, that commonly
those two sins are linked together, Idolatry and Blood. And had not England
the experience of this? Are we to this day cleansed either from the one, or
the other? Yea to do justice is an acceptable service, Pinguior mactari Deo
victima non potest quam homo sceleratus; so that the high prize which is put
upon this service of him, may make men courageous and faithful; And certainly
the Acts of Justice, are so apt to be obstructed, that unless a man look up to
God, he can never bear up his heart in them.

Secondly, From our selves; We shall hereby be freed from the guilt of others;
For where Justice is not executed, there a whole Kingdom is defiled. Now to
have other men's sins become ours, to have the blood of Ireland, all those
outrageous insolences there, and in England, to become our sins, this is
terrible. The sins of others may become ours negatively as well as
positively, when we do not humble our selves, when we do not labor a
Reformation; therefore the Prophet complained, that there was none who called
for justice. It was a sin in the people, not to pray for it, and desire it. And
this is the reason, why in public calamities, the righteous perish as well as
the wicked, because they get some infection, when the plague is general. You
say the plots and the conspiracies of enemies, they ruin and undo us, but may
not also our sins in civil Judicatories undo us?

Thirdly, We shall hereby prevent the public judgment that may come upon a
Land; As neglect of Justice brings other men's sins upon us, so also it ushers
in all public calamities; See what Achan, what Saul's sons unpunished did bring
upon the Nation; therefore Zach. 8.16. It is said; Execute the judgment of
truth and peace in your gates; Justice brings peace; contrary to the sinful
thoughts of many, who think that this is the way to spoil all. And we have the
rather cause to look to this, because the Imprisonments, the Injustice that
has been done upon the godly, and faithful men upon the earth, may still cry;
their imprisonments, their banishments, their death may still cry for
vengeance. Justice is called by Aristotle, Hesperus, the Glorious Star; yea,
it is the Sun of the world; Therefore consider, If you stand up like Phinehas
with pure zeal, to do the judgment of the Lord, it may be the war shall
cease, Gods anger shall be appeased; it may be when the Jonahs are out, the
Ship will be quiet. And certainly how can we pray, that the Lord would be
avenged on the Cruelty, and the Bloudinesse of the wretched Adversary, if we
our selves will not do it when we may?

Fourthly, It is necessary, in regard of others; If they be good, then to spare
the bad, it is cruelty to them. Amos 5. observe that phrase, of turning justice
into Wormwood; which implies that Justice of it self is sweet, even as honey,
and the neglect of it is Wormwood: Qui malis parcit, piis nocet; To let the
Lions and Bears alone, it is to wrong the Sheep and Lamb. And therefore this
may serve to reprove all sinful Mildness and Lenity; When you pity the
Bad, you are hard-hearted to the Good: you pity the Delinquent crying, and
you never think how the innocent Land and Nation would have cried. I do not
speak against true Clemency, but I show the duty in the general. If you will
pity a Cataline, pity Rome much more. Besides, pity the whole, rather
then the part: Pereat unus magis quam unit as: So that there is no just public
act, though it seem never so severe in respect of a person, yet it is a
merciful act to the Commonwealth: you had better have one Malefactor sit
mourning, then a whole Kingdom.

Fifthly, If others be bad, Justice is necessary, because otherwise you
encourage them in their impiety; and this ought much to be laid to heart. If
wicked men abuse the Patience of God, they will much more abuse men's Patience.
One end of Justice is to strike terror into others, that they may be afraid;
and when you sinfully acquit men, if they do wickedness afterward, it is not
so much they that do it, but you. It was an ingenuous acknowledgement of an
Emperor, who when a man had committed wilful murder, and friends importuning
for him, he was released; but presently after, he commits murder again; then
complaint was again made of him to the Emperor, as being twice guilty of
murder; No, (says the Emperor) he is guilty of the former only, I am
guilty of the latter. And so if you acquit the ungodly, and they run
afterward into vile enormities, what will men say? Yea what will your
Consciences say? It is not they that are guilty, it is we that are guilty, we
have thus murdered, we have thus destroyed, not they.

Sixthly, It is necessary, in respect of the Malefactors themselves; for these
acts of Justice, being the appointment of God, they may be blessed by him, to
the awakening and rouzing of men's consciences; it is to make them see their
pride, their wickedness; God has suffered all this to fall upon them, in
mercy to their souls: It is a very uncharitable opinion of the Socinians, That
none of those, who die as Malefactors, for their wickedness, can be saved;
this is against the tenor of the Gospel and Mercy; but howsoever, if Justice
do not work the salvation of their souls, yet it works to the restraining of
their sin; the measure of their wickedness is the less. That is a grave
Speech of Seneca's: Vt nemo pereat, nisi quem perire etiam pereuntis intersit;
That none perish but those, to whom it is an advantage to perish. Thus you see
upon how many foundations this act of Justice is built: if God, if man, if
others, if our selves, if the Commonwealth, be looked upon, then ought
Righteousness to be exalted: I shall end this part with Amos 5.24. where the
Prophet takes them off from all their religious duties; do not think
Sacrifices, Prayers will avail, But let Righteousness run down like waters;
where righteousness is compared to water, how welcome is it to a thirsty
ground? and then it must run down, which denotes abundancy, and like a torrent,
which denotes fervency.

In the second place, we will show you, how you are to do it:

1. By Prayer, and seeking the Lord; therefore I cannot but encourage you in
that you have desired to begin with God; and certainly there is great reason:
for Counsel and Wisdom, they are the gift of the Lord, and direction in these
great matters is from him; you see how that prayer pleased God, when Solomon
prayed for Wisdom; and certainly to miscarry here is very dangerous, you may
soon provoke God, you may soon bring guilt upon the Kingdom, you may quickly
condemn the innocent, or absolve the guilty: and as the Danger is great, and
therefore pray; so the Duty is hard, and therefore pray; to be void of all
sinful affections, and partiality, all fear of men to do it, as an act of
Justice, out of love to God; these things cannot be had without Prayer; for
this you must know, that though you condemn a man justly in regard of the Law;
yet for all that, if you have carnal ends, or sinful aims in you, God will be
avenged of you, even as if it were murder, as I shall show you afterward.

2. By judging your selves for your own sins; that is also necessary to you to
judge your selves, and to humble your selves before the Lord. Our Savior, to
convince the Pharisees, bids them that were without sin, throw the first stone
at the Adulteress; this was to imply, that men who judge others, they must
consider their own sins. And certainly, you have deep matter of humiliation;
for is there any sin committed by any man, the root of which is not in thy
heart? may we not all acknowledge the grace of God, that we are not Cains,
Judases, and happily the Lord has given up some delinquents to such notorious
sins, because of such pride, or such contempt of the means of grace, or such
ambitious desires, for the favor of great ones, which thy heart has been
propense unto; Luther commended a man, who hearing of another fallen into a
great sin, cried out, Hodie illi cras mihi; It is his turn now, it may be mine
to morrow. It is disputed by Divines, whether a Judge that is guilty himself,
may condemn a malefactor, and they conclude, he may; but yet it is his great
duty to see his own sin.

3. By doing it, as the judgment of the Lord: so in the Chronicles, in
Deuteronomy, it is called the judgment of the Lord; you are in the Lords
stead, and therefore to do it, as the Lord would do it: Jus dicere, is res
sacra, it is a holy thing, (says the Civilian) hence the Lawyers were
sometimes called Sacerdotes, because it is a kind of a holy thing to judge and
pronounce sentence; you are to look higher then to men, even unto God himself.
The Romans are much commended for their Justice, yet their actions were but
splendida peccata, refined sins: Aristides the just was but a Glowworm, and
severe Cato but a Blazing-star; Vincit amor patriae laudumque immensa cupido,
the praise of men overcame them; you must not walk by this rule, This man must
be condemned, the people will have it so, and the City will have it so; but
will the Lord have it so?

4. Deliberately and advisedly, howsoever it be questioned, whether a
Magistrate may release the punishments of sins, yet that he may delay, all
agree; Truth is the daughter of Time, Alius dies de alio judicat, de omnibus
supremus; one day judges of another, and the last of all; an act of Justice
ought to flow from mature deliberation, and advised attendency: It is said of
Lewis King of France, that when he had through inadvertency granted an unjust
thing, as soon as he read that verse in this Psalm, Blessed is he that does
righteously at all times, presently recalled himself; especially there ought to
be deliberation, when it is above the life or death of men: When Theodosius had
rashly killed many in a City, which did much trouble him, afterward it was
ordered, that thirty days should intervene between the sentence and execution;
Potest dilata poena exigi, exacta revocari non potest, deferred punishment may
be executed when we will, but if once executed, it cannot be recalled.

5. With much godly pity and compassion; A Butcher (they say) may not be of the
Jury, much less may he be a Judge; and certainly there is just cause of great
relenting, whether we consider our selves or others; our selves, who are of the
same mould, and subject to the same temptations as others; though we may
delight in Justice, yet to do it as it is the evil and grief of another, so
to be glad of it, this is very sinful; and though you may have much Religion
and Piety in your breasts, yet sowrenesse and severity does much discourage:
how did Joshua speak to Achan, My son, give glory to God; where there is
Justice within, and nothing but austerity without, it is like those houses
where they say treasures of Gold are, but the place is so haunted with spirits,
that none dare come near; though there be Piety and Justice, yet Passion and
Frowardness hinder others from being made partakers of it: It is remarkable of
David, that when the news of Saul's death was brought, he rejoiced not at all,
though it was greatly to his outward advantage, but wept and bewailed him.

6. With sure Knowledge and Understanding; it is observed of all, Genesis 18. as a
pattern in judgment, I will descend and see, if it be so: so Job 29. If I did
not search out the cause, that was too hard for me; the Judges had an Image
with a Jewel upon it, that was called Truth, and a multitude of books lying
by, to show the Knowledge of the Judge; and this made Solomon so pray for
Wisdom: In matters of life and death, proofs ought to be full; therefore Moses
ordered, that if there fell out matters too hard for inferior Courts, they
should go to the higher; you are to give physic to the Commonwealth, and
Ignorance may endanger the whole; besides, Knowledge is not enough, but
Prudence is requisite, which is, Rectaratio agibilium, the right way of
ordering things; the Physician has not Knowledge enough, when it is
Theoreticall, but it must also be Practical; therefore, know what you do, for
there is nothing that you judge, but God will judge, yea, the world will judge
it over and over again.

7. With Courage and Boldness; Much opposition, and hatred, will always be in
the way of justice; but the Rule is, Fiat justitia, and ruat mundus; Let
justice be done, though the world be ruined: and that is a true saying, Odia
qui nimium timet regnare nescit; He that fears the hatred of men too much,
knows not how to govern. You will find that to resist Friends, and to overlook
Enemies, in this your work, will be difficult; To have friends entreating, and
to have Enemies reviling, will be a great temptation. Magistracy is called Cos
hominis, the Whet-stone of a man; it is not only a Touchstone, to try what a
man is, but a Whet-stone also, to quicken him in that work. Saul when he was
called to the government, had another spirit; and do you pray, That as the
work you have, is other work then you have had, so your spirit also may be
otherwise; Especially, harden your selves against worldly fears. It is noted
by some Expositors, that Moses when he had killed the Egyptian, he looked up
and down, as being afraid, which (they say) was his weakness, and corruption.
Let that be true of you, which was said of Chrysostom, That he feared nothing
but sin.

8. With much Patience; See what a world of Censures you must lie under; some
will say, you are too severe; some, you are too merciful; some, that you do
nothing; some, that you do too much; and how much patience must here be? And
there is nothing more unstable, then the people, who as they are earnest for
justice, so when it is done, do relent and pity those that suffer, as if
wrong were done to them.

9. With much Fervor and Zeal; This is the cause of Courage; Adami voluntas
non habuit fortitudinem, quia non habuit fervorem; It was Bernards saying,
Adams will had not strength to endure, because it had not fervency and zeal.
The righteous are compared to Palm trees, now they love hot Regions, and so
does Justice a zealous heart. And terrible is that instance of Eli, he did
something, yet because he was not zealous, and fervent, how was he punished by
the Lord? Every Sacrifice was to have fire; and let your hearts also burn with
fire, for the glory of God, and the good of the Commonwealth.

Lastly, This Zeal must be pure, as an act of Justice, and out of Love too, or
it may be thy murder, while it is Justice: hence Numb. 25. Phinehas his zeal
is called the Lords zeal; the fire it must be pure Elementary, not Culinary,
or basely feeding upon carnal respects. Among the Thebans, the Images of their
Judges, were without hands and blind, that so no bribing nor compassion might
divert them from Justice.

And these are the Things which hinder pure Justice:

First, Malice and Revengefull thoughts; Anger and Envy are present Pests to
all Courts and Governments. It was a good speech of Alphonsus, That if he had
lived in those times when the Roman Commonwealth was almost consumed with
mutual jarres, he would have built a Temple Jovi positorio, wherein men should
have deposited and lain down all heart-burnings, before they entered into the
Senate. How necessary is such a place for men, before they come into Courts,
into Committees, into any public Judicatures, where they may meet and lay
down all heart-burnings and private grudgings, that the public cause may be
promoted?

Secondly, Partiality hinders Justice; Justice is often compared to the
Balance; now you know that the Balance does equally weigh gold and iron, it
makes no difference; And so ought you to make no difference between poor and
rich, between high and low, between friends and strangers; you are to be like
Melchisedec, in this respect, without father or mother, or any private
relations.

Thirdly, Covetousness does prejudice Justice: Though your Martial Court were
a Paradise, yet if this subtle Serpent creep into it, it will spoil all; this
is called the Root of all evil; and the Judges were to be men hating
Covetousness.

Fourthly, Carnal or worldly Applause; to do what may please others; You are
not ambitiously to affect the glory, either of severe men, or of merciful men,
but to have a Temperament of both; like that justice of Gods which is tempered
with much mercy.

Now that all these things may be done, take some Theological Rules; which
will serve for your Information.

First, Whatsoever punishment comes upon a man by your false judgment, the
guilt will return upon your own heads, their blood, their death, their loss
will be your sin. And on the other side, the sinful acquitting of any, and the
sad effects thereof, will also be reckoned upon your skore; therefore take heed
what you do, lest you bring a curse upon your selves, and upon your posterity
also.

Secondly, You are to know, that punishments are of two kinds: First, There are
such as are immediately commanded by the Law of God, or are evidenced by the
Law of Nature. And here though it be seriously disputed among Divines, Whether
a Magistrate may remit that punishment, which by Gods Law is prescribed; yet
that opinion seems safest, which does wholly deny it: and the reason is
cogent, Because that if the Magistrate should release the punishment which God
has commanded, he should then remittere de alieno, release another right,
which is Gods; and that is altogether unlawful. Hence it is that our Divines
do justly condemn those Sanctuaries and Refuges in holy places, (as they call
them) for wilful murder, because here Gods Law does strictly bind them up:
As also they condemn the practice of letting Malefactors loose at the time of
Easter, which was a custom of the Christian Emperors: So that custom of the
Jews loosing a Malefactor, though he were a murderer, is judged unlawful by
them. But then in the second place, There are punishments, that are by a mere
positive Law; and in these much moderation may be used without any guilt upon
the Kingdom; For seeing humane Laws are imperfect, and men could not possibly
foresee all causes and circumstances, there is a greater latitude left to them;
therefore the Rule is, Summum jus est summa injuria: So that the punishments
which are by positive Laws, must be interpreted according unto the affection
and sense of the Lawgiver, or of other Laws, or the safety and benefit of
the Commonwealth.

Thirdly, In all acts of Judgment, especially those of death, it is safer to
incline to Clemency, then to Severitie; only this Caution must be taken along;
That wherein there is an express command of God, or evident profit of the
Commonwealth, there must be Severitie. Saul's pity in sparing Agag, was
cruelty to his own self; and that can never be Clemency, which is opposite to
true Justice: But yet where neither of those two is, then we ought to incline
to Moderation, and Clemency. Howsoever that man is much commended, whose
Tribunal was called Scopulus reorum, the Rock where all guilty persons were
splitted; yet Nero's speech has greater praise, who when he was to subscribe
to the death of a man condemned, would say, Vtinam nescirem literas, I wish I
did not know how to write. For there are these things, that may move to
Clemency:

First, The Consideration of man's frail nature, how all sin is contained in
him; and therefore Romans 3. those words; Their Feet are swift to shed blood;
which are spoken by the Psalmist of those enemies of the Church, are applied by
the Apostle to every particular man by nature.

Secondly, The Corrigibilitie and relenting of the Offender, may much procure
Clemency: It is true indeed that herein Spiritual Punishments differ from
Civil; In spiritual, if the party repent, they ought not to inslict them;
but in Civil, the Magistrate he does it howsoever, because he looks at the
good of the Commonwealth; yet where men are not straighten'd by the command of
God, if they do see Corrigibilitie in persons offending, they have the greater
liberty for their Clemency. And upon this ground it was, that Austin did
intercede to the Civil Magistrate for offenders; Intercedimus, etsi non pro
secleratis scelerati, tamen pro peccatoribus peccatores.

Thirdly, There is a great difference between Principalls, and those that are
Accessaries; between those that were the cause of the Stream, and those that
are carried away by it.

Lastly, Man's Law uses to make a great difference between those that actually
have wrought mischief to the Commonwealth, and those that have been in the
preparations and endeavors of it only.

The fourth and last Rule is;

That in a judicial process, though the Law may condemn a man, yet a Judge
ought not to go against his own Conscience, if he have just grounds for the
acquitting of the man condemned. It is true, all the Popish Casuists almost,
determine, That he must proceed to Condemnation, otherwise (say they) a door
will be left open to all Judges, to pretend Conscience, as they please, and so
no justice will be done; therefore the Rule is, Illud tantum Judex novit quod
novit judicialiter, That only the Judge knows, which he knows as a Judge:
But this cannot stand with the Scripture, which requires, that whatsoever we
do, should be done out of Faith, that is, a Conscience and persuasion of the
thing to be lawful. And there are other remedies for a Judge in this case; As,
to appeal to the Supreme, or to delay and respite, or to lay down his
Commission, if he cannot help the innocent otherwise.

The Use of Exhortation, from all this, is, to take these things seriously into
your heart; Defile not the Land with false Judgment, as much as the
Delinquents have defiled it by their offenses; Let no man's life, nor no man's
death witness against you; and in all the Justice that you do, especially see
that it be out of pure love to Justice, and no other respects whatsoever.
Consider that of Jehu, Hosea 1.4. God would avenge the blood of Jezreel upon
the house of Jehu, yet the fact of Jehu in it self was Justice; and God said,
He had done all that was right in his sight: therefore God may be avenged on
you, even for that which is a righteous action, if not done by you out of love
to righteousness. Consider, why the Lord has brought all those evils upon
our Adversaries, has not injustice and guilt of blood done it? God forbid
then, that Partiality, or Friends, should carry you into the same sins.
Remember, that as you judge others, so God will judge you, and men also. And
consider, that when we stand up to execute the judgments of the Lord, the
Lord may cease from bringing any further judgments upon us.

FINIS.

