A TREATISE OF DIVINE Meditation, By that Faithful Servant of Jesus Christ Mr.
JOHN BALL, Late Minister of the Gospel at Whitmore in Staffordshire.

Published by Simeon Ash, Preacher of the Gospel at Austins, London.

Josh. 1.8. This Book of the Law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou
shall meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe to do according
to all that is written therein: for then thou shall make thy way prosperous,
and then thou shall have good success. Genesis 24.63. And Isaac went out to
meditate in the field at the eventide. LONDON, Printed for H. Mortlock, at the
Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard, near the Little North-door. 1660.

TO THE Christian Reader,
THis Treatise of Divine Meditation was penned long since, by that faithful
servant of Jesus Christ, Mr. John Ball, who therein intended the benefit of
some private friends only. But Copies thereof being dispersed into many hands,
good people of sundry ranks and qualities, upon the perusal of it, were very
desirous to have it printed, for more public use: And because it was known
unto many, that this my worthy friend, had committed all his Manuscripts to my
trust, that nothing might pass to the Press, without my approbation, I was
importuned, as by others, so by the five Reverend Brethren, who subscribed, and
sent the Epistle prefixed, that I might receive incoucouragement by their
Testimony, to own the publication of it.

The subject matter is needful and profitable, and the language, with the
method and manner of handling it does speak Mr. Ball the Author. My leisure
has not given me leave, with seriousness to read over this discourse, yet
upon the credit of the forementioned able Ministers of Christ, who have perused
it, I hope that it will be serviceable to thy soul; Which is the desire, and
shall be the prayer of

Thy Friend and Servant in Christ, Sim. Ash.
Aug. 9. 1660.
TO THE Christian Reader.
Reader,
THere is no duty more neglected amongst Christians, than this of Meditation:
whence it is, that though the heads of many are swelled with notions, yet their
hearts are very empty of grace and good affections. A Treatise therefore of
Meditation, which would remove obstructions, and open the passages between the
brain and heart, could never be more seasonable or necessary than in these
days, wherein there is Multum scientiae, and parum conscientiae: men being
much taken up with speculative controversal matters, to find them discourse;
but little meditating upon plain and practical truths, to affect their hearts,
and amend their lives. It is a sad and a strange thing, that there should be
more light in the world, an increase of knowledge, and less heat, a decay of
love; that there should be so much profitable preaching, and yet no more
profiting amongst the hearers: one cause whereof doubtless is, the omission of
this duty. We must read and consider, hear and consider, if we would get good
by what we read and hear: without Meditation Truths are devoured, not
digested. And as leanness of soul is to be seen in many through sinful
rejection, and casting away of wholesome food; so the like is to be seen in
others, that are fed with such food, for want of good concoctio^

This little Tractate of the eminently learned, judicious, and godly Mr. Ball,
is to teach the Art of Divine Meditation, to help thy spiritual digestion,
would thou take in the advice herein contained, thou should find thy
soul growing and thriving by it.

Indeed it is a thousand pitties that any thing of this Reverend Author (humane
frailty excepted) should die with him; though this small piece has seemed to
lie buried in oblivion hitherto, it is now risen, as from the dead, to admonish
us of a necessary duty, and will again rise in judgment against them, that
shall still continue their sinful and shameful omission of it.

Though it be posthumous, yet thou may be confident it is not spurious: Mr.
Heary Baker.
were the person in whose hands this Copy lay, as well known to others as to
us, they would desire no more satisfying evidence than his affirming (as he
did) that he received it from the Reverend Authors own hand.

Thou have here the substance of the original Copy, without any further
alteration, than what the oversight of the Transcriber, here and there made
necessary. And though there may be wanting somewhat of that accurateness in
this piece, which was in others prepared for the Press by the Authors own hand,
yet they who are acquainted with his other works, will clearly see a great
resemblance between this and them.

As to the doctrine herein contained, it is useful and excellent, and that which
few have so practically handled: but they who look for quaintness of
expression, more than the quickening of their affections, and right ordering of
their conversations, must turn away their eyes; this was not written for them;
The excellency of Rules lies in their fitness to direct in necessary duties,
and those which this book affords, have more of solidity than luster, of use
than show.

Let us entreat thee therefore not only to read over this Tractate, but to live
it over, lest thou should mistake the end of its publication. And do not
think this holy exercise is such a grievous task, as that thou should be
afraid of it; it is such a duty, as after a little experience thou will find to
be not so much a burden, as a spiritual recreation; and that to press thee to
the practice of it, is in effect, but to persuade thee to delight thy self with
sitting to the fire, when thou art benumbed with cold, or to please and refresh
thy self with food, when thou art ready to perish with hunger, nay, such
sensitive refreshments are not to be compared with these spiritual delights of
getting a dead cold heart warmed, a starved soul nourished by digesting its
food by Divine Meditation. The greatest difficulty will be in thy first setting
to this duty, which when once thou art acquainted with, thou will be angry with
thy self, that thou either knew, or began it no sooner.

Courteous Reader, we cannot take our leave of thee, till we have once more
entreated thee to set to this duty. If thou would be blessed in all thy
enterprises or concernments with the blessings of God, Josh. 1.8. If thou
would have thy understanding enlightened with the knowledge of God, thy
affections inflamed with the love of God, thy heart established with the
promises of God, thy solitariness cheared up with the company of God, thy
afflictions mitigated with the comforts of God; and if thou would have thy
thoughts, words and works regulated by the command of God, pray and consider,
pray and meditate.

So advises Thy Servants in the Lord Jesus Sa. Cotes. Will. Reynolds. John
Whitlock. Robert Smalley. John Armstrong.

August 9. 1660.
The Contents.
WHat the word Meditation signifies page 1 How Meditation and prayer differ.
page 4 Reasons showing the necessity of meditation. Ibid Who are bound to use
this exercise. page 11 What the matter or subject of our meditation ought to
be. page 17 What the fruits, effects, and benefits of meditation are. page 20
What use we are to make of this point. page 49 What superficial and careless
thinking upon some points of Doctrine by fits is. page 53 What the lets and
Impediments of this duty are. page 59 How the first Impediment is removed. page
61 What a second let or Impediment is: page 65 How it is to be remedied. Ib
What a third Impediment is. page 68 How it is to be remedied. page 69 What a
fourth let is. page 71 How it is to be remedied. page 72 What should move us
to be careful to take time for this duty. page 73 What things hinder the
fruitful performance of this duty. page 74 How these abuses are to be
remedied. page 75 What the sorts and kinds of meditation are. page 77 What
occasional Meditation is. ib. What Rules are to be noted touching extemporary
Meditation. page 78 What the benefits of extemporary meditation are. page 80
How a man should fit himself for extemporary meditation. page 84 What solemn or
settled meditation is. page 85 What motives should persuade Christians to set
upon this duty. page 86 What things must be looked unto that this exercise
might be taken in hand with good success. page 88 What Rules are to be
observed touching the choice of matter. Ib. What we must do if our heart be
so barren that we cannot call to mind any thing that has been taught us, nor
remember any mercy we receive. page 93 What particular meditations concerning
Duties to be performed or practiced we may find commended unto us in the
writings of Godly men. page 97 and 110 What place is fit for meditation. page
115 What they must do that have no room to be alone. page 117 What time must
be set apart for meditation. lb. What is to be said to them that pretend
multitude of worldly business to excuse the omission and neglect of this
exercise. page 123 What course must be holden to redeem time out of the world
for meditation. page 125 How we must make entrance into this exercise. page
127 In what order we must proceed after the entrance. page 130 What must be
observed for the conclusion of this exercise. page 137 How we must meditate on
Gods infinite excellency. page 139 How we must proceed in this meditation page
140 How these things are to be applied upon the heart and pressed upon the
soul. page 145 How we are to proceed in meditation of the holy Angels. page
154 How these things are to be pressed and urged, and applied unto the heart.
page 156 How we are to meditate on man's excellency. page 161 How it is to be
applied unto the heart for the quickening of the affection. page 168 How we are
to meditate on Gods Infinite greatness. page 176 How it is to be applied unto
the heart. page 181 How we are to meditate on the love of God. page 185 How it
must be applied unto the heart. page 198 How we are to meditate on the fall
of our first parents. page 207 How it is to be applied unto the heart. page
221 How we are to meditate on sin. page 228 How it is to be pressed upon the
heart. page 245 How we are to meditate on the work of Redemption. page 246 How
it is to be applied unto the heart. page 267 How we are to meditate on the
Resurrection of Christ. page 273 How it is to be pressed upon the heart. page
284
A TREATISE OF Divine Meditation,
Quest.

WHat does the word Meditation signify?

Answ. Those two words in the Original, which our Translators render, to
Meditate; signify,

Primarily to meditate, in mind or heart. Psalm. 1.2. In his Law does he
meditate (...)
day and night; and 77.6. I commune (...)
with mine own heart, and my spirit made diligent search. Isa. 33.18. Thine
heart shall meditate terror; and 59.13. conceiving (...)
and uttering from the heart words of falsehood.

And secondarily,

1 Articulately, Genesis 24.63. Isaac went out to meditate (...) meditari, and
meditata eloqui.
in the field, i. e. to meditate his evening prayers, and pray over his
meditations. Psalm. 55.17. Evening and morning, and at noon will I pray (...)
; and 105.2. Talk ye (...) colloquimini.
of all his wondrous works. Or,

2 Inarticulately, Isa. 8.19. And when they shall say unto you, seek unto them
that have familiar spirits, and unto Wizards, that peep, and that mutter (...)
qui mussitant.
: should not a people seek unto their God? and 38.14. I did mourn Where are
words used coming from the same Hebrew root.
as a Dove; and 31.4. Like as the Lion, and the young Lion roaring Where are
words used coming from the same Hebrew root.
on his prey. The former of these two significations being the Principal.

Quest. How is Meditation to be defined, as it is taken in the former sense?

Answ. Meditation is a serious, earnest and purposed musing upon some point of
Christian instruction, tending to lead us forward toward the Kingdom of
Heaven, Psalm. 119.23, 48.
and serving for our daily strengthening against the flesh, the world, and the
Devil.

Or it is a steadfast and earnest bending of the mind upon some spiritual and
heavenly matter, discoursing thereof with our selves, till we bring the same
to some profitable issue, both for the settling of our judgments, and bettering
of our hearts and lives.

Quest. How do Prayer and Meditation differ?

Answ. They are often confounded in name, but inseparably linked in nature,
going hand in hand together; and can no more be severed, than two Twins, who
live and dye together; only in Prayer we confer and commune more directly with
God by Petition and Thanksgiving; Psa. 42.11.
in Meditation we talk and confer more directly and properly with our selves,
and with our own souls.

Quest. What reasons may show the necessity of this duty?

Answ. to judge what is most profitable for us, and most acceptable to himself;
is of great Power to punish our contempt, and abundant in Goodness to reward
our obedience. It is his good pleasure that we should purposely separate our
selves from other matters, to think seriously upon some good and holy
observation, that our understandings might be bettered, and our affections
stirred to hate evil, and love good.

Secondly, wonder if they neglect this duty of Meditation, the understanding of
the best settled Christian is dim, his memory feeble, his affections so overlaid
with sin, that without much striving he cannot mount aloft, nor run swiftly in
the way of Gods Commandments. So ponderous is the flesh that presses down,
that unless we labor the thing with our hearts, the word will not stick fast,
nor work kindly, nor our affections rise to any good purposes: would we thrive
in grace, and raise our desires and delight in heavenly things? we must
breathe our selves well in Meditation.

Thirdly, trodden before us; we may truly affirm, all godly men have
meditated, and the most holy have most abounded in Meditation: This the Holy
Ghost reports of Isaac the Patriarch, Genesis 24.63.
That he went out into the field toward the evening to meditate, which had
not been so commendable, if he had not used so to do (being such holy duties
should be often used) herein following his Father Abraham, who was the friend
of God, and very familiar with him. Genesis 5.22.
Enoch in his whole life walked with God, and had much talk and communion with
him. David promised to Psa. 119.48. Psalm. 119.148.
meditate on the statutes of the Lord. And what he vowed, that he did
perform, Mine eyes prevent the morning watch, to meditate on thy word. His life
was a life of sorrow; before he came to the Kingdom, Saul hunted him like a
Partridge; after he was encumbered with wars abroad, and the disobedience and
rebellion of his sons at home, what time could he take to commune with God?
how could he quiet his heart, or bring it into order? when others slept, his
eyes were waking, and his heart was musing upon God, his word and works; his
reins did teach him in the night season. What point of divinity can be learned
without Meditation? not one; for, as none can say that it is his own work,
which his own hands has not made: So, none can count any point of divinity his
own, which he has not wrought by the Meditation of his own heart.

Amongst Christians, who have excelled? such as have been most frequent and
earnest in this exercise of holy Soliloquies, pressing their hearts to the love
of God, and solacing themselves in the remembrance of his love: Even as much
odds as is betwixt a young scholar that can only say his part, and patter over
his rules by rote, and a learned Schoolmaster that by long practice and
experience has the use thereof; or as there is between a cunning Artificer
that can make his own work, and an ignorant Shopkeeper that only sells the
same; such or more is the difference between the Christian that meditates,
Psalm. 119.97, 98, 99.
and him that meditateth not; David attained to more wisdom, than the Ancient,
his teachers, his enemies, it was by meditation of the Law of God.

Fourthly, Jer. 8.6.
None says what have I done?

Fifthly, Nehemiah heard of the affliction of his brethren, and the ruin of
Jerusalem, he entered into a deep and earnest consideration of Gods judgments,
and of the causes thereof, which were the sins of the people; that thereby he
might be the more fit to humble himself by prayer and fasting before the Lord
Neh. 1.2, -- 7.
. When Peter came to himself, and knew where he was, and from what he was
delivered, and by whom; then he began with all thankfulness, to muse on the
great danger he had escaped, and of the author and instrument of his
deliverance Act. 12.11.
. Paul beholding the superstition of the Athenians, and finding an Altar which
was dedicated to the unknown God, began to pity the blindness and ignorance of
the people, and to meditate how he might take occasion from the inscription to
win them to God Act. 17.23.
.

Quest. Who are bound to use this exercise?

Answ. This exercise does appertain to all persons, professing Christianity
Deuteronomy. 6.6, 8.
; and howsoever all men have not equal education, learning, strength of memory,
stayedness of mind, sharpness of wit, and invention, variety of reading,
opportunity of time and place, etc. yet is no man to be freed from it.

There is none so simple, or busy, of so high place, or base condition, of so
short memory, or quick capacity, such a babe in Christ, or so strong a
Christian, that can exempt himself from this duty, unless he purpose to live
unprofitably to others, uncomfortably in himself, and disobedient against God.

Josh. 1.8.
Joshua was a valiant Captain, a mighty Governor, one always busied in the
wars of God, yet must he meditate in the Law Psa. 119.15, 48, 72.
. Who shall pluck out his neck, when such a man must bear the yoke? what must
an holy man, a King, a Warrier, notwithstanding his holiness, dignity,
troubles, have the word of God to dwell in him, and be his Counselor? what
shift can thou find to excuse thy self in the neglect of it, when neither
worldly honor, nor weight of business, nor strength of body, nor courage of
mind, nor variety of encumbrances, nor multitude of distractions, shall be held
as plea sufficient? art thou a Father of many children, and so pleadest the
great charge that lies upon thy hand? hear what the Lord says, Deuteronomy. 6.6. and
11.18. And these words which I command thee, shall be in thy heart; The more
thou have to care for, the more need have thou to acquaint thy self with the
Law of God, that thou may teach and pray for them that depend upon thee.

Thou art Young, and lusty, it is good for thee to be wise aforehand, and to
remember the Lord, for thou must give account how thou have spent thy days,
thou must answer for the sins of youth Eccl. 12.1.
. Call to mind what counsel a good Father gives to his Son, a Father that
advised in love, a godly Father, (who by experience knew that his admonition
was wholesome, a Father moved by divine inspiration in that which he spoke:)
My Son, forget not thy Fathers instructions: Bind them continually upon thine
heart Prove. 6.20, 21.
. What better treasure can thou lay up in thy breast? what safer direction
can thou follow? The word of life is a precious and sweet liquor, fit to
season the green vessel, a sure guide to lead us in the darkness of this world.

Will thou pretend poverty to excuse omission of this duty? Oh fool and blind;
do thou not consider, and if thou be oppressed with want, thou have the more
need to strive for grace, peace with God, and joy in the Holy Ghost? Thou have
nothing in this world, provide spiritual treasure, and learn what legacies the
Lord has bequeathed unto thee in his holy word.

We need not urge reasons to persuade old men, who have accustomed themselves
to the practice of godliness, and by long custom have made that easy to them,
which to another seems difficult (if not impossible) to continue the use of
this exercise: for by experience they know the singular benefit and comfort of
it; They have tasted many times how sweet a thing it is to commune with the
Lord, how profitable to incite, and call upon their souls: and though the
natural stomach be decayed, the spiritual appetite still increases in them
Psa. 92.13, 14.
. There is none so employed, or tied by any service or duty to man, but he may
find some time, either by day or night, to call upon God, to confer and talk
with God, and with his own soul in the presence of God, especially upon the
Sabbath day, wherein the poorest Artificer, and most painful Plough-man,
Prisoner, and Gallislave, must put apart some time, if not to hear and pray
publicly (from which he is restrained) yet to behold, muse and meditate with
himself, both of the word, and works of God. Can thou find time to eat,
drink, sleep Psa. 16.7
? redeem some portion of time from worldly business to refresh thy self with
sweet Meditation. Psa. 119.55.148.
Is it not better to want thy full sleep, than to deprive thy soul of communion
with God? It were a busy day when thou would not a little attend to salute
a kind friend, who is come a far journey to visit thee in love: Let no day pass
without some conference with God and thine own heart.

Many hear the Word of God, praise the Preacher, wonder at the doctrine
delivered, are affected with joy or sorrow; but the godly man treasureth up the
Word in his heart, not as a Talent in a Napkin, but as provision in a
storehouse, which he brings forth in due season. Luke 2.19.
Mary kept all those sayings, and pondered them in her heart, when as others
heard them as well as she. Genesis 37.11.
Jacob observed Joseph's dream, the brethren heard it, but the Father kept it
in mind.

Quest. What ought to be the matter or subject of our Meditation?

Answ. Some good or profitable observation gathered out of the Word, or raised
from the Works of God, as the Titles and Properties of God, Psa. 1.2. and 119.54
by which he shows what he is to his Church and People; his Power, Wisdom,
Justice and Mercy; also the works of the Most High, as his Decree, Creation,
Providence, the fall of man, our Redemption by Christ, Vocation, Justification,
Sanctification and Glorification; likewise our own vileness and sinfulness,
both in general and particular, also our manifold wants, and infirmities; our
mortality, and daily dangers, with the mutability of all things in the world;
the great and sundry privileges which we enjoy daily through the inestimable
kindness of God in Christ Jesus; the sundry afflictions and troubles of this
life; and how we may best bear them, and go through with them, to the glory of
God, and our own spiritual good.

It is good to observe further, and think upon the vanity of all earthly
things, the vain confidence of worldly men, the destruction of the wicked, the
assaults that are made against the Church, and how the Lord does still protect
her with his right hand.

In brief, the Word of God is a rich storehouse of good matter; and the world
a stage furnished with great variety; every day brings forth manifold
occasions of Meditation, and a godly mind may make good use of every Word or
Work of God, of every thing it sees or hears (whether it be good or evil.)

Quest. What be the fruits, effects, and benefits of Meditation?

Answ. They are manifold; for it calls our minds out of the world to Psa. 42.4.
and 39.3.
mourning, or mirth; to complaint, prayer, rejoicing, and thanksgiving in the
presence of God. It dries fleshly and bad humors of worldliness, and
earthly-mindedness; it quickens and awakens the dull and drowsy heart, that is
ready to be sleeping in sin; there is no private help so available, to gave,
and sift, weed and purge, and (as it were) to hunt and ferrit out of our
hearts, swarms of wicked and unsavory thoughts and lusts, which otherwise will
not only lodge and dwell, but rule and reign in them, and to entertain and
hold fast heavenly thoughts, which otherwise will run out of our riven heads,
as liquor out of a rotten vessel. It is an ointment to soften our hard hearts,
and to sweeten the bitterness of our lives in all inward and outward troubles:
It is a sovereign preservative against the sugered baits of worldly pleasures
and commodities that they become not poison unto us. Meditation is the searcher
of the heart, the manure of the soul, the fosterer of zeal, the key of
paradise, the ladder of Heaven, the remedy of security, the pastime of Saints,
the improvement of Christianity. It enters us into the first degrees of
heavenly joys, exalts our minds and thoughts above the highest pitch of
worldly things, and imparteth unto us some first beginnings of the vision of
God; it is as watering to plants, as blowing to fire, as oil to aching joints,
as Physic to the sick; It urges to repentance, it quickneth to prayer,
confirms faith, kindles love, digesteth the word, encourages in well doing,
and refreshes with heavenly consolations.

More Particularly.

First, man or woman; The vanity of mind, and frowardness of will, will show
themselves sooner in this duty, than in any other. By the hearing of the Law
comes the knowledge of sin, but never so clear and distinct, as when we
constantly set our selves to walk with God; Let us observe what unfaithfulness,
injustice, worldliness, impatience, breaks forth in our callings; what
weariness, coldness, deadness, distrust possesses the heart in prayer; how
full of wanderings, forgetful, irreverent, how soon tired we be in hearing the
Word, how senseless, froward, and hardhearted under the Rod, and we shall be
forced to acknowledge that we are very stubborn, and rebellious, prone to
evil, and averse to that which is good.

But set thy self to think upon some instruction that has been taught, or thou
have observed, do it seriously, conscionably, religiously, constantly, as one
who desires to spend all time well, and then corruption of nature will show it
self; Thou shall soon perceive that thou art vain, ignorant, impotent, proud,
worldly, self-conceited, fickle, envious, impatient, unprofitable, an harbourer
of filthy lusts, a stiff opposer of sound holiness, passionate, unsound, and
what not? Begin to meditate when opportunity is offered, thou art barren, and
can find nothing fit to be matter of musing, can make use of nothing
which thou have heard or seen; have thou found matter? thou art dull, and
senseless, not able to fasten one thought upon it, as is mere, so hard-hearted,
that nothing can pierce or enter; Thou set forward, but art quickly turned
out of the way, that thou may well wonder to see how far thou art strayed
before that thou could discern that thou have stepped aside; some idle toy,
earthly business, vain pleasure, needless fear, delightful remembrance of sin
has drawn thy thoughts another way. Do not these things display the poison of
our evil and corrupt nature?

Moreover, by Meditation we look into every dark, filthy corner of our naughty
hearts, and rake into that stinking chanel, which is seldom stirred: So that
when we set about it, we shall be compelled to say, I heard of corruption by
the hearing of the ear, but now I see it with mine eye; I feel it to the great
disturbance of my soul. And thus we are drawn to deny our selves, humble our
souls, and seek to Christ for succor and relief.

Secondly, Note.
For though by the Word we know them, by conference we revive the remembrance
of them, and by reading we do both, Heb. 2.1.
yet all these run out of our riven heads, and abide meanly with us to suppress
our corruption, and to tame our hearts, until we bring our selves to often and
much musing, and debating of the good things, which we hear and read, that so
we may digest them; and of the evils, which by occasion we fall into, that
we abandon them: Even as worldly men ponder deeply their affairs, which are
weighty. Meditation makes known the hainousnefs of sin, inflames the heart with
love of holiness, cherishes the graces of Gods Spirit (which are as fire to
consume the dross of sin) and rouseth to earnestness in prayer, to be set at
liberty from that cruel bondage.

Moreover, the conscionable performance of this duty of Application of the
Word, with Examination, and Prayer, which is done by Meditation, is, through
the blessing of God very effectual, to kill, and crucify the lusts of the
flesh: The special sins prevented by this exercise. Are,

1. Idle roavings, unprofitable wanderings, unsavory thoughts, wishes and
desires of heart; who groans not under this burden? who is not much hindered by
them? They distract in prayer, reading, hearing, and cool our zeal, dead our
hearts, waste much precious time, steal away comfort, defile the soul, and
bring forth much dangerous fruit.

The special medicine to cure this malady is Meditation, it either keeps, or
thrusts out frivolous, and idle thoughts and motions, either it prevents them,
or keeps them under. The Word hid in the heart preserves from sinning. Psa.
119.11.
When the door is open, and the house empty, it is an easy matter for the
thief to enter; but if the heart be occupied in goodness, evil cannot find
room, and harbor; The foul spirit being cast out of a man, seeks to return
with seven spirits worse than himself, Mat. 12.42, 43.
but is not able to re-gain possession, till he find the house empty, swept,
and garnished: when we do nothing, and withal labor to get no good matter
into our minds, we are sure to be pestred with evil cogitations, arising from
natural corruption, or cast in by Satan; but if the heart be employed
continually in that which is profitable, holy, and excellent, corruption shall
not have that strength to molest, nor stir, nor Satan that opportunity to
suggest. Has vanity taken root? To remove it, no means more profitable than
often and deep consideration of the swarms of evil cogitations that arise in the
mind, to bring them into vile account, to be weary and ashamed of them, and to
endeavor to entertain and harbor better motions and desires in their room.
What Christian can endure to have his heart taken up as a lodge, or sty, for
froth, filth; vanity, idleness, or folly, that sees the loathsomeness of it,
and knows how, and where to furnish himself with heavenly and comfortable
matter? He will judge himself, watch, and make earnest requests, never ceasing
till the number of idle imaginations be abated.

2. Earthly-mindednesse, and the inordinate love of things temporal, are bad
weeds that cover much ground, bitter roots that stick fast in our nature, sins
that set open the heart for Satan to take possession, and dwell therein, that
make the Word unprofitable, because it cannot have right and sound plantation,
that are attended with multitude of other sins, and never go alone.

The only means to dig them out of the heart, is Meditation: Look into the
vanity, deceitfulness, uncertainty, vexation that outward things bring with
them, and thou will never set thy heart upon them. Psa. 49.11
Why do many men lay up for themselves treasure on Earth? They know not the
glory and dignity of Gods Saints; they conceive not the necessity and
excellency of saving Grace; they never tasted the comforts of a godly life; see
not the Crown and joy that is prepared in Heaven for them that love and fear
the Lord. It may be they know there is a life to come, an Heaven, an Hell, but
their knowledge is dim, uncertain, confused, idle; earnestly, often, advisedly,
deeply, they consider not of it: It is impossible that he should covet great
things in this world, or highly prize what is base, and transitory, that has
an eye to the recompense of reward. What we are in Meditation, may easily be
guessed by our affection to the things that are perishing: He that admireth
the fading bravery of what is under his feet, has taken but slight view of
heavenly glory.

Thirdly,

Meditation is a spur to quicken us. Eccles. 12.11.
The words of the wise are as goads, if the Word read or preached be of great
force, it must needs work effectually, if we join Meditation. Upon the first
hearing, the practice of good works may seem difficult, and unpleasant; our
slothful nature will object many things against it; A Lion is in the way; a
Lion is in the street; it is hard to be tied so narrowly, dangerous to follow
such courses: But if we consider the matter more attentively, we shall see
great cause, good encouragement to set upon that work with diligence, joy, and
cheerfulness; as the mercies of God, the love of Christ, the comforts of grace,
the bond of Creation, preservation, redemption, the promise of divine
assistance, and gracious acceptance, the peace of conscience, and lively hope
of an Inheritance in the highest Heavens. When these and such like
considerations are duly weighed, we shall find many, and more effectual
provocations to incite to holiness, than possiblely can be to incite unto sin,
or to dishearten in any good enterprise.

Fourthly,

The reason is, because we are not stored with good matter, we have not seen
into the manifold imperfections of our hearts, nor tried in secret how we can
master and overcome corruptions. Whereby the necessity of Meditation is
manifest, that gaging the heart thoroughly, and fighting against sin at home, we
might be more watchful in company, lest we should be overtaken, and better
enabled to resist; for as he who goes to war, is first trained, and made fit
to use his weapon at home, and the scholar tries masteries privately, before
he come forth to dispute openly; so must a good Christian try what he can do
against his affections, and lusts, alone by himself, in his solitary
Meditation, and resolve against them (accordingly as he sees the difficulty
to require) before he can in his common dealings with all sorts and companies,
be strengthened against temptations, and falls, and free from offence-giving
in his words and deeds.

5 Unbeleef, and hardness of heart, are evils no less dangerous than common, to
the godly that feel them, to the ungodly that are insensible, a curse, a
judgment, that cannot sufficiently be lamented.

The special remedy is earnest communication with our selves, and with the Lord
in secret. How does the heart relent when we set our selves in the presence of
God, to record our disobedience with shame, and sorrow; and when we call to
remembrance our mortality, the day of death, the coming of Christ to judgment,
the favors of God, the love of Christ, his most bitter death and passion?
Hardness of heart comes from want of due consideration. Mark 6.52. and 8.17,
18, 19, 20, 21.
Tenderness follows Meditation, as contraries are cured by their contraries. To
chide the heart for sin, and force it by strong reasons pressed again and again
upon the conscience, is effectual to break and rent it, as hard strokes with
beetle and wedges are to cleave the knotty Oak. They that look up to Christ,
will mourn over him. To stock up infidelity, and to plant the word of promise,
what means to Meditation? Psa. 77.9, 10, 11, 12.
when we consider the power, goodness, unchangeableness of the Lord, his free
grace, rich mercy, and constant truth, how he dealt with his servants in
former times, and has helped us in the day of our calamity, does not the heart
rise in indignation against distrust? To check and reprove dejectedness of
spirit, and to stir up our selves to wait and trust in the Lord, is a ready way
to get freedom from distracting thoughts that overwhelm and oppress the soul?

Thirdly, Hos. 7.2. Jer. 5.24. Luke 14.28. and 15.17. Mark 14.72. Psalm. 4.4.
They may promise fair in sickness, conceive some purposes of amendment upon
the sight or hearing of judgment denounced against their bosom sin; but all
this abides meanly with them to break the heart, or change it from those sinful
delights wherewith it was bewitched. They must remember, and weigh what they
have done, before they can rise out of the miry-puddle into which they are
fallen Jer. 8.6. Rev. 2.5.
.

Fourthly, and working knowledge is attained, increased; without understanding
we cannot begin this exercise, but wisdom is begotten and confirmed by it.
Psa. 119.92, 93, 99.
They that hear often, read much; but live not in the exercise of Meditation,
and digest not what is brought to their minds by outward means, they continue
still in darkness, or hang upon the credit of their teachers; at the best,
their knowledge is less profitable to themselves and others, as that which
swimeth in the brain, but is not kindly rooted in the heart. In earthly
occasions, wherein we are sharper sighted than in spiritual, we conceive not
a matter at the first hearing; the more we think upon it, the better we come
to know it. In spiritual things often reviewing the same thing is most
requisite. It is Meditation that settleth the truth in the judgment, assures
it to the conscience, and firmly groundeth it in the heart, that it becomes a
behooveful word, ready in the time of need, and ruling over the whole man, with
an universal, mild, and gentle sovereignty. It may be added, that if we
meditate of what we hear, we shall see more into the truth, use, and benefit
of what is taught, than he that preaches. Surely there is no doctrine so
plain, or work so small, but great good might be gathered, much learned out of
it, by study and diligence.

Fifthly, mind which we would not have to overslip us. Psalm. 119.15, 16.
I will meditate on thy statutes, and will not forget thy Word. The Saints of
God know it is needful to grow in wisdom, and to retain what they have
learned: but look how necessary it is to be filled with wisdom, and to hold
Heb. 2.1, 2.
fast what we have received; so needful it is to repeat again and again, and
to bethink our selves of what has been commanded and committed to our custody:
Defect of memory is best supplied by Meditation.

Sixthly, Quo magis aliquid per contemplatione nobis innotescit, eo magis in
illius amorem erar descimus and quo magis aliquid amamus, eo frequentius de
ipso cogitamus.
Meditation enlarges delight in goodness: much blowing will make the fire to
burn under green wood. Our nature desires liberty, and goodness is burdensome
to the flesh, but if we accustom our selves to mind, and muse, and think
upon the word, until it be made our own, it will be pleasant to our taste, Psa.
119.23, 24.
sweeter than honey, or the honey comb. Familiarity is the best Nurse of
Friendship, better than good turns: Even as looking breeds loving: so when by
the thought of mind we look upon good matters, there is a love of them bred in
us; for affections kindle on a thought, as tinder does when a spark lights on
it. The most vehement love does wax cold for want of communication; and the
coldest affections are inflamed by conversings, Note.
and intercourse of speech.

Seventhly, our meat, sleep, labors. Psalm. 139.17, 18.
Oh how sweet and pleasant a thing it is to come into the presence of God, to
record his mercies, to solace our souls in the remembrance of his love! This is
the place of rest after a toilsome journey; the cool shade to the weary
labourer; the waterbrooks to the panting Heart: Psalm. 42.1.
No mirth, no melody is to be matched to it: The joy and comfort of the Spouse
in the presence of Christ is a matter incredible to the carnal heart, Psalm.
63.52 6.
who never tasted of the refined Wines, and fat things in the house of God.

Eighthly, be the Son of God, what unspeakable joy to possess assurance that
our sins are pardoned, how unvaluable a prerogative to lay open thy cares into
the bosom of the Lord; persuade thy self of his readiness to hear, mercies to
forgive, and compassions to relieve them that ask in his Sons name. These
things will stir up intention and fervency in prayer; with what sighs and
groans will he confess and bewail his iniquity, who with a single eye does
behold the filthiness of sin, and look into his own estate? But lay aside
Meditation, and all is turned into form, comes to be of little use; For the
appetite will decay, if it be not sharpened, desire will cool if it be not
quickened. Meat received into the mouth, and spit forth again presently,
nourishes not; Seed must be covered, as well as cast into the ground. Reading
benefits little without Meditation (which is to the Word what chewing and
digestion is to meat that should feed the body.) 1 Timothy 4.15.


Ninthly, so delightful to the mind, as the knowledge of God in the face of
Christ, in whom the Father has revealed the treasures of his wisdom, the
riches of his grace, long-suffering, and mercy? Nothing can revive the soul so
much as the feeling of his love, and the assurance of his fatherly care over
us. Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us, and we shall be safe.

Tenthly, temptations, Psa. 77.5, 6, 11, 12. Psa. 145.5. Psalm. 119.52. Psalm.
119.93.
and terrors within, and troubles without. I remembered thy judgments, O Lord,
and was comforted: I will never forget thy precepts, for by them thou have
quickened me.

Eleventhly, As the mind is, the affections are tickled, and excited, the will
inclined, and stirred, which commands the inferior powers to execute what
the thought suggested.

Twelfthly,

Thirteenthly and lastly; The Word of God appears excellent, his works great,
Psa. 8.3.
his favor unspeakable, when we ponder them in our hearts. By it in our
solitariness we enjoy God, and our selves, and by conversing with him we are
fitted for, and made more profitable in all good company.

Quest. What use is to be made of this point?

Answ. If formerly thou have been a stranger to this exercise, now learn it,
begin to practice it, entertain not conceits, as though it were needless,
unprofitable, impossible, burdensome; for a Christian life cannot stand without
it; Thou shall find it exceeding beneficial, delightsome, easy, when thou art
entered into it; it is tedious only to corruption, to the heart renewed, it is
most sweet and comfortable: The neglect of this duty is the very cause why many
Christians enjoy not the tenth part of those privileges that God has provided
for them in this their pilgrimage: why they are kept under their strong
corruptions, and break forth offensively in their dealings in the world:
Moreover, how should a man be assured of Gods love, if knowing this to be a
duty required, he never address himself unto it in good earnest. It is not
sufficient to praise that which is good, speak well of the children of God,
keep our selves pure from the gross stains of the time, but we must hate
iniquity, and love righteousness, which they do not, who harbor such thoughts
as are displeasing to his Majesty: How can a purified mind take pleasure in
those filthy waters that flow from the stinking puddle of original corruption?
It is for swine to wallow in the mire, and corrupt fountains to send forth
muddy streams. If the treasure be in Heaven, the heart must be there; If the
soul be of an heavenly disposition, nothing is more delightful than to walk,
and commune with God. By thy thoughts thou may know thy self; as evil
thoughts will argue an evil heart, so good thoughts will argue a good heart:
for these cannot be subject to hypocrisy, as words, and deeds are, which
sometimes come more from respect of the creature, than of the Creator. It is
the will of God that we should not only seek the Kingdom of Heaven, but,
mind it, set our thoughts upon it, and turn the bent of our desires wholly
that way. Mat. 6.19 Col. 3.1
The Lord has given to us the great things of his Law, Hos. 8.12
caused the Scriptures to be written for our learning, and sent his Prophets
to declare unto us his mind, and pleasure; Christ Jesus (the great Dr. of the
Church) has revealed the glory of God, as it were in open face, and fully, and
clearly made known the last will of his heavenly Father touching man's
salvation, than which, nothing can be more wonderful, excellent, delightful,
comfortable: Now for us to pass by these things as strange, and now and then
only to cast an eye toward them, is it not an offense intolerable? How should
the heart be framed after the image of God, but by a serious Meditation of
heavenly things, whereby their likeness is stamped upon the soul; as by
Application, the seal leaves the impression upon the wax? We are strangers in
this world, who have no abiding City on earth, nor may place our hearts,
delights, and felicity here, but Heaven is our home, and our chiefest comfort
must be to have daily communion with God, Phil. 3.20
and to have our conversation in Heaven with him, which cannot be enjoyed
ordinarily without Meditation. If it be tedious at first, use will make it
easy, and the sweetness which at length we shall taste in contemplation, will
make it delightful.

Quest. What say you of superficial, and careless thinking upon some points of
Doctrine by fits, seldom in a good mood?

Answ. The chief praise of this duty, is, that we be much in its use, Psalm.
119.97. and 1.2.
from time to time, through the whole course of our life, and every day
thereof, that by recording holy and divine things, especially those which tend
to soundness in the matter of salvation a little time more or less (as
opportunity is offered, and occasions will permit) may be bestowed of us, to
dry up fleshly, and bad humors of earthly-mindedness, and worldlyness, etc.
and to quicken our dull hearts, lest after sleep in sin, the Devil draw us to
deep forgetfulness and security. Neither can any thing if it be weighed, be
less tolerable in the sight of God Almighty, than whereas he has given us
his Scriptures, which tell us his mind, and teach us how we may commune with
his Majesty, and for our behoof has given us an earnest charge to ponder them
in our heart, to have them in our mind, to make them the matter of our
cogitation, talk, delight, and practice; yet that Christians should not be
better acquainted with this heavenly course, nor be occupied thus, unless it
be seldom (as it were) upon high days, and that very coldly: as if God had
been earnest with us about a trifle, or as if he had offered us great injury
to move us thereunto.

Nor is this work slightly to be gone about, we must set our hearts to the
cogitation of heavenly things, thoroughly debating, and reasoning them with our
selves, so far as we are able, that we might be enabled to order our lives,
as well in one state, as another, and strengthened against the assaults of
Satan, and allurements of this present evil world: Meditation is a weighty
matter, and great pity that works of greatest importance should find the most
slight regard. It is the work of the Lord, wherein remiss dealing is condemned
as injurious to God, hurtful to our selves. Jer. 48.10
The fruit of Meditation stands in fervency; he that is not serious shall reap
no profit: How should the Word sink into our stony hearts, if it be not
minded? how should mercy, or judgment affect, if we dwell not upon the
thought of them? The heart must be pressed, before it will relent, and fixed
upon things above, before it will rejoice in them. Meditation is one part of a
Christian man's treasure, that is ever in his hand, can never be taken from
him: Many duties must wait their seasons, but all estates, conditions,
companies, actions, minister occasion of Meditation: nor can this liberty be
taken from us by the rage of Satan, or cruelty of persecuting Tyrants; for so
long as we be with our selves, we may commune with our selves, and with the
Lord. Now, the more excellent our treasure is, the more careful must we be to
preserve and employ it.

Quest. Seeing this duty is so necessary, profitable, divine, and comfortable,
what does keep so many from the practice of it?

Answ. The main impediment and hinderance of this (as of all other duties) is
the nourishing of some one sin, or more, unrepented of, which dimmeth the eye
of the mind, that it cannot behold spiritual things any more than the Owl can
behold the light, and cloyeth the appetite that it cannot relish heavenly
dainties, any more than a full stomach does hunger after sweet meats: As a
black cloth can take no other dye; so an impenitent heart is incapable of
Divine Meditation.

Quest. How is this impediment to be removed?

Answ. This bar can never be removed, till our hearts be purged, by humble,
and unfeigned repentance, hearty sorrow, free confession, and well advised
purpose of reformation. Wherefore as they that intend to keep any precious
liquor, will see that their vessels be clean: So they that will entertain holy
thoughts and desires, must give all diligence to keep their hearts pure, and
undefiled.

Quest. What are the special lets that hinder the performance of this duty?

Answ. They be diverse; whereof some do keep men that they do not use this
exercise at all; others drive them to use it without any fruit, or sound
profit, performing it slightly, and negligently, making it an idle Ceremony,
or a matter of course or custom.

Quest. What be these lets?

Answ. One is a deadly custom of ranging after fond, and deceiveable thoughts,
delights, and dreams of things either impertinent, or unprofitable, and
oftentimes impossible, being such as never were, nor are, nor ever shall be:
or else flatly wicked, hurtful, and pernicious. For the heart of man is
exceeding deceitful, slippery, fickle, wandering, and wicked, infinite ways:
Besides that, the subtle and malicious fowler, even Satan that old Serpent,
does set his snares so thick in our ways, that it is very hard for us to pass
through them without being entangled. To this head may be referred worldly
cares and pleasures, which clog the soul that it cannot mount aloft. For as a
bird (whose wings are limed) is not able to take her flight on high: So the
man, whose mind is entangled with worldly cares, and earthly delights, is not
able by holy Meditation to soar aloft up to Heaven: When the mind is carried
after other desires, it is unfit for heavenly Meditation, slow, and unwilling
to be occupied in cogitation, and consideration of any holy matters; he that
knows it should be performed, is sometimes grieved for the omitting of it, but
if the mind be impotent, as having lost her former strength, and constancy in
good things, for the time it is constrained to omit and let pass the same.

Quest. How is this to be remedied?

Answ. The remedy to such a one (as through an unsettled heart, cannot meditate
of any parts of Christianity, and godliness, having otherwise knowledge) is to
meditate of his present unfitness, looseness of heart, and earthly-mindedness,
to account it as an heavy burden; to accuse his heart; and to bring it to
kindly relenting, by considering how far it is off presently from that
mildness, humbleness, and heavenliness, and readiness unto duty, which ought to
be in him continually, and has been in him at some other time: Let him bring
his mind to these considerations, and say with himself; I have received a mind
to Heb. 13.18. Col. 1.10.
please God, to be teachable, and ready to any duty; I have opposed my self
against mine own will, and the Devils secret, and malicious counsel (though
sweet to the flesh) Romans 8.12.
I am not a debtor unto it, how can I then yield to the untowardness of my
heart, and to sin against my God I have tasted the fatness and marrow in the
house of God, and shall I return to feed upon the husks of the world? where are
the manifold and comfortable privileges which he has given me, that I might
be faithful unto him? Am I weary of my own peace, and do I haste after my own
sorrow? what pleasure can I find in vanity and vexation? what taste in the
white of an egg? Lord bring back this ranging heart of mine from the deceitful
dreams and fears that it has been snared in, and restore it to the liberty
that it was wont to enjoy, that is, to solace it self in thy favor and
communion with thee. And this gift being decayed, through my own fault, and
Satan's cruelty and subtilty forgive my cold and weak love of thee, who have
provoked thy Majesty (if thou would be provoked) to frown, and look amiably
on me no more: Thou Lord chargest me thus to seek thy face, and sweet
presence, which I have gone from, and for a time been blinded, as having no
ability to muse of any good thing, and have not seen that I was seduced, till I
perceived that I had lost this sweet liborty. Now therefore, O Lord, show thy
loving kindness in my distress and weakness, and restore to me this liberty of
my heart, which many of thy children do find and enjoy. Thus fall into
consideration with thy self, and be not discouraged when thou see thy
infirmities, who have learned to use all thy wants to humble thee, and to bring
thee nearer to God, rather than to go further from him: but let no man give any
liberty in any sort to his evil heart (when it is turned away from cheerfulness
and willingness in any part of Gods service) to go forward therein, for that
were to bring himself into utter bondage.

Quest. What is a second Impediment or Let?

Answ. Inconstancy; when we begin to set upon this duty, but are drawn aside
by the love of vanity, or discouraged by the difficulty of the exercise, and so
give over, and never set about it in good earnest.

Quest. What is the Remedy of this Impediment?

Answ. Labor to be constant, and if it be possible, let no day pass without
some line of Meditation, though many blocks be cast into the way. Impediments
will multiply, as we give way unto them; indisposition and unfitness get
strength through omission, and delay; but constancy and courage (our breaking
through all opposition) with careful watchfulness to tie up our thoughts, will
make this exercise in time, not only possible, but easy, and pleasant. It is
grievous for children at the first to go to school, but after they have tasted
the sweetness of study, and tried the fruit, they are contented to leave
country and kindred for love of learning: So the entrance into this exercise is
hard and tedious, but the progress full of heavenly delight and contentation;
nay, it is grievous to be pestered with vain, wicked, idle thoughts, whereby
communion and fellowship with Christ is interrupted. In the world it is
accounted a hard thing to be bound with cords and chains of Iron, to be vexed
with Tyranny an insupportable burden, what is it then to be bound with chains
of our corruption, to live under the power of lust, to be tossed to and fro
with the temptations of Satan? let us therefore set apart the fittest time for
this exercise, especially on the Sabbath (when spiritual idleness is as bad, or
worse than bodily labor) and to keep it constantly, not giving over (when we
have once begun) till we find that it has done our hearts some good: For
what will it avail us to knock at the door of our hearts, if we depart before
we have an answer?

Quest. May not a man spend too much time in private Meditation?

Answ. Yes, no doubt, and many do, who are so addicted to their own private
devotions, that they neglect other duties of Christianity, and of their
particular callings, the neglect of which, besides that it is a separating of
those things which God has joined together, does not inlighten and quicken the
mind, but rather (by the just judgment of God) blind and dull it. Hence it
proceeded, that the ancient Monks mingling bodily labor with Meditation,
proved excellent, whereas the Popish Monks, mured up in their Cloisters, and
exempted from bodily labor, proved the most noisome Caterpillars in the world.
Wherefore we must so choose our times for the performance of this exercise,
that God be not dishonored, nor our brethren wronged, by the neglect of
others. The object of this exercise being spiritual, is far too excellent for
the weak sight of man to be gazing on continually.

Quest. What is the third Impediment?

Answ. Many are hindered and kept back from this duty, for want of matter.
Notwithstanding the great variety of matter, which the word, and works of God,
and the due consideration of their own estate might minister unto them, yet
their hearts are so barren, and their heads so empty, that they are utterly to
seek about what to bestow their time, and their cogitations.

Quest. What is the Remedy against this Let?

Answ. The help is to bewail and lament the barrenness of their hearts, and to
enforce themselves to read, and hear the Word, and to mark, and observe the
works of God with greater care, conscience, diligence, and attention, than they
have done in former times. How a Christian is to furnish himself with good
matter, we shall show hereafter more fully. But for the present, every man
that is desirous to set upon this exercise, may propound these things to be
thought upon.

First,

Secondly,

Thirdly,

Fourthly, those that seem hardest to be followed, both the well-ordering of
his heart, and framing of his life so far as stands with Gods Word.

Fifthly,

Lastly,

Quest. What is the fourth Let?

Answ. Want of leisure and opportunity, by reason of necessary business taking
up the time.

Quest. How is this to be remedied?

Answ. Men must know, that the ordinary works of their calling, are not to put
this duty out of place, for if they do, it is by the unskilfulness, or
untowardness of them, who commit this fault; but the one of them is appointed
of God to go with the other, and both of them to stand together to the
upholding of one another. If any through necessary occasion and hindrances,
shall be constrained to let pass this duty of Meditation, when otherwise he
would have set upon it, hereby let it appear to have been necessarily passed
by, and without his fault: if he supply the want of this duty after his
necessary labor ended, and take heed that in no wise it be omitted
altogether, unless he can be assured with peace, that God in the omitting of
it has been remembered answerably some other way.

Quest. What should move us to be careful to take time for this duty?

Answ. Because we are earnestly exhorted by the Apostle to redeem the time,
that is, to take the opportunity, and lay hold on all occasions whereby we may
glorify God, or do good to others, and to our own souls. And the special spur
to provoke us to make choice of, and constantly to keep some time to the
performance of this duty, and to break through the manifold lets and
impediments, which stand in our way, is the due consideration of the fruits,
and effects of this duty carefully performed, which have been mentioned before,
and come to be named hereafter.

Quest. What things do hinder the fruitful performance of this duty?

Answ. Two principally, which may be called abuses of Meditation.

First,

Secondly,

Quest. How are these abuses to be remedied?

A. First, We must remember,

Secondly, To obtain, weigh how little worth this is to suffer our cogitations
to be fastened on things transitory with delight, much less about those that
are filthy, and evil, but rather bring them to be taken up in those which are
heavenly: This we are called unto, and until we learn, how weighty soever our
dealings be, to count this the chiefest, to keep peace with God, and ever fear
to offend him, it will be an hard matter to bring our selves to meditate with
cheerfulness, and fruit.

Thirdly, trust in our own strength? Success joined with self-presumption, is
perilous; for it tends to spiritual fullness, and surfeiting, two main and
great diseases of the soul.

Quest. What be the sorts and kinds of Divine Meditation?

Answ. It is fitly divided into two sorts.

First, Extemporary,

Secondly, Set, deliberate,

Quest. What is occasional Meditation?

Answ. It is a serious bending of the mind, to think upon some good and
profitable subject, being occasioned thereunto by such things as (by the
providence of God) do offer themselves to our senses, Psalm. 8.8. Joh. 4.10.
Prove. 6.6. Mat. 6.26.
eyes, and ears, as we go about the duties of our calling, or be exercised in
some honest, and lawful Recreation, for the continuance of our health, and
comfort of our life.

Quest. What Rules are to be noted touching this extemporary Meditation?

Answ.

Secondly, Spring, the fruitfulness of the Harvest, do Psa. 19.1. and 69.34.
and 89.5. Psa. 8.3, 4.
praise the Lord, that is, do minister plentiful occasion to us to praise God:
No month in the year, nor week in the month, nor day in the week, nor hour in
the day, which does not afford us some profitable matter to meditate upon.

Thirdly,

Fourthly, some necessary duty of our own.

Fifthly,

Sixthly,

Quest. What are the benefits of Extemporary Meditation?

Answ. 1 It fits for settled Meditation, as it furnishes with matter, and
prepares the heart to commune with God: as often salutations makes way to
familiar conference. He that observes the Lord in all his dealings, and makes
spiritual use of earthly things, shall with more ease find and fasten his
heart upon some good matter, and have it at command, to attend upon the Lord in
most serious Communication.

Secondly,

Thirdly, affairs, unless we lift up our hearts to God upon occasions offered
in our callings, journies, and such like, we shall deprive our souls for the
most part of sweet fellowship, and communion, and company with the Lord.

Fourthly,

Fifthly,

Sixthly,

Seventhly, our selves most of all, if we read this great volume of the
creatures, and take out no lesson for our instruction.

Quest. How should a man fit himself for extemporary Meditation?

Answ.

Secondly, is, give occasion to man to magnify the name of God, Psalm. 8.1, 2,
3.
who is great and excellent.

Thirdly,

Fourthly,

Quest. What is solemn, or settled Meditation?

Answ. It is a purposed and advised bending of the mind, to consider, and muse
on some good and wholesome matter, with resolution to work the heart into an
holy temper, to which end we separate our selves from all companies and
occasions that might distract us.

Quest. What Motives should persuade Christians to set upon this duty?

Answ. Besides the benefits before mentioned, which principally belong to
solemn Meditation, these considerations may be of force to quicken us.

First, to treasure up, and feed upon the Word of Life; Psalm. 119.11. Isa.
8.16. Luke 11.28. Rev. 1.3.
Bind up the Testimony, seal up the Law, among my Disciples. Blessed are they
that hear the Word of God and keep it. Blessed are they who read, and they who
hear the words of this Prophecy, and keep those things that are written
therein. James 1.21.
Receive with meekness the ingrafted Word, which is so called, because it
should abide in our hearts like a Siens in a stock, and never be removed, but
there grow and fructify unto eternal life. But the Word cannot take root, be
remembered, digested, we cannot feed upon it without Meditation: Mat. 24.15
Let him that reads, consider and understand.

Secondly, life. They set forth the way to blessedness, and direct how we may
be partakers of glory. Rev. 1.3. Joh. 20.31 1 John 1.3
And if we be not careless of the salvation of our souls, we must search into
this Mine as well by Meditation, as reading, or hearing.

Quest. What things must be looked unto, that this exercise might be taken in
hand with good success?

Answ. Choice of good matter, fit place, due time, holy entrance, orderly
proceeding, and seasonable, meet conclusion.

Quest. What rules are to be observed touching the choice of matter?

Answ. The matter of Meditation must be some good and profitable thing: as God
himself, his attributes, titles, properties, works of mercy, and judgment,
creation and providence, his Word, Threatenings, Promises, Commandments; our
own unworthiness, mortality, the afflictions and manifold changes of this life,
and how we may go through them with comfort.

But out of this variety, make choice of some one to be the subject of thy
discourse, for he that is every where, is no where: Nothing is more hurtful to
the body, than many medicines. The sore, to which sundry kinds of plasters are
applied, is hardly brought to a scar. Nihil tam utile est quod in transitu
profit. Senec.
Think upon one thing until thy affections be wrought upon. Nothing is so
profitable, that it can benefit much in passing by; he that comes by the fire
may feel a glympse of heat, he only is warmed that tarrieth at it: It is the
property of a weak stomach to taste many things, to hold and digest nothing.
Many matters thrust upon us at once, weaken and distract the powers of the
soul. To scatter the thoughts upon many things, is to attend nothing as it
ought: when the mind is distracted betwixt diverse things, the one is a
hinderance to the other, and we receive benefit by neither, nor bring our
thoughts to any good issue.

Secondly, of men make a difference: There is a time to mourn, and a time to
be merry; to put on sackcloth, and to sing for joy; and there is matter to be
found in Scripture which does suit with each disposition, and will serve to
stir up either affection. The occasions, diseases, comforts of Christians are
not the same, nor alike at all times: out of the treasury of the Word we may
gather instructions which will fit every occasion, season, and estate: Fitness
of matter is required, as in speaking, so in musing. Isa. 35.3, 4. and 40.28
Job 8.8. Deuteronomy. 4.32. and 32.7 Lam. 3.56 Psalm. 77.11, 12.
Art thou afflicted in conscience for sin? speak with thy heart of the promises
of pardon and forgiveness, that are freely made in Jesus Christ: enquire
diligently into Gods mercies of old, commune with thy self what former
experiences of love and favor thou have felt; call to remembrance how tenderly
the Lord has dealt with others upon their humble submission. If thou would
stir up thy heart to love or reverence the Lord, think of his majesty, power,
goodness, free grace, and undeserved mercy.

Thirdly, Ezekiel. 16.63. and 36, 31.
nor by thoughts stir up the corruption which we desire to subdue, nor cast
our selves into despair and horror for what has been done amiss, nor give
place to doubting of perseverance in respect of the time to come, for
humiliation must be joined with confidence in God, and watchfulness that we
fall not into sin again.

Quest. What if the heart be so barren, that we cannot call to mind any
thing that has been taught, nor remember any mercy we have received?

Answ. These may be observed as matters meet to have good room in our
thoughts, our own vileness, unworthiness, emptiness of grace, the goodness of
God in sparing our lives, bestowing outward blessings, forgiving multitude of
sins, and subduing them more and more; the sufferings of Christ in the Garden,
and upon the Cross; the Christian armor that must be put on, and kept about
us; how we might carry our selves uprightly in all estates, and affairs, that
our hearts be not disordered, nor our lives blemished. It is not amiss to
propound to our selves the mercies of the day, our special wants of grace, and
the chastisements that are laid upon us as matters to be mused on: that we
might be quickened to prayer and thanksgiving.

First, Jer. 17.9.
and that he must of necessity appoint some Psa. 55.17
set time to check, reclaim, and wean it from the same.

Secondly, suspicion, that so it may be more fit to be drawn to such heavenly
exercise, Prove. 4.21
and be stayed therein, and attend upon the same.

Thirdly,

Fourthly, and season, and affect his mind, that so he may learn how to
perform this duty, and quicken up himself to it often, and from time to time,
when he once knows how. If he cannot read, he must desire more help of
others, and for want of help, he must needs look to go the more slowly,
forward, either in the right and kind use of Meditation, or in any part of
sound godliness, and Christianity, seeing we cannot be ignorant of this, that
the old subtle fowler sets his snares, and nets, so thick in our way, that we
have no shift but to fall into them, and light upon them, except with the wings
of Meditation and Prayer, we mount up on high above them, and fly over them,
which to them that cannot read will for the most part be found more hard and
difficult.

Quest. What particular Meditations concerning duties to be performed or
practiced, may we find commended unto us in the writings of godly men?

Answ. They are many, and most excellent, amongst the rest, such as these.

First,

Secondly, where we are weakest.

If a man be fallen, he must not lie still, but return unto the Lord with
speed, though with much difficulty: for sluggishness and deadness will follow,
if the breach be not made up in our consciences, 1 Samuel 7.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
but if we seek to God unfeignedly, he is not far off.

Thirdly,

It is a good thing to rejoice in the Sabbaths, Psalm. 119.57. 2 Cor. 5.16.
and in the communion of Saints, yet we may not rest there, but in this, that
God is our portion always.

Fourthly, for trouble before it come, and in it we must meditate on the best
privilege that God has given unto us, laboring that our graces and strength
increase, as our afflictions do increase: For affliction is doubled, 1 Samuel
30.6. Psalm. 77.3
if the inward infirmity of the mind be not diminished. Although for want of
proof we count all afflictions hard, yet when we have experience of the fruit
and benefit that comes by them, confidence in God will make them easy, if our
cause be good: We shall never want somewhat to exercise us, sin, or trouble,
we shall have; neither is it unprofitable for us, to the end we may be ever
in the combat, for our life is a warfare.

Fifthly, too much in lawful; but the Lord does cross us in them. The things of
this world are too sweet and pleasant to our corrupt taste, but the Lord does
season them with bitterness; vain liberties breed much sorrow, and
unchearfulness.

Sixthly,

Seventhly, Prove. 3.14.
The practice of godliness is a rich and gainful trade, but if it be not well
followed, it will bring no great profit.

Eighthly,

Ninthly, when we are not only delighted in the present duties of Gods
service, but also as joyful to think of them that are to come; accounting that
the more they be, the better they are. The flesh is apt to take the smallest
occasions that may be, to favor it self, but our study must be to increase
in goodness, and to delight more in walking with God in a Christian course.

Tenthly, haunteth the ungodly. It were pity we should for some deceivable
folly deprive our selves of such happiness and peace, as he allows us even
here to be partakers of.

Eleventhly, Mat. 15.27
the more humble thou art also: One special point of profiting, is to know our
own vileness and misery better daily, that so we may come to know the
inestimable bounty of God the better, and what we are beholding to him for, as
receiving increase from him, multiplied pardons of sin, and daily increase of
grace.

Twelfthly, by. Look what care, conscience, zeal, love, and reverent estimation
of good things thou had when first thou embracedst the Gospel, the same at
least retain, and be sure thou keep still afterward. The more knowledge
that thou have, take heed thou be not more secure: for thus it is with many
at this day, who therefore do smart for it: we shall not enjoy the grace we
had at first, except we be as careful now to keep it, as we were then to
come by it.

Thirteenthly, they be afflicted, Exodus 14.25.
and we spared: We may not assign the Lord in what place and state, in what
condition and company we should live, but as strangers wait on him, even as the
handmaid on her Mistress, for whatsoever he will allow us: we are ready most
commonly to be called away by death, before we have learned how to live.

Fourteenthly, Psalm. 32.7. and 91.11
need not to fear any other peril. No good thing abides long with us in its
strength, and beauty, without new quickening: When we feel any weariness in a
godly course, by what occasions, or weighty dealings soever it be, the Devil
has met with us; therefore we must speedily take shame and sorrow, and turn
unto the Lord.

Fifteenthly, Psa. 90.12
by days, not by weeks, and months only. A great difference there is betwixt
the observing and viewing of our life from day to day, and the doing of it by
fits now and then; in the one we are safe, cheerful, and fruitful, in the
other rash, offensive, and often unquiet for it, walking in fear, and with
little comfort.

Sixteenthly, it. If a man can rejoice at the conversion of a sinner, Luke 15.6.
then is he the friend of Christ.

Seventeenthly, It is a folly,

Eighteenthly,

Nineteenthly,

Twentiethly, if we go not about to pull it out, and pluck it up, it will be
too deeply fastened in a short time. The like may be said of conceitedness,
though a man pray, and meditate, and keep a better course in his life than some
do, yet if he do it but slightly, that the flesh prevails much in hindering
the well performing of it, all will soon come to naught: It may be perceived
in the sway it bears in other parts of the life, and then let it be speedily
amended.

Oneantwentiethly, whosoever has most and greatest part therein: when we be
come to the highest degree of seeking God with much travail, yet we abide
hardly, and a short time therein, at least much unprofitableness and barrenness
will meet with us again afterward, by means of our corrupt hearts, which being
so, we need not think that we be too forward, when we be at the best.

Twoantwentiethly,

Quest. What other Observations fit to be meditated upon, shall we find in
the writings of godly men?

Answ. These and such like.

First, 1 Pet. 1.15 Psa. 39.1. Ephesians. 5.15
words, and deeds continually.

Secondly, Ephesians. 5.16 Col. 4.2.
and unprofitably spent.

Thirdly, Luke 14.15, 16.


Fourthly,

Fifthly,

Sixthly, Deuteronomy. 4.9. and 6.7.


Seventhly, Genesis 18.19
That we stir up our selves to Gal. 6.10
liberality to Gods Saints.

Eighthly, Col. 3.5.
lusts and affections.

Ninthly, Mat. 16.24
That we prepare our selves to bear the cross, by what means soever it shall
please God to exercise us.

Tenthly, Dan. 9.3, 4
of the time and age wherein we live.

Eleventhly, 1 Cor. 1.7. Tit. 2.13.
for our full deliverance out of this life.

Twelfthly, James 5.16.
and open our doubts, to the quickening up of Gods Graces in us.

Thirteenthly, Eccl. 7.4 Rev. 22.20
the vanity and alteration of things below, the more to contemn the world, and
to continue our longing after the life to come: And that we meditate, and muse
often on our own death, and going out of this life, how we must lie in the
grave, which will serve to beat down the pride of life in us.

Fourteenthly, Deuteronomy. 17.19, 20. Josh. 1.8. Psa. 1.2. Dan. 9.2.
That we read somewhat daily of the holy Scriptures for the further increase
of our knowledge, and understanding, if it may be.

Fifteenthly, and lives, wherein we have most dishonored the Lord, and raised
up most guiltiness to our own consciences; Neh. 9.38. 2 Chronicles. 34.32.
that we carefully see our Covenant with God kept and continued.

Sixteenthly, 1 Pet. 1.14 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22. 1 These. 5.22
and is weakened in us, and that we turn not to our old sins again, but wisely
avoid all occasions of sin.

Seventeenthly, Rev. 2.4. James 1.19 Romans 2.13
and all the holy exercises of Religion, diligently hearing it, and faithfully
practicing it in our lives and conversations; that we prepare our selves
before we come, meditate and confer of that we hear, either by our selves, or
with others, and so mark our daily profiting in Religion.

Eighteenthly, Ephesians. 5.20 Psalm. 116.12, 13. and 118.15.
and sound forth his praises for the same.

Nineteenthly, Phil. 1.23 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.
and the fruition of Gods presence in his glorious and blessed Kingdom.

Lastly,

Quest. What place is fit for Meditation?

Answ. It is indifferent whether it be in the house, Genesis 24.63 Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7
Act. 10.
or in the field, at home, or abroad, walking, sitting, or lying; but a
solitary place is fittest for this exercise: (as our Savior has taught us,
Mat. 6.6 Luke 11.1
When thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and pray privately) that being
alone, not distracted with noise, or company, we might with more freedom, and
quietness, talk with God. We cannot be too wary in avoiding all occasions of
disturbance, because every small thing will soon break us off in this service.
But some men can be more solitary at the Market-cross, or in the midst of a
throng, than some others in their closets (when they be furthest removed from
company.)

Moreover, it is not amiss to use one place often, for we find fewest
Impediments there where we are most accustomed to meet the Lord; Joh. 18.2
then we can best recollect our thoughts, and being gathered, keep them
together without distraction.

Quest. What say you of them that have no room to be alone?

Answ. First,

Secondly, Isaac, Genesis 24.63 Dan. 6.10
or in the house with Daniel, or at least (if they be hindered all the day
long) in his Psa. 6.7. and 4.4
bed with David.

Quest. What time must be set apart for the performance of this duty?

Answ.

Secondly,

Thirdly, is a cause of constancy, and constant order is a notable means of
continuance.

Fourthly, Jacob did; or the evening, Genesis 28.16
when he has ended his labors, which was the time that Genesis 24.63.
Isaac took; or the midst of the day, which was Act. 10.9
Peter's time; or any other part, and hour of the day: Psa. 55.12
David and Dan. 6.10
Daniel used three times a day to pray, and meditate.

Fifthly, The most quiet, will give leave) are the morning, evening, and night
season: which were the times approved among the Heathen, who for the better
imprinting of any thing in memory, give this counsel (which common experience
does confirm) to think seriously upon it in the evening before they sleep, and
to call it again to mind in the morning when they awake: Oh how sweet it is to
awake with God in the morning, and to salute him with our first thoughts! How
safe and profitable to prevent unsavory thoughts, and wicked projects, by
lodging up in our soul some holy matter worthy our chief employment; Psa.
88.13. and 119 48 Psa. 5.3. Psalm. 63.1. Job 1.5.
and to prepare the heart to walk with God before we enter into the world! He
that makes himself well ready every morning, shall pass the rest of the day
with much ease, and great comfort. It is much with what liquor the heart is
first seasoned; if it be well prepared with some heavenly Meditation before the
cares of this life take up the room; it will be kept in better order, in all
businesses, occasions, accidents whatsoever. How fit is it when we have tasted
of the blessings of the day, that we should render unto God the fruit, not of
the lips, but of the heart, and come into his presence from whom we have
received so many favors? What more expedient, than that we should commend our
selves into the hands of God with confidence, and make our accounts even, being
to lie down in his fear? What more excellent recreation after tedious labor,
than to recount the mercies of the Lord, his fatherly protection, the dangers
we escaped, what service we owe to God for all the tokens of his love, and
what cause we have to be humbled for all our sins. Of the night David says,
Psa. 16.7
My reins shall teach me in the night season. God used to speak to his
servants in the Psa. 119.55. Psa. 63.6 Job 4.13.
night by dreams and visions. When we are freed from cares and incumberances,
compassed about with darkness, that outward objects apprehended by the eye,
cannot draw the mind away; when all things are quiet, and still, then what
greater solace, or sweet refreshing can be found, than to lift up the heart to
Heaven? But these times may be commended as fit, not urged as absolutely
necessary.

Sixthly, but they the most, that have most leisure, and opportunity:
Meditation is an affirmative duty, which must be taken in hand when the Lord
calls thereunto, and puts it upon us by affording us means, and season.

Quest. What say you to them that pretend multitude of worldly business to
excuse the omission, and neglect of this exercise?

Answ. It is their sin, that they will thus set God against himself, as though
he should command them to do that which hinders them from another duty
commanded: God has appointed unto us our several standings in our general, and
personal callings, they are both of him, and the duties belonging to them both
will excellently stand together, if the Commandments of God be not contrary.
Nay rather, we should think that following of the world to be too much, which
is not ordered and moderated by due consideration, how far, and in what manner
we should deal in the world, so as not to be hindered from holiness by it,
but even to practice holiness in our earthly affairs. If we be rich, we have
the less cause to be holden from Meditation by wordly cares. If poor, we have
the more need of this duty to moderate our care, that it exceed not, nor carry
us to unbeleef; What example soever we have of the contrary in the multitude
of worldlings among whom we live, yet we must know, though others will not,
that we are not set here in our places to do as loose, and wretched servants,
who when they go to Market, neglect their Masters business, and mis-spend their
time.

Quest. What course must be holden to redeem time out of the world for
Meditation?

Answ. First, Walk so on earth,

Secondly, and manage both work, and means with discretion. If thy heart be
upright, fear not, Eccl. 10.10
God will teach thee how to walk. To the man that is good in his sight, God
gives wisdom, knowledge, and joy.

Thirdly,

Thoughts of the world do tickle us, and that may be determined in a few
sentences, and in a part of an hour, which may (if we take not heed) hold us
work the most part of a day. Worldly speech does so relish to our pallats, that
if we enter upon it, we cannot tell when to make an end. These two great
devourers of time must narrowly be watched against, for if we waste time
needlessly about the things of this life, we must needs fall short in better
matters.

Fourthly, Gird up thy loins with strength, and what thou do, Pro. 31.17
Eccl. 9.10
do it with all thy might; thy calling requires labor, trifling will not serve
the turn.

Quest. How must we make entrance into this exercise?

Answ. After we have selected something wherein we have some knowledge, or
understanding, we must make entrance unto it, by some short, yet earnest, and
pithy prayer unto God, to guide, and direct us therein by the gracious
assistance of his holy Spirit, without which we shall beat our brains to no
purpose. The Heathen began their business with invocation. Of our selves we
are not able to think one good thought, and if in presumption of our wit,
invention, memory, learning, or any thing beside, we set upon this work, the
success is like to be answerable to the beginning: without the help of God we
can do nothing that is good. The matter or form of our prayer must be this, or
such like: Oh Lord, since it has pleased thee to give me a mind ready, and
desirous to perform this holy duty (for which I humbly thank thy heavenly
Majesty) I beseech thee by thy holy Spirit to assist me therein, that I may
bring the same to a profitable and comfortable issue. Thou have charged me, Oh
Lord, to seek thy face, that is, thy blessed and holy presence; Let my soul
answer, and say with thy faithful servant, Lord, I will seek thy face; Oh cause
the light of thy face to shine upon me, enlighten my understanding, strengthen
my memory, and sanctify my will and affections; withold my ranging and
truant-like heart, from all trifling fantasies, deceitful dreams, vain hopes,
carnal fears, and worldly cares, wherewith it is naturally and customarily
entangled, keep it unto thy self, and unto thy laws, that it may wholly delight
and solace it self in thee, and grant that this point that I now go about to
think upon, may be so settled in my memory, and rooted in my heart, that I may
reap the fruit thereof all my life long, to thy glory, and my own comfort, and
salvation, through Jesus Christ.

Quest. In what order must we proceed after the entrance?

Answ.

Secondly, passages to the several heads, or places of reason. This is a great
help to lead us along in our discourse with more ease and facility, and to
furnish us more readily with profitable matter, touching the point we meditate
upon; as the marks set up in the highway, direct a traveller in his intended
journey; yet we must not be curious, nor scrupulous herein, for that would
distract the mind, and draw us too much from the right end of this holy
exercise, which is not to practice Logic, but to exercise Religion, and to
kindle piety, and devotion. And therefore it shall be our wisdom to take such
places or heads only, as are most pregnant, and ready at hand, and do more
easily offer themselves to our mind. But this order cannot be prescribed as
necessary, but as profitable only. In this we must labor with diligence, and
sincerity, that the understanding, or memory, may be bettered, or confirmed,
but the method is left free, as each man shall find it most convenient.

Thirdly,

Fourthly, strenthening of memory, is vain and to little purpose, unless the
affection be reformed and kindled. It is not the knowledge of good and evil,
but the hearty, and unfeigned affecting of the one, with a zealous detestation
of the other, that makes us holy, and happy. We must therefore endeavor to
have a sensible taste, lively touch, and feeling of that whereof we have
discoursed with our selves, according to the former direction, that we may be
affected either with godly joy, or godly sorrow, godly hope, or godly
reverence, etc.

Fifthly, benefits, we must labor with our hearts and affections to feel how
sweet the Lord is; that as doting Lovers do inwardly conceive a carnal delight
in thinking and speaking of them whom they so love, and of the letters, and
tokens they have received from them: So we may conceive a spiritual joy and
contentment by thinking and speaking of the Lord, and of his mercies toward us.

Again, if we meditate on sin according to the former example, we must labor
to feel the plague in our own hearts, 1 King. 8. Jer. 2.19.
and to know, that it is an evil thing, and bitter, to forsake the Lord our
God, and not to have his fear in us.

Sixthly, The chief things to be observed for the quickening and affecting of
the heart, are these.

1 Trial, examination and communing with our selves, wherein we have offended,
or come short of our duty.

2 Taking shame to our selves for our transgressions, joined with lamentable,
and doleful complaining, and bewailing of our own estate, either in respect of
the sin that abounds, or the grace that is wanting.

3 A most passionate, vehement, earnest, and hearty longing after the removal
of this sin, and punishment, which we hate, and obtaining the good things
which we love.

4 Religious quickening and calling upon our souls, by many strong and forcible
reasons, to hate evil, and follow that which is good.

The fifth is an humble, and unfeigned acknowledgement, and confession of our
own weakness and inability, either to remove the evil, or obtain the good,
proceeding from a broken and contrite heart.

The sixth is fervent Petition, earnestly craving, and begging this at the
hands of God, who is only able to effect it.

The last is cheerful confidence, raising and rousing up our souls, after such
doleful complaining, hearty wishing, humble confessing, unfeigned
acknowledging, and serious stirring up our selves, and earnest craving of what
we want, grounded upon the most sweet, and sure Promises of God, made to them
that call upon him in Faith, and upon the experience which the Saints of God in
all ages have had of the success of their suits, who were never sent empty
away, but either obtained that thing which they begged, or that which was much
better for them; but these things are specially observed in Meditation upon
some grace, or sin, as will be made more evident, and plain, by examples, and
are not ever necessary, that they should be particularly observed.

Quest. What is to be observed for conclusion of this exercise?

A. First,

Secondly, of company or business do urge us thereunto.

Thirdly,

1 Hearty thanksgiving to God, that has vouchsafed in such gracious measure to
assist us in the performing of this duty.

2 Recommending our selves, and our ways to him, that our life, and carriage,
and all our thoughts, and actions afterward, may be answerable to those
heavenly thoughts and desires which we have had, and express in the performing
of this duty.

3 Renewing our covenant to live by Faith, and to walk with God in all holy
conversation.

Quest. Declare this by some example, and first, how should we meditate on God
his infinite excellency?

Answ. Entrance may be made thus into it. Oh Lord, my heart desires to commune
with thee, that I might come into better acquaintance with thy Majesty; but of
my self I have no ability to conceive what is right, or to think a good thought
concerning thy highness: Teach me therefore, Oh gracious God, if not to
comprehend thine excellency, for that is impossible, yet so to confer with
thee, that I may apprehend in some measure how thou have revealed thy self, and
what thou will be unto me: that knowing thee in thy power, goodness, truth,
sovereignty, and grace, I may unfeignedly cleave unto thee all the days of my
life.

Quest. How must we proceed in this Meditation?

Answ. We must consider of his titles, properties, and works, observing how
infinitely he exceeds what excellency soever is in any, or all the creatures
in the world. 1 Timothy 6.16. 1 John 4.12. Exodus 33.20.
Oh Lord, thou dwell in the light unapproachable, whom man never saw,
neither can see and live; thou art incomprehensible by reason, and unnameable
by words, thy name is wonderful, and thy nature secret, I cannot comprehend
what thou art, I will labor to know what thou have revealed; I am not able to
behold thy face, let me see thy back-parts, for this is my life, and joy of
heart to know thee the only true God, which springs, and increases daily as
I come to the fuller knowledge of thee: and shall be infinite, because thou
art infinite.

I believe as thou have taught me (according to my manner, and measure) that
thou art a Spirit, without beginning, without cause, the first and absolute
being, living in and of thy self; giving being and life to all creatures;
infinite, eternal, incomprehensible, Genesis 17.1.
without composition, one in essence, and three in persons; most perfect, a
mere act, blessed, and glorious: all sufficient in thy self, for us a great
reward, void of all possibility to be what thou art not; great in power,
infinite in wisdom, abundant in goodness, everlasting in compassion, rich in
mercy, faithful, sincere, constant in thy promises, unchangeable in thy love,
gentle, easy to be entreated, just and righteous in all thy Commandments,
and Proceedings: the most absolute, universal sovereignty of all things both in
Heaven and Earth: Thy name is wonderful in all the world, for thou have created
all things, and by thy appointment they continue unto this day. Thou have laid
the foundation of the earth, and it abides, thou have stretched forth the
heavens, as a curtain, Job 9.7, 8, etc.
and in them or dained a Tabernacle for the Sun. Thou stillest the raging of
the Sea, and the proud waves are quelled by thy command: the day is thine, the
night also is thine, the Moon and Stars are the work of thine hands: Thou
thunderest from Heaven by thy voice, and bring the winds out of their
treasure; thou breakest up the deep, and causest the springs to ascend in the
valleys. Thou causest the grass to grow upon the mountains, and satisfiest with
thy goodness every living thing. The earth, Oh Lord, is full of thy goodness,
but thy glory shines most bright in the assembly of thy Saints. Oh what
wisdom, power, grace, mercy, love, longsuffering have thou manifested in Jesus
Christ, the brightness of thy glory, the image of the invisible God? what great
admirable things have thou done for thy people? thou have reconciled them being
enemies, redeemed them being bondslaves, justified them being sinners, of
vassals of Satan thou have adopted them to be thy sons, of unclean and
polluted, thou have washed, and made them clean: Thou guardest them with thy
Angels, protectest them against dangers, feedest them with fatness, and marrow,
and have reserved for them the Kingdom of Heaven. All thy Works praise thee,
Oh Lord, and thy Saints bless thee.

Great is the power, wisdom, holiness, and glory of the heavenly Angels, but
they are finite, created, dependent; great, immortal, glorious by participation
only, not able to behold the glory of God; great is the renown, dignity,
dominion of earthly Monarchs, but their persons are mortal, their glory fading,
their Dominion temporary, their power limited, what they are, they have by
deputation, during pleasure: As for our God, he is an infinite, eternal,
absolute, independent sovereign: His Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and
his Dominion endures throughout all ages, Psa. 90.1, 2
Before the foundations of the earth were laid, and ere the mountains were
formed, from everlasting to everlasting thou art God. But Lord thine excellency
far exceeds all that I can conceive; for what can a finite understanding
comprehend of an infinite being? I know very little of thy ways, much less of
thy nature; yea what thou have revealed of thy self in thy Word, does rather
make known what thou will be to thy people, than what thou art in thy self. As
the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are thy ways higher than our ways,
and thy thoughts than our thoughts.

Quest. How are these things to be laid to heart, and pressed upon the soul?

Answ. We must stir up our selves to desire full knowledge of God, and free
communion with him, to trust, love, reverence, glory in his name, and to walk
before him in all humility of mind. Blessed is the man that knows the Lord,
and cleaves unto him in love, fear, and affiance: yea happy is the man whose
God is the Lord. Look unto God, Oh my soul, observe his ways, seek his face,
and labor after more entire fellowship and familiarity with him. The knowledge
of God is excellent, easy, comfortable, it perfecteth the understanding,
seasoneth the will, changes the affections, rejoices the heart. The worth,
and excellency, the profit, and delight that knowledge brings, is answerable
to the object which is apprehended, in which the knowledge of God has
infinitely the pre-eminence. Nothing can rejoice the heart, in which the
goodness of God is not felt, nor his power, wisdom and mercy seen: Oh how
sweet and delightsome is it to behold the face of God as it shines in Jesus
Christ, to contemplate the happy Reconciliation of justice and mercy, by his
unsearchable wisdom, to think upon his long-suffering, tender love, and
never-fading compassion! Love the Lord, Oh my soul, and trust in his mercy,
serve him with fear, and rejoice in his holy name, for he is thy strength, thy
rock, thy portion, thy salvation. His favor is better than life; in his
presence is fullness of joy; he is goodness it self, the highness of all good
things that can be desired. The pleasures of the world are vain; earthly gain
breeds great vexations, Trial.
worldly honors vanish and come to nothing; but God is our pleasure, glory,
gain, everlasting, immeasurable; But woe is me, my sight is dimm, my judgment
vain, my heart carnal, my affections disordered, my thoughts loose, I know
little of God, I have been very negligent to seek acquaintance with him. These
vain things below, the gifts of Gods bounty have stolen away my heart, from
the giver of every good and perfect gift; If men speak, I tremble, if they
smile, I rejoice, in their presence I am reverent, if superiors; cheerful if
friends; if absent, I long for their company; if present, I desire to give them
content; if in distress, I mourn; if in prosperity, I rejoice; when separated
from them in body, I am with them in spirit: If I be ignorant of the things of
this life, I inquire after them; if I have sustained loss, I fall out with my
self for it, am pinched at the heart, learn wisdom, against another time, and
labor by double diligence to redeem it again: But I have greatly neglected the
knowledge of God, when he threatens, I am senseless; in his presence, I am
irreverent, dead-hearted when I appear before him; lumpish in Prayer, loose in
Meditation (scarce lifting up a thought to Heaven) soon tired in the Meditation
of heavenly things, never well till my thoughts be set at liberty, to range up
and down, not moved to hear thy name dishonored, little affected with grief
when I have offended. Taking shame.
I am ashamed and confounded in my self to hear, and see the wisdom of worldly
men in the affairs of this life, when I am so rude, and ignorant in the things
that concern my eternal happiness. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his
Masters crib; but I am not acquainted with the Lord my life, my light, my
portion, from whom I have received what I am, in whom I look to be eternally
blessed: Ah wretched man that I am. I look for reverence from mine inferiors,
for love from them of whom I have deserved little, to whom I can show small
kindness. If men give not credit to my Word, I take it grievously, but in these
things I have offered wrong to the Lord of life, who is glorious in Majesty,
dreadful in power, plentious in goodness, Hearty wishing.
most constant in his promises. Oh that mine eyes were open to behold the glory
of God, and my heart inclined to love him unfeignedly, entirely, above all
things; Oh that my soul were close united to his fear, that I could solace my
self in his favor, and stand in awe of his displeasure, that I might not sin
against him: Awake, Stirring up our selves.
Oh my soul, rouse up thy self to seek the knowledge of God in Christ, whom to
see is eternal happiness: What contentment can thou take in any thing, if God
be not seen in it? If the eye of the body, wherewith we behold this light,
be annoyed or dimmed, we will seek far and wide for help, and shall we not
labor to have the eye of our spirits cleared, wherewith we see the Lord, the
Son of Righteousness, the light, and joy of every Christian? Raise up thy self
to love, reverence, and trust in the Lord; Thou can not comprehend his
goodness, which is immeasurable, his power, which is unsearchable, his truth,
which is firm, and immovable; as his infiniteness passes thy conceit, covet
the more inseparably to cleave unto him: Could thou comprehend his nature,
he should not be all-sufficient in himself, nor able to satisfy thy desire:
But as God is infinite, and never to be comprehended essentially; so is our
joy in him bottomless, our help from him most certain, and our love to him
should be above measure, our confidence in him without wavering. Humble
acknowledgment.
Oh my God, I do confess before thee, that I am miserably stained with
ignorance, unbeleef, irreverence, I am full of carnal wisdom, harlotry love,
vain fear, fleshly confidence, corrupt joy; But grievously wanting in true
knowledge, sound faith, sincere love, and holy reverence of thy holy Majesty.
Nor is my want greater than my inability to help my self: the dead cannot
restore himself to life, nor the blind to sight, supernatural graces must come
from above; Petition.
Therefore unto thee, O Lord, do I direct my supplication, give me grace to
know thee as my chief happiness, to love thee as the perfect good; unite my
heart unto thee in Faith and Reverence, that nothing may draw me aside from
thy testimonies. Confidence.
It is thy promise to write thy Law in my heart, and to put thy fear in the
inner man; Oh Lord, thou art able to do what thou will, and thou will
accomplish what thou have spoken; unto thee I commend my soul, and upon thee I
will rely as long as I live.

Quest. Let the holy Angels be a second instance; how are we to proceed in the
Meditation of that subject?

Answ. We must consider their author, nature, properties, estate, end, and
offices.

The Angels are more excellent than man, but inferior to the Almighty, from
whom they received their being in time according to his good pleasure, and by
whose goodness such as abode in the truth were still preserved in their being,
and blessed condition.

The truth has taught us to define them to be spirits, finite, complete,
immortal, made after the Image of God, who through his grace and goodness abode
still in the estate of innocence and blessedness; they are created spirits,
limited in essence, compounded of subject and accident, act and possibility,
immortal by participation, mutable by creation, but established by grace in
their first state.

As spirits, they are invisible, immaterial, incorruptible, intelligent; as
chief instruments of Gods providence, they are furnished with great power,
incredible swiftness, singular wisdom, burning zeal, and undoubted
faithfulness; as blessed Ministers that ever attend his Throne, they are endued
with clear knowledge of God, inestimable love, exceeding joy, and admirable
glory.

Their life is spiritual, their state blessed, and permanent, for they stand
ever in the presence of God, behold his glory, and rest in him with full
delight.

Their End, and office, in respect of God, is to praise his Name, and execute
his Commandment; in respect of Christ, to minister, and attend upon him; in
regard of men, to rejoice at the conversion of a sinner, to guard and protect
the faithful against the dangers of this life, and the assaults of Satan, to
curb, bridle, and destroy their enemies, and to gather the elect together at
the day of judgment.

Quest. How are these things to be pressed, and urged, and applied unto the
heart?

Answ. 1 We must stir up our selves to admire the power, goodness, and glory
of God in himself, his tender care over us, rouse up our souls to the obedience
of Gods will, and respect of his children, and take courage to rely upon God in
the midst of dangers that compass us about; who would not fear thee, O Lord,
our God, glorious in Majesty, dreadful in Holiness, wonderful in Power! Thine
holy Angels excel in strength, are clothed with glory, that man cannot behold;
but all their might and goodness is derived from thee, a drop of thy Ocean, a
beam of thy Sun; if the glory of the creature be so great, the glory of the
Creator must infinitely surpass all comprehension. Oh how blockish am I, that
in the view and contemplation of the work, have not enlarged my heart to laud
and magnify the workman?

Arise my soul, and gird thy self to the cheerful, sincere, faithful obedience
to Gods Commandment. To do the will of God is Angelical preferment, a divine
and heavenly exercise, the greatest freedom and perfection. Make haste, delay
not to exercise his good pleasure. Lo the Angels in Heaven are thy samplers,
whom thou ought to follow. Let not that seem irksome to thee, that is
delightsome to them: esteem it not a burden, which is to them an heavenly
solace, and refreshing. Ah wretched man! why should I grudge to yield obedience
to my heavenly Father, or do his will negligently by the halves, when those
Noble spirits, and heavenly soldiers do always stand in readiness, to receive
his commands, and execute their commission? Does the world despise the poor
Saints of God for their outward baseness; yet I will honor them as the only
excellent, for God is their Father, the Angels their Attendants. We cap, and
bow to them that are nobly attended, gorgeously arrayed, honorably served, but
herein the Saints excel, if the thing be well considered. They are esteemed
the scum of the world, but respected of God in such manner that he has given
his Angels charge over them; the guard that attends upon his Throne is assigned
to watch over them. Walk on courageously, O my soul, walk on courageously in
the ways of piety. Fear not the assaults of Satan, the fury of any adverse
power that shall oppose it self; for more are with thee, than can be against
thee. If Satan with his bands endeavor thy destruction, The troops of heavenly
Angels do watch for thy defense, yea, the Lord himself is thy keeper, and
stands at thy right hand to save thee from all them that rise up against thee.
How great is the clemency, and tender care of the Lord over his poor people?
what tongue can express, what heart comprehend his infinite goodness? he sends
from on high his mighty soldiers to encamp about us, watch over us, preserve,
and save us, from them that lie in wait to vex, and annoy. Oh my Father, what
can I render unto thee for this thy great kindness, and unspeakable mercy? I
have nothing to give but my heart, which here I offer unto thee; and because I
am weak, exposed to the temptations of Satan, and allurements of this wicked
world, I pray thee give me thy grace, confirm, and strengthen me, that I may
imitate those pure spirits every day more and more, that I may praise thy Name,
execute thy Commandments, love thy Children, rejoice in the conversion of them
that go astray, and fight thy battles against sin and Satan.

Quest. Let man be the third example; how must we proceed to meditate on that
Subject?

Answ. For the better information of our judgment, we must consider these
particulars; the Author, the Matter, Form, End Properties, and Effects, what
are like, and what opposite. Man is inferior to the Angels, but of earthly
creatures most excellent.

The Author of this principal work is God himself, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
and that in special manner; for other creatures were made by a simple command;
man not without a divine consultation; Genesis 1.26.
others at once; man he did first form, then inspire: others in several shapes
like to none other but themselves; man after his own Image: others with
qualities fit for service; man for Dominion: He was made the last of the
creatures, and brought as the Lords Vicegerent into this world, as into a
parlour ready trimmed and prepared, for so worthy a guest.

Man consists of two parts, Matter, and Form; Heaven and Earth, a humane
body, and divine soul; and well may be called a little abridgement, map, or
table of the whole world. In his soul is the nature of Angels, though not so
active and extensive. In his body are the Elements, Meteors, Minerals, as may
appear both by vapors, fumes and spirits: He lives the life of plants, he
has the senses of beasts, and above all, the addition of reason. His body was
framed of the dust of the ground, in more exquisite manner than any other,
furnished with most excellent instruments, absolutely composed, both for
beauty, and duty, in all the works of holiness, and righteousness: For variety
of parts, sweetly knit together, and orderly disposed, it was wonderful; for
temperature, exact; for form, erect and straight. In the whole, beautiful,
glorious, strong, subject to no annoyance, most artificially fashioned, that it
might be the neat, stately Palace of a Divine, Noble, reasonable soul. In
every part beauty, strength, convenience meet together. The distinct
consideration of every member with its temper, proportion, placing, figure, and
use might well astonish: The soul of man was immediately created of nothing,
and being endued with most excellent faculties and gifts natural and
supernatural, was infused into the body, and inseparably knit (had not sin made
an unnatural divorce) to give life, motion, and sense unto it: Thus man was
made the wonder of the world, the principallest of living creatures, endued
with a reasonable soul, most divinely qualified, and strictly united to that
earthly mass to quicken and inliven it.

The end why man was made in respect of God, was the glory of his power,
goodness and wisdom, appearing in the work it self; of his justice in
rewarding man if obedient, and in punishing man if disobedient; of his grace
and mercy redeeming him fallen into the gulf of misery, and that man should
praise and magnify his glorious name. In respect of man, that he should live
blessedly for ever if he did obey: man by creation was immortal, for death is
an enemy, no consequent of nature, but a companion of sin; man dies not
because his body was framed of the dust, 1 Cor. 15.26.
but because he is infected with sin: Subjection to mortality, and all
miseries accompanying it, is a fruit of disobedience.

He is reasonable and intelligent, able to think, invent, judge, devise,
compose, discourse, remember, choose, refuse, suspend, and affect. These powers
being essential to man's nature do still remain, but very weak, and corrupt
since the fall. Also to man is given power to eat, drink, sleep, weep, laugh,
and speak, whereby he may communicate to others whatsoever he conceives: he
was perfectly conformable to the will of God, made after the Image of God, in
knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness: But the Image of God is defaced
with sin, there remaining only some relics in us, as the ruins of a
magnificent and stately palace, that served to show what once we had. Moreover
in the state of innocence, man was honored with great Royalties and
Prerogatives, for he had liberty to eat of every tree in the Garden, except
the tree of knowledge of good and evil; and was made ruler over all earthly
creatures, that he might freely use them to the glory of God, his own
necessity, and lawful pleasure: But these privileges he has forfeited by
rebellion against his Creator.

The effects of man are suitable to the faculties, and gifts he has received,
as to know God, call upon his name, worship him sincerely, preach the Word,
administer the Sacraments, govern, give counsel, contemplate the works of God,
read, write, confer, and dispute, exercise the works of virtue, and honesty,
govern the affections, reverence superiors, live peaceably, and such like. But
in all these things we have much dis-inabled our selves by wilful disobedience.

Would you see the prime dignity of man by comparison? In soul he is like the
Angels, invisible, immaterial, immortal, beautified with understanding, will
and power, enriched with admirable, divine gifts, whereby he resembles God,
or carries his Image. In body he is the perfection of all earthly things whom
they are to serve. In both he is the Epitome of all created excellency in
Heaven and Earth.

Quest. How must these things be applied unto the heart for the quickening of
affection?

Answ. We must stir up our selves to magnify the goodness of the Lord toward
mankind, to shame our selves in conscience of our sins and misery: raise up
the heart to the contempt of earthly things, and love of obedience, and seek
unto God to have his Image repaired in us again, through Jesus Christ. Lord,
Psalm. 8.4, 5, 6, etc.
what is man that thou visitest him, the son of man that thou so regardest him.
Thou have made him little inferior to the Angels, adorned him with grace,
stamped upon him thy Image, invested him with dignity, and crowned him with
glory and honor. Thou have given him Dominion over the work of thy hands, and
put all things in subjection under his feet: Thou have made him for thy
service, his soul to be thy habitation, his body to be the Temple of thy
spirit, and all other things to be serviceable unto him, the world, and all
that is therein for his use. All things are prepared for him; all things are
subject to him, he rules over all living creatures, they labor for him, obey
his command. Lord thou art the glory of man, man the receptacle of thy works,
thy wisdom, and power: But as mine excellency by creation exceeds, so does my
shame and misery by sin and disobedience: The higher mine advancement, the
lower my fall. This was my chief honor and title, that I was the Image of God;
This is my disgrace and ignominy that I bear the Image of the Devil: This is my
comfort, that God did love, delight, and desire to dwell in me, it is my
misery that I am cast out of thy favor, and lie under wrath: Ah what grief is
this to think, how my condition is altered, through my foolishness? once
immortal, now mortal; once pure, now impure and polluted; once rich in wisdom,
and grace, now blind, and naked; once the Image and free servant of God, now
the vassal of Satan; once at peace with God, my conscience, all creatures, now
at war with his Majesty, my self, all the world: Once a free man to walk at
liberty, now a bondslave that can do nothing but sin; once the Ruler of all
creatures, now of all creatures the basest (Satan excepted) once subject to no
annoyance, now secure from nothing that might offend. If a Noble man fall from
height of honor, to great contempt and bitter extremities, he is much
afflicted: much greater cause have I to bemoan my folly, who have cast my self
headlong from Heaven unto Earth, even to the gulf of misery and confusion. Oh
my soul, why do thou forget thy self, so much as to affect the base things of
this life? It is a shame for him that was to subdue all things, to suffer
himself to be subdued by men, and to become a Lacquey to his vile affections,
doing honor to the three great Idols of the world, profit, pleasure, and
preferment. The world is too vile for thy delight, thou art created for more
divine service, the Lord himself covets thy love.

The glory of the world is put under thy feet, as things to be trodden upon,
that which thou should affect is far above, heavenly and glorious. If the
fashion of the body should be so changed, that the face and eyes bowed to the
earth continually, should never be able to look up, it would be grievous: But
if the soul which should be lifted up to God, do creep upon earth, be glued
to worldly, vain delights, the alteration is more uncomfortable and monstrous.
He that subdueth the world, does yield himself to the service of God, which is
perfect liberty; But when we become slaves to the world, we labor to make
God servant to our lusts, which is most abominable, and accursed. The glutton
makes God his caterer, his belly his God, and himself the guest; The covetous
worldling would have God his Broker, and himself the Usurer; The angry sinner
would have God his executioner, and himself the Judge; The ambitious inquisitor
can sometimes make God and Religion his style, but honor shall be his God,
and lust reign. The Lord himself is abased in our esteem. Love the Lord, Oh my
soul, and give thy self to the obedience of his Commandments, thou art the
perfection and end of all creatures, the Lord thy life, perfection, comfort:
what thou art, is of him, that thou shall be happy, is of his goodness; thou
owe him thy self, thou wast created for his glory; defile not his Image,
pollute not his workmanship, be not unthankful for what thou have received,
forget not thy own estate. O heavenly Father, I heartily desire to follow thee
whithersoever thou shall lead me, to do what thou shall command, and to cleave
unto thee as long as I live: But I find the flesh rebellious, soliciting
daily, yea, and violently haling to those things that are evil: Ah miserable
wretch that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? Thou, Thou
Lord only art able, and willing to vouchsafe help, and succor: To thee
therefore do I fly, I pray thee have mercy upon me in Jesus Christ, and
repair the lost image of thy self. Thy hands have made me, and fashioned me,
give me understanding, and I shall live; thou createdst me pure, thou can
restore me, though corrupt. Create in me a clean heart, and renew a right
spirit within me: Breathe into me the Spirit of Life, and establish me in
the way of thy Precepts; Heal my soul, for I am defiled, and cause me to grow
up unto the perfect stature of a spiritual man. I have wounded my soul, but
cannot cure it, defaced thy Image, but cannot fashion it anew: Look upon my
misery, dear Father, forgive my sin, and make me a new creature for thy
infinite mercy, begin in me this good work, and perfect it to thy praise; in
thee do I trust, to thee I seek for grace, for in thee the fatherless find
mercy.

Quest. I would know in the fourth place, how we might proceed to meditate on
Gods infinite greatness?

Answ. God is infinitely good, without quality, infinitely great, without
quantity, his excellency is incomprehensible, and surpasses what we can speak
or think. But for our proceeding in this Meditation according to our capacity,
we may consider, what it is, what be the parts of it, and how incomparably it
exceeds whatsoever might be likened unto it. Great is the Lord, and worthy
to be praised, Psa. 145.3
and his greatness is unsearchable. Our God is the God of Gods, and Lord of
Lords, a great God, mighty, and terrible, who being both the original and end
of all things, Deuteronomy. 10.17.
cannot rightly be said to be any thing; for he must needs be above all,
and better than all. Such is his greatness, that he is that one, infinite, and
eternal being. See how that I, even I (says the Lord) am he, Deuteronomy. 32.39.
and there is no God with me: I lift up my hand, and say, I live for ever.

Thou Lord art so great, that thou art most perfectly one in essence, one in
number: The Lord he is God, and there is none besides him. As thou art Deuteronomy.
4.35. Mark 12.32. 1 Cor. 8.4, 5, 6.
one in essence, so art thou one in thy purpose, determination, promise: For
how should thou that art one in number and essence, be otherwise than thy
self? All things do turn upon this point, and hasten to this center: if it were
not unity, multiplicity would destroy it. Thou Lord art infinite, without all
limits of essence, without matter, or form, efficient, or end; thou art without
all dimensions of length, breadth, or thickness; thou art without all limits of
place, and yet fillest all places in Heaven or Earth; Thou art wholly without,
and within all, and every place; no where excluded, and no where included, and
that without all localmotion, or mutation of place. Job 11.8, 9.
Thou art higher than the Heavens, deeper than Hell, longer than the Earth,
broader than the Sea. 1 King. 8.27. Psa. 139.7 Isa. 66.1. Act. 17.27.
Simply and purely every where by essence, and presence. A God at hand, and a
God a far off. Thou movest or changest all things, without either motion, or
change in thy self; thou art in every place present, in every place entire,
within all things, and contained in nothing; without all things, and sustained
by nothing; but containest, sustainest, and maintainest all things. Thou art
unspeakably present in every place by essence, power, wisdom and providence,
but thy glory is specially manifested to the Angels, and Saints in Heaven; thy
grace, power, and mercy, to the Saints on earth, whom thou do favor, with
whom thou dwell, Job 36.22, etc. 1 Timothy 1.17. 2 Pet. 3.8.
for whose deliverance thou will arise, and have mercy, into whose hearts thou will shine comfort. Thou art eternal, before and after all beings, without all
limits of time, past, present, and to come; Thou art at all times, but without
respect of time, an everlasting, and immortal God, before, and after all times,
and in all times for ever and ever. Thou art the King of ages, the maker of
times, the Inhabitour of eternity. Psa. 90.1, 2. Isa. 57.15. Psa. 92.7, 8. and
102.12, 13, 26, 27. Isa. 41.4. and 43.10, 11. Jer. 10.10 Isa. 40.28.
Before the mountains were made, and ere ever thou had formed the earth, from
everlasting to everlasting thou art God: Everlasting in thy self, in love, in
the fruits of thy favor, toward thy people, which thou have chosen, in wrath
and indignation against the obstinate, and disobedient. O God thou art great,
and we know thee not, neither can the number of thy years be searched out;
Isa. 40.15, 16.
All powers on earth come short to be shadows of thy greatness; The Nations
are as a drop of a bucket, less than nothing, and vanity before thee.

Quest. How must we apply these things to the heart?

Answ. We must stir up our selves to magnify the Lord, love, fear, reverence,
and trust in him for ever. Great is the Lord, and worthy to be praised: for
he sits upon the circuit of the earth, and stretches out the Heavens like
a curtain: He brings the Princes of the earth to nothing, and lifts up the
meek to honor: Great is our Lord, and of great power, his understanding is
infinite. The men of this world labor to set forth the state, and magnificence
of earthly Monarchs, the largeness of their dominions, greatness of their
power, continuance of their house. Oh my soul, why art thou so silent, awake,
and sing aloud of the praises of God, whose greatness is infinite, eternal,
incomprehensible, thou can not by searching find him out: but remember to
magnify his work, which men behold. Every man may see it. Man may behold it
afar off; Love the Lord, Oh my soul, and stick fast unto him as thy life and
treasure. He is that infinite, unbounded, eternal goodness, passing all humane
both search, and sight, that fills and includes all things. Alas, how do
we affect a thousand things that cannot be effected, or if obtained, do
vanish, or cloy, and can no more satisfy desire, than salt water quenches
thirst? Oh that true love, like a strong stream, which the further it is from
this head of eternity, would run into it with greater violence. In Gods love
there is no mixture of sorrow; no want of delight, fullness of pleasure, all
manner of contentment. Alas! alas that ever so many cold winds of temptation
should blow betwixt God and our hearts, to make our affections cooler unto him.
What dull metal is this we are made of? we have the fountain of felicity and
eternity, and yet complain of want and weariness. Do we freeze in the fire,
and starve at a feast? Have we God to enjoy, and yet pine, and hang down the
head? Let me have my God, and let me never want him, so shall my joys be
lasting, pure, incomprehensible: for possessing him that is the pure, eternal,
and an all-sufficient good, how should I not find fullness of joy, and
contentment in him? Oh my soul, fear the Lord, and stand in awe of his Majesty,
for he is a great God, and terrible, a King above all Gods. At his presence
the earth trembles, the mountains quake, and the foundations of the world are
shaken: The Angels cannot behold his glory, the Sun and Moon are not clean in
his sight. Fear the Lord, and depart from iniquity; harbor no wicked plot in
thy breast, contrive not evil in thy thoughts: for thou have to deal with a God
that is light of hearing, who dwells in thy heart, and knows thy
Imaginations long before: And what needs any other evidence when the Judge is
witness? His eyes are as flaming fire, his feet are as burning brass, he will
tread down the wicked in his wrath, and vex them that hate him. Serve the Lord
with fear, and commit thy self to him in well doing. Trust in the Lord at all
times, Hab. 1.12. Psa. 55.18, 19.
and stay upon his mercy. He is the everlasting Rock, constant in promises,
ever present for our aid, unchangeable in love and favor. No place can hinder
God from doing us good; distance, or difficulty may be impediments to all the
creatures to stay their help, but God at a blush fills all places, to comfort,
or confound (as it pleases him.) He that is freed from dimensions, may
pierce, and penetrate, enter and pass whither he pleases, without
probability, or possibility of resistance. He has created the world, and yet
is not weary, his provision is no whit abated, his power nothing diminished:
Let him carry us which way he will, make the passages never so troublesome and
perilous, yet the same hand that makes them hard, will make them sure; and if
we be faithful to him, will master all the difficulties for us. Let him cast
us into such great miseries of long continuance, that he seem to forsake us,
as if he would not return to our help, yet we know that he is everlasting,
the Holy One of Israel, who cannot leave them for ever that rely upon him. O
God, as I have trusted thee with the beginning, so will I trust thee with the
finishing of my glory: And though never so many or main hindrances of my
salvation offer themselves, and after all hopes threaten to defeat me, yet
faithful art thou who have promised, who wilt also do it.

Quest. I would now hear how we must proceed to meditate on the Love of God?

Answ. We must consider of the efficient cause, subject, end, objects,
effects, properties, and kinds of this Love; what is like, what opposite unto
it.

The Love of God signifies either that love whereby God loves us, Joh. 5.48.
1 John 3.17 1 John 2.15
or that affection whereby we being united unto God, do rest in him with
pleasure and delight: Of this Theological virtue first, in order, not the
first, in fruit, and continuance, the greatest, the end of the Commandment,
the bond of perfection, the fulfilling of the Law, I purpose to meditate by the
grace of God. This Love is a grace supernatural, and is neither in us by
nature, nor can be acquired by our endeavor. Yea, the measure of love is not
defined according to the endeavor of the received, but the pleasure and will
of the Spirit measuring and pouring it into every one.

The author, or principal cause of Divine Love, is God himself, by his blessed
Spirit renewing, and regenerating our hearts to the love of his Majesty. Love
is the fruit of the Spirit Gal. 5.22
. Joh. 4.7 Ephesians. 6.23.
He that loves is born of God. Love is of God, and God is love: He loves us
in his well-beloved, and is the ever-springing fountain of all love in us. The
Spirit opens our eyes to see and behold the incomprehensible goodness of God,
without which there is no love: For of a thing unknown there is no desire. The
same Spirit infuseth the grace of love, whereby we are enabled to love God,
and quickened unto it; Romans 5.5
whereas of our selves we are destitute of all power and ability to every
spiritual duty. And the Spirit sheddeth abroad the love of God in our hearts,
whereby they are warmed to love God again: The means which the Spirit uses for
this purpose, is the Word of Grace revealing the incomparable love of God in
Jesus Christ toward us most miserable wretches.

The less principal cause of love is man renewed by the Spirit. 1 John 4.7
Deuteronomy. 30.6
Man regenerate does love the Lord, not of himself, but by the grace of God:
The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart to love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, and with all thy soul. Faith well rooted, will Gal. 5.6 Quantum
cognoscimus, tantum diligimus.
animate, quicken, and move love. Faith and Love are both graces supernatural,
infused at once in the same instant of time; but in order of working, Faith
has the precedence, and kindles Love.

From this it follows, that the subject of Love is a renewed heart,
enlightened with the true saving knowledge of God, purified by Faith, and
seasoned by Grace. For Love is a spiritual affection in the reasonable part,
presupposing knowledge, and affiance, whereby the soul goes forth to embrace
the good it apprehends.

The end of Love is the possession of God as the chief good. Love (as we see)
makes man and woman one, and so it does couple us to God. It is a weight
whereby the heart is inclined toward God, and wholly carried unto him.

The object of Charity, is God in Christ; God is to be loved, not only as he
is good, merciful, gracious, long-suffering, and bountiful; and as he does
love, and daily lade us with his blessings: But also as he is wise, just, and
powerful, even as he does chastize and visit us with severe corrections: For
as the true love of children toward their Parents does effect this, that they
love their Parents, and persuade themselves that they be beloved of them,
though they be reprehended, crossed, corrected, and cannot obtain what they
will; so true Love does look to God when he sends persecution, war,
sickness, or any other calamity. God is to be loved in Christ, in whom he is
well pleased, greatly delighted in us: If any man love not the Lord Jesus, let
him be accursed. Christ has redeemed us unto God, and reconciled us being
enemies. He is ordained of God to be our Lord and King, advanced at the right
hand of his Father, to give salvation unto Israel. Love is a supernatural gift
or Grace, whereby we Psa. 63.8 Josh. 22.5. Deuteronomy. 4.4
cleave to God in Christ, and desire to possess him with joy, and comfort.

The acts, or effects of Love, presupposed, or comprehended under it, are these.

First,

Secondly, him, nothing equal unto him.

Thirdly, Whose keeps the Word, 1 John 2.5.
in him verily is the love of God perfected.

Fourthly,

Fifthly, of the truth: If we love one another, 1 John 4.12
God dwells in us, and his love is perfected in us.

The Properties of Love are,

First,

Secondly,

Thirdly,

Fourthly, Faith shall cease, then Love shall come to full strength, and glory.
Not that the Saints can love God in measure answerable to his goodness, and
excellency: for a finite virtue cannot infinitely love the infinite God, the
infinite Beloved; but their love shall be preserved so far as a creature is
capable.

Fifthly, of Love, what is it but the gate of Heaven, the beginning of
everlasting happiness, not the least portion of that glorious inheritance which
we shall then fully possess, when love is grown to perfect ripeness!

The degrees and kinds of love are diverse. We love God for good things
received, or benefits past; we love him also for the good we expect, that is
eternal happiness, with the comforts of this life; and we love him for
himself, and for his own glory. God is to be loved for himself, and not for
another end, form, or efficient; for he is the last end of all things, his
essence is perfect goodness, his goodness is from himself, and not from an
external efficient: but nothing hinders why God should not be loved for his
blessings received, or hoped for.

Each grace of the Spirit is for original divine, in nature excellent, for use
necessary, bending toward Heaven: but if comparison be made, love must have
the pre-eminence for use and continuance. The dignity and sweetness of love
will appear by the baseness of what is opposite: That is best whose contrary is
the worst: Now what is more abominable, hateful, pernicious, so full of
vexation, and horror, as the love of sin, love of the world, and hatred of
God? As continual fear, unquietness, discontent, does accompany these with
eternal confusion in the latter end: So unspeakable joy, peace, contentment,
security do wait upon it; and the end shall be everlasting glory, and full
fruition of God, in Heaven.

Quest. How must these things be applied to the heart?

Answ. We must stir up our hearts, to the hearty, entire love of God, by
examination, taking shame to our selves for our manifold slips, and great
slackness, complaining of our great bondage, and inability to raise up our
souls, hearts, wishing and longing to be fired with the love of God, calling
upon our selves to be more hot, and fervent, and seeking unto the Lord, by
earnest, and hearty prayer.

Love the Lord, Oh my soul, and all that is within thee, love him with all thy
strength, and let his glory be dear unto thee, for he is the object of love,
gracious, Affectus amoris pro objecto habet pulchrum and bonum.
merciful, long-suffering, abundant in goodness, and truth: he is thy Father,
thy God, thy Husband, thou art bound unto him by covenant; his love to thee is
free, and of mere grace; thy love to him is debt, many ways due from thee,
deserved by him: He loves thee for thy profit, thou art to love him for thy
own good, for in his love stands thy perfection: He is the chief good,
absolute, all-sufficient, the rest, and stay of the mind, beyond which it can
desire nothing, in whom it finds incredible joy, and comfort, and shall
possess everlasting consolation, when it is immediately united to him by
vision, and love. The former blessings thou have received, the future good
things thou do expect, and look for, do challenge this duty at thy hand.
Publicans and sinners love those that love them, and for kindness return
affection: God has loved thee first, loved thee when thou wast not, when thou
wast miserable: He has laden thee with his benefits, given thee more than
thou would desire, and prevented thee with favors which thou never did
ask; he made thee of nothing, he is thy preserver, redeemer, Savior, who
has delivered thee from death, and hell, and vouchsafes unto thee, life and
mercy; his blessings upon thee are innumerable, pass all thought and reckoning.
What can thou render less than hearty affection for these inestimable
favors? Oh my soul, thou can not love thy self truly, if thou love not him
above all things, for thou art coupled to him by love, in whose presence is
fullness of joy, without whom to be, is to be most miserable. Thou can not
but desire happiness, but happy thou can not be without love. But ah wretch
that I am, I find mine affection is weak toward God, strong to vanity. Those
we love, do we not love to be present with them? If they be absent, do we
not think long till they return again? Are we not grieved to hear them wronged
by word or deed, whom we esteem dearly of? are we not desirous to give them
content? does it not cut us if we do them any harm? Are we not with them in
thought, though absent in body? glad of a letter that comes from them? is not
the messenger welcome that can bring us tidings of their welfare? But I find
little joy in coming publicly or privately into Gods house, or presence. I
think little of him, and that but overly, I speak little to him, and that not
without weariness and distraction. Nay, I am like those children, who can play
abroad all the day long, and never care to look unto their Parents: When did my
heart long to return home, and to be with Christ? Though God through sundry
troubles do even smoke me out of this world, yet I will not come away in mine
affection. When I see Gods name blasphemed, and all wickedness committed, do
mine eyes gush out with tears? or do not I offend daily, and pass it over,
taking too light penance of my self? It is irksome to me to do his will; I do
not long for his presence, nor bewail his absence; I do not study to please him
in all things, nor can I rejoice in the prosperity of his Saints: when I my
self am in misery and distress, I cannot prize his favor, am not cheared with
his promises, do not delight in his statutes above all things: His Word is his
Letter sent unto me, but I am not glad and diligent with care and conscience
to read it; vanity has stolen away my heart, and the transitory bewitching
pleasures of the world (which cannot profit) have taken up my thoughts. This
has been mine impudent behavior against thee my God, which I cannot with any
words of indignation sufficiently discover.

If a woman should be dead in the nest, when her husband were before her, but
should be affectionate to every stranger; if she should not care how long
she were absent from him, but think her self best while they were asunder; if
she cared little how her loving husband were offended, casting that at her
heels, which he takes to heart, were not this shameless behavior in her? And
shall I not be ashamed to show no more love to thee, to whom my soul is
married in Christ? Oh my soul! what can thou find in the world, why thou
do affect it? it has bred much vexation and sorrow, thou have been crossed
and molested with it, the more thou love it, the greater trouble and
coffeehouse thou find therein, and will thou still take pleasure in thy
pain? what can thou not find in God, and that above all thought and conceit,
why thou should entirely cleave unto him? what occasion could thou find
at any time to draw thy affection from him? will thou leave the fatness, and
marrow that is in the house of God, to feed upon the refuse, and scraps that
this world affords? Ah wretch that I am! who shall deliver me from this
bondage of sin? I am full of uncharitable and false love. I can love my self, I
have affection enough to the things of this world, to the gifts of God, and
those the meanest, more than to the giver; as harlots to rings, gold,
bracelets, more than to the sender. But I have not power to raise my soul to
the love of God in Christ, here my affections lie dead, and will not mount
aloft. Oh that the love of God did possess my reins in such sort, that in
thought I might be still with him, rejoice in his presence, and walk before
him in dutiful obedience! Oh that my heart did burn with love that is strong as
death, hot as coals of Juniper, that has a vehement flame that no waters can
quench, no floods can drown, no allurements can draw aside. Why art thou so
dead, Oh my soul? why do thou not lift up thy self to the love of God? whom
have thou in Heaven but him? and who in earth is to be desired in comparison
of him? for whom do thou reserve thy prime affection? for the world, sin,
vanity? Oh adulteress, know thou not that the amity of the world is enmity
with God? thou have gone astray, and deeply defiled thy self with the love of
sin, return now unto the Lord, and embrace him with most entire and dear
affection: what thou have bestowed upon the world, pleasure, lusts, carnal
delights, to thy great discomfort, now set it wholly upon things above, that it
may find rest and comfort. Oh Lord, I beseech thee, who art only able to purge
my heart of all filthy, profane love, and to fill it with the pure love of thy
holy Majesty, this is thy promise, I will circumcise your hearts, and make you
love me with all your hearts; therefore I am bold to make this prayer, and
will confidently wait upon thee for this mercy.

Quest. How should a man proceed to meditate on the Fall of our first Parents?

Answ. He must consider the subject, causes, and end of that act, aimed at,
but not obtained; the degrees, properties, and effects of it.

By the Fall of our first Parents, we understand the first sin of Adam, and
Eve, whereby they transgressed the Commandment of God, in eating the forbidden
fruit: this is fitly so called, because, as an heavy body falling upon some
hard and sharp rock is greatly bruised, and hurt: so man, after he had
received so many, and great gifts from God, sinning wickedly against his
express charge and commandment, did grievously wound himself.

The subject of this transgression was our first Parents Adam, and Eve, made
after the Image of God, perfect in stature of body, and strength of mind,
enriched with excellent prerogatives of liberty and dominion, planted in a
garden of delights, that they might dress it, and keep it, favored of God, and
admitted into near fellowship with him.

The principal outward cause of man's disobedience, was Satan, the Prince of
darkness, that old murderer, who being fallen from God, and shut up under
condemnation, did with incredible fury, and malice, seek the dishonor of God,
and the destruction of mankind: This envious one spying his opportunity, set
upon the woman, as the fitter to be made his prey, when she was alone; and by
his subtilty beguiled her; The Serpent, the most subtle of beasts which the
Lord had made, was the instrument that he used to seduce the woman; and the
woman her self being first in the transgression, was made the willing
instrument of her husbands destruction. The quality of the fruit as it was good
for meat, and pleasant to the eye, was by accident a cause that moved them to
eat, which yet they might, and ought to have forborne, having liberty to eat of
all the trees in the garden besides, and being strictly charged upon pain of
death not to taste of it. The just, and good Law of God was a blameless
occasion of man's sin, as it did forbid an act in it self indifferent, that it
could not be done without sin. The Law and Sin, as well as the Law and
Obedience, work together, though in a distinct manner: for of Obedience the Law
is a principal cause, but of sin an accidental, as working besides his own
scope, and main drift, which is to savor nothing but life, and also as a
contrary to sin. The Lord in his wise providence did work in the fall of man,
as the Law by accident was occasion of it, but he is not the author of his
sin, he did not constrain him to offend, not withhold from him any grace, that
by Covenant, or otherwise he was bound to give him.

The principal inward cause of this transgression, was the will of man, freely
turning from the Commandment of God, which he might and ought to have obeyed,
but would not; and willingly hearkening to the suggestion of Satan, which he
should have resisted, but did not. The sin of man was the eating of the
forbidden fruit, not absolutely considered in it self, but in respect of the
Commandment and charge whereby God had severely forbidden the tasting of the
fruit of that tree, and had threatened punishment to them that should transgress.

In evil actions no end can properly be assigned, for the end is of a good
thing, and to be desired. But Satan in that temptation aimed at the dishonor
of God, and the damnation of Man. Man being deceived by the old Serpent,
proposed this end to himself, but obtained it not; that he might satisfy his
superior affection to the Image of God, and his inferior to the fruit of the
tree. The Lord, who brings light out of darkness, out of his infinite wisdom
did order this evil to the setting forth of his mercy, and justice, and the
utter confusion of Satan, contrary to his purpose, and intendment.

In this their disobedience we may observe these degrees: The impression of
the suggestion; obscuration of their thoughts concerning the excellency of God;
forgetfulness of what was done before, and what God commanded; doubting of the
truth of God; tickling of ambition, whereby the woman affected great power,
dignity; credit to the flatteries, and allurements of Satan, and familiarity
with him, and inclination of will to the forbidden fruit.

First,

1 It was the transgression of that precept which God had given for the trial
of man's obedience, and so was an absolute denial of subjection, and renouncing
of obedience: As the performance of it had been an open profession of
submission and due obedience. It was not a breach of some particular
Commandment, but an universal denial of all the branches of obedience.

2 It was intolerable, that man being enriched with so many graces,
privileges, and blessings, should presently forget God, being so much
indebted, and bound unto him in love for his inestimable favors.

3 Amongst so many trees in the Garden, it was easy for man to forbear the
pursuit of one; and being made after the Image of God, he might have resisted
the temptation of Satan: Wherefore to suffer himself to be drawn away in that
manner was an heinous offense.

4 This sin was committed in Paradise, where the tree of life stood in their
sight, and God had manifested himself unto them familiarly. In respect of God,
the Law, the Offender; this sin was hateful, and notorious.

Secondly,

Thirdly, For if they whose Parents are infected with any disease, their
children do possess it by inheritance; how is it possible that our first
Parents, being deprived of the Image of God, we their posterity should spring
of them perfect, and without maim? For the beginnings of all things are all
that in power which does spring from those beginnings, for the virtue that is
in the beginnings, is communicated to the things which receive beginning from
them: Like egg, like bird; what is in the root will be in the branches, and
the vice or fault that is in the beginning, is common to the thing begun. The
punishment of this sin does degenerate into sin, As the want of holiness, and
proneness to evil, is not only a judgment inflicted for sin, but it is sin,
and the cause of sin; One sin begets another, and the second is an effect of
the former, both properly, and accidentally.

The effects of this first sin are bitterness it self, to wit, in respect of
mankind in general, wrath, blame, guilt, deprivation of Gods Image corruption
of nature, spiritual bondage, subjection to death temporal, and eternal. God is
offended in that his Commandment is despised to the derogation of his
sovereignty; sin is vile, and naught, deserving blame; man is guilty, and tied
to punishment, whence issues griping of conscience, fear of the angry Judge,
and dread of punishment. The loss of original Justice followed the act of sin,
in whose room succeeded corruption of the whole man, in every power, and
faculty. Thus the liberty of man was turned into miserable servitude, and he
became bondslave to sin-revenging justice, as his principal Lord; to the Devil,
and his Angels, and to the power of his accusing and condemning conscience, as
the Lords Ministers. Moreover, the natural man has no spiritual liberty, to do
any thing spiritually good, as he did before sin entered, but is led as a
slave, by lusts, by passions, by objects, which please him: So that he is in a
brutish bondage. And death entered into the world by sin, Romans 5.12
and is gone over all men, for as much as all men have sinned.

In respect of Adam, and Eve, the effects are common to both, or particular to
either.

1 The common are sense of nakedness, shame, fear of the angry Judge, slight,
and desire to hide themselves from the presence of the Lord, ejection out of
Paradise into the cursed Earth, and stopping the way that they might not enter
to eat of the tree of life.

2 The particular effects in respect of Adam, are, that the Earth is accursed
to bring forth briars, and thorns; that he should till the ground in labor,
and eat his bread in the sweat of his brows, till he return unto the dust.

The woman was sentenced to conceive and bring forth in forrow, and to be in
painful subjection to her husband.

Satan intended the dishonor of God, and destruction of mankind by that
temptation: but it turned to his confusion, and overthrow. The seed of the
woman has bruised the Serpents head; his power is crushed, and his devices
frustrated.

Nor did the instrument of the Devil escape unpunished: the Serpent is accursed
above all the beasts of the earth, most wretched, and ashamed to appear abroad;
he is adjudged to creep upon his belly with pain, to eat the dust for meat; a
grievous diet. And the Lord has put enmity betwixt him, and the woman.

All sin, especially profanation, and contempt of the Sacrament, is like to
this of our first Parents in some sort, but this was the first sin, the
fountain of all sin, the sin of man and his posterity: for Adam received, and
lost integrity both for himself and us.

Quest. How are these things to be applied unto the heart?

Answ. We must work our heart to humiliation, stir up our selves earnestly to
seek help and deliverance, and acknowledge the justice of God in correcting,
and his incomprehensible mercy, in vouchsafing means of recovery unto man. How
is man fallen from his first dignity and good estate? he was created holy, and
happy, furnished with grace, and set in place of high renown. Thou Lord did
crown him with glory and honor, and gave him a patent for his posterity,
that they should live in blessedness before thee. But woe is me! what
alteration do I find? Man has sinned, and God is displeased. Man that was the
beauty of the world, the beloved of God, is now the map of misery, the object
of divine revenging justice: His mind is besotted, his conscience unquiet, his
will and affection poisoned with sin, fear, dread, horror, and trembling
possesses his reins; his body is naked, deformed, subject to annoyance of
heat, cold, distemper many ways. The Freeman of God, the Lord of the
creatures, is brought into most miserable, and sore bondage unto Satan, sin,
his own conscience; who can comprehend the miseries of this life, whereunto he
lies open? No words can describe the spiritual plagues that are seized upon the
soul already, nor the dreadful torments that are prepared for him in hell for
evermore. Oh my soul, enter into thy self, consider, and bewail thy natural
estate: thou art exposed to suffer a thousand evils, to wearisome vanity in
every thing, yea through fear of death, the upshot of evils, thou art in
bondage all thy days, while in that state thou abidest. Pharaoh did never put
Israel to such hard service, as the Devil puts thee to while thou art under
his power. Thou art sick, filthy, naked, crooked, fallen from the love of God,
more odious in his eyes than the stink, or filthy savor of a dead corpse in the
nostrils of man, exposed to the torments of Hell, shut up under the curse of
the Law, abidest under wrath. How do men of the world take on, when they have
lost a great friend, upon whom all their hopes depended, when they be cast
from the top of honor, into the gulf of misery, poverty, and disgrace? weep,
oh my soul, and pour out tears in secret, for thou have lost thy glory, art
spoiled of thy ornaments, and have provoked the Lord to anger by thy
inventions. The brute beasts take it as a grievous thing to be ensnared, and
taken, and will thou laugh in the midst of bondage, and count it liberty to be
a slave of Satan? Death is terrible, and wilt not thou fear Hell, which
follows after it, as a desert of thy transgression? Ah miserable man, and the
more miserable, that thou art senseless of thy misery; yet now that I know my
disease, I will seek for remedy. The sick person will take bitter pills to
recover health, the bondsman desires liberty, the captive freedom, the
condemned a pardon: My present case is very wretched, and in no case to be
rested in. Nature teaches all creatures to shroud themselves from dangers, or
being in distress to seek help without delay, much more am I to be moved with
mine estate, who am subject to eternal death, which has already seized upon
me in a spiritual death of soul, and mortality, or dying state of the body;
we will meet a disease betime, laboring to rid our selves of it; if any thing
threaten our name and estate, we will endeavor quickly to free the one, and
the other: But whither shall I fly for succor? where shall I find the
Physician that is able to cure, and redeem me from the tyranny of Satan? Set
me free from the fear of Hell? I am even at my wits end, not knowing which way
to turn. Oh Lord, I am utterly destitute of all means to help my self, it is
not in my power to satisfy thy justice, overcome death, or deliver my soul out
of the hands of the Devil: I cannot think a good thought; I know not, nor of my
self can know the way of Life, or means of my recovery. Blessed God, as of
thine infinite mercy thou have ordained, so I pray thee reveal unto me the way
how I may escape eternal death deserved by my sin, and be made partaker of
everlasting happiness, through thy special grace. Righteous art thou oh Lord,
and just are thy judgments, I know that in very faithfulness thou have
afflicted me, and that I have deserved much more than ever I felt from thee;
Thou might have cast me for ever out of thy presence, and given me my
portion with the Devil, and his Angels: But lo thou do correct me in
measure for my good, to purge me from sin, and bring me unto repentance, that
I might be saved. Oh my God, I will magnify thy name, for thou have redeemed
my soul from death, my darling from the power of the dogs. This mercy was not
showed to the Angels, Creatures more excellent than man. Should one redeem us
from the state of villanage, or ransom us from the Gallows, we would think
we could not be thankful enough; But Lord thou have redeemed me from
revenging Justice, from the power of the Devil, holding me under the curse,
from the power of conscience justly condemning me, from the power of sin
commanding as King: How great is thy mercy toward me! I am not able to
comprehend it. As my sin and misery has abounded, thy mercy has abounded much
more.

Quest. Let us now hear what order is to be observed in Meditation of sin?

Answ. We must call to mind, and discourse with our selves of the causes,
ends, properties, and effects, and kinds of sin: what is contrary unto it, what
like, and what unlike.

O my soul, what is sin wherewith thou art beset and stained, yea miserably
besotted, since the fall of Adam? what is it but the privation of Gods Image,
and corruption of the soul, an aberration from the rule of perfection, an evil
disposition of the subject, turning aside from the path of life, and swarving
from the mark and end that all should aim at?

God is the fountain of all good things, the giver of every good and perfect
gift; but sin was not created by him, can receive no approbation from him. God
cannot possibly sin; for he may work besides his rule who may sin: But Gods
Rule is his most just and wise will, which he cannot but work after, no more
than he can deny his own nature. God cannot be the author of sin in and with
his creature, as he is of every good word, and work; for that which the
creature does, God being the author and principal worker of it, he must inform
the manner of it by his Commandment, and work it in him by his Spirit: But it
is impossible for the creature to sin, in working after that which is commanded
him of God; God cannot so far will sin, as to approve it for good in it self;
it has no proportion to his nature. It is such a thing as he cannot be
author of in the creature, nor yet the creature work while it keeps communion
with him, wherefore God cannot allow it as good in it self. The Lord persuades
to obedience, threatens the sinner, commands the practice of holiness,
punishes the disobedient. He is just and holy in himself, in all his ways,
and cannot be tainted with the least spot or blemish: Jam. 1.13.
Thou oh God temptest no man, as thou can not be tempted of evil; and if it
be not of God, it cannot be good; for he is the absolute original goodness,
from whom comes every good by participation.

The cause of sin is some voluntary agent, that works besides Rule, and comes
short in goodness required: Sin it self is an aberration, the subordinate and
deficient cause of sin, is Satan, or man himself revolted from God; Satan
soliciteth, the flesh inticeth, the will consents, and so sin is finished:
The Devil was made an Angel of light, but he abode not in the truth, and being
fallen from Heaven, cease not to draw others into the same perdition. God
made man righteous, but he found out many inventions; this is the cause, but
what is the end of sin?

Of evil there is no end, for that is never good; No gain to be gotten by that
which is naught and vile; the poisoned stalk can bear no wholesome fruit. Satan
in tempting aims at man's perdition; Man in sinning intends the satisfaction
of his lusts; The Lord does by his providence order it to the glory of his
name; but of sin properly there is no end to the sinner: God takes occasion by
sin to give the promise of the Mediator. He can use sin for a punishment,
Romans 1.24.
for the exercising of his children: No speech from Shimei, but sinful,
reviling speech was David's exercise; but yet the goodness that comes by sin is
not of, nor through it by nature, but from the infinite wisdom of God, who
knows how to work good out of evil.

Let us somewhat inquire into the properties of this poison: every sin is
mortal in its own nature, it deserves and brings death endless, and
easeless, of soul and body; for it is a turning aside from God, who is the life
of the soul; it is a breach of his Law, an offense against his infinite
Majesty. If a man sin against the Majesty of an earthly Prince, he is punished
with temporary death, or perpetual imprisonment, if he could be supposed to
live always he should lie in for ever: How much more deservedly am I subject
to eternal death, who have sinned against an eternal God? Every sin in its own
nature is accompanied with final impenitency: He that sins once, can never
cease to sin by any natural power; sin is a running leprosy, that cannot be
stayed; the soul that is once distempered, must go amiss for ever: (if it be
not rectified by supernatural power.) It is of grace that sin is pardoned, it
is of supernatural power that any soul is set free from the power and tyranny
of it. For being once enthralled by voluntary submission, we cannot after draw
back and work deliverance. Sin is of a soiling nature, and defiles all it
touches; Every good work and holy ordinance. To the unclean all things are
unclean. The Word, Prayer, Sacraments, Alms, every thing is polluted by that
touch. Corrupt qualities are more apt to hurt, than sound to heal; one rotten
sheep may infect the whole flock, but cannot be cured by them. One filthy ragg
stained with the plague may infect a whole pack; but the clean garment cannot
purify it. If a common garment touch holy flesh, the garment is not
sanctified, but the flesh polluted. The prayer of the wicked is an abomination
to the Lord. Sin mixed with Gods ordinances, is like poison mingled with
wholesome meat, that corrupts it for our use and nourishment.

Mark and consider well the effects of sin, O my soul! the waters of this
fountain are bitter, the fruits of this tree unsavory. They that sow iniquity,
shall reap vanity; and they that follow vanity, forsake mercy. Affliction
pursues sinners, and shall overtake them to their cost: without question the
wages of sin is death. Look as it is with men, if they turn themselves from
this aspectable light, they are forthwith environed with darkness: So man
turning away by his sin from God the Father of lights, from whence every good
gift comes, he cannot but be forthwith in outward and inward darkness. By
reason of sin the soul is dead in ignorance, and lust: So that they have in
them a seed apt to bring forth every sin: Our bodies have mortality as a worm
corrupting them, our conditions are exposed to a thousand vanities, and
wearisome courses, and these are the beginnings of evil. Despair, darkness,
fear, horror, and shame are the companions of sin; disgrace, sickness,
poverty, loss of goods, the best fruit it bears. Have thou lost any blessing?
sin has robbed thee of it; do thou want any good thing? sin keeps thee
from it; art thou annoyed with evil? thy perdition is of thy self; sin sets man
at odds with God, the Law, his own conscience, all creatures, and with himself.
Oh what a drudge is man made to his lusts by sin! what confusion, vexation,
bitterness, does lodge in the heart continually! Look into the world, and see
what desolations it has made. How are the mighty slain, and glorious Kingdoms
laid on heaps? Is not sin the cause of all disorders, wars, confusions,
bloodsheds, famines, and pestilences that ever were in the world? The sorrows
of this life are many and grievous, but nothing comparable to spiritual and
eternal miseries that sin brings with it. Oh that thou did behold how
miserably the soul is mangled, defaced, wounded, imprisoned by it; the light of
nature, terror of conscience, power of grace is not able to set forth or
comprehend the desert and fruit of sin; for the full wrath of God which shall
be executed upon the ungodly, exceeds all that can be imagined. If the
wicked prosper for a time, sin turns their blessings into curses: The Table,
and by proportion, the wealth, strength, and honor of the wicked are dangerous
snares wherein they are caught to be destroyed. It is misery to sail to Hell
with the pleasantest wind; and to live in fat pastures to be fed unto eternal
slaughter.

This cursed sin is a monster of many heads, a serpent with many stings, the
kinds cannot easily be reckoned, the number passes all count. It is original
that is born and bred with us, or actual that is brought forth by us: That is
the filthy corrupt fountain, this the filthy stinking puddle water that runs
from it; that the cursed root, this the bud, and blossom of that venomous tree.

Again, there are sins of defects, omission, and commission; for sometimes the
soul works for matter that which is required, but in other manner than God
has prescribed; Sometimes it does suspect, and cease to move after the good
commanded, and sometimes it does move it self to something which is forbidden,
which is the greatest, and highest kind of evil. For as in a wife, not to love
her husband is a great lewdness, but not only to neglect his love, but to turn
to the embracement of strangers is much more heinous: So for the soul not to
cleave to God in doing righteousness is sinful, but to leave him, and turn to
love and like any kind of unrighteousness, this is most sinful.

Moreover, it is either inward, lurking and boiling in the heart, by evil
thoughts, motions, desires, wishes, consent; or want, and slackness to think,
devise, remember, and effect what is praiseworthy; or outward, breaking forth
in life and conversation, both in word, and actions.

Sometimes it lives in us, but lies dead, and stirs not with violence; and
sometimes it rages boisterously, and carries us headlong to that which is
forbidden.

Sometimes it rusheth immediately and directly against God, and sometimes it
reaches more properly to the hurt of our neighbor. Oh my soul, look into thy
self, and thou shall find the branches of this venomous tree to exceed in
number: Thou have sinned against God, thy neighbor, and thy self; thou have
sinned of ignorance, infirmity, negligence; and presumption; Thou have been led
away with the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eye, and pride of life: Sin
ever moves, oftentimes stirs violently, and over-ruleth many times to the
committing of what is evil, and hinderance of what is good. Thou have offended
in that which is evil in it self, and thou have come short in that which is
good and honest, not doing it at all, or failing in the manner, measure, and
circumstances: Who can tell how often he offends? The number of my sins
cannot be reckoned, nor the filthiness discovered.

Piety is amiable, lovely, honorable, sin loathsome and abominable. The fear
of the Lord makes the face to shine; but impiety and sin dis-figure the face
and Image of God in him. The man that fears the Lord shall be praised; but a
vile, naughty person, is had in contempt of God, and good men, how great soever
he be in this world: The righteous is more excellent than his neighbor.
Grace exalts the poor; sin debaseth the mighty. Godliness makes a man as like
to God, as a creature can be like to the Creator, but sin transformeth us into
the likeness of the Devil. No man is honorable, but the virtuous, none base,
but the sinner.

Sin is opposite to God in a sort, not by an inward positive repugnance, or
contrariety to his nature, such as is twixt fire and water; but in respect of
outward disagreement, such as may be in a creature from the Creator: Even as
the good created, though it has not an inward agreement with, and resemblance
to the Creator, such as is betwixt nourishment, and the thing nourished, for
then should the divine nature inwardly in it self be better for it, and
necessarily will it; yet has it an outward agreement and resemblance. So is it
most true of sin, that it has no inward disagreement to the Divine Nature, for
then it should be the worse for the being of it, and so should necessarily
nill it; but outward only.

The venom and filthiness of sin is set forth by sundry comparisons in the
holy Scriptures: Sinners are compared to Dogs, Swine, Vipers, Asps, Bears,
Tigers; Sin is known by the name of Rebellion, Disobedience, Filthiness,
Adultery, Playing the Harlot. It is likened to menstruous clouts, and filthy
rags, that are cast aside upon the dunghill, and detested of all that pass by.
It is a spiritual nakedness, a spiritual leprosy, a spiritual crookedness, a
spiritual drunkenness. It biteth as a Serpent, and stingeth as a Cockatrice;
creeps as a gangrene, or deadly canker, that eats to the heart, and cannot
be cured. It is honey in the mouth, but gravel in the bowels, sweet in the
beginning, but death in the latter end. Oh my soul, if thou peruse the holy
Scriptures, thou shall find no book, no leaf, no chapter, nor scarce any verse
wherein there is not some precept, promise, prohibition, threatening, or
example, which serves to show the amiableness of virtue, and ugliness of vice,
and with what care, zeal, watchfulness, the one is to be embraced, and the
other to be shunned.

Quest. How are these things to be pressed upon the heart?

Answ. We must work the heart to humiliation for sin; stir up our selves
earnestly to seek pardon, and labor for grace to have sin in detestation for
the time to come. Is it even so, Oh my soul, is sin so loathsome and
abominable, odious to God, contrary to godliness, pernicious to thy state, life
and spiritual welfare, more infectious than the plague, more stinking than any
carrion, the rottenness and corruption of the soul condemned and cried down in
every book, in every leaf, and almost in every verse of the holy Bible? Woe
therefore, and alas to me that have so long layen under this burden and
bondage, and that even many times willingly and wittingly. When I look into my
self, I can see nothing but a mass of corruption pressing me down. Mine
understanding covered with ignorance, vanity, and folly; I know nothing as I
ought to know; such deadness possesses my heart, that I cannot look up: my
soul is a very den, and cage of unclean motions, worldly desires, corrupt
projects, vain boastings, idle rovings; but marvelous barren, untoward, toward
that which is good: Infidelity, distrust, pride, self-confidence, blockishness,
unthankfulness, envy, malice, discontent, covetousness, do lodge with me
continually. I was born in sin, and it has grown up with me from my youth; so
that it is become exceeding strong, an old stinking, deep festered sore, that
can hardly be cured. My sins are multiplied exceedingly, increase daily, in
number they pass the sands by the Sea, and are become a burden too heavy for
me to bear. When I remember these things, I wonder at my self that I should
be thus senseless in the midst of all misery. Were I descended of one that had
been executed for treason, and so were pointed at as a traitorous brood without
inheritance in earth; Had I but with my nature, the stone, or leprosy, or
falling sickness from my Parents, I should bewail mine unhappy nativity: But my
condition is much more wretched; for descending from the loins of Adam by
natural propagation, with my nature I received the poison of sin, which has
corrupted every power of soul, and like a running leprosy, staineth all it
touches: I am unclean by birth, and whatsoever I touch, it is unclean. Were I
with Job from top to toe covered with biles, it would grieve me, but my whole
spirit is fraught with corruption, more filthy than that which breaks forth
at the eye, car, etc. I am ashamed of corporal nakedness, deeply affected with
lameness, or deformity; if overtaken with any loathsome disease, I grow weary
of the world, and wish to be separated from the society of men: But the
nakedness, deformity, corruption of soul and life is more shameful, and
loathsome, filthy, and abominable. Deep is the stain that sin has made, and
great is the danger that I am in by reason of my transgressions. If I had
offended the Law, and stood as guilty to be censured before the Tribunal of an
earthly Judge, with loss of liberty, limbs, or life, I should bewail my estate,
and condemn my folly; but I have broken the Law of God, and stand guilty before
him, not of temporal, but eternal death, which the Law has pronounced, and I
may expect every moment to be executed upon me: Wherefore I abhor my self,
and repent in dust and ashes: Oh that mine eyes were a river of tears, and mine
head a fountain of water, that day and night I could bewail the misery into
which I am plunged by reason of my sin! But woe is me, what shall I do?
whither shall I fly for succor? I am bound with the cords of sin, who shall
unloose them? I am guilty before the Throne of Justice, who shall acquit me? I
am defiled, who shall make me clean? Humble thy self, oh my soul, and fly unto
the Throne of grace, for with God there is mercy, and with him there is
plentious redemption; against him thou have sinned, and with him there is
forgiveness; acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou may be received unto
mercy; judge thy self, that thou may not be judged. How well is he that
sleeps with his quietus est in his bosom? In this regard Gods children have
followed God more for this, than for deliverance from evils that have been upon
them: Blessed is the man whose iniquity is forgiven, and whose sin is covered.
Oh happy man, who is stirred up to fly the wrath to come. Thou art in danger to
be cast into the prison of Hell for thy debts, thy sins; which make thee
debtor of punishment to Gods justice. Humble thy self, compound with thy
creditor before his heavy arrest be served upon thee. Should thou have to
deal with many men, thou might have a cold suit, but seek mercy of God, none
that comes to him does he cast forth. And now my soul be warned for the time
to come, to take heed of sin, turn from it with hatred and detestation, be
purged from it (as a thing filthy and abominable) It is the most deadly poison,
a fretting leprosy, a corruption, in comparison of all others, most
detestable. We would not suffer spots on our face, nor lint or other soil upon
our clothes; surely we cannot make clean any thing, but thou may thence
take the rise of this thought, how careful should I be to cleanse my heart?
we would not have any natural infirmities, which are unseemly or filthy, as
wry mouths, foul breeches, lameness, or halting in our gate, etc. But a tongue
speaking perverse things, rotten speeches, crooked walking from Gods Law, and
the direction thereof, are far more uncomely than the other. If we go by a
foul stinking place, we stop our noses, and haste away; if an ugly shape
present it self, we shut our eyes, and endure not the view of it: Thus
should thou, Oh my soul, with indignation turn from all filthy and
abominable vices. It is enough and too much that thou have dishonored God in
time past, and gone a whoring after strange lovers, return now unto the Lord,
and keep thy self chaste unto him for ever. To see a child war with his loving
Parents, or a wife contend with her kind husband, is a detestable sight, for
any subject to rebel against his Prince, is wretched lewdness, but for one to
rebel against such a Prince, which out of his bounty has most highly advanced
him, and done him favors from day to day, this is most loathsome disloyalty.
Thus it is with sin, which offends a most kind and merciful Father, who has
redeemed us from death, and daily ladeth us with his blessings: Oh that I could
once find out power and ability to weed out corruption, and to pluck it up
even by the root; Oh that I were able to destroy the root and bud, and branch
of this cursed tree, that it might never spring, or bear fruit any more: But
alas, I sensibly perceive that there is in me no strength, no more than there
is in a sick man to recover himself, or rather in a man stark dead to restore
himself to life: If I purpose to amend this or that which I find to be amiss,
I fail presently, and come short of the accomplishment of my desire: Oh who is
it then that is able to deliver me from the body of this death? surely none
but the Lord who has made and fashioned me, to whom it belongs to kill, and
quicken, heal and wound; to thee therefore oh Lord do I make my moan, to thee I
render my humble petition, and pour out my soul which has sinned against thee:
Oh Lord, I beseech thee for thy infinite mercy in Jesus Christ, to take pity
upon me, and to heal my soul which has sinned against thee; Wash me thoroughly
from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin; Convert me oh Lord, and I
shall be converted, set me at liberty, and I shall run the race of thy
Commandments. Open unto me the fountain of grace for the washing away of my
sin and uncleanness. It is thy property to have mercy, it is thy free covenant
to write thy Law upon my heart. Thou have promised to pour rivers of waters
upon the dry and thirsty ground. Thou invitest the barren soul to come unto
thee for ease and rest, O Lord have mercy upon me, for in thee do I trust,
thou art the wellspring of grace and mercy, the fountain of life, the author
and preserver of grace, unto thee do I commend my soul, and upon thy merciful
promise I will wait as long as I live.

Quest. Let the work of Redemption be the eighth Instance, how are we to
proceed in Meditation on that work?

Answ. In this work we must consider the Author, Subject, Object, Causes,
Ends, Parts and Properties, what is like, and what unlike.

To redeem is to deliver from bondage and misery, freely, or upon exchange; and
to free from captivity by strong hand, or ransom; which two latter have place
in the Redemption of man, in diverse respects.

The Author of this great, admirable, and extraordinary work of Grace, is Jesus
Christ, the eternal Son of God, who in time became man, and was made under the
Law, that he might redeem us that were under the Law: For this he is called
our Savior, and Redeemer, or Redemption of his people, who does deliver them
from the hand of all their enemies, that they might serve the Lord without
fear. Those that God did raise up to redeem his people, as Moses, the Judges,
yea those that redeemed as kinsmen this or that, were shadows of this our great
Redeemer, who was in time to be revealed. Christ has satisfied
revenging-justice, overcome Satan, killed sin, and purchased deliverance for
his people that are given unto him of his Father, and such as believe in him
are partakers of this Redemption in truth in this life, perfectly in the life
to come: For from what time we are ingrafted into Jesus Christ, by a
sovereign, well-rooted, and allseasoning Faith, we are freed from being under
the Law, and revenging-justice of God. The strong man is cast forth from what
time Christ the stronger is entered. The conscience is made a sweet companion
and comforter, rather than a rigorous keeper. Where the King has released a
Prisoner, the Jailer can have no further power over him, for he is but to keep
him during the Kings pleasure.

Again, By grace God does set our wills at liberty, so that sin cannot reign in
us as heretofore; yea the world is crucified to us, and we unto the world: For
as when health comes, a man begins to walk abroad, and do such things as
he could not stir to do while his sickness did keep him under: so it is here.

Finally we are so freed, that we can suffer nothing which our wills have
cause to be unwilling with, all things being such as shall work together for our
good.

Behold the rich grace, admirable love, and tender mercy of the Lord toward
man in himself most miserable, rebellious, and worthy to be cast off for ever.
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. Oh Lord, as our
sin and misery abounded, thy mercy has superabounded. In mercy thou did
provide a means for man's deliverance, that justice being satisfied, grace might
be glorious in his salvation: Oh God, when thou had determined that justice
should take her revenge, if by breach of covenant she be wronged, thine
infinite wisdom found out a way to satisfy wronged justice; when all mankind
lay under the sentence of condemnation, altogether unable to help themselves,
thine unspeakable mercy did show her self for our deliverance; when man had
nothing to pay for his Ransom, nor any strength to rescue himself from the
hands of justice, or the curse of the Law, of thine endless love thou did
give Christ to be our Savior, and by way of ransom to redeem us: Oh my soul,
thou art redeemed not with silver or gold, but with the blood of Christ, a lamb
undefiled. This was it which in the blood of all the sacrifices was prefigured:
The death of Christ is it by means whereof Gods Grace does set thee free, and
that in most just manner. It does pacify justice her displeasure against sin:
For God (that is) God as his Revenging Justice is gone forth, is said to smell
a savor of rest in the death of Christ, and by Christ's being put under the
Law, or curse of Gods revenging made manifest in the Law, we are said to be
redeemed from the Law or curse, as by an all-sufficient Ransom accepted of
Justice. This death does feee us from the Devil, for Satan's power over us was
by reason of sin, and the punishment due to it from the Justice of God. By
death he destroyed him that had the power of executing death. The price of our
Ransom was paid to divine Justice; and it being paid and accepted, Satan was
cast down by strong hand. This death has obtained the Spirit to be given
thee, which does free thee from the captivity of lusts, Gal. 4.4, 5
and enable thee to find liberty in actions of godliness. Through this death
thou have deliverance from all evils; So that all tears in Gods Time shall be
wiped from thine eyes, and in the mean while all thy sufferings are so changed,
that they are not effects of Gods Revenging Justice to destroy, but such things
in which God does offer himself as a Father, intending to make thee partake
further by means of them in the quiet fruit of Righteousness. And now my soul,
why has the Lord done this for thee? that the Glory of his Grace might be
magnified in thy salvation, and thou might serve him all the days of thy
life. As for the parts of Redemption, it is purchased or possessed, and this
begun or consummated in respect of guilt and punishment, or power and tyranny
of sin. Rome was not built in a day. Great things are not begun and finished
all at once. Redemption takes not its full effect in this life, but it is so
begun, that it shall certainly be accomplished in due time.

The Properties of this deliverance will set forth the excellencies of it in
some sort. It is true and real, as far excelling that Redemption of Israel out
of the Land of Egypt, as the substance does the shadow, the soul does the body,
and Christ did Moses. It is spiritual, from Sin, Satan, and the curse of the
Law. The bondage of soul to the wrath of God, tyranny of Satan, and slavery of
sin is most lamentable and grievous; and the more fearful the captivity, the
more comfortable the deliverance.

Nor is this mercy vouchsafed to a few that live in some corner of the world,
in some special age, or time, which much lessen the value of it; but it is
universal, extended to all ages, to all sorts of men, high and low, rich and
poor. Apoc. 5.9
Thou have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue,
and people, and which is the upshot of all, this Redemption is eternal. Heb.
9.12.
He that is ransomed out of the power of a bodily enemy, may be taken captive
the second time; but he that is set free by Jesus Christ, cannot be
captivated by Satan. It was a singular favor that God raised up Saviors to
deliver them out of the hands of their oppressors: It is a much greater mercy
that God has given us Christ to set us free from spiritual thraldom; for that
Redemption was typical, this real; that temporal of the body, this spiritual of
the soul, and conscience: That from the cruelty of man, this from the tyranny
of Satan; that thraldom would have ended with life, this bondage would ever
have increased daily: After that deliverance they might and did return to
bondage, But in this Redemption, he that is once freed, abides a freeman for
evermore; Those Saviors were mere men, but Christ our Redeemer is God and Man;
They delivered their people by force of arms, but Christ by his death first
paid the price of our Redemption, and then God by his great power rescued us
from the hands of the Devil: They brought their Redeemed into an earthly
Canaan, but Christ our Redeemer has prepared for us an heavenly Inheritance.
They saved them that were oppressed, and evil-intreated against their wills;
but Christ set us free, who had voluntarily sold our selves into the state of
slavery.

Quest. How are these things to be applied unto the heart?

Answ. Upon consideration of these things, we must stir up our selves to seek
the knowledge of Christ Jesus; fly unto him with sound affiance, rejoice in
God, and sing praises to his name: Oh my soul, is deliverance from spiritual
thraldom to be found in Jesus Christ, then enquire after him, and seek to
know him with gladness. The Name Jesus is sweet, honey in the mouth, melody in
the ear, a Jubilee in the heart. What a servant were he that knew not his
Masters Name? is not he unworthy the benefit of Redemption, that will not
vouchsafe to enquire who has paid his Ransom? Oh my soul, fly unto Christ in
whom thou shall find deliverance from all spiritual thraldom. God has made
Christ an Adam, Head, Root, Storehouse, in whom are treasured all those good
things, which from him are communicated unto us: We love to thrust amongst
them with whom we may find benefit, and profit; Seek this above all, that
thou may be by Faith in Christ. Should Bankrupts hear of any that should
answer their creditors for them, they would quickly resort to him: how much
more should thou resort to this Mediator, and Surety, who will answer the
debt of those that come unto him by Faith? seek to be ingrafted into him,
strive by Faith to grow up in him: for the more nearly we are united with any
thing, the more we partake of the virtue, and operation of it. Those that are
nearest the fire, partake in the heat of it more than those that are further
removed. Thou see men seek to be made one person in law, to be most nearly
joined to such as may bring them in wealth: Oh my soul, why do thou not seek
more earnestly by a spiritual marriage to become one with him in whom is every
good blessing: Behold he sueth unto thee, not that he might be enriched by
thee, for thou have nothing to give, he stands in need of nothing, but that
he might answer thy debt, set thee at liberty, adorn thee with grace, and
endow thee with eternal life. O my soul, what great cause have thou to love the
Lord, and rejoice in his mercy! God has given his Son to dye for us, before we
asked it: Christ has (when we could not through our gracelesness once ask
him) fulfilled all Righteousness, and discharged us from the danger of sin. We
take it as love in men, if spoken to, they will do small matters for us; He
that will bear a blow for us in our behalf, be bound for us in great sums of
money, specially he that will lie by it for our good: But how much more art
thou to acknowledge this grace of Christ, who has been thy Surety, paid for
thy deliverance, not silver or gold, but his precious blood? The insensible
creatures are called upon to rejoice for the Redemption of Gods people; when
they were redeemed from Babel, the joy did put them into an extrasie, they knew
not whether they were asleep or awake: But this spiritual Redemption does as
far outstrip that temporal freedom, as Heaven is above the Earth, or hell
worse than the house of bondage. Sing unto the Lord, oh my soul, make a joyful
noise unto the God of thy salvation. What cause have thou to praise him, who
has visited and redeemed thee with such a Redemption? Thou may remember the
day when thou wast in thraldom to the burning wrath of God, and stoodest under
the condemnation of the Law, when it was death to be held to the duties of
godliness, in which is the exercise of true freedom; and sin did hold thee so
fast, that though thou saw the mischief of it, and proposedst sometimes a
new course, yet thou could not return to it as before, when this lust and
that passion did tyrannize over thee, and fears of conscience, and death did
hold thee in thraldom: But now the Lord has looked upon thee in mercy, his
wrath is appeased, the Law is answered, Satan is cast down, and thou art
received into special favor to walk with him. Oh Lord, I am ashamed that I
should be so senseless at the remembrance of this unspeakable love, so
forgetful of this undeserved kindness; move the scales from mine eyes, I pray
thee, and take the veil from my heart, which will not let me rejoice in so
excellent mercy.

Quest. Show how we must proceed in Meditation on the Resurrection of Christ?

Ans. We must consider the Subject, Antecedents, Causes, End, Time, Place, and
things that happened with it, the effects, properties, and consequents, what is
like, and what unlike.

My soul desires to think upon the Resurrection of Christ, in which I may
behold the reconciled face of God. Dear Father, direct my mind, rightly to
conceive of this high mystery, to the glory of thy Name, and the comfort of my
soul: To rise from the sleep of sin, is to leave or desist from evil. He that
is fallen prostrate, arises when he gathers up himself. He that lays
himself down to rest, arises when he is raised from sleep. He that is dead
arises when the soul is knit to the body: The Resurrection of Christ is the
first degree of his exaltation, wherein the soul being united again to his
body, he was raised up to spiritual and immortal life. It is a motion partly
natural, partly supernatural; Natural in respect of the subject, bound, and
means. For Christ rose so out of the grave, that he is said to be there no
more, and he rose by means proper to a natural body, that being removed which
might seem to hinder. Nor was this Resurrection in a moment but in certain
succession of time, which is required to every natural motion. Nevertheless
this motion is supernatural, in respect of the cause, efficient, and the end:
The Divine Nature of Christ could not suffer, nor dye, nor rise again; but he
was raised to life in respect of that nature that died for our sins, or in
respect of the body, which for a time was separated from the soul, and laid in
the grave. This was prefigured by types, foretold by the Prophets of the Old
Testament, and most clearly spoken to his Disciples by our Savior himself,
signifying unto them that the Son of Man must suffer at Jerusalem, and be
buried, and the third day rise again.

The principal cause of the Resurrection, was the Divine Nature, most strictly
united with the Humanity: In Scripture this work is ascribed to the Father,
Act. 2.24.
who is said to raise his Son; and to the Son, Romans 1.4. Joh. 10.18
who by his Divine power, or as the Apostle speaks, by the eternal Spirit
raised up himself. I have power to lay down my life, and I have power to take
it: Of his infinite love toward his Elect, he laid down his life, and of the
same love and affection toward them, he rose again, which is more evidently
seen in this, that he did vouchsafe to call them brethren; with which sweet
name, full of love he had not before saluted any man. As he suffered the most
grievous torment for the salvation of the Elect his chosen people, so for the
glorification of his Spouse, that is, the Church, he rose again that he might
enrich and beautify her with spoils, taken from the enemy.

The Causes lead us to consider of the End, why Christ rose again, for every
proper efficient, intends an end which is ever good, and that most excellent
as the worker is of greatest wisdom and excellency: Now therefore, since
Christ rose in special love to his peculiar people, it must needs tend to their
special exceeding great good: By his Resurrection the glory of Christ which he
had with the Father (before the foundation of the world) was manifested, which
the world would not acknowledge by his Sermons, nor by miracles confirming his
Doctrine. By his Resurrection he obtained those glorious Titles with which the
Prophets foretold that the Messiah should be adorned: such as be; Act. 3.15.
1 Cor. 15.20. Col. 1.15, 18. Apoc. 1.5. Romans 14.9
The Prince of life, the first fruits of them that sleep, the firstborn of
every creature, the firstborn from the dead, and the first-begotten of the
dead; and the Lord of Dead and Living. By his Resurrection he showed himself
to be the Conqueror of Death, Sin, and Satan; meritoriously he triumphed
over our enemies upon the Cross; actually he began his triumph at the
Resurrection. Col. 2.23, 24.
Now when the powers of Hell could no longer hold him under, it is manifest
that they are subdued, and conquered. By his Resurrection he declares that
his satisfaction is fully absolute. Had the least penny of our debt remained
upon the score not discharged, he could not have loosed the sorrows of Death.
Christ died for our sins, and rose again for our justification. By the
Resurrection he prepared himself to the glorious function of a Mediator. As
he suffered without the gate to pay the price of our Redemption: So did he
enter into Heaven to appear before the Father for us. He died once for our
sins, and now lives for ever to make intercession for us. By his death he
purchased life and salvation for his people, and now sitting in glory at the
right hand of the Father, he does communicate the blessing that he has
procured for them. Christ rose, that we might rise: For he that raised up the
Lord Jesus, 2 Cor. 4.14.
shall raised up us with Jesus, and set us together with him.

Early in the morning upon the third day after he was buried, our Savior rose
out of the Sepulcher in which he was laid, at which time there was a mighty
Earthquake, and an Angel descended from Heaven to roll away the stone, at which
glorious apparition, the soldiers that kept the Tomb were sore afraid, and
became as dead men.

The death of Christ wanted not signs of Majesty, nor his Resurrection tokens
of exceeding glory? when the Earth was moved at his presence, and the Angels
descended from Heaven to do him service. The effects of this Resurrection are
far more glorious than the signs that did accompany it: for unless his
Resurrection had followed his cruel death, all his benefits appropriated to us
had layen buried together with him. 1 Cor. 15.17. Romans 6.8, 9 1 Cor. 15.55. 1
Pet. 1.3. 1 Cor. 15.21, 22.
The Resurrection of Christ is a notable confirmation of his Doctrine, the
abolition of sin and death, regeneration unto life eternal; and vivification of
our bodies are the fruits of it. It was necessary that Christ should rise, in
regard of the excellency of his person, for being the proper Son of God, it was
impossible he should be held of the sorrows of death; being just and innocent
as man, it could not be that he should lie under the power of the grave, and
dying to overcome, he could not be vanquished of the enemies. It was also
necessary in respect of the Covenant he had made with the Father, the dignity
of his high office of eternal Mediation, and that the truth of those things
which were foretold concerning the glory of the Messiah might be fulfilled:
Many admirable things are spoken touching the Messiah, and the glory of his
Kingdom, who was first to lay down his life, and then to take possession of
his Kingdom in glory; where he shall live for ever to make intercession for
his people, which he could not have done if he had not risen. It cannot be
that the Word of God should take none effect, but it was foretold that the
Messiah should rise again, in which respect his Resurrection was necessary.
Christ not as a private person, but as a public person. He died for his
Elect, and virtually they rose in him, when he rose from the dead, of whose
Resurrection they partake actually, when by lively Faith they are made one with
him.

This Resurrection was exceeding glorious, in respect of the power by which it
was effected, the life into which he rose, and the things that accompanied, or
followed after the Resurrection: For the graves did open, and many bodies of
them that slept in the earth, arose. Whereby the grave did witness, that its
power was taken away, and clean vanquished.

Jonah's deliverance out of the Whales belly was wonderful and miraculous; the
Lord was gracious in sparing Isaac, and raising him as it were from death, who
was a slain Sacrifice in his Fathers account. But these were only types, and
shadows of Christ, his Resurrection the life and glory of the other.

The elect and faithful shall rise to glory at the day of judgment, but they
shall rise by the power of Christ. Christ arose by his own power: they shall
rise as the Members of Christ, but Christ rose as the first fruits of them that
sleep: they shall rise as private persons, but Christ arose as a public: They
shall arise from corruption, but Christ his body did not see corruption: They
shall rise to immortality and glory for themselves, but Christ rose to glory
that he might govern his Church in glory, and bring his Elect unto himself,
that where he is, there they might be for ever.

Quest. How are these things to be pressed upon the heart?

Answ. We must stir up our selves to behold and rejoice in the Lords love
toward us; and fly unto Christ by Faith, that we might feel the power of his
Resurrection quickening us to newness of life, and comfort our selves against
the fear of death, and rotting in the grave, with an assured hope of
Resurrection to immortality, and eternal glory.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader, These Books are printed for, and sold by Henry Mortlock, at
the sign of the Phoenix in Paul's Churchyard, near the Little North-door.
Folios.
A Commentary upon the whole Epistle of Paul to the Ephesians, wherein the Text
is learnedly and fruitfully opened, with a Logical Analysis, spiritual, and
holy Observation, Confutation of Arminianism and Popery. By Mr. Paul Bain.

A Commentary on the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles, and the Major Prophets.
By John Trap, M. A.

Quartos.
An Exposition of the Prophecy of Ezekiel. By William Green-hill.

The dividing of the Hoof, or seeming Contraditions, throughout sacred
Scriptures, distinguished, resolved, and applied. By William Streat, M. A.

Some Sermons preached upon several occasions. By Peter Sterry.

Large Octavos.
A Treatise of the Divine Promises, in five Books: In the first, A general
Description of their Nature, Kinds, Excellency, Right, Use, Properties, and the
Persons to whom they belong: In the four last, A Declaration of the Covenant it
self, the bundle and body of all the Promises, and the special Promises
likewise which concern a man's self, or others, both temporal, spiritual, and
eternal. By Edw. Leigh. M. A. of Magdalen-Hall in Oxford.

The Hypocrites Ladder, or Looking-glass, or a Discourse of the dangerous and
destructive nature of Hypocrisy, the reigning and provoking sin of this age;
wherein is showed how far the Hypocrite, or formal Professor may go toward
Heaven, yet utterly perish, by three Ladders of sixty steps of his Ascending.
By John Sheffield, Minister of the Word at Swithins, London.

An Improvement of the Sea, upon the nine Nautical Verses, in the 107 Psalm,
wherein among other things you have a very full and delightful Description of
all those many various and multitudinous Objects, which they behold in their
Travels (through the Lords Creation) both on Sea, in Sea, and on Land, viz. All
sorts and kinds of Fish, Fowl, and Beasts, whether wild, or tame; All sorts of
Trees and Fruit; All sorts of People, Cities, Towns, and Countries. By Daniel
Pell, Preacher of the Word.

Small Octavos. Several Treatises useful for Christian Practice, viz.
Warning to Backsliders, The way to true Happiness, Mercies, Memorials, A
Sermon preached on the fifth of November. Milk and Honey, first and second Part,
Orthodox Paradoxes, The New Commandment, Divine Similitudes, or Mysteries and
Revelations. By Ralph Venning.

The Exceeding Riches of Grace advanced by the Spirit of Grace in an Empty
Nothing-Creature, viz. Mris. Sarah Wight. Published by H. Jessey, A Servant of
Jesus Christ.

A Latin and English Grammar. By Charles Hool, M. A.

Physical Rarities, containing the most choice Receipts of Physic and
Surgery, for the Cure of all Diseases incident to man's body: Hereunto is
annexed the Physical Mathematics of Hermes Trismegistus. Published by Ralph
Williams, Practitioner in Physic and Surgery.

Twelves.
The Saints Desire, or Divine Consolations, being a Cordial for a Fainting
Soul, containing Observations, Experiences, and Counsels; The Saints daily
Duty, the Life of Faith, and how a Soul may live in the sweet enjoyment of the
Love of God, etc. By Samuel Richardson.

A Receipt for the State-Palsie, or a Direction for settling the Government of
the Nation, delivered in a Sermon upon Proverbs 25. v. 5.

FINIS.

