THE NECESSITY OF Agreement with GOD: OPENED IN A SERMON Preached to the Right
Honorable the Noble House of PEERS assembled in PARLIAMENT, Upon the 29th of
October, 1645. being the Monthly Fast. By C. BURGES, D. D. Preacher of the
Word to the City of London.

Published in Obedience to an Order of their Lordships.



LONDON, Printed by G. Miller for Philemon Stephens, at the Sign of the
golden-Lion in Paul's Churchyard, 1645.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HOUSE OF PEERS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Most Noble LORDS:
THE main design of this plain Sermon, is, to awaken men not yet agreed with
GOD, out of their golden dreams of nothing but Halcyon days, and mountains of
perpetual prosperity, which the almost innumerable glorious Victories heaped
on your Armies, seem to promise. To effect this, I have endeavored to put all
upon the Trial of their Agreement with GOD, which being the soul of my Text,
ought to be the chief subject of my Discourse. I have therein insisted most
upon the examining our performance of the National Covenant, which
(notwithstanding your pious command, to whet the people upon it, every Fast
day) is so much neglected, yea despised, that he is, by some, ranged among the
dissolute, that now will take it; and, it is made one character of the godly
party (which they who say, stand apart, appropriate,) to refuse it.

Uniformity which we have Covenanted to promote, is become a scorn. And they
who (being sensible of the mischiefs of no Government in the Church) press the
settling of a Discipline according to our Covenant, do every where hear, Rigid
Presbyterians, Persecutours, worse than Bishops; and what not, but what they
are? None know now how to Time things, but they who while out the times to
prevent the settling of any thing at all.

My Lords, it is our happiness, and your honor, that you have continued with
Christ in his temptations, and remained faithful in the midst of a perfidious
generation, when the enemy had his hour. For, what Tiberius once spoke to Nero
and Drusus in the Senate, Tacit. Annal. lib. 4.
Ita nati estis, ut bona malaque vestra ad Rempublicam pertineant, may be much
more said of you, who are so borne for the Public, that you are engaged in
honor to promote that, what ever become of your selves. There is no Public
act of yours, if good, but the whole Kingdom fares the better for it; no evil
that you commit, but all the Nation suffers by it. Be faithful unto Christ
(who had never more need of your Zeal) and let him alone with your safety and
honor, until he give you a crown of life.

It is not enough that you act, when acted, unles you also quicken others to
more expedition in that great business of the Government of the Church. It is
not sufficient that your selves come up to an Agreement with God, unless, as
Josiah, you do your utmost with all vigor, to draw others into the same also.
Nor will it suffice that you do good your selves, if you wittingly suffer
others to do evil against God and Christ, without exercising that authority
which God has put into your hands against them.

You remember Galba, who though innocent of much harm, which passed under his
name, yet because he permitted them to commit it, whom he ought to have
bridled, or was ignorant of that which he ought to have known, lost reputation,
and opened a way to his own destruction.

The Lord of Lords guide, quicken and prosper you in all the great affairs
which are under your hands, make you more and more zealous for Jesus Christ,
that he may yet further honor you above all your Noble Progenitors, and give
you hearts so to improve this homely piece, that it may further your Account,
and not rise up in judgment against you in the great day of the Lord Jesus: in
whom I am, and ever shall be

Your Lordships most humble servant, C. BURGES.

THE NECESSITY OF Agreement with GOD.
AMOS 3.3. Can two walk together, except they be agreed?


I May begin my Sermon with the words of Cyril: (...). Cyr. Alex in loc.
This is a deep Riddle, and a dark speech. For better unfolding of it, be
pleased to cast your eyes on the first verse of this Book, which will afford
some light to these words, and to the whole Prophecy.

There, you shall, first, meet a poor Herdsman of Tekoah (a City of Judah, six
miles south from Jerusalem,) to wit, our Prophet, a man bred up among Cattle,
and a gatherer of sycomore-trees Amos 7.14, 15.
, suddenly Amos ruborum mora distringens, repent Propheta effectus est.
Hieron. ad Heliodor.
called of God, as he followed the flock, and sent unto Israel; yea, to
prophecy even at Bethel the Kings Chapel, and Court; and, there, to denounce
destruction to the King, and Kingdom, by the Assyrian; as, he after Amos 7.9,
10, 11.
did.

There also, shall ye discover the People to, and against whom he prophesied;
namely Israel: not the whole progeny of Jacob, but only the ten Tribes revolted
from Rehoboam. These, being the major part of Israel, carried with them that
Name. Sometimes, they are called Ephraim, from Jeroboam their first King, who
was of that Tribe; as, that party which adhered to the House of David, was
named Judah, because that was the Family from whence sprang their Kings.

That these Prophecies were directed to these ten Tribes, is further manifest
by that of Amaziah, the Chief Priest of Bethel. Chap. 7.12, 13. O thou Seer,
flee thee away into the Land of Judah, and there eat bread, and prophecy
there: but prophecy not again any more at Bethel, etc. which shows plainly,
that he prophesied only to Israel, in that place where Jeroboam the first had
erected one of his Calves. There, Amos, for his boldness against the Calves,
received many affronts from Amaziah the Priest; and, at length, a mortal blow
with a Club, on his head, by Amaziahs son, after which he was carried home to
Tekoah, where he soon died of that wound, as we have it from Epiphanius In vit,
Prophet
, and sundry others Hieron. Doroth. Isidor. alijque.
.

In that first verse, thirdly, may you perceive the time when he prophesied. It
was, in the days of Vzziah King of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam the
son of Joash King of Israel, two years before the earthquake, a most
remarkable circumstance.

The mention of those two Kings, discovers Amos to have been contemporaneous
with Hosea, and Joel; yea, with Isaiah too, (whose Father he was not, although
some have so conjectured;) albeit he began somewhat after them, and finished
his course many years before them, by means of that untimely death, but now
expressed.

These Kings reigned long: Jeroboam, 41 years; Vzziah, 56 years, computing from
the 16th year of his age only. To the end therefore, it might be more exactly
known, about what time of their several reigns Amos prophesied, it is said,
two years before the earthquake. This was at the time wherein Vzziah (being
lifted up with his many successes) under pretense of extraordinary devotion for
many victories obtained against the enemies of Judah, would needs go in person
into the Temple and burn incense. The Priests withstood him, as attempting
that, which was lawful for none but the sons of Aaron only. He grew wroth
with them: Whereupon (says Josephus Antiq. li. ^. ca 11.
) God smote the place with an earthquake, and him, by a beam of the Sun
through a crevisse of the Temple, on his mouth, which brake forth instantly
into a loathsome leprosy: for which he was not only thrust out of the Temple by
the Priests, but himself also hasted to go out, and was put from his
Government to the day of his death, 2 Chronicles. 26.

The earthquake which then happened, shook all Jerusalem, and was very
dreadful. For, thereby a great part of a mountain on the west of Jerusalem, in
a place called Eroge, was torn off from the residue, and removed four furlongs
out of it own place, and cast partly into the high way, and partly into the
Kings gardens, says Josephus. This, so astonished and affrighted the people,
that they fled from it with exceeding great fear: so as, this accident became
extraordinary famous in all Judah and Israel.

Of this mention is made, in Zech. 14.5. where, God threatening a sore judgment
to the enemies of Christ, tells them, ye shall flee like as ye fled from
before the earthquake in the days of Vzziah King of Judah. This happened in
the 27th of Vzziah, as is agreed by almost all Chronologers; who, with one
consent, tell us, that it fell out at the same time that Vzziah was smitten
with that loathsome Elephantiasis. Iunius indeed dissents: but his reason is
easily answered. For, albeit Vzziahs leprosy was very remarkable: yet, an
earthquake, in Israel, was more rare, and accounted more prodigious. Lepers
were common, but earthquakes never happened but upon some extraordinary
occasion which concerned the general.


Amos began his Prophecies two years before that Prodigy, which must needs be
near the end of the reign of Jeroboam the second, the son of Ioash, of the
line of Iehu. For Jeroboam began his reign in the 15th year of Amaziah 2 King.
14.23.
father to Vzziah, who lived 14 years after Jeroboam began Ibid. ver. 2.
. And so, it must be about the 39th of Jeroboam, when the word of the Lord came
first to Amos.

This exact calculation of time is here of great use: for it lets us in to a
clear knowledge of the state and condition of Israel, at that time when Amos
uttered these words. It was, when Israel, who had been often sorely plagued
with foreign, and intestine judgments, were now, through Gods melting
compassions toward them, (for the Covenant with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,)
much eased and freed of many pressures; their evil neighbors (who had invaded
them, and encroached upon them) being vanquished, and dispossessed of what they
had usurped, and all by the valor and industry of this Jeroboam, whom God made
a great instrument to save them, as is evident, 2 King. 14.

At this very season (they not improving the mercy) God sends Amos to prophecy
destruction to the whole Kingdom; and, to utter these words now read unto you,
by way of appeal unto themselves to convince them of the impossibility of the
continuance of that blessing, while they stood off with so much pertinacie from
the Lord. For, if they should (as like enough they would) plead; Can these
things befall us? Are not we Abraham's seed? Has not God struck a Covenant with
us? has he not done many and great things for us? (Just as Judah. Jer. 3.4, 5.
Will thou not from this time cry unto me, My Father, thou art the guide of my
youth, will he reserve his anger for ever?) To which God makes answer, first,
by way of concession, in the verse before my Text; It is true, You only have I
known of all the families of the earth: that is, in respect of love, care,
bounty and privileges. Secondly, by way of Commination of the greater
judgment, as a just catastrophe of their ingratitude and rebellion; Therefore
will I punish you for all your iniquities. And, lest they should think this to
be strange severity; Thirdly, He appeals to themselves, making them the Judges
in their own case, whether it were possible to be otherwise, saying; Can two
walk together, except they be agreed? Which interrogation comprehends in it a
more vehement denial than a bare negative could express, and must be resolved
into this proposition; Two cannot possibly walk together, except they be
agreed; Your selves being judges.

For the better clearing of these words, we must a little further inquire into
the subject or Persons here spoken of; and then into the Actions here
predicated of them, and (by way of supposition) attributed to them for the more
full conviction of Israel.

1. The subject is an aggregate, made up of several persons, or parties, here
called Two. Who these Two should be, Expositors agree not. Some understand it
of God and the Prophet; some, of Judah and Israel; some, of God and the
Assyrian, as agreeing to come up together to destroy Israel; others, of
Salmanazer and Nebuchadnezzar agreeing to devour both Israel and Judah. But
none of these expositions seem so genuine and proper, as that which tells us
that the expression is Parabolicall, and therefore must first be understood or
supposed indefinitely of any Two that can be imagined to walk together; for
the Appeal lies first in Thesi, whether they think it possible to be true of
any Two in the world, not only men, but birds, beasts, any thing. This being
first agreed upon, they are then to consider of what Two, in hypothesi, he here
spoke this Parable; and, to whom, God meant they should apply this Apologue, in
particular. And that is, to Himself, and them. For these two are more plainly
declared before to be, I, and You. Ver. 2. that is, the Lord who spoke against
them, and the children of Israel against whom he spoke Ver. 1. These are the
two parties, by them desired, but by him denied, to walk together, they being
not yet agreed as they ought.

2. Let us also inquire into the Actions which here, by way of supposition, are
attributed to these parties, and they are two, walking together, and agreeing
together; this, being the ground of the other.

1. Walking together, if we take it, in thesi, and in the first acception,
imports any sociable, familiar, friendly congresse or companying together,
either in a journey, as those two Disciples going to Emaus, Luke 24.17. or in
some short walk of pleasure or delight; as, David and Achitophel, walking to
the house of God in company. Psalm. 55.14. Hence is it translated to signify
Gods walking with his people in a way of mercy, which is here intended, rather
than walking of his people with him in a way of duty: For however it be a
walking together, that here is spoken of, yet Gods intention hereby is to
declare a kind of necessity of his walking contrary to them, by bringing on
the Assyrian against them. And he is here giving a reason of it, because they
being not agreed with him, he could walk no longer with them in ways of love
and mercy, as he had hitherto done.

Now, Gods walking with a people, contains in it these four particulars.

1. His presence among them, leading and protecting of them by his providence
and power. This is that Presence of God which Moses so much desired, and God
promised, My presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest, Exodus
33.14.

2. His taking content and special delight in that people with whom he
vouchsafes to be in such manner present, manifested by communicating unto them
the very secrets of his heart. The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty:
he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy, he will rest in his love, he
will joy over thee with singing. Zeph. 3.17. The secret of the Lord is with
them that fear him, and he will show them his Covenant. Psalm. 25.14. I have
called you friends, for all things that I have heard of my father, I have made
known unto you. Joh. 15.15.

3. His exceeding tenderness of them, and helpfullnesse to them in all those
ways, straits and difficulties wherein they walk with him. All companions in
travel are so. (If two walk together, if they fall, the one will lift up his
fellow. Eccles. 4.10.) If any of the company in a journey be assaulted, sick,
in any want; all contribute to his succor and supply. It is so with God in
walking with his people. I will walk among you, and will be your God, and ye
shall be my people. Lev. 26.12. that is, I will do all for them that a father
can do for his children. I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons
and daughters, says the Lord Almighty. 2 Cor. 6.18. Hence that promise to all
and every of them, When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee;
and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walk through
the fire, thou shall not be burnt; neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.
Isa. 43.2.

4. His being constant in all this goodness toward them. Walking together
imports, for the most part, a continued society, or constant progress in the
same way; especially when applied to Morals or Spirituals. So we use to
understand walking with God, walking in the spirit, walking in the flesh, etc.
as is every where obvious in Scripture. So Gods walking with his people,
implies a continual presence, a constant delight, an uninterrupted course of
doing them good. I will never depart from them to do them good. Jer. 32.40. I
will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.5.

So then, Gods walking together with his people, comprehends in it his special
presence with them, his delight in them, his supplying of them, and constancy
of all this unto them, as being indeed their God, and making them his people.
For, this is a walking (...), together, per omnia, in every respect wherein two
may be said to walk together, as the Septuagint well express it. But does he
thus walk with, and toward all! No, not with any; except they be agreed. I
must therefore now explicate what agreement is, without which there is no such
walking with them.

2. Agreeing together imports diverse things; those, which are more apposite
to our present purpose, are

1. The making of peace with an adversary with whom we are at difference. Agree
with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way. Mat. 5.23. Between
God and sinners there is a variance, distance, enmity. Col. 1.21. This must be
removed, Ezekiel. 16.63.
and we reconciled. Acquaint now thy self with God, and make peace. Job 22.21.
This is done when God, in Christ (laid hold on by faith) is pacified toward
us; and we reconciled unto God by Christ, in the body of his flesh through
death. Col. 1.23.

2. A suitableness of disposition and harmony of affections. This is the great
attractive of amity, and motive to familiar converse, (...), etc Cyrll. in loc.
. For very nature teaches every creature to love, and consort it self with
his like; a man, to associate with such as come nearest to himself in
qualities and conditions. Yea, our English word bears so much in the very
forehead of it. Hence, the Lawyers (who sometimes make use of the word, turned
into Latin, as a Law term) tells us that agreeamentum, is quasi aggregatio
mentium Dr Cowel. Interpreter.
: Which (however a great Antiquary St Hen. Spelman, in Glossar.
and Philologist will not subscribe unto it) is enough to assure us that, where
there is no harmony in affections, there will be no familiarity in
conversation, no walking together: To be agreed with God then, is to come up
fully to him in all suitableness of affections, namely, to love what he loves,
to hate what he hates, to rejoice in nothing, to delight in nothing, to be
grieved at nothing but what God rejoices, delights in, or grieveth at. If he
love righteousness, so must they: if he hate evil, they who love the Lord must
hate evil too. Psalm. 97.10. Do not I hate them that hate thee? etc. Psalm.
139.21, 22. And this, not by hap-hazard, as we say; but, out of knowledge and
choice, as knowing what disposition he is of, and thereupon bringing our hearts
to agreement with him. Therefore the 72. render it, (...), unless they know
one another. This Aquila well explains by (...); unless they orderly accord
together: which must import a knowledge of one another disposition, and a due
compliance therewith.

3. The coming up fully to a person with whom we desire to walk, in all
purposes, resolutions and conclusions; that, we purpose not one thing, and he
another; he pursue one project, we another, but the same: that, what counsel
we take, we take of him, and consult no other: what he would have done, and
acts in, we pursue fully with all our might. Thus the Jews fully agreed in
casting out all such as should confess Jesus to be Christ. Ioh. 9.22. So they
who are agreed with God, purpose nothing, resolve nothing, pursue nothing, but
what he in his wisdom purposes, resolves and pursues. They come fully up
to the mind and will of God, as Caleb, Numb. 14.24. They have no projects,
hold no counsels, mind no ends, use no means, but what appear to be of God and
for God: resolving in this case, as the Apostle in another, ( we can do nothing
against the truth, but for the truth, 2 Cor. 13.8.) we can do nothing, project
nothing, conclude nothing against God, but only for him.

4. The mutual engaging of one another by Covenant, for ever. This is the
completing of all agreements, when men, to prevent disagreements, cement
themselves by an indissoluble League. So did David and Jonathan; Their
agreement grew up into a Covenant, that their love might receive no
interruption or abatement. This was done twice 1 Samuel 18.3. 1 Samuel 20.16, 17.
over, to make all more sure: and the reason is given, because each loved the
other as his own soul. Where love makes the agreement, it will do all it can to
perpetuate it. Thus God covenanteth with his people, That he will never depart
from them to do them good, Jer. 32.40. And they (when they come up to a full
agreement with him) enter into an everlasting Covenant never to be forgotten,
Jer. 50.5. Yea, even wicked men perfect their agreements by a Covenant:
witness those, in Isa. 28.15. who said, We have made a Covenant with death,
and with Hell are we at agreement: which argues a Covenant and a full agreement
to be all one, who ever be the parties that so agree.

Thus you have an explication of the words in their latitude, with reference to
their scope, to the circumstance of time when they were spoken, and to the
condition of the Persons to whom they were directed. Now put all together, and
it results to this maine Conclusion, which I take to be the Doctrine of this
Text. viz.

How kind soever God has been unto a people, by his presence with them, his
appearing for them, and blessing of them, for a long time together; yet, there
is no possibility that this should hold always, unless they be perfectly
reconciled unto God, and come up to a full agreement with him.

This is, I confess, a plain Point, but of such great and universal
concernment, that should I spend the whole time allotted for this Exercise, in
the very repeating of it over and over again, I might well avow it (as
sometimes Latimer said, in a Sermon at Court, touching those words, Take heed,
and beware of covetousness.) to be the best spent time, that ever I had the
happiness to employ in such an honorable Audience; and, the best service that
ever was performed to you, if God should please to set it home upon your
spirits. But because such I should soon preach to the bare walls, by running
such a course. I shall therefore 1. Give you some Scriptures that declare Gods
mind in this particular. 2. Add some Instances of Persons and Nations, upon
whom this has been made good. 3. Inquire into the Grounds why it must be so.
4. Shut up all with some Uses.

1. For Texts of Scripture positively declaring this to be Gods will: one you
have in Eccles. 8.11, 12. Though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his
days be prolonged: that is, not only spared, but abundantly blessed; (for all
blessings are often comprehended under length of days Exodus 10.12. Ephesians 6 2,
3. Prove. 3 2. and ver 16. Psalm. 91.16.
,) yet, surely, I know (says the Wise man) it shall be well with them that
fear God, which fear before him: that is, they shall fare well always, as
being agreed with him (for, fearing of God, is put for covenanting with God;
Ier. 32.40. ( But it shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall he
prolong his days which are as a shadow; because he fears not before him. He
may prosper a while; but, a night of misery is drawing on, that will easily
eclypse all his momentany happiness; and that, for want of agreement with God;
which is the same with not fearing of God; as from that place of Jeremy but now
alleged, is fully manifest.

Another Scripture you have in Prove. 11.18. The wicked works a deceitful
work, but to him that sows righteousness shall be a sure reward. Wicked men
many times pretend very fair for God; they have many specious and glorious
pretenses to varnish over and carry on their private interests and self ends.
They can work upon, and make advantage of every humor, of every season. If
gain be the likeliest lure, Demetrius knows how to raise a whole City in an
instant, to banish Paul and his company from Ephesus; if he but once tell them;
Sirs, ye know that by this craft we have our wealth. This is argument enough to
uphold the grossest Idolatry in the world, among men that care for no other
godliness but gain, Acts 19. If Religion be in fashion, they can, with Herod,
make great show of devotion, and court John Baptist with extraordinary
respects, hoping that their fawning upon, and complementall complying with a
man so eminent among the people, may make them pass for religious men, and
carry on any design under color of Religion, with which the multitude (they
know) are some times more moved, then with their own gain or liberties. But,
however they may cosen uncautious men for a while, yet, mendacia non diu
fallent, hypocrisy will at length be unmasked, their glozings will be in time
discovered; and then, all that they have done will prove but a deceitful work
to themselves, as it was before unto others. Yea, their craft will deceive none
so much as themselves. Only they who are upright and sincere with God, that
sow righteousness, as men that are agreed with God, and are for God in
uprightness, reap a sure reward, because God walks for ever with them. The
end of such men is peace Psalm. 37.37.
.

As this is the Rule of Gods proceedings with particular persons, so is it the
course which he professes to hold with whole Nations and Kingdoms. Witness,
Ier. 18.9, 10. where he says, At what instant I shall speak concerning a
Nation and concerning a Kingdom, to build and to plant it (which is, to walk
with it) if it do evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice (which is all one
with not agreeing with him) I will repent of the good wherewith I said I would
benefit them: that is, I will walk no longer with them. Tros Tyriusque mihi
nullo discrimine agetur. This is Gods Rule of walking with Persons and
Kingdoms.

2. Come we next to some instances and examples, of Persons and Nations with
whom God has so proceeded.

1. For Persons. Look upon Eli and his house, Saul, and Vzziah, as sad examples
in this kind. As for Eli and his house: God had done great things for him; and
so, had walked with him very graciously for a long time together. The Office of
High Priest was settled upon him by special grant of God himself, when in
ordinary course it pertained to Eleazar Number. 20.26. 1 Chro 24.1, 2.
, (after Nadab and Abihu his elder brethren were cut off;) Ithamar, from whom
Eli sprung, being the youngest Number. 3.2. 1 Chro. 6.3.
son of Aaron; And, Eli the first High Priest of Ithamars house, as Josephus
affirms Antiq. 5. ca. ult.
, and Abulensis in 1 Samuel 2. q. 28.
proves. But when God saw the wickedness of Elies sons, and his remissness
toward them, God, after all this honor, sent him this heavy message, 1 Samuel
2.30, 31. I said indeed, that thy house, and the house of thy father should
walk before me for ever: but now, the Lord says, Be it far from me. For
them that honor me I will honor, and they that despise me shall be lightly
esteemed. Behold, the days come that I will cut off thine arm, and the arm
of thy fathers house, etc. God first cut his family short, and then, after four
generations, took that Dignity of the High Priesthood from his house. For,
after Ahijah, Ahitub, Ahimelech (slain by Saul 1 Samuel 23.16, etc.
,) and Abiathar Ibid. ver. 20.
(put from the Priesthood by Solomon, that he might fulfill the word of the
Lord which he spoke concerning Elies house in Shiloh, 1 King. 2.27.) the Chief
Priesthood was taken from Ithamars line, and restored to Eleazars family, by
Solomon, who settled it on Zadok that descended from Eleazar 1 Chro. 6.8.
, in whose race it continued, not only until the Maccabees, but even to the
last destruction of the Temple and City by the Romans. So severe is God
toward those with whom he has some time walked by eminent mercies conferred
on them, if care be not taken to agree with him, as he requires, upon receipt
of those mercies.

How God walked with Saul (our next instance) appears in part by that of
Samuel, 1 Samuel 15.17. When thou wast little in thine own eyes, wast thou not
made Head of the Tribes of Israel? And the Lord anointed thee King over Israel:
and that, when he least expected it; while he was seeking his fathers Asses.
But this high Honor not drawing his heart to agreement with God, the Lord
rejected him from being King, ver. 26. and repented that ever he had made him
King, ver. 35. He had not reigned three years when this sentence passed against
him, and began to be executed on him in a terrible manner. He held the Throne
indeed 37 years after that doom pronounced, (for he reigned in all 40 years
Acts 13.22.
) but lived and died a most miserable forlorn wretch; being forsaken of God,
haunted by an evil spirit, macerated with envy, and tearing himself with rage
against David, crossed and cursed in every thing he went about: and, at length,
when he saw three of his sons, Jonathan, Abinadab and Malchishua fall in one
day at Gilboa by the sword of the Philistines, he fell upon his own sword, and
became his own butcher, 1 Samuel 31.4. His son Ishbosheth (the only legitimate
son that survived him) did indeed by the aid of Abner, mount the Throne, and
made a shift to keep it two years 2 Samuel 2.10.
. But, Abner (upon a base quarrel) revolting, two of his Captains, Baanah and
Rechab, murdered him upon his bed 2 Samuel 4.7.
, carrying his head to David to purchase their peace. After all this, God sent
a sore famine upon Israel three years together, in the reign of David, for Saul
and his bloody house, because he slew the Gibeonites 2 Samuel 21.
, contrary to the Oath of Ioshuah Josh 9.15.
made to their Ancestors: which famine could not be removed, until David had
delivered seven of Saul's sons to the Gibeonites, who hung them up all in one
day before the Lord in Gibeah of Saul, and so that plague stayed. Thus we see
how contrary God walked unto Saul, both living and dead, because Saul made no
better use of Gods walking with him in advancing of him to so much honor.

Vzziah (our last instance) had great experience, in the former part of his
reign, of Gods walking with him in a very gracious manner, so long as Vzziah
sought the Lord in the days of Zechariah the Priest. For God made him to
prosper, and helped him against the Philistines, Arabians and Mehunims, the
Ammonites, and whom not? So that his name became great and formidable over many
Countries: for he was marvellously helped until he was strong, 2 Chronicles. 26.
But then, instead of coming up to God fully, his heart was lifted up unto his
destruction, for he transgressed against the Lord his God, and went into the
Temple to burn incense. Then God walked contrary to him with a witness. He
smote the Temple and City with a most dreadful earthquake, which so amazed and
affrighted the whole City, that they fled out of Jerusalem Zech. 14.5.
for fear of being destroyed by the fall of houses, or opening of the earth.
And, by this earthquake, a part of the roof of the Temple was opened, whereby a
beam of the Sun smote Vzziah on the mouth with a loathsome scabb, that
instantly brake out into a terrible Leprosy all his body over, which could
never be cured to the day of his death: as was hinted before out of Josephus.

2. From Persons, let us ascend to whole Nations and Kingdoms. And first, look
upon Israel in Egypt. How did the Lord redeem them thence, and walked with them
even through the red sea, going before them in a cloud by day, and in a pillar
of fire by night, and bare them as a man bears his son, in all the way that
they went Deuteronomy. ^.31.
, insomuch as within the space of a very few months, he brought them to the
very borders of Canaan, even unto mount Hor, Numb. 20.23? But there, instead of
coming up to a perfect agreement with God who had showed them such mercy, they
fell to murmuring; wishing themselves in Egypt again, or that they might die in
the wilderness, rather then adventure to go up and possess the Land which God
had promised them, because they had heard of the Anakims and other Giants
there, that would oppose and withstand them. For this, God instantly smote them
with a very great mortality, and doomed them to a forty years pilgrimage in
the wilderness, that all who had murmured against him, might be cut off,
before he brought their children into Canaan, Numb. 14.13. When they saw their
error, and smarted for it by the plague, they who before would not go up, when
commanded, would now needs adventure upon it when they were forbidden; telling
Moses, Lo, we be here, and will go up to the place which the Lord has
promised, ver. 40. No, says Moses, it is now too late: the Lord will not go
with you; and the reason he gives them was this, because ye have turned away
from the Lord, therefore the Lord will not be with you. They who would not
agree with God, to go up when he bad them, found him now to walk contrary to
them, when they were afterward willing to go of their own heads: for, some of
them who after Moses had forbidden them, adventured presumptuously up into the
hill; but, the Amorites which dwelt in that mountain, came out against them,
and chased them as bees, and destroyed them in Seir, even unto Hormah, Deuteronomy.
1.43, 44. selfwild obedience is but transgression.

Afterward, when God was again pleased to walk further with Israel through the
wilderness; see how Moses expresses Gods tenderness to him, Deuteronomy. 22.10,
etc. He found him in a desert Land, and in the waste howling wilderness: He
led him about, he instructed him, and kept him as the apple of his eye. As an
Eagle stirs up her nest, fluttereth over her young, spreads abroad her
wings, takes them, bears them on her wings; so the Lord alone did lead him,
etc. Here was walking with a people beyond all parallel. But when Ieshurun
waxed fat, and kicked, and forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed the
rock of his salvation; God would walk no longer with him, but abhorred him,
hid his face from them, and a fire was kindled in his wrath that burned to the
lowest hell, etc. Thus Gods mercies abused turn into fury. God will not walk
always with Israel himself, except He and they be agreed.

I will not stay you with the story of Israel after it was divided from Judah.
Their Tragical story is very well known. Let us a little behold the case of
Judah. How much God protected, blessed, exalted Judah, and delighted to walk
in the midst of her, none conversant in the sacred story can be ignorant. How
far he made Josiah isntrumental to carry on the work of a great and
glorious Reformation, by purging the worship of God, casheering Idolatry and
Idols, rooting out of Sodomitry, restoring the Passover, and entering into a
solemn Covenant, causing all Judah and Israel to stand unto it; who is such a
stranger in Israel as not to know? Who would believe that such a work should
end in desolation of the Kingdom so Reformed; especially when Josiah was so
upright and sincere, that there was no King before, or after him, like unto him?

Howbeit, even then it happened to Judah, as afterward to the Roman Empire,
which by the piety and zeal of Constantine became Christian (but not in
sincerity) yet met with ruin, instead of establishment. For, notwithstanding
all this, Judah never came up to a full agreement with God: their hearts never
closed with him, but upon the first opportunity, under his son Iehoahaz,
revolted to Idolatry. Therefore the Lord, who had so highly exalted them,
brought them down wonderfully Lam. 1.9.
, never leaving to walk contrary to them, until he had romoved Judah out of
his sight also, 2 King. 17.

And albeit Judah returned from Babylon, yet the last destruction of the Jews
by the Romans was far more bloody and fatal, then all their captivity under
the Caldeans. For, in the former, we read but of 26000 captives (2 King. 24.16.
Jer. 52.30.) the number of the slain, being not so considerable, as to be
recorded. But in the other, Josephus Lib. 7. de Bell. Iud. cap. 17.
tells us that there were eleven hundred thousand slain and destroyed, and
ninety seven thousand taken prisoners; of which number eleven thousand perished
by famine, many were cast to the wild beasts to be devoured, and others cut
off by the sword on the Roman Theaters, merely to make them sport at their
public solemnities and triumphs. And thus says the same Author, that famous
City of Jerusalem, which from the first foundation of it had stood 2177 years
Ibid cap ult.
, miserably perished. (...), etc. neither her gray hayr'd antiquity, nor her
infinite riches, nor her universal fame all the world over, nor the great
glory she obtained for Religion, could privilege her from such a catastrophe,
when God, for her not agreeing with him, set himself to walk contrary to her.
So terrible is God where great mercies have been greatly abused. Nor is it in
vain when he says of any people with whom he has walked, Woe unto them when I
depart from them, Hos. 9.12. It were easy to multiply instances of this kind.
The seven famous Churches of Asia, yea, all the Eastern Churches who (God
walking with them) were able to swim comfortably through all the bloody streams
of the ten Persecutions of the Primitive Church, were at length drowned and
devoured by their own errors, heresies, emulations, rents and schisms, and
became a prey to the savage Saracens and Turks unto this very day. Germany,
yea England too can furnish us with too many examples of the same nature, that
all give testimony to this truth. But I forbear them, and hasten to the third
thing propounded, viz. The Grounds of the point which we have in hand.

3. The Grounds 3. The Grounds of the Point.
and Reasons, why this is and must be so, are manifest in great part from what
has been before spoken in opening the nature of that agreement which is here
intended. I shall therefore touch the more briefly upon them.

1. Enemies not reconciled, will not walk together. Yea, Cain walked with Abel
in the field Genesis 4.8.
, or as Joah with Abner, when Joah took him aside in the gate to speak with him
peaceably, or friendly, but smote him on the fifth rib that he died 2 Samuel 3.27.
: or as the same Joab saluted Amasa, with one hand taking Amasa by the beard to
kiss him, and with the other stabbing him to the heart 2 Samuel 20.9, 10.
. How then, can men who have not made their peace with God, nor come to any
agreement with him, expect that he should always walk with them in a way of
mercy? God and they are enemies by means of their wicked works. And that may
truly be said of him and them, which himself once spoke of those three
sheepherds whom he cut off in one month. Zech. 11.8. My soul loathed them, and
their soul abhorred me. Therefore, they walk contrary to him, and must expect
that he will walk contrary unto them, Lev. 26.40, 41. Or, if he do walk with
them, it will be as the executioner with a malefactor to the place of
execution, as a Fowler with the birds, or as a Lion with his prey which he
intends to tear and devour: When they go (says the Lord of such as are not
agreed with him,) I will spread my net upon them, and bring them down as the
fowls of Heaven, Hos. 7.12. I will be unto Ephraim as a Lion, and as a young
Lion unto the house of Judah: I, even I will tear, and go away, I will take
away, and none shall rescue them, Hos. 5.14. And, as one enemy takes delight in
the destruction of another; because revenge is sweet, whatever it cost; so will
the Lord, in the confusion of those whom sometimes he rejoiced over to walk
with them for good. Thus himself expressly tells Israel, in case of
disobedience continued, without making their peace and agreement with him, It
shall come to pass, that as the Lord rejoiced over you to do you good, and to
multiply you; so the Lord will rejoice over you to destroy you, and to bring
you to naught, Deuteronomy. 28.63.

agreed. What one loves the other will hate, what one desires the other
abhors, what delights the one vexes the other; If one of them be merry, the
other will be sad, or sullen, or angry. And this must needs make them shun all
walking and converse together. This also is the case between God and men until
they be agreed. There is no suitableness of disposition, but rather an
antipathy. If God love the good, and hate the evil, men will hate the good, and
love the evil, Mich. 3.2. If God delight in him that is upright in his way,
Prove. 11.20. the same man is an abomination to the wicked, Prove. 29.27. If
they know he delights not in such or such a thing, they will make choice of
that the rather: they choose that wherein I delight not, says the Lord, Isa.
65.12. If God rejoice in doing good, they will rejoice in doing evil. When thou
do evil then thou rejoycest, Ier. 11.15. And upon this ground it is, that
God and they cannot walk together. For therefore it is that the Lord seems
there to stand and wonder at his peoples coming into his house; What has my
beloved to do in my house? as if he should say, what mean they to come so near
me that are so cross to me in disposition? we can have no intercourse
together, we must needs forbear company. There must be agreement in
disposition, before there be a walking together with any content and affection.

3. They who are not agreed, do ever cross, and clash in all Hushai did
Achitophel 2 Samuel 17.14.
. So it is with men whom the Lord is pleased sometimes so far to walk with,
as to make use of them in some special services that he sets them upon. They
may perhaps carry on his work so long as Gods way and theirs lie together, but
they have ever a design of their own in their eye, contrary to Gods design;
and, they will carry on their own, whatever become of His. Therefore God uses
them so far as to bring his own counsels to pass by them; and in the
conclusion, he falls upon them and breaks them to pieces, when he has no
further use of them. And so, he that can be content to walk with them, that
is, to assist and prosper them while they be employed in doing his work, will
walk no longer with them, when his work is done. Thus, Gods end in sending
the Assyrian as the rod of his anger against an hypocritical nation, was only
to humble them for their sins. But, the Assyrian meant not so, neither did his
heart think so. He meant to make a conquest of them for himself, not to
subdue them unto God. The issue therefore was, that when the Lord had performed
his whole work upon mount Zion, and upon Jerusalem, he would punish the fruit
of the stout heart of the King of Assyria, and the glory of his high looks,
Isa. 10.11. So, Gods end in setting up Iehu, to cut off the house of Ahab, was,
to execute justice on Ahab for his Idolatries. Iehu is willing to undertake the
service, the reward whereof was no less then a Kingdom. And, so far as
concerned the destruction of Ahab, let Iehu alone; he would not be long about
it. For, no sooner was he anointed (although but in a private room) but he
vigorously set upon it 2 King 9.13.
. But, when he had cut off Ahabs house, he so much minded a Crown, that,
whatever his Zeal for the Lord was, he would rather be as gross an Idolater as
ever Ahab was, then hazard the loss of a Kingdom so suddenly and easily
gotten, by destroying those Idols which Ahab worshipped. Therefore, however God
rewarded him according to his promise, with a lineal succession to that Crown
to the fourth generation; yet, this word being made good, the Lord would walk
no longer with him, but avenged upon the house of Iehu that very blood which by
Gods command he shed in Jezreel, because of his hypocrisy and selfishnesse in
the doing of it. And so, the Lord utterly destroyed both him and his house.

4. Where there is no Covenant stricken, there can be no constant walking
together, although there should be a kind of truce or temporary agreement for
a season. Men that desire a firm and perpetual amity and intercourse, use to
settle their agreement by the strongest bond of a mutual Covenant, as Jonathan
and David. Now then, when men will not come to a Covenant keeping, as well as a
Covenant making with God, it is impossible they should long agree or walk
together. Their hearts will fit loose from each other, and every trifling
occasion will make a breach. It is an everlasting Covenant, that is the
foundation of perpetual friendship, and of walking constantly together in a
way of love. Therefore, when God would assure his people that he would walk
with them for ever in a way of grace and love, he says, I will make an
everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them
good, Jer. 32.40. And they also do the like with him. Ier. 50.5. Come, say
they, and let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant that
shall not be forgotten. Where then there is no Covenant smitten, there can be
no constant walking together; because such are without God in the world, Ephesians.
2.12. that is, without any solid interest in him, or league and agreement with
him, that may be a foundation of constant mercy from him.

And now (Right Honorable and Beloved) give me leave in the Use and
application of this Point, to deal plainly and faithfully, as for God, and from
God, before whom ye are come this day to humble your souls, and to seek of him
a further blessing upon your selves and all the three Kingdoms: yea, so to
take hold of God, as to prevail with him to walk together with us in a way of
blessing and mercy for ever.

And first, this Point will help us to judge what is like to be the issue and
event of all those concussions and convulsions under which we labor, in this
time of universal earthquake, that, at present, seems (to the eye of sense at
least) to threaten the demolishing and swallowing up of all the Churches of
Christ: and how far we may expect Gods walking with us in our troubles.

It cannot, without great ingratitude and impudence, be denied that He has
graciously walked with our Parliament all the time of their sitting (even five
years together, within five days This Parllament began, November. 3. 1640.
,) to the admiration, if not envy, of the neighboring Nations. Insomuch, as
all other Protestant Churches and States that look Heavenward, have their eye
and heart upon our Parliament, as Jacob upon his Benjamin. For, as he accounted
his life to be bound up in the lads life Genesis 44 30.
, so they reckon their welfare and happiness to be wrapped up in the safety
and prosperity of this Parliament; even as all the Popish crew and profane
Atheistical Belialists do measure their hopes by the good success of the
public Incendiaries of this and the other two Kingdoms, in this bloody war
of theirs for the extirpation of our Religion, Laws and Liberties all at once.

How has the Lord guarded, guided and enabled our Parliament to bring back
from the grave, even a dead Kingdom, whose Laws and Liberties had yielded up
the ghost; and, to revive Religion, which lay drawing on toward her long home,
expecting every moment to breath her last; Popery having long since prepared
her winding sheet, and the sovereign power being employed to draw away her
pillows, and to close up her eyes!

How mavelous have the outgoings of our God been toward our Armies even from
the beginning, when it was more to bring an Army into the field, then now to
lead it through the Kingdom! At the first taking up of this War, the Popish,
plotting, destructive faction, looked upon the very Nobility and Gentry of this
Kingdom who adhered to the Parliament, with as much superciliousnesse and
scorn, as sometimes Tiberius and his Court-Parasites beheld the Roman
Senators O homines ad servitutem nati!
, coming in a servile way to visit him, after he had, by the instigation of
Sejanus and other lewd Counselors and companions in evil, to be rid of that
great Council withdrawn himself from Rome, first into Campania, and then into
the Island of Capres, where he might be most remote from the Senate, and more
free to contrive the ruin of it, as well as to act wickedness at his pleasure
with his minions, without interruption or control. If any were sent from our
supreme Senate, or from the Army, with humble Petitions and seasonable advice,
they were looked upon with so much contempt and scorn, as if they came rather
to be made a sport to all the scumme of mankind, then to offer any thing
worthy the acceptance of reasonable men. And as for the generality of this
Kingdom, they having been so much overawed and accustomed to an iron yoke of
Arbitrary power, it was too too evident that the ancient English generosity of
spirit, was degenerated into so much poorness and pusillanimity, that it was a
very difficult work to draw together any considerable power at first, to
withstand that strong torrent of violence and oppression, which had for so long
time carried all before it, and broke down whatever stood in the way to oppose
it, and began to plead prescription against all Law and Justice. Our condition
therefore at that time (when the enemy presumed that none durst be so hardy as
to appear in Arms against them) required more then ordinary spirits, to break
the ice, and to appear in the head of an Army, or Navy, to give the first onset
and charge against a party so great and puissant, so inveterate and subtle, so
combined, so many years preparing, so many ways assisted, and so strongly
backed and countenanced by the Royal Majesty, which they had also deeply
engaged for the destruction of all that the faction had necessitated to take
Arms in defense of the Royal Authority, as well as of the Laws and Common
Liberties. Yet even then God stirred up some Noble and Public spirits from
among the Governors of Israel, who offered to sacrifice themselves willingly
among the people Judge. 5.9.
, whom God went along withal, and did great things by them, wherein we greatly
rejoiced, what ever the unthankful world (apt to cry Hosanna, one day; and,
stone him, the next) when their own turn is served, please now to bark to the
contrary.

But, this last Summers successes have been beyond all expectation, and almost
beyond credibility. The right hand of the Lord has so visibly smitten through
the loins of our proud enemies, that even themselves must confess, God has
every where sought for us against them. How many victories have been obtained!
Towns and strong holds won and recovered! and the strength of the enemy how
is it every where broken! This is so mavelous in our eyes, that we are like
men that dream, scarce daring to believe our own eyes. Oh that we could more
exalt our God, and give unto him the glory due unto his Name, for so many, so
great, so glorious salvations afforded to his people by his own Almighty arm
stretched out for them in so eminent a manner.

But will God thus walk together with us for ever? He alone that is our
strength, our buckler, the horn of our salvation, and our high Tower, grant it
may be so: and cursed be that man who shall so much as in his secret thoughts
desire it may be otherwise.

Howbeit remember the Text, and remember the Doctrine which it has yielded us,
together with the Instances whereby it has been abundantly confirmed. There
must be an agreement (yea, another manner of ugreement then most are aware of)
between God and us, before I dare promise any long continuance of his walking
with us, as he has hitherto done. Nay, I must pronounce the contrary from the
Lord, and do here call God and all his people to witness this day of that I
speak, namely that it is as possible for light to walk with darkness, for
Christ to keep company with Belial, for one contrary extreme not to oppose the
other, as for God and England to walk long together, while they be upon no
better terms of agreement, then (for ought appears) they be yet come unto. Let
our Parliament and Counsels consult, let our Armies fight and be as prosperous
and expeditious as Caesar, when he every where made that good, Veni, Vidi,
Vici: Let the enemy be every where routed, scattered and shattered all to
pieces before our forces; yea, let the great City be never so strongly
fortified, guarded, united, yet, unless God be really and fully agreed
withal, I must say (mutatis mutandis) unto them and you, as sometimes Jeremy
of the Caldeans, who for a while were forced to quit their siege of Jerusalem
when Pharaohs Army was upon their march against them; and when the people grew
confident that now the worst was past, and the danger was over; Deceive not
your selves, saying, The Caldeans (I say, Cavaliers) shall surely depart from
us: for they shall not depart. For though ye had smitten the whole Army of them
that fight against you, and there remained but wounded men among them, yet
should they rise up every man in his Tent, and burn the City with fire, Jer.
37.9, 10. It is not multitude or strength will do it: there is no King
(therefore no Kingdom) saved by the multitude of an host Psalm. 33.16.
They are but vain words, to say, I have counsel and strength for the waare 2
King. 18.20.
. How soon can the Lord make that good upon England, which he once brought upon
Egypt, Isa. 19.11. The Princes of Zoan are fools, the counsel of the wise
Counselors of Pharaoh is become brutish, etc. Let them tell thee now what the
Lord of Hosts has purposed upon Egypt, ver. 12. The Princes of Zoan are become
fools, the Princes of Noph are deceived, they have also seduced Egypt, even
they that are the stay of the Tribes. The Lord has mingled a perverse spirit
in the midst thereof, and they have caused Egypt to err in every work
thereof, as a drunken man staggereth in his vomit, ver. 13, 14. So that we see
it is neither strength nor policy, Armies nor Counsels that can save a people
not agreed with God. To all such the Lord says, Woe unto them, for they have
fled from me: Destruction unto them, because they have transgressed against
me, though I have redeemed them, yet they have spoken lies against me; that
is, they have made false protestations and vows unto me, of that fidelity and
service which they never performed, (as some expound that of the Prophet) Hos.
7.13. Therefore, woe unto them. But you will perhaps plead; we are agreed with
God, we have entered into solemn League and Covenant with him: What lack we
yet? To this I answer, that it is not the making, but the keeping of a Covenant
with all integrity and zeal, that argues our Agreement with God. For, as there
be some, who in words profess to know God, yet in works deny him; So are
there not none who make a great deal of stir to enter into a Covenant, and
seem for a while to be as zealous as Josiah, to bring all others into the same
bond also; yet are Covenant-breakers, and further off from true Agreement with
God, then many of the ignorant brutish heathens, who are strangers from the
Covenant of promise, without hope, and without God in the world Ephesians. 2.12.
. For Covenant-breakers, are ever near of kin to haters of God, Romans 1.30, 31.
and so cannot truly be, nor said to be agreed with him.

To the end therefore we may be the better and more Use of Examination and
Trial, whereby we may better discern whether yet we be agreed with God, or
not, To search and try our ways Psalm. 3, 40.
, is not only our duty, but the constant practice of all Gods people. Now for
trial, call to mind what has bin said in Explication of the Text, and
Confirmation of the Doctrine. For I love to inculcate the same things, rather
then to abound in variety, because I desire more to profit than to please.

1. If we be agreed with God, we are reconciled to him. Reconciliation is the
first thing in Agreement, where Enmity has gone before. And by Reconciliation I
mean, not only the pacifying of Gods wrath toward us, by removing the guilt
of sin; but the purging out of that natural enmity and malice that is in our
minds and whole man by wicked works, against the holy nature and mind of
God: so as, there is no longer that studied and industrious thwarting and
crossing with him in our conversation and actions, which is daily to be found
in enemies not reconciled. Now then, is the way wardnes, Trial.
malice and fiercenes of our natures taken off, and our hearts subdued unto
God? Is the inward frame of our spirits for God, for Christ, for the things of
God? Have we friendly and cheerful countenances toward God, his ways, and
servants? Have we kissed the son, as they who are content or desirous to
submit to his Scepter? Or have we not rather sent him a message of defiance, by
our words and actions, to let him and all the world know, we will not have this
man reign over us Luk 19.14.
? If it be thus, flatter not your selves with vain imaginations; Do not think
a few good words, or the taking of a formal Covenant, will satisfy him: he
has already declared your doom, Those mine enemies, which would not that I
should reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me, Luke 19.27.

For thy sake, says David, I have borne reproach, shame has covered my face,
the zeal of thine house has eaten me up, and the reproaches of them that
reproached thee, are fallen upon me, Psalm. 69.7, 9.

Trial.
Try then the present frame of our affections by this rule: Have we learned to
deny not only ungodlines and worldly lusts, but our own selves, our wit,
wisdom, dearest affections; and to bring our hearts to an exact compliance and
correspondency with the Lord thorowout. Do we study and observe his
disposition, (as men study the humors and inclinations of their Prince.) do we
love, hate, rejoice, greive, where God does, and as God does? Nay rather, do we
not love what God hates, and hate what he loves? Do we not hate the power of
Godliness, rejoice in iniquity, repine at a through Reformation, greive to see
that work so likely to prosper to the prejudice of our greatness, profits,
interests, pleasures, lusts, etc. If this be our case, if we deal with God, as
Peninnah with Hannah, when she provoked her sore to make her fret 1 Samuel 1.6.
, The Lord will be quit with us, and as we provoke him by our crossenes and
peevish disposition, he will provoke us with a witness, and resolve, as Deuteronomy.
32.20. I will hide my face from them, I will see what their end shall be, for
they are (a cross piece) a very froward generation. Their disposition is very
averse from mine, there is no sutablenesse between me and them in affections,
therefore no constant walking together.

3. Where there is agreement with God, there is no driving Jehoshaphat to Ahab,
I am as thou art, my people as thy people, my horses as thy horses, (1 King.
22.2.) And we will be with thee in the war, 2 Chronicles. 18.3. We will not be
biassed by correspondences, compliances, self ends, ambition, any thing, but
study how to promote and carry on Gods work, whatever become of our own. Thus
Saul (afterward a Paul) before he was agreed with God, crossed and persecuted
Gods design of spreading the Gospel: but once humbled and converted, he lays
aside all his own project, and is wholly for God, Lord, what will thou have me
to do? Act. 9.6. He is now no longer for persecution of the Gospel, which was
his own business, but for the propagation of it, which was Gods. Trial.
Let us then consider whose work, ends, and interests we endeavor most to
promote. Are we for God, for Christ, for his maine design, in all we do? Can
we be content to perish, so Gods cause and counsels may prosper? Is it our
meat and drink to do his will, although his will should thwart our own, etc.
Are we willing to adventure our selves and all we have for Christ, not counting
estates, honors, families, no nor our very lives dear unto us, so we may set
forward his Gospel, and the power of Godliness? then take comfort. But if we
make use of God, as cunning Politicians do one of another, pretending a great
deal of respect and service, merely to out-wit each other, and to drive on
their own ends, as Tiberius and Sejanus, of whom Suetonius reports, That
Tiberius in favoring Sejanus had one design, and Sejanus in serving Tiberius
had another. ( Tiberius meant that his affection to Sejanus should be of use to
himself, and Sejanus in obeying the Emperor aspired to the Empire. Tiberius
intended to serve him of the craft and subtilty of Sejanus to ruin the house
of Germanicus, and to raise his own: Sejanus resolved to make his way to the
Empire by the ruin of them both.) If it be with us as with God and Jehu. God
meant to exalt Jehu for the ruin of Ahabs house for Idolatry, and Jehu made
use of Gods commission and providence, to raise his own family, and to keep up
Idolatry; God will search this out, and at length, as Tiberius was the ruin of
his great Favorite Sejanus, so will God be of us, how much so ever he make of
us at the present.

Agreement with God to purpose, it is firmed and established by a Covenant. I
have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments,
Psalm. 119.106. David had two things equally in his heart, the entering into a
Covenant, and the keeping of it, and he binds himself by an Oath unto both
alike. He will not only vow, but pay. Nor will he content himself to do so for
a while, so long as he is in a distress, and then (when his own turn is
served) study to cast it off by degrees, putting new glosses and senses upon it
to elude and evade the true meaning of it, or laying aside the vigorous
execution of it (first, for a season, and then altogether,) upon politic
pretenses. But he will keep it always, even unto the end. It is with him, an
everlasting Covenant that shall never be forgotten Jer. 50.5.
; as well knowing that God has no pleasure in fools, and that it is better
not to vow, then to vow, and not pay Eccles. 5.4, 5.
Yea, so punctual was David in keeping Covenant, that he would never forget
that which once he had made, but to a man, to Jonathan his friend: not only
when he had need of Jonathan, and Jonathan able to serve him, but after
Jonathan was in his grave: not only when Saul's house was yet strong, and David
but low and weak, and needed the favor and aid of the people, but after Saul's
house was wholly reduced and broken, and David established in the Kingdom, and
had the remainder of them under his absolute power to save, or destroy them, 2 Samuel 21.6, 7.

This will try us indeed. For first, Trial.
it may perhaps be demanded of some, Have ye at all taken the National
Covenant? Have all in power and place done their duty in taking sufficient
course that it may be administered unto all, according to the resolution and
Ordinance of Parliament in that behalf? There was great forwardnes and show of
extraordinary zeal in some to enter into that Covenant, and to press it upon
others, when we were low, and needed the assistance of our Brethren of
Scotland, but when we had once engaged them, and they were come into this
Kingdom, I know not how it comes to pass, but so it is, that the pressing of
the Covenant have been by degrees laid aside, even where there was most need of
administering it, as if it were not only safe, but profitable (for, honorable,
I think none do account it) to prostitute a solemn sacred Ordinance of God to
corrupt ends, and to be prosecuted, or cast aside, as the occasions of state,
or the private designs of some Projectours shall suggest, or require, what
ever the piety and zeal of both the Honorable Houses of Parliament have
ordained to the contrary. But either the National Covenant was evil, or good.
If evil, why is it not so declared by Authority, that we may all shake it off,
and be deeply and publicly humbled, for our great rashness and sin in
entering into it. If good, why do not all take it? or, if it be not a duty, why
should any be bound by it, whiles others are at liberty, and act contrary to it
every day? Do you think God will put up such trifling with him in a matter so
serious and sacred? Be not deceived, God will not so be mocked: his right hand
will find out all those seeming Angels of light who thus promote works of
darkness, and make such use of such a solemn Religious act of Divine worship,
tendered to the most high God, as no honest ingenuous Heathen durst to make of
any solemn piece of Idolatrous service, tendered to their Idols. Will ye say,
such as these have agreed with God, that thus dally with God, in the most
solemn action that can possible pass between God and man? There is no man so
impudent as to affirm it, so silly as to imagine it.

But to leave them: have they who have taken the Covenant, made any conscience
to keep it? Give me leave to insist upon this, for it is a principal duty of
the day to consider our breaches, and to renew our Covenant: for which end it
is commanded by Authority, that the National Covenant should be publicly read
in every Congregation, on every Fast day. Are there not too many among us, who
care no more for a Covenant with God after they have taken it, then Mahomet the
second regarded his Leagues and Confederacies with any neighbor Nation, which
he would observe strictly while the observation of them would advance his own
ends, but deride all men as fools and idiots that thought him bound any
further? Are there none that have strained not only their wits, but their
consciences too, to enervate and anull it, by forced glosses and
interpretations? None that dispute and protest against it, professing they will
lay down all, rather then be bound by it, and that they repent their taking of
it, and declare, by their carriage to all the world, not only a thwarting of
it, but a deriding of all that press them with it? But I come to some
particulars of the Covenant.

1. I beseech you that it may be considered, what sincerity, reality and
constancy has appeared in many, in the Reformation of Religion in this
Kingdom, at least in the matter of Discipline and Government according to the
word of God, and the example of the best Reformed Churches, thereby to bring
all the three Kingdoms to the nearest conjunction and uniformity therein. Be
there no plottings, no bargains in the dark, to hinder that Reformation we
have covenanted to promote? No scorns put upon that uniformity which our
Covenant binds us to endeavor? No engagements for confusion, under the
specious (but false) name of Liberty of Conscience, and toleration of all
opinions and sects, for fear that if the contrivers of such a design, should
pitch upon a liberty for those of their own way only, they must needs leave so
many out of the bargain, as would soon cause all other sectaries to forsake
them, and make them appear a very small inconsiderable company, who now vapor
it in all places, as if all the sectaries in the Kingdom were for their ways
and opinions? Are there none who to effect this, cast Remora's in the way of
settling any thing, in hope there will be ere long a necessity of settling
nothing? Be there none, who, notwithstanding their Covenant, give it out aloud,
that nothing at all, no not so much as the main substantials of
Church Government, so far as concerns the standing Officers and Ordinances
of Christ, ought to have any stamp of Divine Right set upon it; and that there
is no such thing as a Church Government in reference to Church Censures to be
found in Scripture, but the Civil Magistrate is wholly trusted with that; and,
whatever Discipline be established, it is to derive from the Civil Magistrate
only? It is true, some things requisite unto the exercise of Church Government,
in reference to common order and peace, are not of Divine Institution, but from
the light of nature. Nor have any of those who have been called to advise in
things of this nature, affirmed otherwise of them. But, that therefore the very
standing Officers of the Church, their Offices, the Ordination of Ministers
This the Parliament has asserted to be the Ordinance of Christ. See Ordinance
for Ordination
and Church Censures, are not instituted of Christ, no man acquainted with the
Gospel, and Kingly Office of Christ in any Church visible, can with any reason
deny.

For men, then, to pretend, in a Covenant, the promoting of that Church
Discipline and Government, which is according to the Word of God, and the
example of the best Reformed Churches (who, as all know, do, without prejudice
to the Civil Power, unanimously and clearly hold out the essentials of their
Discipline to be of Christ's Institution:) and then to tell the Civil Magistrate
there needs no other Government but what he pleases to appoint; and that, to
have no authority at all but from him, is to put him upon an action somewhat
like that of Philip of Macedon Plutarch in Ph l.
, who commanded sumptuous statues of twelve principal gods of Greece, to be
exactly made and carried before him at a great solemnity, with show of doing
much honor to the gods: but withal, he caused one statue more to be made for
himself, which took place of all the rest; For which act he stands branded unto
all posterity, for a contemner of the gods and of all religion.

2. What care has been taken, without respect of persons to extirpate heresy,
schism, profaneness, and what ever is contrary to sound Doctrine and the
power of Godliness? Is there any effectual course taken against any of these?
Are there not sectaries, heretics and hideous blasphemers scattering their
poison where ever they please, without suppression, even after proof made of
their broaching sundry damnable opinions and blasphemies? Is there any opinion
vented, be it never so pernicious and destructive, but some will be found to
plead for the maintainers of it, and help them out of the briars, when
questioned for it? And as for profaneness, how does it abound, and flame out
in the lives of even innumerable numbers of men that have covenanted against
it! Nor can I account them better then profane, who suddenly leap out of the
very gulf of prophannesse, into some one or more of those ways and opinions
which they find to be most in request with those who are able to pleasure and
prefer them; becoming great zealots in crying up (or down, as the market
goes) those things which they understand not, without giving any testimony of
their repentance for their debosheries and lewd conversation, or making any
haste to forsake them. Yea, is there not a way projected by some, to pluck up
the sluice of hell it self, to let in upon us all errors and heresies that ever
were; and baits laid to draw the incautious heady multitude to swallow them
all, the more to increase and endeer a strong party to themselves, for the
better carrying on of private ends and interests?

3. How have we endeavored to preserve and maintain the Rights and Privileges
of Parliament, etc. This (because Magistracy is an Ordinance of God) is the
duty of every one that fears God. For, if the Magistrate be the Minister of God
to thee for thy wealth Romans 13.4.
, thou art bound by the fifth Commandment, to assist and support his just
rights and authority. But, alas! are there none among us that begin to be fond
of a Democracie; yea, to whisper not only an alteration, but subversion of all
Government, and to bring in Anarchy and confusion? Is not this one of the
Tenets of the Anabaptists which are now so much dandled and courted by some,
whose Covenant binds them to suppress their errors and fury?

And of those that look after this branch of their Covenant, are there none who
terminate all their care and zeal, sometimes upon one, sometimes upon the other
of the two Houses of Parliament, as their fancies lead them; talking of the
other as if they had rather covenanted to pull it down, then to support and
maintain it? Are we not by the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom (which we have
fought for all this while) bound equally to preserve the Privileges of both
Houses? Not that any should be less zealous for either, but rather more. The
thing I complain of is, their negligence and partiality, who are not alike
zealous for both. For, it cannot sink into any wise man's head, that if the one
be weakened or slighted, the other can continue strong or honorable. Castor
and Pollux were both the sons of Jupiter, and did well together, but ill
asunder: while they joined, they scoured the seas of Pirates, and did what they
list at land too, in behalf of the oppressed. Therefore the Romans erected but
one Temple for both, that none might honor the one, but he must honor the
other. When but one of their stars appeared without the other, they who
beheld it, especially Mariners, were stricken with such fear upon it, that they
presently fell to their superstitious devotions, and apprehended it as a very
bad Omen, and would never give over sacrificing, till they had obtained sight
of both together again. Let either of our (...), our Tyndarides, our Gemini,
our two Houses of Parliament, begin (I will not say to part asunder) but only
to shine weakly, or to dipp in, or suffer an eclypse, and farewell all our
happiness and hopes, our Government, Religion, safety, and whatever is justly
precious and dear unto us in this world.

4. Have there been any conscionable observation of our Covenant, in the
faithful discovery of Incendiaries, Malignants, and evil Instruments that
hinder Reformation of Religion, that make divisions among our selves, or
between the two Kingdoms; that contrive, and raise factions and parties among
the people, contrary to our League and Covenant? and has there been due care
used, to bring them to public trial and condign punishments? Have we not
rather forgotten that ever we covenanted with the great and dreadful God, to
do any such thing? Are there not found among us concealers, harbourers, yea
abettors of such vipers? Did never any escape public punishment, who have
been, upon public trial and conviction, condemned? Is there no where the
price of blood to be found? If there be, hear what God doomed Ahab unto, 1
King. 20.42. Because thou have let go out of thine hand, a man whom I appointed
to utter destruction, thy life shall go for his life, and thy people for his
people. This the Lord made good upon him. For how ever Benhadad crouched to
Ahab at that present, and was content to buy his life at any rate, restoring
all the Cities that he or his fathers had taken from Israel, and promising all
peaceablenesse and good neighborhood toward Ahab for all time to come: Yet,
at three years end, another battle is fought at Ramoth Gilead, fatal to Ahab,
who by the special direction of the same Benhadad to his Captains, ( to fight
neither with small nor great, save only against the King of Israel 1 King.
22.31.
,) was there singled out and slain. Thus God oftentimes makes them who are
unduely spared, to be the destruction of those who did not execute justice upon
them. Again, is there no laboring to gain proselytes to a party among the
people? no pleading by word and writing against what we have bound our selves
by Covenant to promote? no brow-biting, blasting and slandering of men of
honor and approved fidelity, if they stand in their way? no artifices to
engage all men against what ever shall be settled by Parliament touching matters
of Religion; as if the best keeping of Covenant, did consist in the strongest
opposition against it? Shortly after the beginning of this Parliament, there
was tampering with our Army in the North, to march Southward with a Petition;
but the meaning was to force the Parliament: I hope it will not so soon be
forgotten, but that the wisdom of the Honorable Houses will be vigilant and
careful to prevent like tamperings in all time to come.

5. As for the preservation of that League and unity so happily settled between
the two Kingdoms, and the bringing to punishment all that sow division
betwixt them; what shall we be able to answer either to God or men for the
daily neglect hereof; yea, for the manifest endeavors of too too many to set
them at variance, for causes known best to the contrivers of such a wicked and
pernicious design? Albeit some speak their fears thereof, with grief; yet,
when such a question as this (What, shall we and our Brethren of Scotland fall
out?) is made but the occasion of a further discourse against them, and to open
a way to some confident slander or backbiting of our Brethren in common
discourse, and that by those who have neither certain intelligence of their
actions, nor commission to call them to account, thereby to work them out of
the hearts of so many as they can; (not so much to reform things amiss
between us, as to be rid of them;) putting not any difference between the acts
done or avowed by the Nation, or by their Commissioners, and those faults that
are made by some particular persons among them; this can be no other then a
breach of our Covenant, by a cunning artifice of telling news, and a manifest
endeavor to make a quarrel between the two Nations. And therefore (if they
who have power, do not punish and suppress this unsufferable liberty) God must
needs visit for such hypocrisy, and avenge the quarrel of his Covenant upon
all such miscreants, who will rather mingle Heaven and hell together, and break
through all bonds that very Heathens have ever held sacred, then miss of their
own ends and wills, what ever become of the public, in respect of Religion or
Government. These, these be the men that will destroy all, if your wisdom and
justice do not seasonably prevent it, although the Lord should give us to tread
on the necks of all other enemies.

6. And as for assisting and defending all that enter into this Covenant in the
maintaining and pursuit thereof, not suffering our selves to be by any means
drawn from it, either to a defection to the other side, or to a detestable
indifferency or neutrality in this Cause of God. I report me to you, how this
has been performed. Have not many brave and gallant spirits received
discouragements, been many ways traduced, and at length cast aside as broken
bottles? Nay, is there not an endeavor in some, so far to exasperate
Authority and the whole Kingdom, to break (if it were possible) with a whole
Nation that for our sakes entered into this Covenant? Are they few that have
made defection to the other side? and are there none who were once very hot for
the Covenant, even to the punishing of those who truly out of conscience
scrupled any thing in it at first; that are now grown cold and remiss; yea,
are gone beyond neutrality or indifferency therein? But, to conclude this part
of our Trial by the particulars of the Covenant; Let all whom this may
concern, no longer flatter themselves with vain imaginations, that God and
they be agreed: but know for certain, that there are none in the world further
off from agreement with him. For he puts Covenant-breakers in the number of
those who are given up by him to their own lusts, and to the most vile and
outrageous abominations that can be committed by persons incurable and ordained
to everlasting destruction, Romans 1.31. So far our fourth general head of
Trial.

agreement with God, agree with all his party, they heartily close with his
children and servants where ever they meet them, and are enemies to all that
are enemies to God. It is so in all firm Leagues and Feuds. He that loves him
that begat, loves him also that is begotten of him, 1 John 5.1. And this
Commandment have we from him, that he who loves God, love his brother also, 1 John 4.21. On the contrary, If they meet with Gods enemies, they dare make this
appeal to God, Psalm. 139.21, 22. Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee?
and am not I grieved with those that rise up against thee? I hate them with
perfect hatred, I count them mine enemies.

Trial.
Now, consider seriously how you stand affected to the faithful servants of
Jesus Christ. Are you for them indeed? are they in your hearts to live and die
together? do you countenance and encourage the faithful Ministers of Christ?
Nay rather is not their fidelity to Christ, interpreted pride and ambition
after exorbitant power? are not the godly your greatest eye-sores, are they not
looked upon as a company of silly, ignorant, rash, peevish men, because they
will not bow or bend in matters of Religion, to humane inventions of any
Authority, nor depart so much as an hairs breadth from their principles? Or if
they be sometimes made use of, in case of necessity when things cannot be
carried on without them, are they not afterward by some cast aside, as people
not owned or worthy of any respect, especially if a new generation of
projectors, (men that are more malleable and fit to be molded to serve turns)
arise, and present new notions and projects? Or if we do make show of some
respect to this or that eminent man, as Herod to the Baptist; is it in truth of
heart for the graces of God shining in them, or rather to grace our selves by
countenancing of them? And, how stand we affected to all wicked men? are they
not our chief, at lest our ordinary companions? Do we not set more by a
scurrilous wit, a Buffone, then by an holy humble Christian, whose speech may
administer grace to the hearers? Who are the most usual companions of many
that have given themselves out Reformed? There is no surer trial of a man's
inward temper of spirit, then by choice of his company. Jehoshaphat may, in
Courtship, comply with Ahab, but he shall surely smart for it; should thou
help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? Therefore is wrath upon
thee from before the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19.2. Let them look to it, who do as he
did; that while they run such a course, they may not foolishly dream that God
and they are agreed; for, this bred a quarrel between God and Jehoshaphat,
although a godly Magistrate, and eminent for holiness of life.

Thus have I endeavored to bring all to the Test, whereupon, I doubt, it will
appear that we are not the people we would be taken to be, (being yet very
far from that agreement with God which we stand in need of, and rest upon, as
actually made up between him and us,) nor can promise to our selves that
continuance of Gods walking with us which we do expect; but have just cause to
fear his sudden departure from us, and the exposing of us and the Kingdom to
much more woe and misery then ever we have yet felt or feared.

Exhortation unto a twofold duty.

1. Be deeply humbled before the Lord this day, for our want of agreement with
him that has done so many, so great things for us: for that great enmity and
malignity that yet remains in us against the God of our mercies: for our
cross affections, and peevish passions, whereby we are apt upon all occasions
to fly out against him; for all our carnal, corrupt and base ends and
designs, which thwart and oppose the wise, holy and good purposes and counsels
of our God; for our standing out and refusing to come into the bond of his
Covenant; or, dealing unfaithfully in it; for our want of Zeal for Christ in
doing our utmost, in our several places and callings, to promote the
Reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, not only in
Doctrine and Worship, but in Discipline and Government, according to our
Covenant; for our great lukewarmnesse in not endeavoring, as we ought, to
extirpate superstition, heresy, schism, profaneness and what ever is
contrary to sound Doctrine and the power of godliness, whereby we do in great
part partake of other men's sins, and bring our selves into apparent danger to
receive of their plagues; for want of that reality, impartiality and constancy
in preserving the Privileges of Parliament, and liberties of the Kingdom,
which we ought upon all occasions to express; many growing weary of the
Parliament, and clamouring against it as one of our greatest grievances, and
abusing the Liberties of the Kingdom to all licentiousness and confusion: for
want of courage and faithfulness in the discovery of all Incendiaries,
Malignants and evil instruments, that do palpably and openly hinder and oppose
that Reformation of Religion which we have bound our selves by Covenant to
promote; or that secretly undermine and way-lay all endeavors of Peace between
the King and his people, or, that labor to make division between the two
Kingdoms, or factions and parties among the people, contrary to our National
League and Covenant: for want of zeal in doing all we can, according to our
places and interests, to maintain and preserve that blessed Peace so happily
settled between England and Scotland, that they might remain conjoined in a
firm League and union to all posterity, and that justice may be done upon the
wilful opposers thereof: for our great unwillingnesse constantly to assist and
defend all those that, in this common Cause of Religion, Liberty and Peace of
the Kingdoms, enter into the National League and Covenant: for our aptness
to be withdrawn from that blessed Union and Conjunction, to the other side, or
at lest to a detestable indifferency or neutrality in the Public Cause, which
so much concerns the glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and the honor
of the King: for our not humbling our selves even unto this day: for our own
sins, and for the sins of all the three Kingdoms: for undervaluing the
Gospel: for not receiving Christ into our hearts, and walking worthy of him in
our lives: for want of a true and unfeigned purpose, desire and endeavor, for
our selves and all others under our power and charge, both in public and
private, in all duties we ow to God and man, to amend our lives, and each one
to go before another in the example of a real Reformation, that the Lord may
turn away his wrath and heavy indignation, and establish these Churches and
Kingdoms in truth and peace: Finally, for want of that Christian and brotherly
charity and unity, that every where appears in many sad rents and dangerous
divisions that daily in all places abound, threatening greater desolation then
the sword of the enemy, or any other judgment that is upon us.

You see what a long roll, what a black catalogue may be brought in against us,
how many sins we have to spread before the Lord this day, what great, what
scarlet sins we are guilty of, who yet are apt to put far away the evil day,
to grow confident that our danger is over, that we shall never see that
adversity which have come upon others in the Kingdom, and that God is now so
fast tied to us, as never to depart from us, nor to give over walking with us
in all ways of mercy and grace.

This day is set apart for solemn, serious, public humiliation, and Sermons
upon this day, are, or should be so managed as to help us in this duty: to set
our sins before us with their several aggravations, that we might draw the
more water of godly sorrow out of our rocky hearts, and pour it out before the
Lord, as Israel at Mizpeh 1 Samuel 7.6.
O therefore, be afflicted, and mourn, and weep, rend your hearts, put your
mouths in the dust through shame and confusion of face, and out of desire to be
humbled to the utmost, before the decree of Englands ruins bring forth
desolation, before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you, before the day
of the Lords anger come upon you Zeph. 2.2.
, as the Prophet speaks.

Take heed of turning these monthly humiliations into formalities, lest we
provoke God more by our hypocritical mock-fasts, then by any other our sins,
for which we pretend to be humbled on such days as these. Beware of that
bull-rush humiliation which the Lord complains of, Isa. 58.8. Who derides not
that ridiculous folly of Jews the 11th. who wore a Crucifix in his hat, in
testimony of great devotion; and so often as he had sworn an Oath, or committed
other gross offense, he would take off his hat, and kiss his crucifix,
thinking that a sufficient satisfaction for his fault, and then go sin again as
much as before? But there is somewhat more to be done by those that would
indeed make their peace and agreement with God. Surely it is meet to be said
unto God, I have borne chastisement, I will not offend any more: That which I
see not, teach thou me; if I have done iniquity, I will do no more, Job 34.31,
32.

2. This leads me to the second branch of the Exhortation, and which is the
other main part of this days duty, namely, to labor, before we depart this
place, to bring our hearts to come up to a full and perfect agreement with God.
This is one of the great errands of all the Ambassadors of Christ, namely, to
pray all to whom they come, in Christ's stead, as though God did beseech you by
them, to be reconciled unto God, 2 Cor. 5.20. Let the power of the death of
Christ be applied by faith, to eat out and kill that natural malice and enmity
that naturally rages in every one of our bosoms against God. Mortify
therefore your members which are upon the earth, fornication, uncleanness,
inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness which is Idolatry;
for which things sake the wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience,
Col. 3.5, 6. Bring your hearts to a perfect compliance with God, in affections,
resolutions, and in all your actions; away with all self-love and self ends.
Men of private designs, will betray the Kingdom, Religion, and all the world,
if it were in their power, if temptations and opportunities be offered, rather
then be frustrate of their own ends; what ever show of zeal for Christ and the
Public they pretend unto in the carrying on of the Public Cause. It was
Calebs comfort, happiness and honor, that in managing the public service of
Israel committed to him by Moses, he followed God fully, Numb. 14.24. An
excellent pattern for you that are the heads and guides of our Tribes, who are
now leading this poor sinful Nation through a sharp and tedious wilderness,
where we are to march through rivers of blood, toward a firm and well grounded
Peace and perfect Reformation. If any of you have private ends in this public
work (which God forbid) we shall be bought and sold (as sometimes Esther and
her people were) not only for bondmen and bond-women, Esth. 7.4.
but to be destroyed, to be slain, and to perish.

Be sure of this, nothing but a firm agreement with God, and the power of
godliness, can keep any of you all firm and constant to the Cause of God and
his people. Achitophel was a man of as deep wisdom, and as great a pretender
to the interests and service of David and the Kingdom, as is possible for any
mortal to be toward any King or Kingdom in the world. Yet when Absalom by
wiles and promises of greater place and preferment, set upon him, he could not
stand before such temptations. Only an Hushai, a faithful, plain,
publike-spirited man held it out, and at length had the happiness to overthrow
the counsels of a far deeper and subtle Counselor then himself, and
thereby saved both a King and Kingdom. It is the honest, plain
downright-hearted Counselor (that scorns all private ends, out of
supernatural principles) that shall carry it at the long run, and live to
see all the Achitophels of the time sent to hell in a string, or in some other
dress.

Renew Covenant with God this day, and do it heartily, it is a chief work of
the day. If David and Jonathan thought it necessary to enter into Covenant a
second time (1 Samuel 20.16.) who had never violated their first agreement;
think it not superfluous, but a matter of necessity, to renew that Covenant
which we have every day broken, and that with a very high hand, by walking
contrary unto him, for which he has brought the sword upon us, to avenge the
quarrel of his Covenant Lev. 26.24, 25.
. But, do it in sincerity: for, all haltings in a Covenant, are the greatest
provocations that men obnoxious to wrath can possibly commit; that great sin
against the Holy Ghost only excepted.

Rest not here, think it not enough to renew Covenant, but mind it and keep
it. When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it: for he has no
pleasure in fools, Eccles. 5.4. Therefore God made a Law to bind men to
performance even of voluntary vows, to which they were no way tied, but by
their own voluntary choice. Deuteronomy. 23.21, 22. When thou shall vow a vow unto the
Lord thy God, thou shall not slack to pay it: for the Lord thy God will surely
require it of thee, and it would be sin unto thee. I beseech you therefore to
consider all that you have Covenanted, but especially in matters of Religion
and Reformation. And herein let your selves be first firm and unmovable, in
such Truths as all the people of God have unanimously embraced, as being
undoubtedly founded on the word of God. Shift not opinions with the time; court
no party, because great and strong; Thou shall not follow a multitude to do
evil Exodus 23.2.
; nor defer the doing thy duty for fear of a multitude. It is not in the
work of Christ, as in civil affairs: In civil business of the state, it is
wisdom to observe the genius of the people, and what they will bear: but in
the things of Christ, it is duty to look only to what he commands, because his
Ordinances have this prerogative, to still the madness of the people. Suspect
that man and his counsels, who casts off old principles received by all the
Churches of Christ: and shun those men that walk in the dark, that they may
hold the fairer correspondency with all sects and opinions. A true godly man
holds out his principles clearly to all the world (truth seeks no corners: he
that conceals his Tenets, lies in the wind for advantage; and you are never
sure of him, nor know where to find him, unless you can discover his most
hidden ends and interests: And he that will not discover his principles, will
be sure to hide his ends. There can be no greater evidence of a rotten heart,
and base ends, then to be a weathercock in matters of Religion. And commonly
they are in the issues most pernicious to a state, who, under pretense of new
light, can shift and change opinions, as men do fashions: Liberty and
licentiousness in opinions, is one of the greatest in-lets to all corruptions
in the state: Be therefore zealous of promoting Reformation in a clear and
uniforme way, that all may know what to trust unto. It is true, you must not
run upon implicit faith: but then, take pains to be informed by those whom you
have called to advise withal: inquire into the full strength of their
Arguments held out by themselves, and not rest satisfied with such abridgements
and interpretations as their Adversaries please to suggest. And if you will
have the work to prosper, set to it with one heart and one shoulder. Be at
peace among your selves, and with all those that in sincerity and plainness of
heart, desire and endeavor to carry on the Lords work with you, or under you.
Stop your ears against all whisperers, that seek to make or foment divisions
and quarrels, how specious soever their pretenses be. If you be not agreed
among your selves, how shall you walk together, in the cordial, effectual
managing of any business? yea, how is it possible for you to save the Kingdom
from destruction? Agesilaus being asked why Sparta had no walls? returned
answer, that the Citizens agreed together. There is no fortification like to
unity: whereas a Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand. If you have any
private differences, they are not to be now so much as remembered. Aristides and
Themistocles, the heads of two great Factions in Athens, when they saw the
Persian to take advantage of their divisions, and to send an Army to subdue
them, met, and struck hands, saying, here we lay down all our differences,
until we have put an end to the Persian war. Have Heathens done thus, and
shall Christians stand upon Punctillo's of honor, when it is indeed a
dishonor to be so poor-spirited, and an honor to cease from strife? What got
Aristobulus and Hircanus by their implacable contending for sovereignty,
Joseph. Antiq. lib. 14.
but only the opening of a way to Pompey to subdue both, and to put all the
Jews under the Roman yoke? Was not division the destruction of Jerusalem, when
Titus came before it? And was not Constantinople lost to Mahomet the Great by
the same means; whereas neither Amurath his father, nor Bajazet his
grandfather, got any thing but loss of men and honor, in attempting that City
in former times, when it was better at unity within it self? It was the
wisdom of Alcibiades and Nicias, two great men of Athens, that were at
variance, when they saw the wickedness of Hyperbolus in seeking the banishment
of one of them two (he cared not which) by the Law of Ostracisme This Law began
about that time, by which such as grew too exorbitant in wealth or power, were
banished the City for ten years, that they might not be the heads of factions
which might prejudice the public Plut. in Nicias.
, that he might afterward more easily destroy the other: they secretly met,
composed their differences, and joined both their parties together, and by that
device procured his banishment which had sought theirs. Do but serve some of
those so, that labor to set you at odds, and it would be a great means of much
quiet and safety both to you and us.

I conclude all with that of the Prophet, Jer. 13.15, 16. Hear ye and give ear,
be not proud: for the Lord has spoken. Give glory to the Lord your God, before
he cause darkness, and before you stumble upon the dark mountains, and while
ye look for light, he turn it into the shadow of death, and make it gross
darkness over this Kingdom forever.

FINIS.
Errata, Page 1. mar. l 1. r. (...). p. 11. l. 13. dele such.


