Paul's last Farewell, OR A SERMON, PREACHED At the Funeral of that Godly and
Learned Minister of JESUS CHRIST, Mr. THOMAS BLAKE.

By Anthony Burgess, Pastor of the Church at Sutton-Coldfield in Warwickshire.

With a Funeral ORATION made at Mr. Blakes death by Samuel Shaw, then
Schoolmaster of the Free School at Tamworth.

march.25. LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper, at the Sun against S. Dunstans
Church in Fleet Street. 1658.

depiction of the four evangelists and their symbols (Matthew, angel; Mark,
lion; Luke, ox; and John, eagle) with the Paraclete (as a dove) occupying the
central position in the depiction
To the Reader.
READER,
THat I might satisfy the desire of some worthy Friends, I do here present
unto thee a Sermon (with very little alteration) preached at the Funeral of
that Godly and Learned Minister of Jesus Christ, Mr. Blake, now with God: Being
the rather induced thereunto, because I know the memory of his Name, will be
very grateful and welcome to such who were acquainted with him. How sadly his
death was laid to heart, the deportment of many at that time did abundantly
manifest, and Although I cannot speak the same which Nazianzen affirms
concerning the Funeral solemnities of Basil, how that many thousands were there
present, some whereof by the violent press were killed, being happy in this (as
he Rhetoricateth) that they dyed with him, as also that Jews and Heathens did
strive with Christians, who should pour out greater plenty of Tears, yet so
many declared their Affections by weeping eyes, that we may say, Behold how
they loved him. But I forbear this sad subject. The Lord Christ, that chief
Shepherd of souls provide for his Church successively in all ages such Pastors,
who shall feed his People after his own mind, and that with Truth, Zeal and
Concord they may be found doing his work, when their Master shall come.

Sutton-Coldfield, October. 19. 1657. Thy souls well-willer, Anthony Burgess.

depiction of the four evangelists and their symbols (Matthew, angel; Mark,
lion; Luke, ox; and John, eagle) with the Paraclete (as a dove) occupying the
central position in the depiction
A SERMON At the FUNERAL of the Reverend Mr. Thomas Blake, Minister of the
GOSPEL.
ACTS 20. 36, 37, 38. And when he had thus spoken, he kneeled on the ground,
and prayed with them all:

And they all wept sore, and fell on Paul's neck, and kissed him;

Sorrowing most of all for the words which he spoke, that they should see his
face no more.


IN the latter part of this Chapter, we have Paul making his own Funeral
Sermon; and the words of a dying Pastor, whose Face they shall never see more,
are to be like goads and nails, yea, fiery nails, as the Septuagint render it,
Eccles. 12. 11. And this valedictory Sermon, we know not whether the matter, or
the affection in the delivering of it, be more admirable: It Is milk that comes
hot from the breast; excellent matter, without hearty affections, is like a
Messenger without feet, and a Bird without wings. I shall not make a Sermon
upon his Sermon, only in the general; by that discourse we have a description
of a Pastor and Officer in the Church, in Idea and in subjecto: In Idea, or in
the Thesi, there the Apostle describes such by their name and titles, they are
Overseers and Elders, v. 17. from the efficient cause the Holy Ghost has made
them so, from the relation they are in: The People are their Flock, and they
are Gods Church. And lastly, from the dignity and high thoughts put upon them
by Christ, they were purchased with his own blood, shall we think our labor,
our pains our sweat, too much, when Christ thought not his blood too much?

To enter upon the Controversy who these Elders and Overseers were* is
repugnant to the occasion at this time: Then you have this office in subje^to,
in Hypothesi; in the practice of it, you have the rule of a Pastor, and the
example of a Ruler, and that is in Paul himself: O the zeal, watchfulness, the
dilegence, the courage, the purity of aim and ends, which he professes in his
Ministerial discharge! not that he speaks these for ostentation, but
imitation; for he would not have said thus much of himself, says Grotius on
the place, but that hereby he would leave a pattern or form of life to all
successors; Insomuch, that no Minister reading Paul's expressions of himself in
this place, but may cry out, O me! a clod of earth to such a Star, Ice to such
a Fire, a worm to such an Angel! Though he were a Paul, as some think his name
denotes, little in stature of his body, yet he was a Giant in Gifts and
Graces, so that Papists themselves cannot but give the pre-eminence to Paul
above Peter, in respect of Doctrine and Ministerial abilities: He was the
earthly Angel, the Cor Christi, the Tuba Evangelii, as the Ancients call him;
yet I am not of Amyraldus his mind, consider. in cap. 7. ad Romans who denying
the Interpretation of the seventh of the Romans, to be understood personally of
Paul, thinking this would be injurious to the Grace of God sanctifying of him,
and making him so eminent a Servant in his Church: He affirms, that if God
pleased so to adorn Paul with the gifts of the Spirit, that he should in this
life arrive at that fullness and perfection of holiness, which other Believers
obtain no where but in Heaven, that thereby he might be propounded as a perfect
example to all Christians, and his Ministry be more happily efficacious; here
was not (says he) any thing to be blameworthy: But though we grant Paul to
have an elder Brothers portion in the Graces and Gifts of Christ, so that if no
Minister could be saved, unless he were a Paul, woe be to us all; yet that Paul
was not above the combat of the flesh and spirit within him, appears partly
in that careful keeping down of his body, 1 Cor. 9. 27. lest sin should
prevail; as also in those buffetings of Satan which he was exercised with, that
he might not be lifted up above measure, 2 Cor. 12. 7. Well, however it be, the
Apostle having both by rule and example, as you heard described what a Minister
or Pastor is to be, we have the consequent of this in my Text: When he had thus
spoken, thus of himself, and thus of a Gospel-Minister, he kneeled down and
prayed.

There are two actions of the body mentioned in Prayer, which denote that
excellent deportment that should be at that time in the soul; kneeling of the
body, that denotes self-humiliation; lifting up the hands, that implies faith
and confidence: Thus descendendo ascenditur, how hardly do the people of God
keep these two Graces cooperating together, but either their Humiliation
abateth their Faith, or their Faith hinders their Humiliation; both these
together are the Calidum and the Humidum, which maintain the life of holy
Duties; be Prayed as well as kneeled, for that is the only key to open Heaven,
that is David's Harp, to allay all those unruly affections that are apt to
disturb us.

Lastly, here is the effect of all upon the Auditors, which is expressed,
First, In their passion of weeping, with the aggravation. 1. They wept sore. 2.
Their great love, They fell on Paul's neck and kissed him. 3. The motive of all
this affectionate carriage, That which did open these Floodgates, it was
because they should see his face no more; they should for ever lose him, enjoy
no more of his Ministerial Labors and diligence: now this is recorded by the
Evangelist, as a commendation; It was a spiritual, not a natural weeping; It
was not like weeping for a dead Father, or a dead Wife, but for a dead Pastor,
by whose spiritual labors their souls had made great proficiency; I shall
from these words observe two doctrines suitable to the two considerable parts
of this auditory, the one seasonable for the Ministers of the Gospel here
present, The other opportune for the Congregation of Tamworth, now bereaved of
a faithful Pastor, whom I may see mourning and weeping, and that most of all,
because you shall see his face no more, you shall not behold him in this place
again, you shall not hear his voice from hence again. The first Observation is
grounded upon these words, when he had thus spoken, This about the duty of a
Minister, This about his Holy, Godly, and exemplary conversation; From whence
observe,

That a faithful discharge of the ministerial Office does bring unspeakable
comfort to such as can upon just grounds assume this to themselves; From this
faithfulness we see often Paul receiving a great deal of comfort. 2 Timothy 4. 6,
7, 8. The time of his departure was at hand; does not this then make him
afraid? how shall he give an account concerning the improvement of his talents?
No, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, etc. We have the
like glorious profession made by this holy Apostle, These. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. which
is an excellent Copy for every Minister to write after, to live and breathe
from thence; and in this he is so clear, that he says, Ye are witnesses, and
God also, how holily, justly and unblameably, we have behaved our selves
amongst those that believe. But yet let none think that Paul does thus magnify
inherent grace, to exclude imputed grace, for 1 Cor. 4. 4. Though he says, he
knows nothing by himself, yet he concludes, I am not thereby justified, but
he that judges me is the Lord, he knew more evil in Paul, then Paul him self
could do, and certainly, so great is this ministerial work, that Paul himself
cried out, Who is sufficient for these things? Chrysostom has very
discouraging passages, as if few Ministers could be saved, but his meaning must
be, because few are careful, zealous, and diligent; Otherwise such as
Chrysostom himself, that is said to fear nothing but sin, and those that by
their Doctrine and life, turn many from iniquities, shall have more then
ordinary glory in heaven; To amplify this, I shall in some particulars or
Characters describe how, or when the Ministry is faithfully discharged, what
is ingredient thereunto, or constituent thereof; And first there is required an
inward experimental savory work of grace upon the Ministers own heart, that
thereby he may more affectionately and cordially deal with others; when we know
the terror of the Lord, and the love of Christ experimentally, this makes us
able in the work of the Ministry, 2 Cor. 5. 1^. I do not say that the Office
of a Minister is null, if he be not a regenerate man, or as if he were no
Minister, or might not be useful in the Church of God, but as to himself, he
cannot faithfully discharge this Office, so as to obtain a crown of glory
hereafter, unless he be thus qualified; There is Theologia ratiocinativa and
experimentalis, as Gerson speaks, A man may know things, as Aquinas says,
per modum cognitionis, or, per modum inclinationis; now it is this experimental
Divinity, that works besides Knowledge an inclination and propensitie to the
thing known, that makes us able to discharge this duty; To Preach of
Regeneration, of Faith, when a man has no savory understanding of these
things, is to talk of the sweetness of honey, when we never tasted it, or of
the excellency of such a Country, which we never were in, but know it by Mapps
only. If thou know the truths of God, but by Books, by Authors only, and
thy own heart feels not the power of these things, Thou art but as the
Conduit, that lets out wine or refreshing water to others, but thou thy self
tastest not of it, or like the hand that directs the Passenger, but thou thy
self stand still.

2. To a faithful discharge, there is required a sound knowledge, judgment
and skill in divine things; hence they are called lights, guides, and
Shepherds, they are required to be (...) 1 Timothy 3. 2. apt to teach, to reprove
in all Doctrine. 2 Timothy 4. 2. It is not enough to cry out of Heresies or of
sins, unless we rebuke with doctrine; The least Knowledge that Casuists
condescend unto in a Minister is, that he must be learned, supra vulgus
fidelium: Is he a fit Minister that can only Preach and pray by a prescript,
or form from another? He is not a fit Physician, or a fit Lawyer, that should
do so in his way; Ministers therefore should take that exhortation, which we
see Paul gave even to Timothy, though so well accomplished. 1 Timothy 4. 15.
Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them, that thy profiting
may appear, yea, verse. 13. Till I come, give attendance to reading. The
circumstance of time is to be observed, for though Paul was to come shortly to
him, yet that little time he was absent from Paul, must be improved in reading
Gods Word. Be thou a scribe instructed for the Kingdom of heaven, that can
bring out of thy treasure, old and new; be a Fountain, not a Cestern, that will
quickly be dry; Cajetan Summula, Tit. Doctoratus, makes it a mortal sin to
approve any for a Doctor in Divinity, who is notably insufficient, because
hereby he is testified to be a Physician of souls, when yet through his
ignorance, may be the ruin of many; I dare not avouch that of Luther, who said
it is a German Proverb, that young Divines fill Hell, only it is a good
warning, that such be diligent in studying, that God may bless them with all
knowledge and understanding, first in the Scripture, and then in all other
parts of Divinity, whether controversall, positive or practical, especially
add to thy Ministerial knowledge these two things; First a firm faith, for to
read and to know much, but not to digest it, makes us scepticall; Have faith,
not reason or opinion in religious things, Calvin says in Comment. 2. Epist.
ad Corin. that the Ministers of of God, who go up into the Pulpit in the name
of Christ, to preach his Word, ought to have such firmness of Faith in them,
that they are assured that their Doctrine can no more be overthrown, then God
himself; now truly, this faith is much to be commended to us, we may have much
learning, much reading, but little Faith, be very scepticall, and deal in
Divinity as we use to do in Philosophy, videtur quod sic, videtur quod non,
Great Scholars are not always great believers, The want of this makes a man
of a Socinian faith, an Arminian faith, a Popish faith, as often as any
plausible Argument, or carnal Interest interposeth.

2. With this knowledge labor much after Casuisticall Divinity, whereby you
may be able to direct the tempted in cases of Conscience, To guide the
afflicted in soul, what they are to do; Indeed the Papists have a deal of
Casuisticall divinity in large voluminous discourses, but it is for the most
part calculated according to their meridians of superstitious usages and
Customs, but it is pity that among us Protestants, our controversall Books
are far more then our casuisticall, yet remember the Scripture calls it,
the tongue of the Learned, Isa. 50. 4. To know how to speak a word in season to
him that is weary; The wounds of Conscience are the most tender, and therefore
require a Spiritual skillful Physician. The Consciences of men are the subject
matter of your Office, and therefore look after that Ars Cordis, which is
indeed a liberal art that will set us free.

3. He that will faithfully discharge the Office of his Ministry, must regard
the end of it, the finis operis, and finis operantis, the finis ministerii, and
ministri, must be all one: The end of the Ministry is to exalt God and Christ,
to dethrone Satan, to bring many out of their sins unto the obedience of the
Gospel: Now if a man aim at other things in his Ministry then this he can never
comfortably discharge it: To be a Minister for earthly profits, for ambition
and vain glory, these will be like the gravel, that will presently stop the
Ship in its passage; and truly herein we may much lament our entrance in to
this work, how many set upon it as a profession to live upon, by that they hope
to satisfy their needs, but if this end and motive do still reign in thee, it
will be like a millstone about thy neck; outward maintenance may be a secondary
end, but not the principal; still then awe thy soul with the end of thy office,
that all other knowledge is exercised about the body, or men's Estates, or the
nature of things; but thine is Theology, De Deo, a Deo, in Deum, its concerning
God objectively, its from God effectively, its to God finally.

4. He that will faithfully discharge this Office of the Ministry, must as Paul
professes, 2 Cor. 1. 12. have his conversation with all godly simplicity and
sincerity: He is to carry on his work in Scripture-ways, avoiding those two
Rocks, Media violentiae, and Media fraudulentiae; A man of a crafty
multiplicity of Spirit, will turn into any shape, dispute for any thing as
lawful: This the Jesuit said to one (for so I understand it) who doubted about
something he was to do, whether lawful or no, Aude (says he) and nos
efficiemus probabile, Jansen. St. August. lib. proaem. page 9. Be daring to do
it, and we will make it probable; now this simplicity of Spirit in Ministerial
employment, is greatly seen in an obediential dependence upon the word of God,
whether in matter of Duty, or of Faith: What is it that makes so many learned
Men embrace Errors after Errors, but because they leave Faith, and attend to
reason? They think we come to be Christians by Disputations and scientifical
Demonstrations; as we come to be Philosophers, not by a single and plain
captivating of our understandings to the scripture, whereas it is Christian
Faith, nor Christian reason: It is said to be Nazianzens Emblem, Theologia
nostra est Pythagorica, by this simplicity of Spirit, a man shall overcome
those Temptations, which are usually in Scholars to bring, inaudita and invisa,
strange and unheard things unto our People; especially let the Ministers of the
Gospel be so guided by simplicity of Spirit, that they may avoid these three
Rocks.

First, that while they avoid a Popish blind obedience to men, examining
things by Scripture, they therefore do not make all things uncertain: That of
Durand is true, whosoever forsakes reason because of humane Authority, incidit
in insipientiam bestialem, makes himself like a Beast; yet let not this
liberty be abused to licentiousness, to believe nothing, to despise all those
Ministerial helps which God has vouchsafed to the Church, because he is to try
all things; though he must try, yet he must not be always trying, but hold fast
that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. This liberty and particular Judgment of
discerning, which God allows every man, is not to be opposed to that decisive
Ministerial Judgment, which God has appointed in his Church.

Secondly, under pretense of a more moderate and impartial handling of things,
as not being addicted unto parties, take heed thou do not make a party of thy
self, as the Sect of Philosophers, called (...), Diogen. Laert. in Proem.
pretending they would be of no Sect, but choose the best Art of all; thus they
made a Sect, while they condemned all.

Lastly, Take heed of being deceived under the pretense that thou do not
bring in any new matter, but new words, or thou do digest things into a
better method; for by this means, men leaving that simplicity and
Scripture-dependance they once had, have corrupted their Ministerial Office,
instead of a faithful discharge of it.

Fifthly, To a faithful discharge of this dreadful Office, there is required an
excellent compound of many choice Graces, insomuch that a Ministers
qualification, is like that Ointment that was to be made for the Priest only:
There must be love and compassion to Peoples Souls, which was abundantly
discovered in our Savior himself: Paul compares himself, sometimes to a
Father, sometimes to a Mother, sometimes to a Nurse, because of this
affectionate desire in him: There must be Zeal, Fortitude, and Courage, the
spirit of love and of power also; he is not a Minister, that is not ad mill
mortes paratus, said Chrysostom; as a good Soldier endure hardship, says
Paul to Timothy, 1 Timothy 2. 3. There must be Prudence and Wisdom, else Love and
Power will make us like Sampson, without eyes; there must be salt in the
Sacrifice, as well as fire; Oportet Pastor sit totus oculus, a Pastor must be
an Argus, full of eyes.

Again, there must be an Heavemly heart, contemning the world and all earthly
advantages: The eye that is to see for others must not have dust falling into
it: Austin makes an Heretic to have some carnal profit or emolument that is
attractive of him: There must be a desire to please God, and not men, as Paul
says, Gal. 1. for so a man cannot be a servant of Christ: This fear to
displease men, whereby we do not reprove sin so Zealously, so Cordially and
Faithfully as we should, has eclipsed the comfort of some godly Ministers at
their death. It is too true that the Wise man says, The fear of a man is his
snare, Prove. 29. 25. The Camelion for fear, says Aristotle, turns into the
likeness of every object it meets with.

These are the special qualifications of a Godly Minister, whereby he will be
able to say with Paul, I have fought a good fight. 1 Timothy 4. 7. Yea, with
CHRIST, I have finished the work thou gave me to do, John 17. 3. To all
which must be added diligence and labor, all the names, they have denote
labor more then glory, office more then dignity; now in all these things
there is one particular, which does much quicken, and that is temptation, one
of those three things, Luther said, made a Divine; we are not to desire
temptations, but God for the most part does prepare those Ministers, whom he
intends to be serviceable, by such exercises; This is the sawing, and the
polishing of the stone, by this he is brought into the deep waters, and sees
the wonderful works of God, by this he is able to understand the depths of
Satan, and by this he is adapted to be a most special Instrument to comfort
and refresh others, when they shall see theirs is not a singular condition,
they must not think none are tempted like them, for they shall find that even
Paul's have had the buffetings of Satan, and that by these foul temptations
they have learned more then all Books or authors could teach them. And thus I
leave the first Doctrine, and proceed to the second, which is.

That a Godly People cannot but affectionately mourn under the loss of their
faithful Ministers.

You see here what these Ephesians did, with what affection they were moved,
because they should never see Paul's face more; Grace does not lie in
extinguishing, but regulating affections; Christ wept, and they argued from
thence, behold how he loved him, Joh, 11. 35, 26. So that Nazianzens
commendation of his Mother Nonna, that she never wept under the many troubles
she underwent, submitting all to Gods hand, was rather Stoicisme, then
Christianity; It is said of Ambrose, when he heard of the death of any good
Minister, he could not forbear weeping; how then can a people forbear, when
their own Minister, their own Pastor is taken away, should not the Congregation
be a valley of tears, or a place of mourners; now there are these grounds for
it, 1. Because of that experimental soul-good, and spiritual advantage the
Godly have reapt thereby; Oh! when thou shall remember what quicknings, what
meltings, what warming of heart thou have had, this will cause grief to think
they are gone. Carnal natural men never are affected with the loss of a
Minister, they never got any good by their Preaching; it was no converting
Ministry, no inlightning, no comforting Ministry to them, and therefore the
loss is no more troublesome.

2. They must needs mourn, because they have just cause to fear, their sins
have caused God to deprive them of such helps; your unthankfulness, your
contempt, and low thoughts of the means of grace, your unprofitableness and
negligence, may make you mourn, for if God upon the abuse of natural
Creatures, will take away his Wine, his Bread, his flax, will he not much more
remove the candlestick, for unfruitfulness under spiritual mercies; mourn
then, lest thy sins, thy unfaithfulness, thy deadness and dullness of heart
have provoked God to take such guides away; yea in the third place, may not
some mourn, who by their Disobedience, and unwillingnesse to submit to Christ's
yoke, and opposition to his way, have so filled the Ministers heart with grief
and sadness, as thereby to hasten his death, making his life the more
uncomfortable, and causing him to mourn in secret for your stubbornness and
disobedience; Thus your sins, not only meritoriously, but efficiently may
concur to the removing of him by death; Consider that place. Heb. 13. 17.
Obey them that rule over you, etc. that they may give their account with joy,
and not with grief; some make this particular to relate to the former, that
they may watch over your souls with joy, and not with grief, for that is
unprofitable for you. A grieved Minister, a discouraged Minister cannot do his
duty, so powerfully, it will be unprofitable unto you, you will find it in his
study, in his sermons; A dull people are apt to make a dull Minister.

4. There is cause to mourn, because of the excellency of the relation between
a Pastor and a People, in some respects, it is above all natural relations.
They are spiritual Fathers, your souls receive good by them; They are
Isntrumental to bring you unto eternal glory, and therefore there is more
cause of Mourning in this respect, then when God breaks natural relations,
no Father or Mother, or friend happily has done that for thee which his
Ministry has done.

5. There is cause to mourn, because it is a sign of Gods anger and displeasure
to a people, you are not so much to look upon it; as the loss of a man, as a
token of Gods anger to the congregation; The righteous man perishes, and none
lays it to heart. Isaiah. 57. 1. Who knows what soul-Judgments, what bodily
Judgments may hereafter come upon you, and therefore it is for a people to be
sensible, and mourn, when the desire of your eyes, so I may call the Minister
(as well as the Wife) is taken away. The desire of your eyes, you long to see
him in the Pulpit again, and the desire of your ears, you long to hear him
again.

6. There is cause to Mourn, because of the sad consequents that many times
falls upon the death of a faithful Pastor; sometimes the learning and
soundness of a Minister, keeps a People from licentious errors and corrupt
opinions; His Gravitie and Piety has a special influence upon many, but upon
his removal, then the weeds of a man's heart grows up: After my departure,
says Paul, Wolves will arise from among your selves, Acts 20. 29. Paul's
presence was a great means to hinder them.

2. What good Foundation is laid in Faith, what Godly Order may be begun? there
is danger, that all these will die, when a Faithful Minister dies: I wonder
that you are so soon removed, says Paul, Gal. 1. Alas! that which the
Ministers of God have with many years diligence, many Prayers, and much
opposition brought about, when the Minister is dead, may quickly be destroyed,
so that we may wonder, how such a Town, such a place should be overrun with
Briars and Thorns immediately.

3. Another sad consequent is sometimes, divisions and breaches among the
People, while a Godly Minister is alive, he is like a Corner Stone, that
uniteth both sides of the Wall together, but when that falls, then the wall
falls with it. Then one is for this Minister, and another for that, then one
likes this, and another the contrary, and thus seeds of contention and
division are sown, which may come up too fast, hence the presence of a Godly,
Grave, Wise Pastor is very necessary, it is the Spiritual defense of a People,
which made him cry out, when the Prophet was taken, My father, my Father, the
Chariots of Israel, and the horsemen thereof. 2 Kings 13. 14. And now we come
from the Doctrinal part to the practical; And although my custom in such
Sermons, is not to discourse about the Dead, they being like Anatomy Lectures,
for the good of the living, yet because we are celebrating the Funerals of a
Learned and Godly Brother, who by his Office, was in public station in the
Church of God; I shall briefly speak to some few of those Ministerial
qualifications, that were in him mentioned in the Doctrine, not imitating
Nazianzen, who in his Funeral Orations of his Father, as also Athanasius,
Basilius and others industriously gathers up every thing that may make to
their praise, if not hyperbolically exceeding sometimes; but I shall rather
come short of what might be spoken. And first, his Doctrinall abilities, and
parts in controvsrsall points, are sufficiently known by the Books he has
written; those Children will resemble the Father, though he left no bodily
ones. It is true, there were some particular opinions and contests he was
fallen into with other Learned men, on whose side the truth did stand, you will
not judge it meet for me to interpose, only because of the difference that is
sometimes in Judgment between Godly men, we see some by profaneness, gladly
have it in their mouths, saying, what heed is to be given to these Ministers,
there are not two of a mind; They write against one another, they have Book
against Book, and then some good people they are offended; what shall we do,
say they, we look upon both as Godly, and yet they cannot agree; because I say,
of this offense, I shall speak a little to it. First, that this difference
amongst our selves, is an old objection, The Pagans and the Jews urged it
against Christianity, whose Arguments Clemens Alexandrinus answered, retorting
upon them the same divisions; the Philosophers likewise objected this to the
Christians, when that Synod was gathered together at Nice, as the Centuriators
inform us; Though Augustine (lib. de vera religione) brandeth them for this,
that the Heathens, though they had diverse schools, yet they had Commune
Templum, a Common temple, which argued, they worshipped their Gods more out of
Custom, then because of their opinion.

2. We are to know, that all the Godly do know only in part, perfection in
knowledge, and unity is reserved for heaven; there will be no parties, no
dividing opinions, there will be no different Forms, and ways of worshipping
of God in that place, so that although this difference amongst the Godly be as
Calvin said to Melancthon, pessimi exempli, of a very bad example, yet if we
consider, that the measure of Light and grace in this world is imperfect, then
we may not wonder at such breaches; had not Paul and Barnabas a Paroxisme, a
sharp fit, for to understand the Word in a good sense, as some would, because
the Word is used so. Heb. 10. 24. is very improbable. Austin and Hierome,
Chrysostom and Epiphanius had great contests.

3. The differences of Godly Ministers are not in fundamentals; They all build
gold and precious stones, though some may add hay and stubble

Lastly, a brotherly and amicable disquisition into truths controversed, not
fundamental, but between Godly men, though different in Judgments, is very
lawful and useful, indeed if this be done with pride, passion, scornful and
disdainful words, despising the gifts of others, This is not a dead fly, but a
dead toad in the box of ointment, that makes the wise Reader think, men do
regard opinions, not so much as they are Gods Truths, but as they are their
opinions, wherein they must have glory; But return we to our Learned Brother;
as God had given him such Doctrinall Abilities, so also was he Prudent and
Wise, and wise to direct such as were troubled in their mind, and perplexed
about what they were to do; It is true, it pleased God before his sickness to
exercise him with some sad and black thoughts, sometimes tending to the great
dejection and discouragement of his soul, but by this we see, that comfort is
not a flower growing in our Garden, that we can pluck up when we will, God is
the God of Comfort only, he gives it when he pleases, and he takes it away
again as he pleases. Christ had an Angel to comfort him in his Agonies, so
that all, both Ministers and People, are to take Gospel-Consolations, as
mercies from heaven, not as the work of our hands.

In the next place, the diligence, constancy and faithful Preaching of your
Godly Pastor is not unknown; These walls, these seats can sufficiently bear
witness thereunto; Though you a great People, and he declining in age, yet a
laborious Preacher to you, and a great Student in private: The Catechizing also
of the younger sort of people, discovered his vigilance, and it was the earnest
desire (as he would have you informed) and request of your dying Pastor, that
the younger Persons of this place would readily and willingly submit to that
order; Besides all this, his writing for the public good of the Church, still
demonstrated his faithfulness and zeal herein; when the Persecutor had cut out
Cyprians tongue, and then banished him, yet he made a supply by his Pen; but
our Learned Brother was willing both by Tongue and Pen to edify the Church of
God, so that both his opuscula, and his opera will praise him in the gates, His
tenderness of Spirit likewise was exceeding much; and as in soft wood, worms
sometimes breed to weaken it, so did (as you heard) discouragements sometimes
lie upon his soul, but the Lord did quickly blow over the clouds, and as I am
informed, his expression was, That he dyed with full satisfaction of Spirit,
and communion with God.

Lastly, you are not ignorant of the way he took about the Sacrament, that he
was not for the promiscuous Admission of all thereunto; and therefore when a
late Writer, Mr. Humphreys, would have gathered such conclusions from his
principles, he was willing publicly to vindicate himself, and to show his
dissent herein; All this, though comparatively little, I have spoken, not to
exalt man, for what have we, that we have not received, but to bless God, and
magnify him, who gives such gifts to men; he that praises the gifts and
graces of any, thereby extolleth God; as he that commends a Picture,
magnifieth the Artificer that made it; and thus we take our dear and last
farewell of him, and come to you, sheep left without a shepherd, to you on the
Sea without a Pilate; To you Orphans, without a Spiritual Father; and first
you see what cause there is for our constant expectation and preparation for
death; Gods own Ministers and servants must dye, God needs no man's labors or
parts, Moses, Joshua, Paul, Peter must die, sola mors non habet fortasse, said
Austin, only Death has no may be; It may be thou may be rich, it may be
thou may thrive in thy trading, it may be thou may have comfort in thy
Children and friends, but thy death has no may be; Oh! let not the world, let
not your Shops, let not trading take off your hearts from this Meditation, but
think you hear God speaking to you, set not your house, but your souls in
order, for thou must die.

And secondly, here is some comfort, though there be cause of much sorrow, that
though your Faithful Pastor he dead, yet the chief Pastor of your souls is
not; He that sets Pastors and Teachers in the Church, he that sends forth
laborers into his harvest, he lives for ever; as one in the Ecclesiastical
History, when news was brought him that his father was dead, Desine
blasphemias loqui (says he) pater enim meus immortalis est, cease to speak
blasphemy, for my Father is immortal; Thus let this honey fall into your gall,
this Wine into your water, The great and Chief Shepherd of your souls is not
dead.

Lastly, now the will of God is done, concerning our deceased Brother, your
duty is to be much in Prayer to God, that there may be a Joshua after Moses,
That God would join your hearts together as one man, to seek out a Pastor for
you, which shall feed you according to his holy will; The Lord has made a
great breach upon you, be sensible of it, and seriously consider how all your
soul-comforts and advantages are bound up in this matter; Ministers are
compared to the Sun, and Salt, nihilsole and sale utilius; can you be without
the Sun in the heavens? without bread for your body, so neither without this
bread of life for your souls, or without this light to guide you in the
wilderness of this World, to eternal happiness.

FINIS.
A Funeral Oration at the Death of the most desired Mr. Blake.
By Mr. Samuel Shaw, then Schoolmaster of the Free School at Tamworth.
WIth a face sadder then usual, with an heart sadder then my face, but upon an
occasion sadder then them both, I (who was deputed to this work by him to whom
I now perform it) am here, rather to receive the expressions of your sorrow,
then tell you the resentments of mine own. Being sensible of my stupefaction,
(caused, not through the want of my affections, but the want of their object) I
desire out of a pious policy, to supply my dryness, by taking your Tears, and
putting them into my pump, so hoping to revive mine own, which yet I judge are
rather drowned then dried up. And yet when I have done this, I know that all my
expressions will fall short of the greatness of my grief, as much as my grief
does of the greatness of its cause. This numerous Company of Pious groaners,
these so many blacks, not made, but occasioned to be Mourners (badges of
profession becoming badges of that grief, which for its greatness can be
equaled by nothing but their former happiness which they once enjoyed) the
universal gloominess of this day, represents to me rather the funeral of a
Town, then a man, and the fall of a Church, rather then a single pillar: and
rather induces me to think that ye are come to quench the unmercifull heat of a
fever, then only to bedew that which was the subject of one. But if it may be,
hold a little, and suffer your eyes a while to a new employment, even to see
where you are, what you are doing, whose Obsequies you are solemnizing with so
great devotion, and take the dimensions of your loss, if it be capable of any:
which indeed is so great, that they only can know it, who knew not him, and
they only can feel, who never enjoyed him; I speak not to aggravate your loss,
but the sense of it, as for the cause of it, it admits of no addition. Whilst
he lived, it was as impossible for him not to love you, as it was for you
adequately to return his love: His care answered his love; and if his success
had answered his care, we might happily have this day wanted an object of so
great sorrow, in enjoying him. His writings were not read without satisfaction:
His Sermons were never heard without an approving silence, seldom without a
following advantage. His kindness toward you could not be considered without
love, his awful gravity, and secretly-commanding presence, without reverence:
Nor his conversation, without imitation. To see him live, was a provocation to
a godly life; to see him dying, might have made any one aweary of living. When
God restrains him from this place (which was always happy in his company but
now) he made his chamber a Church, and his bed a Pulpit, in which (in my
hearing) he offered many a hearty prayer for you: And his death made him
mindful of you, whose life made you unmindfull of him. And I did not see that
any thing made him so backward to resign up his pure soul to God, as his
unparalleled care for you, and your proficiency in godliness, which seemed as
little to him, in comparison of what he desired, as it does great to others in
comparison of what they find; so that I sat by him, and I only, when with as
great affluency of Tears, as words, he prayed, Lord (with some ingeminations)
charge not on me the ignorance of this people. And indeed your ignorance had
not been so remarkable, had not his Knowledge, and desire still to communicate
it been so. With what a grace and majesty have you heard him Preaching, who is
now (alas) confined to a worser wood. Could you ever resist the power by which
he spoke; or find in your hearts to contradict any thing that ever he said, but
when on his sickbed he said, I am a dying man? Ah! who would not there have
contradicted him, if they should not have contradicted Gods Decree! His
Wisdom, Justice, and Tenderness were such predominant Graces in him, that it
is as much my inability to describe them, as my unhappiness not to im^tate
them: And truly, to think to express them, were infinitely to in^ure their
greatness. It is a sad thing that so many resplendent graces* should never be
so truly, nor so fully discovered, as by the loss of him that had them; and
that we should not so justly consider that he had them, till we have not them.
But yet your loss might be the better borne, if ye were sure it had nothing of
a Judgment in it. But I fear that within a short time, it will appear as
truly, that God has taken him away in anger, as now it appears sadly, that he
has taken him away: And that it is not only a misery that must be repaired by
a change of Pastors, but also a sin which must be redrest by the change of your
lives: For, if your unworthiness have driven your teacher into a corner, and
you sinned him into his grave; your Repentance and Humiliation must raise
another out of his ashes. So great, so sad, so general is this loss, that I
am ready to excuse my self, and think it more reason then passion, if in my
solitary mournings, and retired complaints, I cry out, My Father, my Father,
the horsemen of England, and the Chariot thereof. To tell you of his worth in
a measure proportionate to my experience, would require too long a discourse
from your Infant-Orator. And to tell you of your loss, I have said too much
already: which although it do not answer many of your expectations, yet I hope
may conduce to the affecting of you to an attention to him, whose eloquence can
represent your loss, and whose wisdom can teach you how to make the best use
of it.

ERRATA.
Page 1. line ult. for And read In. p. 2. l. 24. a Ruler, r. the Rule. p. 5. l.
16. for This r. Thus. l. 17. for This r. Thus. p. 12. l. 11. for (...) l 13.
for Artr. out. p. 20. l. 28. dele and wise


