Die Mercurii, Febr. 25. 1645.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that S. Robert Harlow, and
Col. Purfrey do give thanks to M. Burgess, and M. Goodwin, for the great pains
they took in the Sermons they preached this day, at the entreaty of the House
of Commons, at S. Margarets Westminster (it being the day of public
Humiliation) and to desire them to print their Sermons. It is also ordered,
That none shall presume to print their Sermons without license under their
handwriting.

Hen. Else. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I appoint Thomas Underhill to print my Sermon, and no man else.

ANTHONY BURGESS.

Public Affections, PRESSED IN A SERMON Before the Honorable House of COMMONS
Assembled in PARLIAMENT: Upon the Solemn day of Humiliation, Febr. 25. 1645.

By ANTHONY BURGESS, Pastor of Sutton-Cold-field: Now Minister at Laurence
Jewry London, and a Member of the Assembly of DIVINES.

Published by Order of that House.

LONDON, Printed by J. Y. for Thomas Underhill, at the Bible in Woodstreet.
M.DC.XLVI.

TO The Honorable House OF COMMONS, Assembled in Parliament at WESTMINSTER.
Worthy SENATORS,
THE Vicissitude of Gods Providence to men in great place, sometimes pulling
down those who are lifted up on high, and again raising up those who were laid
prostrate, may justly provoke all Magistrates to walk with fear and trembling;
knowing, there is a greater then they are. All earthly Potentates and
Principalities are, before God, but as so much pindust, which, when he
breaths on, is soon scattered away. Hence, Psalm 2. the great Ones of the
earth are exhorted to kiss the Son, lest he be angry; and a little of his
anger is too heavy for the shoulders of any mortal men. Be affected therefore
with your own nothingnesse, comparatively to Gods greatness, and advance his
Truth, Worship, and Government. Many States have stumbled upon Christ, as a
Stone of offense; and he again has fallen upon them, grinding them to powder.
The Lord make you so blessed, that you may not be offended at any thing which
is Christ's; and fill you so with faith, that you may be fully persuaded in your
hearts, that the surest posture of defense for the Kingdom, is, when it is put
into a submission unto the Scepter of Christ Jesus. Although God has done much
for you, yet great is the need you still have of his Goodness, Wisdom, and
power to you. The ship coming into the harbor may miscarry, as well as that
in the wide Ocean: And, certainly, the businesses of your War and Peace, of
the Church and State, of Divisions and Reconciliations, are of so great
concernment, that he sees nothing at all, who does not judge you in as great
a necessity of Gods good Providence, as at the very first. Therefore, after all
the great success which God has vouchsafed unto you, be not high-minded, but
fear: keep a sure interest in God, and provoke him not by any sins; but so
manage all things belonging to God and men, with piety and justice, that God
from heaven may prosper you, and men on earth praise you.

Your humble servant in CHRIST, ANTHONY BURGESS.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Honorable House OF COMMONS, At the public Fast,
Febr. 25. 1645.
NUMB. 11.12. Have I conceived all this people? Have I begotten them, that thou
should say unto me, Carry them in thy bosom (as a nursing father bears
the sucking-childe) unto the land which thou swarest unto their fathers?


THe Deliverance of the Israelites out of Egypt, that iron furnace, and the
conducting of them through the wilderness unto the land of Canaan, is so
famous and remarkable an history, that many after-deliverances given unto the
Church of God, are described allusively to this: Thus the bringing out of
Babylon temporal, The rescuing of the Church out of Babylon spiritual, is set
down with words relating to this grand mercy; yea, it is made typical of that
great redemption, purchased by Christ's blood: For this is a peculiar thing to
Gods word, that not only words, but things themselves do signify; only we
must not make a type or allegory, but where the holy Ghost gives ground, lest
we should have tot sacramenta, quot ingenii acumina, (as was said of Origin)
as many mysterious notions, as men have fancies. This History therefore will
serve for our Meridian; and there is scarce any Kingdom or Church, but they
have had their Egypts, their Pharaoh's, their bricks to make: and God in great
mercy does sometimes raise up some Moses's and Aarons for them, providing a
land of Canaan, as the comfortable issue of their former labors. The slavish
and miserable condition of the Israelites is related Exodus 2. as also Gods
pity to them, in most emphaticall words, ver. 24, 25. he heard their
groaning, remembered his covenant, looked upon them, and had respect unto their
cause: This heap of words does express, after the manner of men, the great
affection and bowels of God to help, though this was delayed to very extremity,
according to that known saying, Quando duplicantur lateres, venit Moses.

Now, after the people of Israel had been freed from this bondage, instructed
in the will of God, covenanted obedience with him, seen his wonderful power,
enjoyed his mighty presence, so that they could not be more safe then they were
under his protection, not more free then they were under his laws, not more
rich then they were under his provision; yet in this Chapter begins a narration
of their manifold mutinies against God, and their faithful governors: so true
is that, Subditis semper gravis est praesens status; and, Vulgus est semper
querulum: not knowing how to bear either their miseries, or their remedies. The
first mutiny seems to be for their long march, ver. 1. whereupon a fire from
the Lord consumed them. It is to be observed, that in all their former
rebellions before the Law was given, (except that of the Calfe) God never
punished them; but since the Law given, he punished them severely: This was
(say some) to show the nature of the Law, that it works wrath; or because
their sins committed after the Law given, were against greater knowledge and
engagement.

The second mutiny begins ver. 4. (for I cannot be of their mind, that make
the former and this all one) and this was occasioned first by the mixed
multitude that was with them, viz. the Egyptians, and other nations; and the
plague upon them did quickly infect the Israelites: They murmr because they
have nothing but Manna; and because this was a sacrament, and a type of Christ
and his graces, their sin was spiritual as well as corporal: whereupon Moses,
to show their ingratitude, takes occasion to describe this Manna, what it was.
The peoples rage and ingratitude puts Moses into a sinful passionate
distemper, though there was also good zeal in it. The popish Interpreters make
this zeal of Moses pure fire: but that cannot be; and, instruunt Patriarchae
etiam errantes, the errors of the godly may teach, as well as their piety.
That Moses his heat was not wholly natural, but something feavourish,
appears, 1. From the complaint of that trust and charge God had committed to
him; when as, indeed, it was God his love and honoring of him. 2. In
complaining of those qualities that ought to be in him as a Governor, Have I
conceived all this people (to be a mother to them)? Have I begotten them (to be
a father to them)? And this care over the people is resembled to the fathers
bearing a sucking-child in his arms: and when Moses complains, that God did
say unto him, Bear these as a father, we do not read any-where that God
commanded him in such express words; but calling him to that office, was, in
effect, to say so. 3. His impatience is seen, in desiring to die, rather then
to go through that work, it being not lawful to desire death out of impatience
for any pretense whatsoever.

The Rabbis they have another reason why he was in a passion; because, say
they, he speaks to God in the feminine gender; for v. 15. there is (...) for
(...): but a Friars notion upon the New Testament, and a Rabbis upon the Old,
are much alike; for the word is used in a feminine form, though of a masculine
gender, Deuteronomy. 5.27. Ezekiel. 28.14.

The Observations I shall pursue out of the Text are these:

1. God lays a command and charge upon all those whom he raises up to
relieve an oppressed people, to do it with tender affections to the public:
They must regard the Commonwealth, as the father does the sucking-childe in
his arms. Hence, Psalm. 28.9. to feed a people, is, to rule them; and the word
does not signify a mere single feeding, but, with love and great affection:
and this phrase, (...), is frequent among Heathens: Hence Philo observed, that
God took Governors from following the sheep, being used to a pastoral cure,
that so they might with greater bowels and affections govern men. And, as God,
in the Old Testament, called shepherds, rather then of any other profession;
so, in the New Testament, he called fishermen, rather then others, to public
employment; and all because such are used to more pains, labor, and diligence.

Obs. 2. The ingratitude and discontents of people are such under Reformers,
that they make their condition very hard and uncomfortable.

Obs. 3. It is very hard for Governors themselves to lead a people out of
bondage into freedom, and not to provoke God much by their own sins.

Obs. 4. That though God do raise up men on purpose to do some great work for
him, yet there will be many difficulties and stops in the way.

Obs. 5. It Is not enough to bring out of Egypt, but we must be carried into
Canaan.

All the matter I have chosen to treat of, is practical, remembering, The Manna
did not fall within the camp, or tents; so neither does sweet practical matter
in controversies.

For the first Observation, I shall declare in how many ways these tender
affections to the public are to be seen:

1. In a deep sense and feeling of public miseries. In this, Nehemiah's
practice is imitable; who, though he had all the content and accommodation,
for himself, that his heart could wish in the Kings Court, yet was exceeding
sad, and took no notice of all his advantages, because Jerusalem was in
desolations. Christ, in the midst of all his applause and acclamation, wept,
because of the evil to come upon Jerusalem. Write after this copy, and say,
All our own safety and good success does not take off our hearts from the sad
thoughts about public desolations. Sometimes take off your thoughts from other
matters, and consider in private how great the streights, miseries, and
difficulties of thousands are in the three Kingdoms; especially on such days
as these are, take the advantage of your hearts. Shall so many families and
estates be broken, and not your hearts? so many bodies lie wounded in the
field, and shall not your hearts be wounded?

Let us be so many Jeremiah's, making our lamentations before God. And if the
Prophet finds his bowels making noise like an harp within, even for the
desolation of a Moab, how much rather for Jerusalem? Me thinks, these days
are rather spent in expecting what new thing, or witty thing will be preached,
then preparing hearts to mourn, and gush out because of the breaches God has
made.

2. In taking heed of provoking God by our personal sins. If we love the
public, how careful shall we be to sin, lest God punish it upon the
Commonwealth? When David had sinned, and the Kingdom was visited, how does
he cry out, I have sinned, but what have these sheep done? Injustice and
impiety in men of office and dignity, is cruelty to the Commonwealth: The
sins of such are like the eclipses of the Sun, and other celestial bodies,
that do much corrupt the sublunary. Aristotle says, The perpetual duration of
things comes from the simple and daily motion of the Sun from the East into
the West: but the corruption of things is, because of the oblique motion of the
Sun and Stars through the Zodiac. Resolve then, because we love the public,
there shall no iniquity be found in our hands, no ungodliness in our families:
I will not be a Jonah in the ship, to cause the tempests and storms to arise.
As great men's children have sometimes other boys whipped for their faults; so
does God chastise Governors upon the people, as sometimes the peoples sins
upon Governors. Consider therefore, Is the wrath of God upon the land? what
sin may you find out of yours, or your families, that so, the vapors being
dispersed, there may be no more thunder?

3. In abhorring all self advantages to the prejudice of the public. This is
to be like a tender father: and how fully did Moses express this? When God
offered him great preferment, to make a great nation of him and his, he does
utterly refuse such an offer. Who has sincerity and faithfulness enough to
deny such a thing in our days, if God should tender it? Tully had two wishes,
though he saw neither effected: one was, to see the Commonwealth free before
he died: and the other, That every man might have such a fortune (as he calls
it) as he stood affected to the public. The devil does many times proffer the
glory of the world to a man, if he will deny the public. Be able to say of
all self-advantages, as Pliny in another case, Capio aliquam voluptatem, quod
hac voluptate non capior. Hoc est principatus, sua negligere, and eorum quos
regit, curam habere. Therefore, says Oleaster, God made Pharaoh have a dream
about the scarcity and famine that was to come (though ignorant of God) rather
then any other, because it belonged to those that were in authority to provide
for others: see Isa. 22.21, 24. They were high expressions of Paul concerning
his contrymen, He could be even an Anathema for them: I will not dispute
about those expressions, but gather this, That the heart of a man rightly set
for the public good of others, is more boundless then the sea, having no huc
usque.

4. Faithful diligence, and indefatigable labor to procure the good of it.
Take an example from Moses: How does he consume himself in care and labor for
them, till Jethro advises him to take some assistants? And although he had
these, yet the burden lay most upon him, as appears by his expostulation:
Therefore God appoints a new help of the Sanhedrim in this Chapter. It was a
speech of an heathen, that the burdens of men in place, are worse then those of
asses; for they are taken off their backs while they eat or rest, but it is not
so with those Governors that faithfully attend to the public. The
Lacedaemonians in their public Courts would have no pictures or images, that
there might not be the least object to draw away their minds from the matters
in hand. As therefore it is said of God, he is totus oculus, and totus uber: an
eye, because of his vigilance; and a dug, or breast, because of his sweet
nourishing all: the same is to be true of all in place.

5. To eye Gods command and charge; for this God lays upon every one in
office and place, to be like a father in it. Hence were those appellations,
Patres patriae. Now the eying of God in this duty, will make us to exceed the
famous Romans, as much as the Sun does the glowworm. Who know not the brave
exploits and great services they did for the Commonwealth? The acts of Curtius
and others are almost incredible: but they looked not to God in these things;
so that their actions were good bullion (as it were) but not a true stamp upon
them, and therefore would not pass with God. It is well maintained by our
Divines, yea, some of the Schoolmen, Ariminensis, and others, That these were
not works moraliter bona; because, though the proxime end might be good, yet
they knew not the ultimate end, which was Gods glory. Consider therefore what
obligations God puts upon you, and let your public actions be a Deo, per Deum,
ad Deum: that in serving the Commonwealth, you may serve God also.

6. To do all things from an inward principle of affection. For, a man is not
a father by reading all the Oeconomicks in the world, but it must be implanted
in his heart: so neither will you be good Common-wealths-men by reading
Aristotle's Politics, or Machiavel; but by earnest prayer to God to give you
father-like affections. None but a father or mother will take pains about his
child. As he therefore said of his image that would not stand, (...), There
wants something within; so, when thou find thy heart listlesse, careless,
selfish in public matters, cry out, Here wants something within, bowels
within. What Maximus Tyrius said of a superstitious man, He was Gods flatterer,
not his friend: the same is true of many to the Commonwealth. Who knows not
Nero's Quinquenuium? His Utinam nescirem literas? But a fatherly affection is
solid, and real; he loves it for its self. Many follow the Commonwealth,
as flies do a man that does carry an honey-box; not for the man's sake, but the
honey. It was a brave challenge which Samuel made, and the people acquitted him
in it, 1 Samuel 12.3, 4, 5. yea, Paul (Act. 20.33.) goes higher; for he says,
he had not desired any of their goods.

7. To mind all things that do heal and unite. And this is necessary at this
time, when, by opinions and discontents, we are scattered into so many pieces,
that, unless Democritus his opinion should prove true, that all things are
composed of Atoms, there is little hope for us: and I do not so much tremble
at the dreadful effects they are likely to produce, as the cause from whence
they come, viz. from Gods anger and displeasure. Judge. 9.23. when God purposed
to destroy Abimelech, he sent an evil spirit between him and the men of
Shechem. I have read a story of two in a ship that were in deadly enmity one
with the other, and immediately tempests arise, the ship is ready to be
drowned, but the two men mind not to save that; only one gets to one end of
the ship, and another to the other, and would needs know which would sink
first; accounting it happiness enough, though the ship were not safe, yet if
one might survive to see the other drowned: I need not apply it. And this
likewise does argue want of bowels in those, who, for an opinion that is not
fundamental, will endanger the public good. Certainly, when the Apostle
says, Have thou faith? Have it to thy self, he supposes it becomes the
modesty of a man to keep that opinion to himself, which differs from all
others. Cyprian, reproving the Christians that would needlessly profess their
faith, though it endangered their lives, has a good saying, Confiteri nos
magis voluit Christus, quam profiteri; Christ would have us confess, rather
then profess: he confesses, that does it being called, and put upon it; he
professes, that does it of his own accord. Homer feigned wittily, that Jupiter
took (...) (the goddess of strife) by the hair, and threw her out of heaven,
whereby they had peace: O! throw this Alecto out of Church and State.

8. To pass by much ingratitude and unthankefulnesse of people. Thus the
mother does at the childs hand: and so Moses does with the Israelites at other
times. Si quoties peccant homines -- said he of God. Labor to be content with
the reward of a good conscience, and glory with God, how unkind and unstable
soever people be. That custom of Ostracismus, banishing men of great deserts
and abilities, was only because of the envious sore eyes of the people, that
could not bear such worth: Fatherly affections will not give over for this. We
read indeed of the Heathens, that, for such discourtesies, would take snuff,
and endeavor to ruin the public; but this will be far from a godly,
fatherly disposition. And, certainly, if we can read of Christ enduring the
contradiction of sinners, and dying for them who did revile him and reproach
him; how well may Magistrates bear with the peoples ingratitude?

9. To execute justice upon offenders and enemies. He that loves the sheep,
will kill the wolves, 1 King. 2.35. Yea, to abound in all kind of justice,
distributive, and commutative. This is more glorious then the morning-starre;
which makes the Scripture call so diligently upon all in place to execute it:
This makes the oppressed and injured to love you. What was the cause that the
Egyptians made the bird Ibis their God, but because, by her horned bill, she
killed those venomous creatures that had annoyed them? The Eagle, though an
excellent creature, yet was counted unclean, because of his rapine and violence
upon others. How lovely is that carriage of Jobs, described in several verses,
Job 29. from ver. 7. to the 17th?

10. To venture against all fears and dangers. Thus the father and mother do
for their little ones, choosing it should rather fall upon themselves, then the
fruit of their loins: Thus we see Nehemiah and Zerubbabel not daunted at any
oppositions; their zeal for the public made them, like Job's Leviathan, laugh
at the spear. To go against friends, relations, enemies, for to save the
public, argues a fatherly courageous heart; Praesis ut prosis.

11. To hasten the accomplishment of their misery. Luther called peace, Coelum,
and Paradisum, a very Heaven, and Paradise; but it must be a peace which does
not divorce it self from truth: Maledicta sit illa pax (says Hierome): nor in
qua involutum est bellum. They are therefore so to hasten it, as God speaks
concerning the accomplishment of mercies for his people, Isa. 60.22. I the Lord
will hasten it in his time. Hezekiah has an emphaticall expression about the
Kingdoms calamity in his time, Isa. 37.3. where the land is compared to a
woman in travel, that is tortured with many pangs and throbs: now we know what
care and industry uses to be taken in such extremities. The heavenly bodies
communicate their influence not in quantum cailda, sed in quantum velocis motus.

Grounds. 1. From the example of God and Christ himself. No wonder Moses is to
be so tender, when God himself is so, Deu. 32.10, 11, 12. where God is said to
find his people as so many straying sheep; to lead him about, or to compass
him, as the Greek translateth it. Thus David says, Ps. 32.7. Thou will
compass me about with safe deliverance: He kept them as the apple of his eye;
that is, with all diligent care. And this providence of God is further
resembled to the Eagle, which fluttereth over her young ones: It is the same
word with Genesis 1.2. [The Spirit of God moved;] so that it implies the
cheerful influence which God put into them: She takes them (if they be
negligent) and bears them upon her wings, not in her talons, wherewith she
carries her prey. See in this passage a lively description, what Governors in
place and office should be to their people. Thus Hos. 11.3, 4. I taught Ephraim
to go, taking them by their arms: -- and I was unto them as they that take off
the yoke on their jaws, and I laid meat to them. Here Gods government is
described to be full of meekness: he used them not as beasts, but children;
yea, he took off the yokes others had put on. And as for Christ's government
over his people, how gentle that is, appears Isa. 40.10. He shall gather his
lambs in his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those
that are with young: He therefore said truly, Nulla creatura humilior Christo.

2. From the greatness of that God to whom all in place and office are
accountable. Howsoever, when men in place look beneath them, they may be apt to
puff up themselves, and grow lofty; yet, comparatively, to God they are
nothing. All the Nations of the world are but a drop; and how little art thou,
who art not the thousand part of that drop? The Scripture delights to speak
of Gods greatness to men; for till God be great to us, every man and power is
great: but nothing is great to him, to whom God is great. According to thy
fear, so is thy wrath: by fear may be meant the word of God, as Psalm. 19. The
fear of the Lord is excellent: so that Gods wrath is so great as the word
reveals it, though men may despise or lessen it. Consider diligently that
place Isa. 40.21, 22, 23. We shall not govern with contemptuous carriage, when
we apprehend that we are but as so much small dust, which God will blow away
when he pleases. It is with men, as with letters that have great and glorious
superscriptions, (Right Honorable, etc.) but, when opened, there is nothing
but a little black ink, and dust upon them: so, though men have great places
and offices; yet within there is but a little black blood, and dust to cover it.

3. This is the only way to have the hearts and consciences of people. Piety
and justice do only convince men, when all carnal policies will be like a
blazing star, that makes a great gaze for a while, but ends at last in
slime and noisomenesse. Herod feared John, because he was a just and holy man.
When the consciences and affections of a people are to their Governors, they
are tied by stronger bonds then power or fear can put upon them. How
successful then will it prove, when, as God (by raising up of men to places)
gives them the titles of God; so likewise he communicates unto them the
justice, the holiness of a God, by which the people are kept in awe and love?
Some Heathens, before they went to war, sacrificed to Love; implying, that
none would truly fight, but those that had love to the Commonwealth: and so it
holds in all other public actions. Let men therefore in place and office so
deport themselves, that all the people may cry out, and say, God so love you
and yours, as you have loved us, and the Commonwealth.

4. This is a sure clear way to keep from confusion. They that observe lying
vanities, forsake their own mercy, says Jonah by experience. A plain upright
way proves in the event, to all the owners thereof, the best policy.
Commentators observe of David, that he was never brought into streights, but
when he left Gods way: Psalm. 119. Then I shall not be confounded, when I have
respect to all the commandments. A man shall never be brought to this, O
wretch that I am! Would to God I had taken another way, or another side. It is
a sad thing to read of Tully, when he saw all public events to make against
him, complaining, O turpem senectutem! O me nunquam sapientem! And to such a
tragical end have many mere Politicians been brought: Lege historiam, ne fias
historia, said he. It was Gregory Nazianzene's meditation by the seaside,
when he saw many fishes carried with the stream; they were hurried upon the
land, then a torrent would fetch them off again, presently they would be landed
again; but he observed other fishes that stuck to a rock, and they were always
in the same place, howsoever the waves did rage and roll up and down: Thus he
applied it; The former sort of fishes were like men that adhere to these fading
creatures, and the latter to those that stick fast to Christ.

Fabius Maximus, though a Soothsayer, yet would say, Optimis auspiciis ea geri,
quae pro salute Reipublicae gerentur; quae contra Rempub. ferrentur, contra
auspicia ferri.

What did Ahithophel get by his carnal wisdom? Might he not say as Jonathan,
Behold, I have tasted a little honey, and now I must die? I have enjoyed a
little applause and greatness, and now I must be damned?

5. The greater places of trust, the greater are our accounts. Sicut crescunt
dona, sic crescunt rations donorum: Where God gives more, there he requires
more. O, let every one then that is called to steare the ship, especially in
these tempests and storms, imitate Solomon, praying unto God for wisdom to
administer that office: and this was so acceptable to God, that he gave him
all other abundance. Take heed lest the Devil set thee not up upon the
pinnacle of the Temple, hoping to throw thee down headlong. You are, at the day
of judgment, not only to give an account for your personal sins, but
Commonwealth sins: O, tremble in the thoughts of such an account. Bernard said
well, Descendamus in infernum viventes, ne descendamus morientes: Let us go
into hell while we are alive, by meditation and consideration, lest we go into
it while we are dead. How necessary is it that you, whose labor and praise it
is to set the Church and State at liberty, should have your own hearts also at
liberty from all corrupt aims and respects? Be not offended at these things;
Genus quoddam martyri^ est non ignobile, reprehendentes aequanimiter far: It
is a noble kind of martyrdom, to bear reproofs patiently.

6. Their Titles and Names are for this duty. Hence they are called gods, and
fathers: their government is said to be feeding; yea, the King of Tire is
called Cherub, either ironically, or because he thought so, Ezekiel. 28.14. for,
as God does give sometimes the names from earthly powers to Angels, as when
they are called thrones, and dominions, Col. 1.16. so he does take the names of
those heavenly spirits, and adorneth Governors in the earth with them. Now
they are spirits of service to others; that, as the Sun has its name from a
word that signifies to administer, and to be serviceable, because the light is
not for it self, but others; so likewise all the power and honor that God
gives men is for the public, and not for themselves: Let therefore new titles
and places raise up the heart to suitable operations; and upon miscarriages, let
us reflect, and say, How ill does this action and title agree together?

7. Acts of unrighteousness have a great guilt: for they are not only against
a spiritual conscience, but a natural; and when that is awakened, what ado
is there to have it graciously appeased? When Paul preached of justice, and
temperance, sins which a natural conscience does condemn, he made Felix to
tremble. Though you have a privilege (Honorable, and Worthy) that no man can
arrest or implead you; yet you know full well, that there is no privilege from
the arrests of conscience, and the impleading of Gods word. It is necessary to
consider, we have to do with God and not man: and if Socrates, though an
Heathen, could rise up to that resolution, I will obey God rather then men (the
very same words which the Apostle used); how much rather ought Christians?

8. The people do expect this from them, even as they do that the Sun should
shine, and the clouds rain. For this they give themselves and their families to
be plundered and undone, that piety and righteousness may be established. When
they come up hither out of the Country, they think they are come to the gates
of the kingdom of heaven, where righteousness shall presently enter: they
forget all the pangs and troubles their souls have traveled in, because of
the hopes of that man-child of Reformation which shall be brought forth. They
think, when they have been stung by any serpents full of poison and venom, it
is but their looking upon you, and they should be healed presently. Solomon's
administration is excellently described, Psalm. 72.6. He shall come down like
rain upon the mowen grass: The Original word signifies also a shorn fleece
of wool; and some make it an allusion to Gideons fleece, that had dew fell on
it: but it may well be retained as in our Translation; for the grass mowen
craveth rain, as the people did righteousness; and the Psalmist does again
express this righteousness by showers. The word is used only in this place,
and has its signification of dispersing, hereby representing the scattering of
justice abroad, as the drops of rain are to make fertile the ground.

Use. Suffer (worthy Patriots) a word of exhortation from what has been said:
Certainly, if ever, here are occasions and objects of all the graces requisite
in such offices. So walk and do, that the Commonwealth may look upon you as
their Joseph's, their Mosesses, their Mordecaies. Humble your selves this day
before God for any neglect or omission. What has been done with public
affections, and unbyassed respects to God and his cause, will be incredible joy
and gladness to you afterward. Observe how much Nehemiah refreshed himself
with this, Neh. 5.19. Think upon me, my God, for good, according to all that I
have done for this people. So Chap. 13.14. Remember me, O my God, and wipe not
out the good deeds that I have done for the house of my God. So ver. 22.
Remember me according to this, and spare me according to the greatness of thy
mercy: and ver. 31. Remember me, O my God, for good. See here what comfortable
encouragements he has: Is not this more then if the King had given him many
Provinces and Kingdoms to rule over? Thus Hezekiah, 2 King. 20.3. when he
heard the sentence of death passed upon him, what supported him, but an upright
heart in that Reformation he had begun? I know the heart set upon great things
in the world, is apt to contemn these truths of God, as too pusillanimous, and
emasculating their courage: But, as Dionysius, (if I mistake him not) who,
being a Stoic, wrote a book, that pain was nothing, it was but an imagination;
yet when he fell sick of the Stone, and felt the torture of it, he cried out,
All that he had written was false, as he now felt by experience: So men, who,
in their life times, have greedily pursued the great and glorious things of
this world; when dying, when appearing before God, will cry out, They were but
all dreams, and imaginations: And this destroys men, that they take these
things as the words of mere men, and believe them not as the undeniable truths
of God: even as young Samuel thought the voice he heard to be the voice of Eli,
of a man, and no more; therefore goes to sleep again, till he understood it to
be the voice of God. Consider likewise the honor that God puts upon you, when
he makes you instruments to relieve the oppressed Church and State. If a drop
of cold water shall not go without a reward, how acceptable then will it be,
when men have been ready to give many drops of their warm blood? God, when he
made heaven and earth, took no instruments, no not Angels themselves, in that
work of Creation; but when he makes new heavens, and new earth, (as the
Scripture phrase is about the Reformation and good change of a Kingdom) he
puts much glory upon those who are subservient therein.

Again, meditate on the difficulty and rarity of this disposition and affection
in men of trust. How few are there that look upon themselves as for the
public, and not the public for themselves? Yea, and suppose we be mounted up
so high by generous principles, as to give the pre-eminence to the public; yet
to do this with godly, sincere aims and ends, is a further difficulty. Jehu,
how high did he go in a Reformation? yet would not yield to take away
Jeroboam's Calves, though he did zealously destroy Baals Priests.

Thus it is an easier matter to consent that the Antichristian yoke and burden
shall be removed, then to set up Christ's order and government. But when our
Savior invited those that were heavy laden and burdened (under the
Pharisaicall government and traditions) as some learned men expound it; lest
they should think this were all, he bids them take his yoke upon them. Men's
corruptions may make them willing to have Antichrist pulled down; yea, their
advantages and self-interests may incline them that way: but there are required
many positive graces to set up the ways and orders of Christ. And certainly,
there was something in it, that the Heathens did so universally object against
the Christian Religion and way, as incompatible with Commonwealths and
Magistracy; not that indeed there was any contradiction: but only it is hard
for States to bring up every thing in their Kingdom to the Scripture way. This
must be laid down as a most certain principle, (says Luther) that Gods word
will not attemper it self, or condescend to Princes and States, but they must
bring themselves to that. And therefore we ought the more earnestly to strive
in prayer unto God for such that are in authority, and to rejoice in seeing the
clusters of grapes, though as yet we are not entered into Canaan. Now let me
instance in some particulars, wherein your tender bowels may be wonderfully
expressed: As,

First, In the setting up of a faithful, learned Ministry in all the parts of
the Kingdom: And, blessed be God, you have showed much readiness to this
work. It was your enemies design to put that down, although it proved a work
as impossible to them, as to put fetters and gyves upon the Sun, to hinder it
in its course. Herein our Savior showed his bowels, and imitate him, Matthew.
9.36, 37. The people then enjoyed the reading of the Scriptures every Sabbath
day, with the Pharisees explication of it: that was not wholly unusefull (for
then our Savior would not have bid the people hear them); yet, for all this,
his bowels yearned to them, as sheep without a shepherd. What pity is it, to
have a great harvest, and no laborers to inn it? The Ministers are the light
and salt of the earth; and how necessary are they, especially if we consider
the great darkness, and unsavory manners of most people? These are like
Orpheus, to use the harp of Gods word, whereby those who are as wild as
beasts, and stupid as trees, may be new-moulded, and become the people of God.
Some have thought, that therefore Christ would use spittle in the curing of the
blind man, to show, that it must be something which goes out of his mouth, the
word preached, that would indeed give the true eyesight: But I will not abide
by that notion.

A second thing wherein compassionate bowels may be seen, is, as much as lies
in you, to stop the infection and contagion of heresies. How many men are
there, who may be called, as Origin was, Centauri, for the diverse monstrous
opinions they hold? There is a Book, called, The compassionate Samaritan, who
makes it a great act of pity, to give an unbounded and illimited toleration to
every man: But, certainly, this is such a pity as St. Francis had, that would
take the beggars lice, and put them into his own bosom. The Scripture speaks
much of the cordial affections that ought to be in us against them, Gal. 1.8,
9. Though we, or an Angel should preach any other doctrine, let him be
accursed. So again, 2 John 10, 11. If there come any unto you, and bring not
this doctrine, receive him not into your house, nor bid him God speed: and mark
the reason, He that bids him God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds: He
calls evil doctrines evil deeds there. Rev. 2.2. Thou can not bear them
which are evil, and thou have tried them which say, they are Apostles, and are
not: so ver. 14, 15. Its made their sin, that they had such as taught the
doctrine of the Nicolaitans, and others. Learn of this Moses, Deuteronomy. 9.9. How
did he mourn before the Lord, fasting forty days and nights, because the
people had committed idolatry in his absence? Not but that instruction by way
of reason, ought to go before all rejection of them. It is the Apostles rule,
To rebuke in all doctrine; so that there are none who would have the
suppression of heresies and errors, but they likewise press a rational
admonition and information, that so the obstinacy of men gainsaying may appear
to all the world. Musculus has a memorable story in his Commonplace de
haeresi, that there were some Anabaptists, who had been four years in prison,
and there were some who cried to have them put to death; but others, more
moderate, dealt with them by way of argument, and in such a spirit of
meekness, that they were convinced their salvation, and not confusion was
sought for: And by this means they changed their minds, and one, being a
pretty scholar, was chosen Deacon in a Church, and by his means many more were
drawn from Anabaptisme. It Is no disparagement to the Reformation, but rather an
argument of the truth of it, that when the good seed is sown, the Devil is so
industrious to sow his tares. The April showers, that make the grass grow, and
the flowers sweet, do likewise cause many croaking frogs to come forth: But as
this is not to be cast upon the Reformation, so ought those that are in
authority to be the more vigilant, knowing, that then Satan is more busy then
ever: The tares were sown when men were asleep.

Again, Look to this, That while you suppress heresies, you still leave a way
for the improvement and growth of men's abilities and parts, lest in time it be
thought heresy, to have more learning then another; as, when Reformation
began, the Papists made it a suspicion of heresy, to understand Greek and
Hebrew.

Lastly, Let not every opinion in matters of less consequence, be accounted
heresy: for then it will fall out, as among one kind of people, that made only
Treason capital, and to be punished by death; but then the Judges had a device
to find every offense Treason, and so indeed all sins were capital. These
cautions, and such like, laid down, you ought to be zealous and vigorous
against them.

2. Another Use may be to us Ministers: For, certainly, we need as much the
pressing of public affections upon us as any other. How hardly do we find
such bowels in us, as were in Paul? Gal. 4.19. My little children, of whom I
travel in birth again. So 1 Thessalonians. 2.7. We were gentle among you, even as the
nurse cherishes her children: thus Paul, whom Chrysostom calls the
terrestrial Angel; yea, more, Cor Pauli est cor Christi. And, certainly, if
these bowels were in us, it would keep us from pride, self-seeking, and
tyranny: And what is preached from inward bowels does more good, then things of
mere invention and parts, how excellent soever; as the milk that comes warm
out of the breast nourishes more then that which is heated at the fire. What a
ridiculous thing was that of Bernard, to excommunicate flies, because they were
troublesome to a Chapel? And how cruelly has that spiritual sword been
drawn out in Popery, merely for want of bowels? So that in preaching,
dispensation of Sacraments, and infliction of spiritual censures, there is
required much prudence, zeal, holiness, love, all which cannot be done without
tender bowels and compassions. Many times we Ministers are like Samsons dead
Lion, though others may find honey in us, yet we our selves feel not the
sweetness of it. Christ said thrice to Peter, Feed my sheep; but not once,
Milk them, or, Shear them. So that I know not what more necessary to be prayed
for this day, then to say, Give, Lord, to Magistrates, give to Ministers, give
to Committees, give to Soldiers: What shall thou give them? Fatherly bowels.
This will be a living spring to carry us forward in our work, when all other
principles are but a land-floud, that will quickly be dried up. Many disputes,
divisions, and jealousies would be extinct, if this inward love were
effectual. The bowels of the true mother will by no means endure the sword
should divide the child. I shall conclude, desiring to all that temper which
Paul commends in Timothy, Phil. 2.20. naturally to take care for the public;
and so shall we avoid that charge the Apostle lays upon many, that they seek
their own, and not the things of Jesus Christ.

I come to the 2d Observation, which is, that The ingratitude and discontent of
people is such under Reformers, that they make their Governors lives hard and
miserable. Moses, though a man noted for such meekness, yet is quite wearied
out with the work; and sometimes the people talk of stoning him, as the cause
of all their calamity. They could not be more bitter and violent against
Pharaoh and his taskmasters, then now they are against Moses and Aaron. Thus
they deal with their Worthies, as beasts with trees, that run to shelter
themselves under them while the storm and tempest is, and after that is over,
then they browze upon the boughs, and break down the branches thereof. So that
there is no safe rule to go by in public administrations: not self-interests,
not present success, not applause of the people; but a faithful eying and
owning of God in all.

In the amplifying of this Doctrine, we will take notice of the particulars,
Wherein, and How the Israelites murmured under the faithful conduct of Moses.
Their murmuring is excellently described, Exodus 16.2. to be a beastly sin; for
the word does signify such howlings as beasts use to make when they are ready
to be famished. What an horrid noise do dogs and such creatures make? the same
did the Israelites against Moses and Aaron.

And first, Consider, they charge their Governors as the cause of the
calamities that are come upon them. Numb. 16.13. Moses is there charged with a
design to bring them out of Egypt to kill them in the wilderness, and that he
intended to make himself a Prince over them: and mark their expression, v. 14.
Will thou put out the eyes of these men? that is, Do you think so to blind
them, that they should not epsy out your fraud? O horrible ingratitude! Moses
was much incensed at this: and see how his integrity comforted him, I have not
taken one ass from them (the vilest beast) nor hurt one of them. Thus the good
Prophets were judged the troublers of Israel: Thus the ignorant people blame
the Physic and Physician, as if they made them sick, when it is the corrupt
humor within. And are there not men now adays, that, in stead of charging
their Idolatries, Oaths, and Blasphemies, as the causes of the miserable
calamities upon us, lay all the blame upon those that would reform things
amiss?

2. Though the servants of God labored by arguments to allay their
frowardness, yet this melodious harp could not drive out that evil spirit in
them, Number. 14.9, 10. Exodus 6.9. Though they were told what great things God had
done for them: though they make it appear, God had forsaken their enemies; yet
they hearken to nothing. To bid men in distress not consider the dead womb of
the creature, but the power of God, is as ridiculous to their carnal hearts,
as that mock-charity James speaks of, which says, Go home and be warmed, but
does nothing at all. Though you draw buckets of water out of the wels of the
Scripture, yet you can hardly quench the fire of impatiency, when it has
inflamed a people.

3. A third expression of their discontent, is, To magnify their former life,
though never so miserable. Exodus 16.3. When we sat down by the fleshpots:
Sat down; as if they had such ease and plenty: not one word of their brick and
straw. Numb. 16.13. They tell Moses, he had brought them out of a land that
flowed with milk and honey. That which was an iron furnace, in which they
groaned, and were weary of their lives, they here call, A land flowing with
milk and honey; the same phrase that is given to Canaan: And are there not many
such mutiners to this day amongst us? Have not people forgotten the pressures,
the State and Church burdens, that once they crouched under? Did they not long
for a redemption? and now when it is working for them, they make an Egypt as
good as a Canaan.

4. To be willing, for their ease-sake, to go back to their condition again.
Numb. 14.4. Let us make our selves a Captain, and go down into Egypt. And does
not many a man wish for the Popish innovations again, rather then to be undone
thus continually, as they account it? But, what good would peace and plenty do
to a gracious heart, if he must drink again of streams muddied by the
inventions of men, and have gravel again put into the bread he must eat?
Certainly, corrupt Doctrine and Worship is more to be feared then the devouring
sword.

5. They are only discontented, because of outward streights and miseries; and
when indeed they should complain, we have not a word fall from them. When Aaron
was indeed in blame, for making a golden calfe, they could bear that well
enough: When he said, To morrow shall be a feast to the Lord, none opened his
mouth, crying, It is Idolatry, we dare not do it: but, in hunger and drought,
in want of necessaries, then they fret and rage. Thus, people that open their
mouths because of taxes and assessements, found no trouble or burden under
those altars, cringes, and corrupt doctrines that were then preached. When our
estates are gone, we think our selves undone; but not so, when God and his pure
worship is removed from us.

6. In all their murmurings, they never blame themselves for their sins:
sometimes they complain of God, of the instruments, of the evils themselves;
but never any word of their own sins. If they had said, God has done like an
holy and just God, our Governors like faithful and wise men; but we, by our
iniquities, have brought all this evil upon our selves, it had been well. It
argues a carnal froward heart, when we are always complaining, and talking
against instruments, never seriously humbling our selves for our sins, nor
considering, that if God do leave Governors to their own selves, it is for
the sins of the people. What makes our hearts like so many Mount Aetnaes,
sending forth vollies of enraged flames; but looking upon mercies as so many
debts to us, and calamities as so many injuries? Let us feel sin more, and we
shall feel outward troubles less.

Use 1. Of admonition to people, to take heed of this sin of murmuring and
discontent. 1 Cor. 10. Neither murmr ye (says the Apostle) as some of them
murmured. It is questioned, how this was applicable to the Corinthians; Why
should they murmr? And it is answered thus; The Corinthians were guilty of
many foul and disorderly courses: now the false Apostles let them alone; but
Paul he was resolved to come with the rod of discipline among them (as he
says): hereupon the Corinthians muttered, their sore eyes could not endure the
Sun shining: And this is still the cause of the vexations and disquietnesse of
men, that they cannot submit to the holy rules and ways of Christ. This made
some heretofore call the Geneva Discipline the Spanish Inquisition; and all
because men love their lusts and their pleasures even to death. Grudge not
therefore under the difficulty of a Reformation. Think not, that God will cast
England into a dead sleep, as he did once Adam, and take out of her side a
glorious Church, and she never know of it, or feel any pain. Consider how much
the Antichristian party ventureth for their Idols and corrupt worship; how
they, through many tribulations, enter into the kingdom of hell, and the
kingdom of darkness suffers violence by them: they deny themselves, and
take up the cross, and follow Satan. O that we were as wise, as cordial, had
as public affections for the truths and government of Christ, as they for
Satan. Shall men bring their earrings to make a golden calf; yea, offer their
sons and daughters to Molech? And shall not we be ready to do and suffer in the
way God calls for?

Use 2. Of direction to men in place and trust, To expect difficulties and
hardship. You see Moses is even weary of his life. Josuah indeed, never met
with any discontent or muttering from the people (herein God was very merciful
unto him.) But Moses, and David, and Nehemiah, what difficulties did they
devour? Be you as the heavens, that communicate their influence to the earth;
though that, by way of requital, sends up nothing but black and smoaky
vapors. Now in the midst of these, take some Remedies:

1. Consider seriously, Whether you have not sinned against God, and therefore
God makes the people loose in their affections. When Shimei reviled David, see
how spiritually David resenteth it: The Lord bid him do it. There is not any
sigh or discontent in people, but there is a just and wise providence in it,
though it may be their fault and impatiency. It is a great expression of Gods
love to the people of Israel, that a dog should not move his tongue against man
or beast, Exodus 11.7.

2. Keep up sincerity, and holy ends in reference to God. How could Moses have
supported himself, if there had not been that brazen wall therein? O how sweet
a repose is it to a man much in public affairs, when he can truly empty his
soul in prayer to God! O Lord, the people are jealous and suspicious, many have
hard thoughts, but thou know the integrity of my heart and endeavors: O
Lord, I have not sought my self, nor been vainly puffed up. I have made no
parties, driven on no designs; but cordially thought, meditated, and
endeavored the public good; Remember me, O my God, in this. Such a man God
will honor, and he has the advantage of all others who serve corrupt ends.
And, truly, such is the change of all sublunary things, while they are at the
best, that there is no safe haven but in this one thing.

Lastly, Consider this or Moses; As soon as the people were out of Egypt, and
they became to be an embodied people, the first thing he sets upon by the
command of God, is to settle the Worship of God, and order therein: for the
Church of God, being a Society joining together to worship God, it cannot be
rationally thought, that it should remain compact together without Government,
no more then any other Society. And it is one thing, when God raises up some
to be avenged on the sins and oppressions of men that have gone before; and
another thing, when, besides this, God puts into their heart to settle the
things of his Temple: The first is a mercy, and this was done by Jehu: the
second is a far greater mercy, and that was done by Hezekiah, and Josiah. Now
our considence and expectation is, that God will use you as instruments for
both these mercies to the Kingdom: And, oh that in this Land, at last, we
might (as Paul concerning the Colossians, Col. 2.) rejoice, beholding the faith
and order thereof.

FINIS.

