THE BURDEN OF ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND: OR, The Watchmans Alarm.

In a plain Declaration to the KINGS most Excellent Majesty, pointing out the
chief sins, and causes of this Civil War, and of all those judgments under
which the three Kingdoms now groan, plainly proved by Gods Word, and our
practice.

ALSO Showing the means, or remedies, (approved of by God) for the
establishing a sound Peace, and the removing of the said judgments out of the
three aforesaid Kingdoms, according to the mean wisdom God has given unto
the Author,

ED: de CLARO VADO.

PROVE. 25. 2, 5. It Is the glory of God to conceal a thing: but the honor of
Kings to search out a matter. Take away the wicked from before the King, and
his throne shall be established in righteousness.

Miser est imperator apud quem vera reticentur, Capitol. in com.

Salus illius desparata est, cujus aures ita formatae sunt, ut aspera, quae
utilia, and nil nisi jucundum, and laesurum accipiant. Tacitus 3. Hist.

LONDON, Printed for Gifford Galton, and are to be sold at his shop at the
sign of the Kings Arms in the Poultrey. 1646.

TO HIS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY CHARLES By the grace of God, of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, KING, Defender of the Faith, etc.
The humble Petition of Ed: de Claro vado, a poor Minister of JESUS CHRIST,
(though most unworthy)
Humbly shows:
THat whereas your Majesty in the book of Prayers set forth upon the Treaty at
Uxbridge, to be read on the Fast day, then enjoined by Proclamation, * there is
this clause, (or if the guilt of Vide the book of Prayers printed for the Fast
before the Treaty at Vxbridge.
our great sins, cause this Treaty to break off in vain,) Lord, let the
truth clearly appear, who those men are, who under pretense of the public
good, pursue their own private ends: and remembering that of the Prophet, Ier.
9. 12. Who is a wise man that he may understand this, and who is Acqui
(di^^bane Iudaei) habemus legem and Prophetas non est peritura lex ex ore
nostro, habetis quidem ait Propheta, sed neque Propheta est, ullus qui
eloquatur, neque; ullus in populo qui ^^scultit legi. Trem. and Iun. not. in
locum.
he to whom the mouth of the Lord has spoken, that he may declare it, for
what the land perishes, etc. and perceiving your case to be like his, who had
many Priests and Prophets, attending at his Court, but there was none that
spoke out, nor showed him, and his people their transgressions, but were as
they are described, Ier. 8. 8. deceitful flattering persons; for the pen of
the Scribe wrought for falsehood, the wise men were ashamed, dismayed, and taken,
they had rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom was in them then?
Surely none at all, though they boasted, Lo they were wise, and the law of the
Lord was with them: so your Majesty, has had many great Bishops, and learned
Doctors, and grave Divines, but none (as yet I have heard of) have declared to
your Majesty the true cause of our miseries; for, in that book of Prayers,
they confess to God, (and with him they should deal uprightly) that they know
not why this strange and unnatural war should be, but only in a general
notion (thy Justice and our sins excepted) therein clearing your Majesty with
words of deceit, as if you had not partaked with them in their sins, and causes
of our miseries: for so it follows, Look on thy Moses, who stands in the
gappe, beseeching thee to turn Exodus 32. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
thine anger from thy people, as Moses was an Advocate between God and the
people in their sin of the molten Calfe, and no way partaker; and so in the
next Prayer, more plainly they say, Regard the sincerity of thine Anointed,
and to flatter your Majesty in your sin, and obdurate your heart, and deceive
your soul, they apply that of the Psalmist, Be thou my Judge, O Lord, for I
have walked innocently, my trust has also been in the Lord, therefore shall I
not fall: Examine me, O Lord, prove me, try out my reins and my heart; Let my
sentence come forth from thy presence, and let thine eyes look on the thing
that is equal: Remember Vide the book of Prayers, ut supra.
what he has suffered, and the heavy things thou have showed him, and in the
day when thou make inquisition for blood, forget not his desires of peace,
and the endeavors which he has used, and the prayers he has made to thee,
for it; these men have boasted of their Learning, Wisdom, and that the truth
was on their side, and that it was Gods cause they did maintain. But their
pens have wrought falsehood, Vide, the vindic. of Episcopacy, and Dr. Hammonds
preface in the survey of the Directory.
like Ahabs Prophets, 1 Kings 22. 6. 11. 22, 23, 24. 27. A lying spirit has
deceived them, whilst they cried out to your Majesty, as they to Ahab, Go up
and prosper; and have rayled against, smitten, and imprisoned the poor
Michaiahs of the land; But God has made them ashamed, they have been dismayed,
and taken, for they have rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in
them then? their worldly wisdom they vaunt of, is foolishness with God, he
takes them in their craftiness, 1 Cor. 3. 19, 20. he has declared their
thoughts to be but vain, Job 5. 13. Also, considering the heavy doom,
denounced on that watchman, who seeing the sword coming, does not blow his
Trumpet, to give warning to the people, the blood of the unwarned, God will
require at the watchmans hands, Ezekiel. 3. 18. and 33. 6. and knowing S. Paul's
woe, if I preach not the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9. 16. which, though properly it
appertain to that flock over which the holy Ghost has made me overseer, Acts
20. 28. over whom a more special care is required, yet, seeing those who have
been about your Majesty, fail of their duty, and knowing your Majesty to be
under no particular cure, but to be a public person, in whom all have
interest, 2 Samuel 19. 42, 43. and on whom, every Minister should cast an eye,
(as the supreme Governor of the Church) on whom the well-being, and ordring
thereof does depend, and therefore to whom, all ought to give Intelligence,
Cannon 1. of the Constitution made at London, An. 1603.
being obliged thereunto by the Law of God, 2 Chronicles. 20. 2. 16. and 1 Samuel 22.
8. and Levit. 19. 17. and man, by their office, Esaias 58. 1. and 1 Timothy 5. 20.
and Oath of Allegiance, besides the Oaths and Protestations they have lately
taken, together with their particular engagements in the safety of your
Majesty's person, and kingdom, wherein their own lives, families, and
fortunes are embarked. Therefore, I having Gods warrant for what I speak, and
the approbation of Gods Spirit in mine own conscience, first moving me unto the
work, and afterward confirming, November. 11. 1642. Aug. 26. 1643.
and approving of it, when I first began it, making this prayer. O Lord, let
thy good Spirit guide me into all truth, and give me a right understanding in
thy word, and grace to be ruled alone thereby, that I may do nothing, but what
is of faith, nor for fear, or favor, may run into heresy, or error, into
superstition, or Rebellion, but that (being guided by thy word, and led by thy
Spirit) whatsoever I shall do in word, or deed, it may tend to the praise and
glory of thy Name, to the good of thy Church, and to the salvation of mine own
soul, especially in this work; which, O Lord, prosper in mine hand, and
enable me well to perform it, to tell this people of their sins boldly,
without respect of persons, that so I may be a means to bring them to
repentance, that so thou may turn away thy wrath from them; which O Lord,
grant for Christ Jesus sake. Amen. And after this, God sundry ways, assisting
and strengthening me in it, by helping me strangely to diverse books, out of which
I gathered diverse weighty matters, and God graciously keeping me in health, and
safety, notwithstanding the fury, and malice of mine enemies round about me,
(who thrice imprisoned me) and the weak constitution of my body, together with
the many cares, and fears wherewith I was troubled, whilst I was penning it,
from without, besides the inward fears, troubles, and perplexities of my
soul, arising from the temptations of the world, flesh, and Devil, who all
allured me, to spare my self, and not to hazard my person, nor estate, in this
dangerous enterprise, nor to expose my wife, and children to the merciless
world, discomforting me, in my unlikelinesse to speed in the work, or to come
off with life, and that it would be accounted a ridiculous and desperate
attempt; yet Gods Spirit mightily wrought in me, and prevailed against all
these, and with an holy violence moved me to go on, and perfect the work, and
to oblige my self thereunto In Lent 1644.
by a Vow, on condition, God would dispossess mine enemies that compassed me,
by a set time, to confirm me in the same; which accordingly came to pass:
Therefore having Gods glory, your Majesty's, and subjects repentance, and
conversion, together with mine own salvation, for the ends I aimed at, (though
too long, through weakness and corruptions prevalent in me, I have delayed,
the declaring this work, and have been much hindered, through the malice and
mistake of other men) yet now, that I might no longer confer with flesh and
blood, Gal. 1. 16. the hand of God being strong on me, and his Spirit lifting
me up, Ezekiel. 3. 14. though I go in the bitterness of my spirit, I have
resolved to publish the same. Having, by the help of my God, obtained some
small gifts (though the fewest of a thousand) and observing the seasonablenesse
of the action, being as a preparative to digest the Propositions that are
brought to your Majesty, from your Parl. of both kingdoms, which, will be the
wholesome physic, to recover Furnishing with gifts, seasonablenesse of the
action, evidence of good to issue from it, and some notes sufficient of Gods
separation of that man to the action, are proofs of his calling. Bifields
vindication of the Sabbath.
our sick and much distracted kingdom, and being assured evidently, of the
great good that may issue from the sincere perusal and practice of this work;
and having convincing and undeniable notes of Gods separating me hereunto,
having a lawful ordinary calling to the Ministry (nay almost extraordinary)
being consecrated thereunto by my mother, (a godly Matron) before I was, as 1 Samuel 1. 11. Samuel was by his, and Gods Spirit when I was about 15. years of
age, strangely moving me thereunto, (whereunto I consented:) and relying only
on Gods assistance, who out of the mouths of babes and sucklings, perfects his
praise, Psalm. 8. 2. and who uses to manifest his power, in man's weakness,
his wisdom, in man's infirmity, that the excellency of the power may be of God,
and not of us, 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28. and 2 Cor. 4. 7. and seeking only herein his
glory, your Maj. and these kingdoms honor, and Reformation, (which is more
precious to me then life, and all I have, I call God to record, I lie not.) And
calling to mind what devoute Chrysostom, and that zealous Martyr of Christ
John Chrysostom. Homil. 55. ad pop^ Ant. Vide his defense of the 15. Article of
Io. Wicliffe in Mr. Fox his Acts and Monuments. Vol. 1. pagin. 418. printed
1610.
Huz says, That he that openly declares the truth, and does justice, (though
he work no miracles) he is a man of God; for who is sent of God? not he that
does work miracles, but he that speaks the truth; not he that preaches
humane Traditions, and customs, but he that speaks Gods word, and does
justly. Encouraged with all these reasons, I am willing to obey Gods command,
and to hearken to the motions Recte facit animo, quando obsequitur suo, quod
omnes facere opertet, dum id modo fiat bono. Plaut. in Amph.
of his Spirit herein, to divulge this work, being backed somewhat by the
year of my nativity, being the same, wherein Bishops, the chief cause of our
misery, were newly erected in Scotland, by the advice of Dolman the Jesuit, and
other Jesuited Doctors here in England. And remembering the history out of
Eusebius, of the subtle Philosopher, Vide, Altar. Damas. in prefatio
lectoribus, and epist. Philadelphi, page 200.
who could by no kind of learning be converted to the faith, but put by, and
withstood all the arguments of the learned Bishops, and Doctors brought against
him, yet was at last by a poor man, of small wit, and less learning, (who
started up from amongst them, and beginning to encounter Eusebius. Eccles. hist.
lib. 11. cap 3.
him in the Name of the Lord Jesus) nonplust, contrary to all men's expectation,
so that he could not choose, but acknowledge the power of God in his words, and
give place to the truth. And I trust, the same may this effect with your Maj.
and people, by the same power of the holy Ghost, though performed by me (the
unlearnedst of Christ's Ministers) for Gods hand is not shortened, nor power
abated, in the turning of men's hearts now adays, as well as he did then; so
true is that of our Homily, where the Homily on Whit-Sunday, part. 1.
holy Ghost does instruct, and teach, there is no delay at all in learning; for
this is the difference, (says a learned Author) Inter Dei, and hominu^
jud^cia, ho^. inter si^ etc. Camer. in 1. epist. Thossal. cap. 4. verse. 4.
Bezae testam. Anno^.
between Gods judgments, and man's, that men in choosing have regard unto the
qualities of the things proposed, but God finds in himself, the reason of his
counsel; so that whereas we are unfit, so much as to think of Gods matters,
those whom he first chooses to these vocations, he does not find them, but
makes them fitting: even as Christ himself says, Mat. 11. 25, 26. his Father
had hid these things from the wise and prudent, and had revealed them to babes,
for so it seemed good in his sight. Also having examples, both divine, and
humane, to confirm me herein, as how Plato reproved Dionysius King Flutarchs
lives.
of Sicily, and Diogenes boldly taxed Philip (King of Macedonia) for rapacity,
telling him, It was for dogs to Lychosten. Apoth de libere dictis.
bite their enemies to hurt them; he with his free speech did bite his
friends, to do them good. And so indeed in David's account, the friendly
smiting of the righteous, Psalm. 141. 5. he accounted a precious balm to his
head, Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness, let him reprove me,
it shall be an excellent oil, which shall not break my head. And so the wise
King: Reprove a wise man, and he will love thee, give instruction to a wise
man, and he will be wiser, Prove. 9. 8, 9. and he that rebukes a man afterward,
shall find more favor, Prove. 28. 23. then he that flattereth with his tongue:
As Fulco found by experience, when with courage, and boldness, he told Richard
the second your predecessor, of his three vicious daughters, which he
admonisht the King to take good heed of, and marry away, viz. mischievous
pride, greedy covetousness, and filthy luxury, which three, unless they were
speedily provided for, would utterly undo, both himself, Fox Acts and Mon.
Vol. 1. page 225. printed 1610. Fox ut supra, page 212. Fox ut supra, page 213.
and his kingdom. I find Henry the second King of England, was often reproved,
as by an old man at the Castle of Cardiffe in Wales, for profaning the
Sabbath. Secondly, by an Irishman, who gave him secret signs. Thirdly, by a
knight, called Philip de Easterbie, and that with threatening. It Is a
commendation of Ethelwolfe (sometime King in this land) that he followed for
his souls health, the good admonitions, and counsels of Swithinus his
Schoolmaster: Fox Acts and Mon Vol. 1. page 123.
but it is a perpetual blot lies on Sigibert king of the west Saxons, who
murdered one, who faithfully and lovingly counseled him; who afterward, for
his misgovernment, was deposed, by his own people, who wandering in the Fox ut
supra. page 99.
woods, was slain by the Swineheard of the aforesaid Counselor. I need not
relate how Henry the third your predecessor was reproved by a Dominican Friar,
for his evil Councillors he loved, and maintained about him. Fox Acts and
Mon. Vol. 1. page 253. printed 1610
Nor how Gregory wrote to the French king, moving him to command a Synod to be
congregated, to cause all the carnal vices which reigned amongst his Priests,
and all the wickedness and symony of his Bishops (which is most hard to be
condemned and reproved) utterly to be banished out of his kingdom, and that he
would not suffer them to possess any more substance under his dominion, then
Gods (...) u^ s^pra, ^^^ 4^2 (...)* ^sse ^alitiam, and ad (...) peccat^^^ nec
tantum ^orr^ctionem rep^d^^, sed de (...)equo qu^s^^ hos^^e^^ vind^ctam s^^i^
^^zae no^. (...)* 19. 20.
commands did allow. There are two unparaleld examples in holy writ, the one of
David (a king after Gods own heart) whose conversion, and salvation, was
wrought instrumentally, by a bold Reprover; And Nathan said unto David, Thou
art the man, 2 Samuel 12. 7. 13, 14. and David said, I have sinned; and Nathan
said, the Lord also has put away thy sin, thou shall not dye. The other is of
king Herod, the height of whose sin, (which brought temporal and eternal
misery along with it) consisted in despising the counsel of S. John the
Baptist, and shutting up the Reprover in prison; for Herod being reproved by
John, for his brother Philips wife, added this above all, that he shut up John
in prison; S. Luke hereby noting, his desperate estate, and that he was come
up, to the height of wickedness, when he was angry with the physic, that
should cure his disease, and takes bloody revenge on the Physician that
prescribes it. Lastly, considering Gods precept, given to all Christians, Thou
shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, when thou see him sin, thou shall in
any wise rebuke him, and not suffer sin for him, Levit. 19. 17. by thy silence,
or flattery, in not saving a soul from death: by converting a sinner from the
error of his way, as S. James, James 5. 19, 20. exhorts, and encourages unto,
by promising thereby, he shall hide a multitude of sins; for, hereby love is
nourished amongst the wise, Prove. 9. 8. and knowledge increased amongst the
prudent, Prove. 19. 25. and a good blessing from God, is procured upon both,
Prove. 24. 25. when as he that neglects this duty, becomes guilty of his
brothers blood, by being partaker of his sin, as Gregory confesses, He that
Gregor. in Regist. in lib. 7. cap. 9.
may correct a fault, and does neglect the same, without doubt, he makes
himself partaker of the offense; and S. Paul commands us, not to be partakers
with wicked men, nor to have fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, but rather to reprove them, and not to connive at them, nor
dissemble with them: Yea, Christ commands, If Multi^ modis, petest quis dici
communicare cum operibus tanelrarum, vel cooperando, vel eadem faciendo, vel
consulendo, approbando, permittendo, co^^^vendo, and non prohib^ndo, cum
possis, and debeas, vel tacendo, dissimulando. Zanch. expos. in Ephesians. 5. 7. 11.
thy brother sin against thee, rebuke him, and if he repent, forgive him, if
he hear thee, thou have gained thy brother, Luke 17. 3. and Mat. 18. 15. Now
if I should say, that the sins herein mentioned, have not been an offense unto
me, I should lie, and have no truth in me; therefore, that I may deliver mine
own soul (that I dye not in mine iniquity, by silence, or consent) and your
Majesty, and peoples, by showing the errors, and failings wherein you have
been deceived, that so you may repent thereof; and that I may cry aloud, and
spare none, for fear, or favor, profit or pleasure, (there being a necessity
laid on me, by the Spirit of God that gave me no rest, day nor night, till I
had accomplished it) but may be a weak means (which God can make mighty) to
help reduce the troubles, and distractions of these times, and may reunite the
heart of your Majesty to your godly and faithful subjects, and their hearts to
yours, and may procure Gods mercy, and favor on both. I have with fear, and
faith, gone on in this work.

Therefore, though I have no Court holy water to sprinkle on you, nor sleeked
phrases of Rhetoric, (the garb of our times) to enchant your ear, and steal
on your affection, (for I know such fine linen and soft clothing are in Kings
houses) Yet, let the reverence you owe to your dread Sovereign, (who is Lord
of Lords, and King of Kings, Revel. 17. 14. and 19. 16. and 1 Timothy 6. 15. a
great God, a mighty, and a terrible, who regards not Deuteronomy. 10. 17. Romans 2.
11. persons, nor takes reward, who measures the waters in the hollow of his
hand, and meets out the heavens with a span, and comprehends the dust of the
earth in a measure, Esaias 40 12. 17. and weighs the mountains in scales, and
the hills in a balance, before whom all Nations are nothing, and they are
counted to him, less then nothing, and vanity, in whose hand is thy breath,
and whose are all thy ways, Dan. 5. 23. as Daniel told Belsh^zzar) and the
reverence, and obedience he requires to his sacred word, and to the meanest of
his Ministers that brings it, Luke 10. 16. and Mat. 10. 40. prevail with you,
and command both, (although I rub your tender ears with reproof, and with
Eliah, and John Baptist, my message be harsh and unpleasant;) for Christ has
said, He that despises you, despises me, and he that despises me, despises
him that sent me. But I doubt not, but your Majesty will confess, that every
word of God is good, and that all his judgments are righteou^, and that you
will lay apart all filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness, and with
meekness will receive the ingrafted word, Psalm. 119. 62. 57. 160. and James 1.
21. which is here delivered, and is able to save you: and that you will no
longer hearken (as Joash did) to your profane Courtiers, and Blanditiis ita
Ioaschu^ demul^^ent prin^ipes Jehuda, ut animum illius divini cultus alioqum
studiosum frangerent, and regiae autoritatis speci^ (omnia) prol^bid^ne
administrarent, etiam in causi^ Religions. Trem. and I^n. in 2 Chronicles. 24.
^arthly minded teachers, (which are enemies to the Cross of Christ) Phil. 3.
19. for these like Joash his Princes, and Priests, under pretense of
maintaining, as Junius speaks, his regal power, administered all things,
according to their own lusts, (Religion it self not excepted) and so changed
his religious mind, (otherwise studious of piety and peace) by their
flatteries and lies; and surely the same have they dealt with you. Therefore
let me entreat your Majesty (as the Prophet Jeremy did his Sovereign) Ier. 38.
20. to obey the voice of the Lord, which I declare unto you, and it shall be
well with you, and your soul shall live; Search with the noble Bereans the
Scriptures, whether the things I speak be true, or no, Acts 17. 11. and then,
receive the word with all readiness of mind, (as they did) but not as the
word of me, a vild sinful creature, who am full of error, and sin, (even in
this work, which in charity I beseech you for Christ's sake to forgive and
pass over) but as it is in truth the word of God, which effectually works in
all those that believe, 1 These 2. 13. bury therefore my failings in silence,
(which are committed out of pure ignorance) and what shall be taught out of the
word, either to inform your judgment, or reform your ways, let it with the
kingly Prophet be hid in your heart, that you may not again sin against God,
Psalm. 119. 11. and with that good King Josiah, let your heart be tender, and
humble your self before the Lord, when you hear, what is here spoken against
this place, and against the Inhabitants thereof, for great is the wrath of the
Lord that is kindled against us, 2 Kings 2^* 11, 12, 13, 14. because we and our
fathers have not hearkened to the word of God, to do according to al^ that is
written concerning us. O let your Majesty, with al^ your people (as Josiah
commanded) enter into Covenant, to walk after the Lord, and to keep his
commands, an^ statutes, and testimonies, with all your heart, and all you^
soul, 2 Chronicles. 34. 30, 31. and let all that take it, or have taken it, be
caused to stand to it, and perform it, and with Josiah, let your most sacred
Majesty take away all the abominations, both of Church, and State, out of City
an^ Country, that shall be known or found out, and let all tha^ profess
themselves Christians, be enforced to serve the Lord their God in unity, and
uniformity, according to the rule of Gods word, and examples of the best
reforme^ Churches; in thus doing, God will certainly power down a blessing on
your head, your childrens heads, and on their posterities, and from thence it
shall descend on your Nobles* and Clergy, on your Judges, Gentry and
Comminalty, an^ generally on the whole kingdom; for when, both you, and your
people, shall humble your selves, and pray, and seek^ Gods face, and turn from
your wicked ways, then will God hear from heaven, will forgive your sins,
and heal^ this land; then shall your kingdoms flourish, your glory fa^ exceed
your predecessors, your subjects shall abound with happiness, Mercy and truth
shall meet together, righteousness and peace shall kiss each other. In thus
doing, God will honor your Crown here with his grace, and will grace your
honor, with a Crown of glory hereafter, which is the daily prayer of your most
humble and faithful subject and petitioner,

Ed: de Claro vado.

THE PREFACE.
It Is a truth confessed by all the faithful, approved by the holy Ghost, and pend
by a chief Scribe thereof, that all Scripture is given by inspiration from
God, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, for, as S. Peter says, 2
Pet. 1. 20, 21. All Christians, before they go to practice the life of faith,
they must know this first, that no prophecy of the Scripture is of any private
interpretation, [(...). Non enim humana voluntate, vel loquentis, vel
audientis: Corran. Sicut prophetae, non sua, sed Dei verba scribebant, ita
lector, non sua interpretatione uti debet, ne a fide exorbitet. Gloss.]
(whether you refer it to the speaker, or auditors) for the prophecy came not
in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke, as they were moved
by the holy Ghost. He that was the Author, was also the Interpreter of them,
and that which was spoken to one man, was applicable to more, that which was
denounced against some persons or Nations, appertained to others also, and that
which was promised in general, belongs to every faithful man to make his
own: For instance, Abraham's faith was accounted to him for righteousness,
Genesis 15. 6. Now S. Paul is interpreter, that it was not written for his sake
alone, that it was imputed unto him: but for us also, to whom it shall be
imputed, Romans 4. 23, 24. If we believe on him that raised up our Lord Jesus
from the dead, for the rule of Abraham's justification, and of all the
faithful, is one, [Una est, and perpetua, tum in Abrahamo, tum in omnibus
fidelibus justificatiouis regula, viz. In Deum, qui (in Christo mediatore
nostro, expiatis nostris peccatis) cundem a mortuis excitavit, ut and nos
justificati in eo servemur. Bezae not. in locum.] and perpetual; to wit, in
God, who (in Christ our mediator, baving by his blood expiated our sins) has
raised him from the dead, that so we may be both justified, and saved by him.
The promise particularized to Joshua, Josh. 1. 5. As I was with Moses, so I
will be with thee, I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee, is in general
applied to all the faithful, whose conversation is without covetousness, as
the Apostle expounds it, as a motive to contentation, Heb. 13. 5. for he has
said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee; Therefore let your
conversation be without covetousness, and be content with such things as you
have. For, as learned Iunius observes, that promise given to the Captain,
appertained to all his soldiers, even to the whole household of God, which were
of the same faith with him, concerning the promised land, and therefore it
belongs to the whole Church of God; Now, in these days, as well as it did to
the Jews, over whom he was Captain; [Ac proinde, tam ad Ecclesiam temporis
hujus pertinere, quam ad illam priscam, cui Joshua praefectus erat. Iun. lib.
3. Paralle cap. 13.] for, since God is Jehovah, I am immutable, and subsistent
of himself whatsoever gracious promise he has made to any man, that walks
worthy of his voca^^^ wherein he is called, the same also appertains to all
believers, who walk worthy of theirs, in an equal proportion, according to
that of the Apostle, Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for
our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope, Romans 15. 4. The Apostle does comprehend all sorts and conditions of men;
[Quae ante scripta sunt, ad doctri^am nostram scripta sunt, ergo omnis loci and
ordinis homines simul comprehendit, and proinde omnes scripturis subjicit.
Gualt. Homil. 86. in Epist. ad Roman:] and as his promises, are motives, and
helps to patience, and comfort, so also are his judgments, and threatenings,
recorded in the same Scriptures, either general, or particular lectures and
examples, for us to avoid sin. Thus S. Peter uses the judgments befalling on
the Angels, on Sodom and Gomorrah, and on Balaam, 2 Pet. 2, 4 5, 15, 16. to
deter the Jews, (and in them us) from committing the same sins, and to
admonish them, to beware, since they knew these things before, lest they also
being lead away with the error of the wicked, fall from their own
steadfastness, 2 Pet. 3. 17. and S. Iudes Epistle contains in it, the same
conclusion, drawn from the same premises, Jude 5, 6, 7, 11. Nay our Savior
Christ applies the destruction, Luke 13. 2. 4. falling on the Galileans, (whose
blood Pilate mingled with their sacrifices) and those, on whom the tower in
Siloe fell, unto the Jews, and Christians, that unless they repent, they shall
all likewise perish; [Justis aliorum paenis, non oportet nos insultare, sed iis
potius ad resipiscentiam erudiri. Bezae not. in loc.] and so S. Paul proves the
Jews punishments, to be our examples, 1 Cor. 10. 6 7, 8, 9, 10. 11. Now these
things were our examples, to the intent we should not lust after evil things,
as they also lusted, nor be Idolaters, as were some of them, nor commit
fornication, as some of them committed, and fell in one day 23000. neither let
us tempt Christ, as some of them tempted, and were destroyed of Serpents:
Neither murmr ye, as some of them also murmured, and were destroyed of the
destroyer: Now all these things hapened unto them for examples, and they are
written for our admonition upon whom the ends of the world are come, and more
properly for us, then for them; [Quia ergo in ultima saeculi aetate sumus tot
exemplis priorum corrigi debemus. Gorran in locum.] What judgments therefore I
shall show out of the Scripture, or threatenings denounced on sinners, whether
general, or particular, the same if parallel to us, may be our examples, and
lessons; and what promises are made to a whole Nation, or private man, if it
may agree with us, we will make it our Counterpane: that so knowing the
threatenings on such sins we are guilty of, we may both tremble at them, and
repent, Esaias 66. 2. and seeing his judgments falling on such sinners, as we
are, we may confess unfainedly our faults, and amend our lives, by forsaking
them, Prove. 28. 13. and so may obtain mercy, for, blessed is the man that thus
[Id est, serio pavore ad confessionem pecati sui, and ad fugam and
recipiscentiam illius, semper adducitur. Iun. and Trem. not. in locum.] fears
always. Lastly, that knowing his promise, made to the penitent, we may
believe them, and by believing, enjoy them, and whilst we behold others
judgments, we may acknowledge God righteous in what he has inflicted on us;
and whilst we believe his threatenings, we may admire at the riches of his
goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, which leads us to repentance,
and whilst we view his promises, we may confess our own ingratitude, and
unbelief and so humble our selves in dust and ashes, returning unto the Lord,
with fasting weeping, and mourning, Joel 2. 12. and for the future, resolve to
cleave to him, with full purpose of heart to serve him, Acts 11. 23. [Hortatur
eos ad constantiam, sine qua, nil effici potest in omni negotio, ne dum in
causa pietatis. Aretius Com. in loc.] That so God may see our works, and repent
of the evil which he has threatened to bring on us, Jonah 3. 10. as the
Ninevites did: Israel we know was Gods son, even his first borne, Ezod. 4. 22.
they were an holy people unto God the Lord, their God, God had chosen them to
be a special people to himself, above all people that were on the face of the
earth, Deuteronomy. 7. 6. yet to these branches of the good Olive, Romans 11. 17. The
axe of Gods justice walaid, even to the root of the tree, a^ S. John Baptist
testifies, so that every tree which brought not forth good fruit, was to be
hewed down, and cast into the fire, Luke 3. 9. God had a controversy against
his own vineyard, the Inhabitants of Israel, Hos. 4. 1, 2 because there was no
truth, no mercy, nor knowledge of God in the Land: But by swearing, and lying,
and killing, and stealing, and committing of adultery, they brake forth, and
blood touched blood; Therefore God threatens, the Land shall mourn, and every
one that dwells therein shall languish, for many years God watered his Vineyard
with his word, Esaias 55. 10. 11. he placed it in a fruitful hill, and fenced
it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and planted it with the choysest vine,
and built a tower in the midst of it, Esaias 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and made a
vinepresse therein, and he looked that it should bring forth the pleasant
grapes of holiness, truth, and righteousness, and it brought forth the wild
Grapes of Idolatry, covetousness, profaneness, laciviousnesse, and Injustice
etc. Therefore God will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up,
and break down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down, and I will lay
it wast, and it shall not be pruned, nor dug. For the vineyard of the Lord
of hosts, is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah, his pleasant plant, and
he looked for judgment, but behold oppression, [Singlaris esse accommodatio
judiciorum Dei in populum i^gratum and ^ebellantem Deo.] for righteousness but
behold a cry. Judge ye therefore, between me, and my vineyard, [Quasi dicar,
appello conscientiam vestram vos ipsi cognoscite, and bona fide statuite.
Iunius and Trem. in loc.] for, because hereof as the fire devoureth the
stubble, and the flame consumes the chafe, so their root shall be
rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as the dust, because they have cast
away the law of the Lord of hosts, and despised the word of the holy One of
Israel, Therefore is the anger of the Lord, Esaias 5. 25, 26. [Paenas denunciat
propheta qua ostendit contumaces istos (qui sibi tam graves visi sunt, ad
exuendam pietatem and humanitatem) fore aptissimos incendio, atque levissimos,
ut nullo negotio judiciis Dei consumantur. Iun. and Trem. in locum*] kindled
against his people, and he has stretched forth his hand against them, and has
smitten them, and the hills did tremble, and their carcasses were torn in the
midst of the streets, for all this, his anger is not turned away, ^ut his hand
is stretched out still for they served still their Idols, and above in their
superstition, walking in the statutes of the Nations, which the Lord had
expelled before them, 2 Kings 17. 7, 8. yea, the Magistrates, Ministers, and
Elders committed secret closet sins, and heinous abominations, Ezekiel. 8. 5, 6,
7, 8. ad finem] and open profaneness, and wickedness, Ezekiel. 11. 1, 2. 3. and
2 Kings 17. 10. and Jer. 5. 30, 31. imitating the Heathen, whom the Lord
carried away before them, and wrought most wicked things, to provoke the Lord
to anger. They served Idols contrary to his word, and though he testified
against them by his Prophets, exhorting them to return, yet they would not
hear, but hardened their necks like their fathers, and believed not in the
Lord their God, but rejected his statutes, and his Covenant, that he made with
their fathers, and his testimonies which he testified against them, and so
followed vanity, and became vain, and made marriages with the wicked, going
after the Heathen that were round about them, concerning whom the Lord had
charged them, that they should not do like them: They left all the
commandments of God, and sold themselves to do evil in the sight of the
Lord, to provoke him to anger, Therefore the Lord was angry with Israel and
removed them out, 2 Kings 17. 13. 14, 15, 16. to the 21. [Aetiologia est
judiciorum Dei, qua explicatur quibus sceleribus provocatus Deus Israelis
regnum pessum dederit.] of his sight: Also Judah kept not the commands of the
Lord their God, but walked in the statutes of Israel which they made, and then
the Lord rejected all the seed of Israel, and afflicted them, and delivered
them into the hands of spoylers, until he had cast them out of his sight,
[Altera causa Judicii in Israelitas contagium regni, Jehudae in eandem labem
prolabentis vicini regni exemplo. Iun and Trem. notae in Kings 17.] If then God
spared not the Jews his eldest son, will he spare us Gentiles his youngest?
Luke 15. 12. Sic interpretatur Gorranus sic etiam Gloss. homo quidam, habuit
duos filios: sc. Deus pater populum Iudaicum, and Gent^lem.] if we become
guilty of the same sins? If the natural branches were not spared, but broken
off for their disobedience, and unbelief, much less will God spare us, for if
we continue not in his goodness, we shall be cut off, Romans 11. 20, 21, 22.
their land a long time was watered with the dew of his grace, and with the
rain of his word, but they killed the Prophets, and stoned them that were sent
unto them, Mat. 23. 37. the land was full of adulterers, and because of
swearing, the land mourned, Ier. 23. 10, 11, 12. to the 17. folly was in the
Prophets, who prophesied in Baal, and caused my people Israel to err they
strengthened the hands of the wicked, that none returned from his wickedness,
and from the Prophets of Jerusalem profaneness was gone into all the land,
for they prophesied falsely, and the Priests bare rule by their means, and the
people loved to have it so. Ier. 5. 30. Therefore says God, what will ye do
in the end thereof? when I shall forget you, and forsake you, Ier. 23. 39. And
has not our land drank in the rain as S Paul calls it Heb. 6 7, 8 of his word,
and grace? and lo it has brought forth naught but briars, and thorns, and
it is to be feared, it is rejected, and nigh unto cursing. Have we not been guilty
of the same sins of Israel?

First, contemning his word, and persecuting his Ministers. Secondly,
committing Idolatry and superstition, walking in the ways of the Papists which
the Lord expelled. Thirdly, commiting secret abominations in the sight of God,
yea, and openly practicing contrary to his word, joining in marriage and
friendship with the Papists whom God commanded us to forsake. Fourthly does not
our land mourn for oaths? and long to enjoy her Sabbaths, from which we have
hid our eyes? Have not the Prophets prophesied in Baal, and so caused the
people to err, strengthening the hands of the wicked, that none return from
their wickedness? and is not from them profaneness gone forth into all the
land? for too many of them have prophesied falsely, and the Prelates and Bishops
bear rule by their means, and the people love to have it so, and what can be
the end thereof, but destruction? Our equal sins, have pulled down an equal
judgment, and if by speedy repentance we prevent it not, there will be no
remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. as was the case of the Jews again, and again, Numb.
24. 21, 22. 23. and Ezekiel. 24 13, 14. and Ezekiel. 14. 14. 20. Heb. 3. 18. John 15.
22. Luke 13. 34. and Luke 19. 42. Knowing therefore, that righteous lips are
the delight of Kings: and that they love him that speaks right, as the holy
Ghost witnesses, Prove. 16. 13. To express my duty to God, my loyalty to your
most excellent Majesty, and love to my native [Non solum nobis nati sumus, sed
partim patria, partim parents, etc.] Country, and that I may really discharge
that godly Covenant, and solemn Protestation, which by lawful Authority I was
obliged to take, to maintain the Protestant Religion, your Majesty's person,
honor, and estate, the privileges of the Parliament, and the liberties of the
Subjects, (All which, by a sincere perusal, and practice of this Declaration
may be effected, and without which, ruin and destruction must inevitably fall
on your sacred person, progeny, and kingdom, as God in his express word has
therein declared) I have made this Declaration, most humbly, plainly, and
faithfully, which I refer unto your most serious consideration, praying unto
him who alone teaches to profit, Esaias 48. 17. and opens the heart to
understand, Luke 24. 45. who is only the Interpreter of his own word, 1 Cor.
2. 12, 13, 14, 15. 16. that he would send his holy Spirit into your heart, and
sanctify it, and give you spiritual wisdom, and understanding, Ephesians. 1. 17.
and Colos. 1. 9. to discern his truth from falsehood, 1 John 2. 27. and would
incline your heart sincerely to love the truth known, Zach. 8. 19. to embrace
it, defend it, Mark 8. 35. and practice it, 2 Ep. Ioh. 4. to the glory of his
most great and fearful Name, the comfort and welfare of this Church, and this
kingdom in particular, the increase of your Majesty's honor, and happiness,
to the joy and peace of all your godly subjects, to the ruin and destruction
of Antichrist, and all wilful and malicious opposers of his truth, which the
Lord in mercy grant, for the King of glories sake; to whom be glory, and
Majesty, dominion, and power, now and for ever. Amen.

Some Typographicall fault escaped, which may be thus amended:
PAge 2 line 20 for as, read a, and l. 26 1. excludamus, p. 4 l. 12 r.
interpretationem, and l. 29 1. Imperial, p. 5 l. 27 r. apertum, and l. 40 r.
quum, p. 6 l. 3 r. deterreretur, and l. 4 r. assidue, and l 23 r. Ecclesiae,
and summam, for summa, p. 9 l. 29 r. bear, p. 11 l. 24 r. ovis, p. 12 r.
poenae, for paena, and l. 18 r. desent, p. 13 l. 15 r. Mrs. p. 14 l. 14 r. on,
p. 17 l. 19 r. being, and l. 27 r. fit, and l. 28 r. to, and l. 31 r. do to,
and l. 35 r. praenuntians, p. 19 r. exiti^, p. 20 l. 15 r. loquutiones, and l.
34 dele of, p. 23 l. 20 r. vivi, p. 24 l. 3 dele and, p. 29 l. 19 r. metuunt,
and l. 22 r. molesta, and l. 24 r. scortationem, p. 30 l. 29. r. operum, p. 33
l. 13 Ahashuerus, and l. 19 r. vermibus, and l. 29 r. as, p. 41 l. 15 r.
fallacia, p. 42 l. 13 r. coleretur, and prae, and l. 34 r. cavent, p. 48 r.
abjured, p. 49 l. 2 r. this, p. 50 l. 9 r. horror, p. 62 l. 7 r. lenatives, p
64 l. 39 r. formae, and l. 40 r. women, p. 65 r. necessitudines, p. 67 l. 2 r.
fight, and l 4 r. infideles, p. 70 l. 39 muneribus, p. 71 l. 5 r. Vortigerne,
and l. 26 r. that after, p. 72 l. 13 r. quis, and l. 15 r. and the son, and
l. 28 r. dealt, p. 75 l. 30 r. Psalm. 78. and slew us, p. 78 l. 27 r. and
Idolatry, p. 80 l. 32 r. peierant, p. 81 l. 17 r. only, p. 82 l. 40 r. this, p.
83 l. 12 r. liberes, and l. 11 r. teipsum, and l. 13 r. haberes, and, per deos,
and l. 18 r. mulct, p. 84 l. 36 r. Cleomenes, p. 92 l. 37 r. for, p. 94 l. 10
r. Shauli, and l. 11 Shaulem, p. 96 l. 24 r. saw, and sheards, l. 34 r. which,
p. 98 l. 17 r. palam, p. 99 l. 14 r. singularem, and l. 19 r. of, for to, p.
100 l. 32 r. eyes, p. 101 l. 27 r. declared himself, p. 103 l. 16 r. that, and
l. 24 coetibus, p. 109 l. 8 r. Soter, p. 116. l. 6 r. the beast which rest,
for, the beast which do toward sanctification, p. 111 l. 2 r. hands, and l.
11. r spoke, p. 113 l. 10 r. reliqui, and l. 39. r. two p. 114 l. 20 r. choreae
sunt vitandae, l. 21 turpes, and indignae, and l. 22 r. fructus, and l. 30 r.
Milverd, p 115. l. 28 r. of, and l. 29 r. aliud, p. 116 l. 19 r. et, and l. 20
r. Iibidini, and l. 22 r. conscientiae, p. 117 l. 8 r. it, and l. 32 r. them,
p. 1. 8 l. 8 Observe,

This should have come as the second Cause, but was by oversight misplaced: and
l. 14 r. excess, and l. 36 r. Teraphim, and l. 37 r. pietatem, p. 121 l. 5 and
contumaces.

June 18. 1646.
Imprimatur,

JOSEPH CARYL.

A DECLARATION to the Kings most Excellent, Majesty, pointing out the chief
Sins and Causes of this Civil War, and of all those Judgments under which now
the three Kingdoms groan; plainly proved, and declared by Gods Word, and our
Practice: Also showing the Means, or Remedies (approved of God) for the
establishing of a sound Peace, and for the removing of the said Judgments out
of the aforesaid Kingdoms.
I. Cause Major. To despise the Word of God, brings destruction on Magistrates,
Ministers and people. Minor. But we of this Kingdom, both Magistrates,
Ministers, and People, have despised Gods Word. Conclus. Therefore destruction
is coming on us, both on the Magistrates, Ministers and People.


THE WORD, is here to be taken largely, and generally; for all, and every part
of the Canonical Scripture, and for sound Doctrine, Reproof, Instruction, or
Consolation whatsoever is drawn from thence, which in Scripture is called the
Word of life, Phil. 2. 16. and Jam. 1. 22. the grace and virtue whereof
converts the soul, rejoices the heart, gives light to the blind, and wisdom
to the simple, Psalm. 19. 7, 8. works faith, pulls down strong holds, and
casts down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the
knowledge of God, and brings into captivity, every thought to the obedience of
Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 4. It Is lively, and mighty in operation, sharper then any two
eged sword, Heb. 4. 12. it quickneth them that hear it aright, John 5. 25. and
raises their souls that are dead in sin, it comforts the Saints in all
troubles, strengthens them in all temptations, Psalm. 129. 50, 92. it is the
sword of the Spirit, whereby they conquer, Ephesians. 6. 17. it sanctifies and
cleanses the heart, Psalm. 119. 9. and John 15. 3. and chap. 17. 17. being
believed, and observed, it makes us free, John 8. 31. In sum, it is against
all evils, a Catholic Antidote, happening to us in our spiritual warfare or
pilgrimage; for it leads us walking, watches with us sleeping, and talks
with us waking, Prove. 6. 22. It Is the conduit whereby all the mercies of God,
and sweetness of Christ are derived and conveyed: for its able to furnish us
perfectly unto every good work, 2 Timothy 3. 17. and therefore it is set out to us
by many excellent names and periphrases; as the Gospel of God, 2 Cor. 11. 7.
and of Jesus Christ, the doctrine of the Lord, and of our Savior, Tit. 2. 10.
the preaching of the Lord, Romans 16. 25. the Law and the Testimony, Isa. 8. 20.
Gods statutes, judgments, ordinances, the wholesome doctrine of salvation, the
good seed: The Word, of the Kingdom of truth, of life, of peace, of
reconciliation, of faith, the doctrine of the Spirit, the eternal Gospel; the
Gospel of the glory of Christ, the glad tidings of salvation, the commandment,
the Scriptures, the least Iota whereof shall in no wife fail, till all be
accomplished, Mat. 5. 18. and 1 Pet. 1. 25.

Secondly, to despise or contemn, is an act of the will, which the Philosopher
calls aversation, [Keckermans Ethics in precognitis] the Father as not willing
[August, voluntatem sic esse considerandum docet ut noluntatem quoque
includamus.] we refusing or rejecting, the object whereof is a real evil, or
apparent, which though it be good and honest in its own nature, yet seems to be
evil to a corrupt man, because its either unprofitable or unpleasant. Now the
will has a lubency or joyfulnesse adjoined to its actions sometimes, which is
termed the highest degree of willing; [Non excludadimus gradus voluntatis, seu
lubentiam illam adjunctam voluntati. Kecker. Ethics in precognitis.] And so
there may be a partial, or plenary despising, according as the object is
received into the understanding, as very evil, or less evil; indeed the Word
of God of it self, is very good, and greatly to be desired, Psalm. 19. 10. and
Romans 7. 12. but because, to carnal minds it seems to be both unpleasant and
unprofitable; therefore is it hated and contemned; yea, bebecause it thwarts
and condemns their carnal pleasures and desires, requiring the contrary to
them, therefore its rejected and despssed: For, then, says Aquinas, a man's
sins, out of contempt, when his will refuses to be subject to the rule of the
law, and from thence proceeds to do contrary to the law, [Aquin. 22 d^ q. 86.
Art. 9. 3. m. tunc enim transgreditur excontemptu quis, cum voluntas ejus
re^uit subjici ordinationi legis, and ex hoc procedit, ad faciendum contra
legem;] So that despising properly, is an internal act of the will corrupted
and misinformed, proceeding from a vehement love it has to the pleasures and
profits of this life, (and for want of the true love and fear of God,) which
causes it to Ioath and despise all, or some part of Gods Word, and the sincere
preaching thereof, refusing to believe or be ruled thereby; or at least
hypocritically obeying the same; nay, sometimes it not only loathes and hinders
the knowledge and sincere preaching thereof, but also proudly opposes and
gain-saith the truth; yea, persecutes, kills and destroys the preachers and
professors thereof.

First, then to undervalue the Gospel, and lowly to esteem of that inestimable
benefit, (the powerful preaching of Gods Word) by loving, honoring, or
respecting our selves, honors, pleasures, profits, sins, or any thing else,
whereby our obedience is slackned, his Word disobeyed, and the preaching
thereof vilified, is a despising of Gods Word, a great sin. This was old Elies
fault, in that he cockered his sons, honoring them above God; and though he
knew his sons made themselves vile; yet he restrained them not, 1 Samuel 3. 13.
Therefore is he said to despise God, 1 Samuel 2. 30. This was the Gadarens folly,
Luke 8. 37. who esteemed their swine above the doctrine of Christ: And Jehues
hypocrisy, who would rather part with his God then his crown, with his
religion, then with his new got honor, 3 King. 10. 29. 31. Demas makes
shipwreck of faith and a good conscience, to embrace the present world, 2 Timothy
4. 10. [Acquievit in hoc seculo, amore inductus illius;] Those in the Gospel,
that made excuses, preferred their farm, oxen, wife, before Christ's invitation
to the marriage supper: Luke 14. 24. 21. [Adeo insanit maximaetiam eorum pars,
quibus 'Deus seipsum patefecit, ut quae adeo nacti sunt, adjumenta, in
impedimenta sponte convertant, Bezae in locum not.] which greatly angered the
Lord: The Israelites that would not believe Gods Word, nor obey Moses, but
loathed the Manna, and desired to return into Egypt for love to the fleshpots,
onions, garlic, grieved God hereby, erred in their hearts, knew not Gods
ways, Heb. 3, 10. Herod preferred his lust before Saint John's Sermon, and
would rather part with the Baptists head, then violate his rash oath, under
pretense of displeasing his guests, or lessening his honor, Mat. 14. 9. The
Priests for covetousness, despised Gods name, polluted his ordinances,
accounted his meat contemptible; it was a weariness to them, they snuffed at
it, and brought that which was torn, the lame and the sick, against whom God
denounces a curse, Mal. 1. 6, 7. 12. 13, 14. such fools despise wisdom and
instruction, Prove. 1. 7. By the punishment the haynousnesse of the sin
appears; for those that despise the Word of the Lord, and break his
commandments, that soul shall be utterly cut off, Numb. 15. 31. his iniquity
shall be upon him. It was the height of David's sin to cloak his adultery, to
kill Uriah, which Nathan aggravates; wherefore have thou despised the
commandment of the Lord, 2 Samuel 12. 9. Demetrius, for gain, cries up Diana,
rejects the Gospel, and raises an uproar against Saint Paul, Acts 19. 24, 25,
26, 27, 28.

Secondly, To neglect to labor after the purity and power of the word, by
being lukewarm in the service of God, or hypocritically believing, or obeying
it; as first, in not loving and longing to have it sincerely, and constantly
preached and read. Secondly, not to tremble at the threatenings and judgments
denounced in the word, against the transgressors thereof. Or thirdly, in not
laboring after the power of godliness, and to serve God in spirit, and truth:
But to content our selves with a partial or outward obedience thereunto,
serving him only with an outward worship, this also is a secret loathing, or
despising of his word.

Thus Saul in not fully performing the word of God in destroying utterly
Amelech, (thinking to satisfy God) with outward sacrifices only, is said to
turn back from following Gods commands, 1 Samuel 15. 11, ad versum, 22, 23. and
is censured for Rebellion and rejecting the word of the Lord.

And St. Paul reputes meanly, or lowly to account of sound preaching,
despising, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 20. [Prophetias ne pro nihilo habete idest, verbi Dei
interpretatione: sic Bezae nota in locum] and to be lukewarm and slack in the
law, is despising Hab. 1. 4, 5. of his word, as St. Paul expounds that place
Act. 13. 41. Behold ye despisers and wonder and perish. They could not endure
the Saints holy admonitions, and were impatient of sound reproof, as Junius
notes, [Nequeant far patienter sanctas admonitiones ex verbo tuo, sed
impatientes doctrinae. Dei jurgium and litem efferunt. Contra servos Dei.
Junius in Hab. 1. 3.] This was the sin of the Galatians, who labored not
after the purity of the Gospel, nor stood fast in the liberty wherein Christ
had made them free, Gal 5. 1, 2, 3. And how much this sin should thrive in
the last days, St. Paul forewarned us, 2 Timothy 3. 5. That men should be lovers
of themselves, and have a form of godliness, but should deny the power
thereof: for to hear the word, and pretend to obey it, and to do nothing
less, is a plain contemning and hating of it, as Christ tells the Pharisees,
Ioh. 15. 24. such men's hatred is covered with deceit, Prove. 26 26. their
despising, with a pretense of love, they profess they know God, and his word,
but in their works deny him and his word. Titus 1. 16. Being abominable,
disobedient, and to every good work reprobate or void of judgment. Such also
were the elders of Israel, they had Idols in their hearts, and were separated
from God. Ez. 20. 1. 16. and 14. 3, 4. 7. They despised his judgments. Love is
the impartial passion of the soul. [Vid. Mr. Wrights passions of the mind.]
And he that is of God loves his word, Jo. 8. 47. hears his voice, 1 John 4.
6. keeps his commandments, Jo. 14. 15. they are not grievous to him. 1 Jo. 5.
3. But they delight in the law of God, and meditate therein day and night,
Psalm. 1. 2. the word is sweeter to them then the honey and the honey comb, more
to be desired then gold, or fine gold, Psalm. 19. 10. it is hungered after as the
food of the soul, 1 Pet. 2. 2. wantng which love, and desire, men become
either Atheists in their hearts, or hypocri^^^ in their profession; either
inwardly dead, in regard of affection to Religion, or outwardly lukewarm in
the actions of their devotions; in both, they declare their great contempt of
his word, and Apostacy from him.

This was the Church of Ephesus sin, Rev. 2. 4. she had lost her first love;
but chiefly of lukewarm Laodicea, Rev. 3. 16. Counterfeit holiness, is double
iniquity; no sinner to the hypocrite, who thinks to deceive God, and his
neighbor, but in the end deceives his own soul; who in outward show pretends
love to the word, but loathes it in his affection, denies it, and despises it
in his actions.

This was the pecular sin of the Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, who said,
but did not, made a specious show outwardly of holiness, but were within full
of hypocrisy and iniquity, whom Christ calls, blind guides, painted
sepulchers, fools, hypocrites, serpents, generation of vipers, Mat. 23. 25.
16. 17. 27. 28. 33. Publicans and harlots were saved before them, for the ones
ignorance was simple, the others affected. [Hic ex ignorantia purae negationis,
ille ex ignorantia prava dispositionis peccat, hic excusatur a tanto ille
damnabitur pro summo.] Natural ignorance excused in part them, but affected
malice highly aggravated the others offense, and brought greater condemnation
on them, Mat. 23. 14. weakness pleaded for mercy to the one, but wilfulness
cried for justice on the other: For he that knew his masters will, but did it
not shall have many stripes, Luke 12. 47. he worthily deserves drowning that
refuses the hand that would help him out, and he in justice can expect no
less that refuses the means that would bring him to happiness. [Merito sub
mergitur, qui respuit volentem se salvare. Gorran. in Evan.] Better had it been
for such not to have known the way of righteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 21. then being
known to despise it, and to depart from the holy Commandment, for pleasure or
profit. Both sin and punishment had been less and easier had such obtained
pardon. Matthew the Publican became an Apostle, obeying Christ's call: when
Judas an Apostle, became a devil, by despising his masters counsel. Joh. 6.
70. Saul from being an ignorant persecutor, obtained mercy, because he did it
ignorantly in unbeleefe, 1 Timothy 1. 13. and became a zealous preacher: Whenas
Saul, from being the Anointed of the Lord, became an Atheist, and Idolater, 1 Samuel 28. 7. [Pejus tectum quam aptum od^um.] No hatred to cloaked malice;
Christ had no greater enemy then Judas, nor David then Absalon, nor God then
profane Israel and Judah, Ezekiel. 16. 48. 51. nor his Church then Julian,
Arrius, nor his word in all ages of the world, then the false teachers, and
hypocritical professors thereof, who made a show of loving and reverencing it,
such derogate more from his honor, then the heathen, Christ would rather the
Laodiceans were cold by Infidelity, then lukewarm by newtrality. A civil
Pagan far excells a profane Christian: for God must account it greater
wickedness by them to be hated, despised, disobeyed, from whom he expects
reverence, thankfulness^, love. Therefore says God, Samaria had not done half
Ierusalems sins, Sodom had not done as she, but she had multiplied her
abominations more then they, so that they were justified by her. [Longe minus
peccasse Israel dicitur, quia neque tanta a Deo beneficia acceperat quam regnum
and sacerdotium in Indaea essent, neque fuerat revocatum tam diuturna
patientia, sed Iudaea plura habuit and diuturniora beneficia quibus alliceretur
atque exampla Iudiciorum quibus de deterretur, and tamen malitia sua obfirmata
cum beneficiis, Iudiciis, and documentis Dei fossidue concertavit. Iun. in
Eze.] Iudahs sin therefore is written with a diamond, Ier. 17. 1. (...), what
thou my son? said Caesar to Brutus, his stab went highest his heart: so
Christ to Judas, what do thou betray the Son of man with a kiss? so Nathan
to David, wherefore have (thou) despised the Commandment of the Lord thy God?
2 Samuel 12. 8. to the 14. And as hypocrisy is so foul in general, so more
especially in this point, to despise the word, and to hinder the preaching of
it in purity, and in power: As Alexander greatly withstood Saint Paul's words, 2 Timothy 4. 15. and so did him much evil, of whom (as of a pestilent fellow) he
commands Timothy to beware; and such were the false Apostles amongst the
Corinthians, who through subtility beguiled them, corrupting their minds from
the simplicity that was in Christ, yea and disgraced St. Paul, and his
Ministry, they confessed his letters were weighty and powerful, but his bodily
presence was weak and his speech contemptible, 2 Cor. 10. 10. they could not
endure to have the word sincerely preached, but undervalued his doctrine, whom
he paints out in their own colors, 2 Cor. 11. 13. being false Apostles,
deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ, and
such St. Paul tells us should be in our days, who as Iannes and Iambres the
two chief Magitians of Pharaoh withstood Moses; so should these the truth, 2 Timothy 3. 1 to the 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. [Non esse sperandum Ecclesiam aliquam
incorruptam in hac seculo, sed fore potius magnum perditissimorum hominum
proventum, in ipso etiam ecclesiam sinu, qui tamen summa pietatem, and
charitatem, pre se ferant. Bez. in locum nota. Jannes and Jambres dicuntur
fuisse principes magorum Pharaonis multumque restitisse Mosi, etc. Iunius in
locum.] by their false glosses, and oratoricall expositions of the word, and
lying signs and wonders, as they by their false miracles, and diabolical
apparitions deceived Pharaoh, and resisted the truth: but in thus doing they
were men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith, which is a
Graphicall description of your Popish Monks and Jesuits, and of Jesuitical
Doctors, ambitious Prelates, and Courtflattering Chaplains, to whom God has
sent strong delusions, that they should believe lies, as a just punishment of
this sin, viz. because they received not the love of the truth, that they
might be saved, which is the sin noted by the Holy Ghost to be in all those who
are favorers and followers of the Papists, whom Antichrist shall seduce, 2 Thessalonians 2. 10. God sharply reprehends this sin, Ier. 9. 3. that they did bend
their tongues like their bow for lies, but they were not valiant for the truth.
They hated him that reproved in the gate, and abhorred him that spoke
uprightly, Amos 5. 9. They covld not endure the Prophet to prophecy against
their Idolatry, to tell the King thereof, was accounted by his flattering
Courtiers conspiracy, and therefore, they forbid Amos to prophecy any more at
Bethel, it was the Kings Chapel, near the Kings Court, whose tender ears
could not endure reproof, much less threatening, Amos 7. 13. [Atrox quidem sed
mendax criminatio fraud Amaziae qui perfide accusabat prophetam apud regem,
Iun. and Trem. notae in locum] But with such Ahabs presently the Minister is
his enemy, therefore because he prophesied evil against them, for their
wickedness, they hate them, as he did Michaiah, 1 King. 22. 8. this sin
Jerusalem run into, in despising Gods holy things, hiding their eyes from the
Sabbaths, Ezekiel. 22. 25, 26. and as of a wonderful and horrible thing does God
account it, Jer. 5. 30, 31. for the Prophets to prophecy falsely, and the
Priests to bear rule by their means, and the people love to have it so, viz.
not boldly to speak the truth, but to prophecy smooth things, to speak to
them deceits, Esaias 30. 10. [Ob signatio prophetae propter incredulitatem
populi, qui velint ut desinat Deus prophetas illos obtundere, Iun. and Trem. in
locum] These sort of persons God will have noted in a book, and to be
registered for the time to come, that they are a rebellious people, lying
children, that will not hear the law of the Lord, which say to the Seers see
not, and to the Prophets, prophecy not unto us right things, but get ye out of
the way, turn aside out of the path; cause the holy One of Israel to cease
from before us. Thus judgment is turned backward, and Justice stands a far
off for truth is fallen in the streets, and equity cannot enter; yea, truth
fails, and he that departs from iniquity, makes himself a prey; and this
the Lord beholds, and it displeases him greatly, Esaias 59. 14, 15. for hereby
they pulled out the eyes that should give them light, and destroyed the food
that should feed them.

Secondly, not to tremble at the threatenings and judgments denounced in the
word against the transgressors thereof, is a great sin, and a despising of his
word: so the Lord shows by his dislike of those, who were the professors of
his word, but neglected this duty, Esaias 66. 2, 3. etc. and by his gracious
mercy, and approbation to those who performed this service, To this man will I
look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and that trembles
at my word; but to perform outward service, without this inward affection, is
hateful, abominable, though the work in it self be never so just, or
lawful; For, he that kills an Ox, is as if he slew a man, he that sacrifices
a Lamb, as if he cut off a dogs neck, he that offers an oblation, as if he
offers swines flesh, and he that burns Incense, as if he blessed an Idol.
Gods Name is dreadful amongst the Heathen, and much more reverent ought he to
be esteemed by his Saints, Mal. 1. 14. [Non est illa mea habitatio justa, sed
in animo pauperum and contritorum spiritu, ibi unanimiter habitaturus sum, ut
est. 2 Cor. 6. 16. Jun. in locum] God is a consuming fire, therefore we must
take grace, to serve him acceptably with reverence and godly fear, Heb. 12.
28, 29. he commands even Kings, and Judges of the earth, to serve him with
fear, and to rejoice before him with trembling, Psalm. 2. 10, 11. Thus good
king Josias, when he heard the law read, and the threatenings denounced therein,
for those sins they were guilty of, he rent his garments in token of sorrow;
the fear of Gods displeasure made his heart tender, and caused him to humble
himself before the Lord when he heard his word, both which extracted tears
from his eyes, 2 King. 22. 11. 13. 19, 20. And so the godly after their return
from the Captivity, they wept, when they heard the Law expounded, Nehem. 8. 9,
10. and trembled at the word of the God of Israel, Ezra 9. 4. Moses when God
speaks, must put off his Exodus 3. 5. shoes, from his feet, to testify the
inward reverence of his mind, by this outward Ceremony, [Simplicissima hujus
Ceremoniae ratio videtur esse, ut pedum n^ditas, religionem animo incuteret,
and for is eam testatam faceret, Iuni. in locum] For, God will be sanctified
in all those that come nigh him, as he tells Aaron, Levit. 10. 3. and those who
sin against him, he will make them public examples and documents of his
severe and inflexible justice, that others also may fear. Solomon enjoynes a
great care and preparation before we hear, Eccles. 5. 1. and Christ bids us
take good heed how we hear, Luke 8. 18. for the word spoken shall judge us at
the last day, Joh. 12. 48. if with S. Peter's Converts it prick us not at the
hearts, Acts 2. 37. working in us a fear of offending him, and sorrow for
displeasing him; It Is to be feared, the god of this world has blinded our eyes,
lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should shine unto us, 2 Cor. 4.
4. for to the godly, the preaching of the word comes in power, and in the holy
Ghost; they hear it as the word of God, as if Christ himself had spoken unto
them, 2 These. 1. 5. and 2. 13. as the Galatians received St. Paul as an Angel
of God, even as Christ Jesus, Gal. 4. 14. and therefore to hear it carelessly,
as the Jews did our Savior, or wantonly to please our lusts, as the Athenians
did S. Paul, for novelty sake, Acts 17. 19. or lukewarmely, as Agrippa to be
half persuaded, Acts 26. 28. or hypocritically, as Ezekiels hearers, Ezekiel. 33.
31, 32. who heard them, but would not practice them; with their mouth made a
show of love, but their heart went after their covetousness; In a word, to
hear any other way without fear, thereby secretly despising it, brings
destruction, as the Antithesis of Solomon's Proverb plainly declares, Prove. 13.
14. Whosoever despises the word shall be destroyed, but he that fears the
Commandment shall be rewarded.

Thirdly, not to labor after the power of godliness, and to serve God in
spirit and in truth, but to content our selves with a partial or outward
obedience thereunto, serving him only with an outward worship, this also is a
secret loathing, and despising of his word. This was Zedekiah king of Iudahs
sin, Ier. 38. 15. 16. who made a great show of love, both to the word, and
messenger that brought it, but when he knew it, he labored not to observe it,
he obeyed not the word of the Lord, nor hearkened to the counsel of the
Prophet speaking the same, but out of a carnal fear, or shame, and out of a
slavish love to himself or his Courtiers, he followed their counsel,
preferring it before the Word of God, for his friends (such as the Hebr. calls
the men of his peace) who pretended loyalty and service to him, for the
maintenance of his crown and dignity; these by their crafty counsel prevailed
against him; for that his feet were sunk into the mire, and they were turned
away back; yea, all the misery that befell him, was effected by his ill
Counselors, as Junius notes [Crimen totum defectionis, a Caldaeis in
consiliarios tuos, and foederatos exteros transferant, ad excusandum te per
illos effectum esse, ut in hanc malorum abyssum devenires* and a Chaldaeis
deficeres, Iun. and Trem. notae in Jer, 3. 8. 6. 22. 21.] not much different
from this, is that example of Iohanan the son of Kareah, with the remnant of
Israel, who promised obedience, and called God to witness their promises,
whether the word spoken were good or evil, Jer. 42. 5, 6. 20. 21. but they did
dissemble in their hearts, in what they promised and obeyed not, but condemned
the Prophet for speaking falsely, and said, that the Lord had not spoke by him,
because it pleased not their humors, and opposed their lusts and desires, Jer.
43. 2, 3. This was the sin also of the Israelites, in Isaiahs time, they drew
nigh to him with their mouths, and with their lips did honor him, Isa. 29. 13.
but their hearts were removed far away from him, and their fear toward God was
taught by the precepts of men. This sin eminently shined forth in the Scribes
and Pharisees, as our Savior himself expounds, Mat. 15. 7, 8. But in vain was
their worship and religion, they fasted often, prayed much, gave alms, paid
tithes, praised the Saints dead, built the tombs of the prophets, but in the
mean time sinned horribly; and therefore Christ pronounces many woes against
them, Mat 23. yea, of old this sin so displeased God, that he calls them Rulers
of Sodom, and people of Gomorrha, as high in iniquity as they; for though they
thought by their outward service to please God, he tells them his soul hated
them, Isa. 1. 10 11. [Malitia atque sceleribus cum Sodomitis comparandi nam
externus cultus nil valet, non tantum corpore, sed etiam animo integro sistati^
vos and exhibeatis mihi, Jun. in locum.] such service was a trouble to him he
was weary to hear them; therefore when they stretch out their hands, he will
hide his eyes; yea, when they make many prayers, he will not hear them. And so
he tells them by the Prophet Amos, Amos 5. 21, 22, etc. I hate, I despise your
feast days, I will not smell in your solemn Assemblies, I will not accept your
meat offerings, etc. thousands of rams, nor ten thousand rivers of oil will
not appease his wrath, Mic. 6. 7, 8. for he will have mercy, and not sacrifice,
he requires the obedientiall knowledge of his Word, more then burnt offerings,
Hosea 6. 6. he delights not in external rites, nor will he reprov^ thee for
thy sacrifices, Psalm. 50. 8. ad finem, as at large the Psalmist sh^weth, his
sacrifice he accepts, is thanksgiving and payment of vows, praising of his
name; and a right ordering of our conversation according to his word; for he is
a Spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit a^^ in truth, Joh. 4. 24. even in
sincerity of obedience; and to such alone w^l^ ^e grant his approbation and
salvation: But to observe outward service, and (...) still in our sins, to
present our selves in Gods House, and to hate Reformation, to hear his
Ministers, and to cast his word behind our back, for pleasure or profit, to all
such he says, What have thou to do to take my Word into thy mouth, seeing thou
hate to be reformed? Psalm. 50. 16, 17. Will God accept his bodily service,
who gives his soul to Satan? Or, is there any true love of Gods Word in him,
who is in love with himself, or the world, which is enmity with God? James 4.
4. none at all, 1 John 2. 15. for God (like the true parent) will have no
division, there is no halting between God and Baal, we cannot be in the light,
and have fellowship with darkness, 2 John 1. 6. For, what concord has Christ
with Belial? 2 Cor. 6. 15. see how God scorns such service, Jerem. 7 9.
[Redargui^ Hypocrisin Judaeorum, qui dicunt tuti sumus, ab omni periculo, nil
potest damno esse nobis quia servat nos Deus quem colimus in templo suo, Trem.
and Jun. in locum;] (for men to continue in sin, and yet presume to serve him;)
will ye steal, murder, and commit adultery, burn incense unto Baal, and walk
after other gods, whom ye know not, and come and stand before me in this house,
and say, we are delivered to do these abominations? But in thus doing, they
were poor and foolish, they knew not the way of the Lord, nor the judgment of
their God, because they execute not judgment, nor seek the truth? And though
they know it, they will not obey it: though he spoke, they would not hear; and
though he called, they answered not, which most highly displeased God, Jer. 7.
13, 14, 15, 16. as appears in the subsequent verses, they refused instruction,
hardening their hearts like the rock; they refused to return, but say in their
hearts, the Prophet shall become wind, and the Word is not in them; thus shall
it be done unto them, Jer. 5. 3. 12, 13. we shall be freed from those plagues,
and shall punish them, [Potius haec mala in ipsos recident, and nos male
multabimus ipsos, prout denunciant nobis, ipsos gladio perdemus, and fame Jun.
in locum;] but this increased their sin and judgment. The Lord our God is but
one, a holy, jealous and just God, Deuteronomy. 10. 12. 16. and Chap. 6. 5, 4. who
retards not persons, nor takes reward; and therefore will have us love and
serve him, with all our hearts, souls and might; he will have no partner, Psalm.
119. 3. and 1 King. 18. 21. he that breaks willingly one command, is guilty of
all, Jam 2. 10. and Eze. 18. 10. 13. compared together. For true obedience must
be out of conscience to Gods command; this alone must move a Christian to
perform holy duties; and then, when its sincere, it will be universal, both in
the matter, to all parts of Gods Word, and to every precept therein contained;
and in manner, with all the heart, mind, soul, and strength: And lastly, in
regard of ^ime and place, at all times, Psalm. 119 93. 112. always* even to the
end, in ^ll places and companies continually: Psalm. 44. 46. 117. It Is confessed
indeed, the best Christians fail in their obedience, but not in their purpose
to obey, Acts 11. 23. that is, sincere, like David's, to all Gods precepts,
Psalm. 119. 6. For he longs after him, and seeks them with his whole heart, he
rejoices in the ways of Gods testimonies, meditates therein, desires to keep
them, has respect unto them all, and will not forget them; his soul breaks
for the longing that he has to Gods judgments at all times, Psalm. 119. 2. 6.
14, 15, 16. 20. So he keeps them affectu, though not effectu; he has a will,
though not a power to observe them, Romans 7. 22, 23. he obeys habitu, though not
actu; he so fears the Word, that he despises no part of it; he is no
hypocrite, though not perfect; he loves no sin, though he offend seven times
aday; he contemns no precept, though he transgress against most, which is
quite opposite to the hypocrites obedience, which is either slavish, for fear
of punishment, or mercenary, for hope of reward only: As Pharaoh lets Israel go
for fear of his own death, Exodus 12. 33. [Omnia Israelitis concedentes, modo
exierent, and vitam suam prece, precioque redimentes. Jun and Trem. in locum.
Ahab humbles himself for fear of judgment, 1 King. 21. 27. Iehu destroys Baal
and Ahabs house, to confirm himself in the kingdom; the Israelites fast for
themselves, Zach. 7. 5. and not to God; the Jews used not force to the
Disciples, but it was for fear of the people, Acts 5. 26. And Herod did many
things for fear of John Baptist, Mar. 6. 20. Diverse malicious hearts break not
forth into outrage of villainy, for to obtain their own ends, either pleasure or
profit, fear, or favor always prevail; that's the weight sets the wheels
agoing: The Devil in sickness will turn religious; but as a Lion in chains,
is still a Lion, though he prey not: A Wolf a Wolf, though he worry no sheep,
being overawed by the Shepherds and dogs. So are all hypocrites as wicked in
abstaining as in the acting of many sins; [Nunquid quia ovem non tulit, ideo
Lupus venit, and oves redit, Lupus venit fremens, Lupus redit tremens, Lupus
est tamen and fremens, and tremens, Aug. de verb. Apo. Sermon. 21.] For even
then, their obedience to the Word, is but only partial, compelled, external;
it is effectu, not affectu, they do it, but without any good will or liking of
it: it is actu, not habitu in show, not indeed, or indeed, not in heart. It Is to
some command, not all; at some times, not always; in some places, companies,
and not for ever, continually: For, in the fitness and preparation of their
hearts, they break those commands they keep; they despise that Word they seem
to obey, on all accasions, for their advantage, being ready to violate the
same: he loves no precept, nor part of the Word, though he seem to hear and
observe much; he is, in a word, guilty of all, though openly and actually he
transgress not all.

As the Pharisees preaching, praying, fasting, almesgiving, tithing, and
observing the ceremonial law, did rather aggravate then extenuate their
contempt of Christ and his Word: So is it with all hypocritical professors of
his Word, their hearing, reading, praying, preaching, will not avail them,
unless to bring on them greater judgment, 2 Pet. 2. 21. [Sus dum in luto
lavatur, sordidior redditur, sic qui peccatum plangit, nec tamen deserit, paena
graviori se subjicet, Glos.] For to such, pleading these outward works, Christ
will say, I know you not, depart from me, Mat. 7. 23. all ye workers of
iniquity. [Verba Christi acerbissime repellentis, non ignorantis. Bez. in
locum.] The sheepskins must then be pulled off from these wolves, Man. 7. 15. and
God will show how hateful and detestable such outward holiness is in his
eyes, Mat. 24. 51.

Lastly, openly to loath and reject the word, and the sound and sincere
preaching of it, and proudly to oppose and gainsay the truth, hating and
persecuting the faithful Ministers thereof, either first, because they preach
against, and condemn their beloved sins: or secondly, because by their
doctrine they are hindered in enjoying their pleasures, profits, honors: or
thirdly, because it condemns their unlawful traditions, humane inventions,
and superstitious ceremonies; this also is to despise the word, a grievous sin.
This was Amaziahs sin, 2 Kin. 25. 16. who when the Prophet reproved him for his
Idolatry, asked him whether he were of the Kings Council, and hearkened not to
his word, but silenced him. It was the sin of the old world who would not
hearken to that Preacher of Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 5. who instructed them of
Gods purpose, and decrees, both by his words and works. [Centu^ enim and
v^ginti annis non descit impios and dictis and factis commonefacere quanta
illis i^a Dei in mineret, Camer] It was the special sin of the Jews, Mat 23.
37. and Acts 3. 15. who killed the Prophets, and the Prince of life, who
persecuted the Apostles, and pleased not God thereby, but were contrary to all
men, forbidding them to speak to the Jews, or Gentiles, that they might be
saved, and so filled up the measure of their sin. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15. 16. It
grieved them that they taught the people, and therefore they laid hands on
them, and imprisoned them, Acts 4. 2, 3. y^^ they commanded them not to speak
in the name of Christ, and beat them, Acts 5 40. By reason of which sin,
wrath come on them to the uttermost; (...) ^^use of their rejection, had they
h^d eyes to have seen it, was before (...), Ier. 9. 12 and Zeph. 3. 1 8: and
Esa. 28. 12 13, 14 15 16 etc. for the (...) word and mocking at the zealous
professors thereof. See how h^i^ou^^y God ta^^s this sin, Ier. 22. 50. and Job
elegantly expresses it. Job 21. 14 and ^. God complain^s of it in the Priests,
Mal. 2. 2. loash though in his young ye^r^s he ^^clared a great d^^le of zeal
and godliness (whilst his tutor and fosterfather good I^^oj^da lived) yet
running into this sin by his seduced counselors, his piety with Iehojada
dyed, his faith and zeal soon vanished, and with the Kings the greatest sort
of the Nobilities and Gentries goodness decays, which highly provoked Gods
wrath, and caused God to forsake them, 2 Chronicles. 24. 19. to the 26. It was a
full period to Ahabs sin to persecute and reject Michaiah and his prophecy,
2 Chronicles. 22. 28. A sin harder to be pardoned then Sodomes, and more
intolerable then Tire and Zidons, Mat. 11. 24. which Christ with tears be
wayles in Jerusalem, Luke 13. 34. for as their fathers had done before, 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. so they persisted in their sin, being stiffenecked and
uncircumcized in hearts and ears, always resisting the Holy Ghost, Acts 7.
51, 52. persecuting his Ministers, and despising his law. Solomon shows the
folly and misery hereof, Prove. 1. 24, 25, 26, to the 32. But then is this sin
aggravated especially, when men hate and reject the Word, and persecute the
Ministers thereof. First, because it condemns their beloved sins, as Moses
did the tyranny and covetousness of Pharaoh, which hardened his heart, made him
hate his Prophets, and persecute Gods people with his Army. Thus did Herodias
hate John Baptist, for reproving Herod's incest, Mar. 6 19. Ahab, for that Eliah
reproved his sin, hated him, 1 King. 21. 20. and Jezabel sought his life.
Christ was persecuted by the Scribes and Pharisees for opening their vices, and
telling them the truth, Ioh. 8. 37. 40. Or secondly, because the word preached
hinders them in their pleasures, profits, honors, as the doctrine of St. Paul
did the false Apostles and teachers, Phil. 3 19. Thus Demetrius for his gain
raises an uproar against St. Paul, Christ; and the mistress of the Damsel,
that had the spirit of Pithon, when they saw that the hope of their gain was
gone, then they blasphemed the doctrine of the Gospel, and persecuted Paul and
Silas, Acts 16 19. The Prophet that cried against the Altar of Bethell (which
Jereboam for to secure his ^onor had reared) is presently commanded to be laid
hold on, 1 Kings 12. 26. and 13 4. The Jews also persecuted Christ, and his
Apostles, lest the Romans should destroy their Temple and Nation, Ioh. 11, 48.
Balaam for hope of honor, profit, ^urseth Gods people; as Herod killed the
infants and fought to destroy Christ, ^est he should lose his Crown and
riches, Mat. 2. 16. As Josephus relates, [Vid. ^he unfortunate Politician.
Herodes Hypocrita novit Christum natum, eum quarit simulanter ad necem* quod
cum non succedat, ad vim crudelem convertitur. Aretius in Mat. 2.] Or thirdly,
because the word preached opposes their unlawful traditions, humane
inventions, and superstitious ceremonies. This was the sin of the Galatians,
wherewith they were bewitched, in turning to those weak and beggarly elements
of the ceremonial law, which Christ abolisht, yet they desired again to be in
bondage, and because the Apostle told them the truth in this point, to avoid
these (otherwise Christ would profit them nothing) therefore he was accounted
their enemy. Gal. 4. 9 16. A sin which Christ blamed in the Scribes and
Pharisees, who transgressed Gods commands by their traditions, Mat. 15. 3* 6.
for which they hated him, persecuted him, and so they did St. Paul for
preaching against these ceremonies, Acts 15 1, 2. and Acts 21. 28. Diotrephes
to maintain Prelacie represt the truth, despised St. John's letters, and
preached against the holy Apostle, and other sound orthodox teachers, casting
the godly out of the Church, Ioh. 3. Epist. 9. 10. Of the same sort were those
false teachers mentioned by St. Paul, Titus 2. 10. who were unruly, vain
talkers, and deceivers, subverting whole houses, teaching things they ought
not, for filthy lucres sake.

Such also were those Monkish Prelates, whom St. Paul paints forth, Col. 2. 19.
being unsound, rotten members, fallen from their head Christ Jesus, and hurting
and corrupting those, who are not so wilful nor wicked as themselves, with
their vain philosophy and carnal wisdom, and show of humility, and
will worship, whom St. Jude, Jude epist. verse. 4. sets forth, that they turn
the grace of God into wantonness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord
Jesus Christ (as the only Prophet, Lawgiver, and teacher of his Church) and
thereby bringing on themselves swift destruction, whose pernicious ways many
shall follow, by means whereof, the way of truth shall be evil spoken, and
persecuted, and through covetousness, shall they with feigned words make
merchandise of you, 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. [Predicit Petrus falsos fore
doctores in Ecclesia, adeo ut ipse Christus a quibusdam abnegetur, qui tamen
illum redemptorum vocabunt. Bezae in locum not.] whose judgment now a long
time lingreth not, and their damnation slumbreth no. So that this sin brings
destruction out a man, or Nation, which is the next thing to be proved.

The Holy Ghost says plainly, he that despises the word, shall be destroyed,
Prove. 13. 13. And again, he that being often reproved, hardneth his neck,
shall be destroyed, and that without remedy, Prove. 29. 1. The judgment was so
heavy on Ely, and his family for this sin, that it makes ones ears tingle to
hear it, 1 Samuel 2. 11. 12. 13. It brought death on him, and his sons in one
day: God would judge his house for ever, for this iniquity. The Gedarens, for
contempt of the Gospel lost the Kingdom of heaven, as well as Corazin and
Capernaum, Mat. 11. 22, 23. against whom, Christ thundreth forth a terrible
woe. Iehues throne lasted but to the fourth generation, 2 Kings 10. 30. because
he did Gods work hypocritically. God will avenge the blood of Iezreel upon the
house of Iehu, and will cause to cease the Kingdom of the house of Israel,
Hos. 1. 4. Those in the Gospel that made excuses, shall not taste of the
heavenly supper, Luke 14. 24. they are prepared for slaughter, who will not
obey his voice, Luke 9 27. Saul because he rejected the word of the Lord, the
Lord rejected him from being King. 1 Samuel 15. 23 those that despise, and wonder
perish. Acts 13. 41. See the many woes denounced against the Pharisees for this
sin, Mat. 23. They that profess they know God, but deny him in their deeds,
are abominable in Gods sight, and reprobate, Titus 1. 16. The lukewarm
Laodiceans Christ will spue out of his mouth, Apoc 3 16. God will cause all his
curses to come upon that man, to pursue him, and overtake him till he be
destroyed, that hearkens not to the voice of the Lord, to keep his commands,
and his statutes which he commanded; and because they served him not with
joyfulnesse, and with gladness of heart, Deuteronomy. 28. 45. 47. St. Paul denounces
Anathema Mara-natha, 1 Cor. 16. 22. to those that love not the Lord Jesus
Christ with sincerity, and enflamed affections: the Church of Ephesus, for
losing her first love to the word, is threatened to have her Candlestick
removed, unless she speedily repent, Apoc. 2. 5. St. Paul tells us the end of
those false teachers, (who disgraced him, and loved not to have the word
sincerely preached) should be according to their works, 2 Cor. 11. 15. which is
destruction, Phil. 3. 19. they shall come to the same end with Jannes and
Jambres, for resisting the truth, their folly shall be manifest to all men, as
theirs also was, 2 Timothy 3 9. and because they received not the love of the
truth, that they might be saved; for this cause God will send them strong
delusions, that they should believe a lie, that they all might be damned, who
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 These. 2. 10,
12. as a just punishment of their former sin, [Haec est justa nemesis divina,
nempe ut caecitate percutiantur, qui lucem aspicire recusarunt, ut mendaciis
fidem habeant, qui veritati consentire, ut pereant, qui salvari noluerunt,
Zanch. in locum] that they should be smitten with spiritual blindness, who
refused to behold the light of the truth, that they should believe lies, who
would not consent to his truth, and that they should perish, who would not be
saved; Thus he dealt with the people of Israel, because they were not valiant
for the truth, but forsook his law he set before them; therefore God would
feed them with wormwood, and give them water of gall to drink, Jer. 9. 3. 13.
to the 16. 17. verses, and because they hate him that rebukes in the gate, and
abhor him that speaks uprightly, Amos 5. 10, 11, 16, 17. Therefore they
shall build houses, but shall not dwell in them, and plant vineyards, but shall
not eat of them, wayling, lamentation, and woe shall be in all the streets,
and in the vineyards: Amaziah for reproving, and silencing the Prophet, is
threatened therefore, his wife should be an harlot in the City, his sons and
daughters should fall by the sword, and his land should be divided, and he
himself should go into captivity, and dye in a polluted land, Amos 7. 16, 17.
The Prophet was sure God had determined to destroy the King, because he
despised Gods word, and had not hearkened to the counsel of his Prophet, 2 Chronicles. 25. 16. and so Michaiah tells Ahab, 1 King. 22. 19. [Quia nunc
ludificast^ consilium Dei. and in credulitatem palam testatam facis, jam tibi
certam Dei sententiam de nuntio. Junii and Trem. notae in locum] This sin
because Jerusalem run into, God powered out his indignation on her, Ezekiel. 22.
25. ad finem; and for this wonderful and horrible thing, God says, he will
visit them in wrath, and will be avenged on them, Ier. 5. 29. Because their
ear was uncircumcised, and the word of the Lord was to them a reproach, they
had no delight in it; therefore says the Prophet, I am full of the fury of the
Lord, to wit, in Prophetical words, testifying the greatness of Gods wrath
which was to be powered out, both on men, and women, on young and old, Ier. 6.
10 11. [Id est verbis prophetic^s gravissimam Dei indignationem
testificantibus, Trem. and Iun. in locum.] There is also an heavy doom
pronounced on those tender ears, who silenced the powerful and faithful
Ministers of the word, and loved to hear quaint phrases, and rhetorical
strains, smooth things, enticing words of man's wisdom, deceits, and could not
endure long Sermons, nor Gods Ordinances to be administered with power;
Wherefore, thus says the holy One, because ye despise this word, and trust in
oppression, and perverseness, and stay thereon: Therefore this iniquity shall
be unto you as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high wall, whose
breach comes suddenly at an instant, and he shall break it, as the breaking
of the Potters vessel, that is broken in pieces, he shall not spare, nor
leave any useful piece thereof, Esaias 30. 10, 11, 12. etc. ad 18. They did
hereby pull the wall whereon the Commonwealth was sustained on their own
heads, utterly ruining it. [Proinde facitis haec iniquitate vestra, ac si
vectibus aut malleis jam inclinantem murum vestrae Reipub: momento detubaretis
in cervices vestras, Iun. in locum notae] And so again, because truth failed,
and equity could not enter, but he that departed from evil, made himself a
prey, therefore will he severely punish this sin, Esaias 59. 15. 18. repaying
fury to his adversaries, and recompense to his enemies.

Secondly, not to tremble at the word, when delivered, brings judgments; for
such shall be ashamed, he will show no favor to their outward services, but
will choose their delusions, and bring their fears upon them, Esaias 66. 3, 4, 5.
God will send a curse on them that will not hear, and will curse the blessings
he has sent, of all those, who will not lay Gods word to heart, he will
corrupt their seed, and spread dung in their faces, and they shall be taken
away with it, Mal. 2. 2, 3. It Is a great spiritual judgment of it self, to
have a fat heart, an heavy ear, a blind eye, they are always the forerunners
of certain ruin. Esaias 6. 9. Acts 28. 26. It was the case of the Jews before
their total rejection, Romans 11. 8. the word heard to such, brings with it the
sentence of condemnation, because they believe it not, John 3. 36. It Is the
savor of death, unto death, 2 Cor. 2. 16. for it leaves them altogether
without excuse, John 15. 22. yea, it is that shall judge them at the last day,
John 12. 48. and if men will not hearken to it, there are judgments enough
threatened in this life, to prick any man's heart, that has the least spark of
grace, Levit. 26. 15. etc. If ye shall despise my statutes, and abhor my
judgments, I will appoint over you, terror, consumption, and the burning
Ague, that shall consume the eyes, and cause sorrow of heart, etc. you may
read it at large, and see more hereof, Deuteronomy. 28. 15, 16, 17. 45. ad finem.

Thirdly, not to labor after the power of godliness, performing what the word
requires, or not sincerely to purpose, and resolutely to perform the word
preached, or known, but to content our selves only with a partial, or outward
obedience, and so remaining hypocritical, brings Gods judgments. This sin
was severely punished in King Zedekiah, who was taken by the King of Babylon,
who gave judgment on him, slew his sons before his face, and afterward put out
his eyes, bound him in chains, and carried him away captive, Ier. 39. 6.
compared with Chap. 38. 21, 22. his enemies burnt his house, and the houses of
his nobles, brake down the wall of his royal city, slew his subjects, and
carried the choysest of the rest into Babylon: So also Johanan, the son of
Kareah, and the remnant that obeyed not the voice of the Lord, dyed by the
sword, famine, pestilence, whither they desired to sojourn, Jer. 42. 22.
against the hypocritical Elders, God will set his face; he will make such a
man to be a Proverb, and a reproach, and cut him off from the midst of his
people, Ezekiel. 14. 8. [Tum ante acti judicii monumentum, tum demonstrationem
justorum judiciorum Dei eventurorum immorigeris, Iun. and Trem. in locum;]
making him a monument of his former judgments, and a sign of his future
wrath, to all despisers and rebellious hypocrites: so also he threatens those
that draw nigh to God with their lips, when their hearts are far away; amongst
such, he will do a mavelous work, and a wonder; for the wisdom of their wise
men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall he hide; the
terrible one shall be brought to naught, the scorners consumed, and all the
workers of iniquity cut off, Isaiah 29. 13, 14. [Sententia est obdurationis a
Deo, exponens causam, and judicium ejus, Iun. and Tr. in loc.] which was
fulfilled in the Jews, Scribes and Pharisees after Christ's death, which nation,
as Christ foretold, was miserably destroyed by the Romans, and lie scattered
through the world, even to this present day, bein a scorn and a derision, both
to Christians and Turks, Mat. 23. 38. and Mat. 24. 2. those who labor not
after the power of godliness, they shall be devoured by the sword, the
destruction of the transgressors and sinners shall be together, Isa. 1. 10, 11.
20. 24, 25. He will avenge himself of such enemies, and those that had the form
of godliness, but denied the power thereof, they did hereby resist the truth,
and were men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith, whose damnation
slumbreth not, 2 Pet. 2. 3. And Saint Jude tells us, they were of old ordained,
[Non temere, sed ex Dei providentia sit, ut nonnulli perditi in Ecclesiam
irrepant, Bezae not.] unto condemnation; such outward professors God will
reprove, and set their sins in order, and tear them in pieces, when there is
none to deliver, Psalm. 50. 22. but such partial professors (or Atheists
rather) says God, because you have done all this; and I speak unto you, rising
up early, and speaking, but ye heard not, and I called, but ye answered not,
therefore I, will cast you out of my sight; I will do this house as I did to
Shiloh, pray not thou for this people therefore, nor lift up thy cry, nor make
intercession, for I will not hear; it is a judgment irrevocable, Jer. 8. 9. 10.
13. 14, 15, 16. and so those that mocked the Prophets, because ye speak this
word, Jer. 5. 14. [Jeremiah pernuntians verbo calamitates populi illud facere
dicitur quod Deus praestat opere, Trem. and Iun. in locum.] Behold, I will make
my words in thy mouth fire, and this people wood, and it shall devour them:
For, to all such hypocrites, be they never so glorious in some works, Christ
will say to them, I know you not, depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity,
Mat. 7. 23. he approves not of their external holiness, nor superficial piety.

Lastly, openly to loath and reject the Word and the sincere preaching thereof;
and proudly to oppose and gainsay the truth, hating and persecuting the
faithful Ministers thereof, either because they preach against, and condemn
their beloved sins: or, secondly, because by their doctrine, they are hindered
in enjoying their pleasures, profits, honors: or, thirdly, because it
condemns their unlawful traditions, humane inventions, and superstitious
ceremonies is a sin brings destruction: This brought the flood on the old
world, Job 22. 15, 16, 17. they said to God, depart from us, and what can the
Almighty do for us? For they strove against the Spirit of God in the Ministry
of Noah, and chose them Idolatrous wives to please their lusts, contrary to the
doctrine and counsel of that Preacher of righteousness, Genesis 6. 2, 3. for he
preached to them, but they remained disobedient, all the while the
long-suffering of God waited for their repentance, even an hundred and twenty
years, whilst the Ark was a preparing, 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20. and 2 Epist. 2. 5.
which time being elapsed, [Semel hoc adverbio declaratu^ tempus ultimum
prefixum fuisse, quo elapso, nullum postea superesset, Camer.] there remained
no more hope. This sin brought ruin and destruction on the Jews common
wealth, Matthew. 23. 37. For hereby they filled up their sins, and ripened
themselves for judgment, viz. having killed the Lord Jesus and their own
Prophets, and persecuted the Apostles, forbidding them to preach to the
Gentiles, that they might be saved, to fill up their sins always, for which
wrath is come on them to the uttermost, 1 These. 2. 15, 16. which was indeed
before prophesied of them, Zeph. 3. 18. In particular, you may see it
accomplished in Jeroboam, 1 King. 14. 9, 10. and in Baasha, King of Israel, 1
King. 16. 3, 4. and specially in Ahab, 1 King. 21. 20. and the same judgment
he threatens to tht King of Judah, Jer. 22. 5, etc. [Omnem tuam dignitatem
abripiant tibi, and perdant funditus sine spe ulla restitutionis, Trem. and
Iun. in locum.] If ye will not hear these words, I swear by my self, says
the Lord, that this house shall become a desolation: for thus says the Lord
unto the Kings house of Judah, thou art Gilead unto me, and the head of
Lebanon; yet surely I will make thee a wilderness, and cities which are not
inhabited; and I will prepare destroyers against thee, every one with his
weapons, and they shall cut down thy choice Cedars, and cast them into the
fire; so that thou shall be destroyed without hope of recovery. Ioash is a
remarkable example, who in his youth declared a great show of zeal and
godliness, whilst his Tutor Iehojada lived; but with him his piety died, his
faith vanished, and with the Kings, the whole peoples goodness in general
decays; yet the Lord sent Prophets to bring them again, and they testified
against them, but they would not give ear: and when the Prophet Zachary told
them from the Lord, that they could not prosper whilst they transgrest Gods
commands; and that because they had forsaken the Lord, the Lord had forsaken
them; yet they conspired against him, and stoned him at the Kings command, in
the court of the House of the Lord; but before the years end, all those Princes
were destory'd by a small army of the Syrians, and loash himself is smitten
with great diseases from God, and his own servants conspired against him and
slew him, and deprived him of an honorable sepulcher for his apostasy,
contempt of Gods Word, and killing his Prophets, 2 Chronicles. 24. 19. to 26. It was
a full period to Ahabs sin, to hate and reject the counsel, and persecute the
person of Micaiah, 1 King. 22. 26, 27, 28. This sin Saint Paul tells us, in
whomsoever it raigns, is an evident token to him of perdition, Phil. 1. 28.
[Certa testimonia sunt a Deo ipso impiorum exilii, Beza in locum]. Asa, a good
King in other things, yet failing herein, escaped not judgment; for within
three years after he had put the Prophet in prison, and openly despised the
Word, the Lord struck him with a grievous disease in his feet, that he died, 2 Chronicles. 16. 10. [Nam cum Propheta agebat, ut reo minutae majestatis, Trem. and
Iun. in locum]. Balaam, who loved the wages of unrighteousness, would have
cursed Gods people, perished with the Midianites that hired him, Numb. 31. 8.
The Jews that refused to hearken, pulled away the shoulder, that stopped their
ears, and would not hear, but killed the Prophets, and those that were sent
unto them, their house was left desolate, Luke 13. 34, 35. great wrath came on
them from the Lord of hosts, they cried, but he would not hear, but scattered
them with a whirlewind among the nations, and made the land desolate, as was
prophesied, Zac. 7. 11, 12, 13, 14. for on them was fulfilled that direful
curse of the holy Ghost, Prove. 1. 24, 25, 26, etc. Because I called, and ye
refused, I have stretched out my hand, and none regarded, but ye have set at
naught my counsel, and would none of my rebuke, I also will laugh at your
calamity, and mock when your fear comes; when your fear comes as
desolation, and your destruction as a whirlewind, etc. Herod that killed Saint
James, was eaten of worms, Acts 12. 2* 23. Ieroboams hand that was stretched
out against the Prophet, withered, 1 King. 13. 4. The Scribes and Pharisees
that were offended against Christ, for reproving their unlawful traditions and
humane inventions, are threatened to be rooted out, and are pronounced to be
blind guides, leading the blind, both which must fall into the ditch of
eternal destruction, Mat. 15. 12, 13, 14. Saint John threatens Diotrephes, to
remember his deeds, and will not suffer him to go unpunished, Joh. 3. Epist.
verse. 10. Saint Paul wishes such persons were cut off, who withstand the
truth, for to maintain their ceremonies; and rather then they would suffer
persecution for Christ's sake, Gal. 5. 11, 12. such, to maintain these humane
ordinances and doctrines of men, they reject Christ from being their head, and
so cannot be saved, Col. 2. 19. For, hereby turning from the truth, there is
nothing pure unto them, but their minds and consciences are defiled; for
professing him in words, they deny him in works, and so are in Gods sight
abominable, disobedient, and to every good work reprobate, Titus 1. 14. 16. A
bitter curse is denounced on such, who forsake the law of God set before them,
and obey not his voice, nor walk therein, but walk after the imaginations of
their own hearts, and after Baalim, which their fathers taught them, viz. old
Idolatrous customs, God will feed such a people with wormwood, and give them
water of gall to drink, he will scatter them among the heathen, and send a
sword after them, Jer. 9. 15. 16. [Rebus amarissimis tractabo nam amaritudinem
saepe absinthio comparat scriptura, Iun. in loc.] they are as bruit beasts made
to be taken, and destroyed, they shall utterly perish in their own corruption,
2 Pet. 2. 12. [Eo exitio peribunt quod ipsi corruptis illis morbis accersunt.
Camer.] and there are diverse reasons to confirm this truth.

1. Reason. First, because by this, men make themselves wiser then God, who for
their presumption, disappoints the devices of the crafty, so that their
counsel is carried headlong, and they meet with darkness in the day time, and
grope in the noone day as in the night, as Eliphas shows, Job 5. 13. [In
rebus etiam evidentissimis caecutiunt, translatae loquulions. Iun.] so that in
the most plainest things they are blind; for when man will be wiser then God,
it is just with God, to make him more brutish then the beast, as were those
hypocrites in Israel, more sottish then the Ox or Ass, as the Lord
complains, Esaias 1. 3. this was the cause of Satan's downfall, 1 Timothy 3. 6.
and of ours, and our parents misery, Genesis 3. 6. in aspiring to divine
knowledge, and always brings destruction to the selfe-conceited-wise, seduced
by Satan, 1 Cor. 1. 19. for this thing is in the world perpetual, that they
that will not obey the Gospel, must obey the Captain of the Wars, and they
that will not hear Christ, must hear Antichrist, as Reverend Bullinger notes,
[Bulling in Apoc. sermon. 30.] as a scourge of this sin.

2. Reas. Secondly, because hereby, men declare they love themselves, more then
their God, their pleasures, profits, honors, more then his truth, or service
and so become his enemies, Jam. 4. 4 unworthy to be Christ's disciples, Luke 14,
26. and what then can be expected, if they are his enemies, you may see, Deuteronomy.
32. 41. and Psalm. 68. 21. nothing but woe, ruin, judgment, fiery indignation,
which shall destroy his adversaries, as the Apostle says, Heb. 10. 27.

3. Reas. Thirdly, because men hereby, declare they prefer their own corrupt
depraved wills, before Gods eternal and most holy will (which is Idolatry in
the highest degree) and surely he that despises God, shall be lightly
esteemed, 1 Samuel 2. 30. In speaking against his truth and his Ministers, they
offer indignity to God himself, and commit blasphemy, Col. 3. 8. Now they that
hate the righteous shall be desolate. Psalm 34. 21. Senacherib that drawd out of
his mouth against the true worship of God, which Hezekiah had restored, God
would not suffer this sin to go unpunished, but 185000. of his army are
slain in one night, and he himself at last in the midst of his Idolatry, is
murdered by his sons, 2 King. 19, 35. 37. St. Paul delivered Hymineus and
Alexander over for this sin unto Satan, that they might learn not to
blaspheme, 1 Timothy 1. 21. Those rulers both of the Jews and Romans, that
blasphemed the worthy name of Christ, and persecuted his Ministers, James 2. 6,
7. felt the severe justice of God on them, and on their people, as learned
Bullinger, and laborious Fox well notes, [Bulling. in Apoc. sermon. 30. ad
finem.] for the Roman Emperors, have been troubled with most grievous war,
for no other cause, then that they refused peace offered to them by the Gospel.

Pilate under whom Christ suffered, by Tiberius, was banished to Lions, and at
length slew himself, Agrippa, that half Christian was imprisoned by him; The
Scribes and Pharisees and people of the Jews that believed not, were by
Vespatian and Titus his son, miserably destroyed, inhumanely butchered,
ignominously sold. Caiphas was deposed from the Priesthood, and Jonathan set in
his place. The Senate of Rome, refusing Christ and his Gospel, following
rather the law of man, then God, and preferring their ungodly Emperors, rather
then Christ to rule over them, were scourged, enslaved, and murdered, by the
same men they chose: for as they preferred the Emperors, and rejected Christ,
so the Lord stirred up the same Emperors against them in such sort, that both
the Senators themselves were almost all devoured, and the whole City most
horribly afflicted with sundry plagues, almost for the space of three hundred
years together: nor did the Emperors themselves escape unpunished for
persecuting Christ, and his Ministers; for they most of them came to a
miserable and wretched end, even in this life; some were poisoned, some were
stabd, some slain by their own Soldiers and Citizens; some killed themselves,
some were drowned, some made slaves, as Fox at large records it. [Fox his Act.
and Mon. Vol. 1. p. 27, 28, 29. printed at Land. 1610.] for none other cause
was Rome it self taken by the West Goths, burnt and destroyed by the East
Goths, then for contempt of Christ's word, and their loving their old
superstitious customs, and Idolatries. [Bulling. in Apoc sermon. 30. page 85.
English.] Nay, come we nearer home to our selves, and we shall find it was
this despising of Gods word, which caused the Britans (the ancient inhabitants
of this land) to be subdued, and brought into slavery by the Saxons; for they
hated the truth, loved lies, embraced evil instead of goodness, and regarded
mischief instead of virtue, received the devil and his ministers, instead of
an Angel of light, and the true Ministers of Christ, for all things whether
they pleased or displeased God, they were alike regarded, and therefore no
marvel, says Gildas, that such a degenerate people should lose their Country,
they had thus defiled. [Amor mendacii, susceptio mali pro bono venerati^
nequitiae pro benignitate exceptio Sathanae pro Angelo lucis, etc. Gildas
Cron.] Thus we may see how the just scourge and heavy indignation of God from
time to time, ever follows there, and how all things there go to ruin,
neither does any thing there well prosper, where the Gospel of Christ Jesus
the Son of God is contemned, and not received, as by these examples of the
Jews, Romans, Brittons, is evident, by whose example, says Mr. Fox, [Mr. Fox
Acts and M^^, Vol. 1. page 28. printed ut supra.] all Nations and Realms, may
take notice what it is to reject the visitation of Gods verity being sent, and
much more to persecute them which be sent of God for their salvation. I may
add that this was one cause why the Normans got this Kingdom, even by reason
of the great profaneness of Clergy and people, and great contempt of the true
doctrine of saving grace which appears by the blind ignorance and
superstition, contained in King Edgars oration to the Clergy, a little before
the Conquest, [Mr. Fox Acts and Mon. ut supra. page 153.] wherein is showed the
wantonness, pride, and filthiness of the Clergy, neglect of serving God, and
contempt of saving grace, of true works of piety and charity, and the
Idolatrous and superstitious practice and opinions both of Bishops, and Nobles,
who were persuaded by enriching of Churches, and giving to Monks and Friars,
they redeemed their souls, obtained pardon for their sins, and merited
heaven.

4. Reas. Fourthly, by despising and hating the word, and persecuting the
Ministers thereof, they despise and hate God himself, yea and persecute Jesus
Christ as he tells Saul from heaven, when he breathed out threatenings and
slaughters against the Disciples of the Lord, Acts 9. 1 4. [Christus sibi
tribuit quic quid sanctis suis accidit nam in membris suis patitur. Aretius
Com. in locum.] Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me? for Christ suffers in
his members, he that touches them, touches the apple of his eye, Zach. 2. 8.
for in regard of the mystical union which is between Christ and his Church,
what any member suffers, Christ who is the head accounts it his, for in all
their afflictions he is afflicted, He therefore, says the Apostle, that
despises them, despises not man, but God; He that hates them hates me:
Whatsoever ye do unto one of these little ones, ye do unto me, and surely who
ever despised the Lord, and prospered? who ever fought against him and
prevailed? he will slay the wicked, and they that speak against him wickedly,
shall be destroyed, evil shall slay them, and they that hate the righteous
shall be desolate, Psalm. 34. 21. it is just with God to render tribulation to
them that trouble them, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6. for if they shall be condemned to hell,
that show not works of mercy to his members, Mat. 25. 41. where shall be
their portion, who have derided, scorned, persecuted, and killed his
Ambassadors, his Ministers? 2 Cor. 5. 20. such must expect Pharohs, Antiochus,
Herod and Iulians plagues here, and unspeakable woe and torment, indignation
and wrath, tribulation and anguish hereafter, Romans 2. 8. 9. Wisd. 4. 18. for
they shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power, 2 Thessalonians 1. 9. The lowest place in the
infernal lake is their portion.

5. Reas. Fifthly, this sin must needs bring ruin, because there is no
conversion of such, so long as they continue herein, for the word is the pipe
or means whereby faith, and all graces are conveyed, whosoever despises that,
thrust from themselves the means of happinsse, and judge themselves unworthy of
eternal ^^fe, Acts 13. 46. now, such shall suddenly be destroyed without
remedy, Prove. 29. 1. who often being reproved out of the word, yet still harden
their neck; they must needs remain impenitent, and so subject to condemnation,
who either blow out the light that would show them the way to repentance, or
despise that hand, that would save them from drowning, without which they are
under the wrath of God, and unless men repent, believe, they cannot be saved;
for, whom God has ordained to the end he has also to the means, Romans 10. 17.
Mat. 5. 3. etc. Luke 13. 3. Mark 16. 16. He that believes not, is condemned
already, John 3. 18. 36. and without faith it is impossible to please him, Heb.
11. 6. there is nothing to be expected but woe and misery by them who do not
obey the truth, Romans 2. 8.

6. Reas. Lastly, continuance in this, as in all other sins, breeds hardness
of heart, and where grace is bestowed in any degree, there it increases to a
presumptuous sin, which whosoever committed, was to be cut off, Numb. 15. 30, 31.
and when to this presumption is added wilful, and continued malice, then it
becomes an irremissible sin; for he that despites the spirit of grace, and of
malice constantly persecutes the known truth, is in the gall of bitterness,
and bond of iniquity, he has sinned the sin unto death, 1 John 5. 16. it is
impossible for him to be renewed by repentance, Heb. 6. 4. for, to such there
remains no more sacrifice for sin, Heb. 10. 26. [Si capitale fuit legem Mosis
violare quantum magis exitiosum est a Christo deficere, Deus enim contemptorum
est ultor alioqui suum Ecclesiam non rite gubernaret nihil est autem Dei vicu
ir a horribilius, Beza in loc.] but a fearful expectation of judgment, and
fiery indignation which shall devour the adversaries; for, if he that despised
Moses law dyed without mercy, under two or three witnesses, of how much sorer
punishment shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of
God? (perfidiously rejecting the Gospel of Christ) and has counted the blood
of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified (in part, or at least seemed so to
men, and perhaps to himself too) an unclean thing, not able to cleanse him,
or at least unholy, in regard of some other means of cleansing he looks for in
himself, or some other) and has done despite unto the Spirit of grace; (which
clearly and plainly testified to his heart and conscience the contrary) for,
we know him that says, vengeance belongs unto me, and I will recompense it,
(he will be the Revenger of all contemners of his word) he will judge his
people: (and nothing is more fearful then to fall into the hands of the
living God) For, if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every
transgression and disobedience thereunto received a just recompense of reward:
How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation? much less if we
contemn the word, which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was
confirmed to us by them that heard him? Heb. 2. 2, 3. for, this is the sin
against the holy Ghost, [Mr. By fields Catal. of sins, fol. ult.] which is
unpardonable here and hereafter, Mat. 12. 32.

Thus your Majesty may see how dangerous the beginning of this sin is, how
deadly the continuance of it, and how desperate and destructive the end
thereof, and so, that I may conclude with Job, Job 9. 4. Who has hardened his
heart in this sin against God, and prospered? Surely no man, nor Nation, though
it be his own people, never so near, or dear unto him, if they cast away the
law of the Lord of Hosts, and despise the word of the holy One of Israel: The
anger of the Lord shall be kindled against them, so that as the fire devoureth
the stubble, and the flame consumes the chafe, so their root shall be
rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as the dust, Esaias 5. 24. such
contemners shall be as the dry combustible matter, fit and ready to be burnt,
and consumed by the judgments of God, which shall sease on them, from the
highest to the lowest, and shall utterly destroy them, both root and branch,
without pity, and hope of mercy or remedy; [Predicit propheta contumaces istos
fore aptissimos incendio atque levissimos ut nullo negotio Dei judiciis
consumantur ab imo ad summum disperdentur extirpabuntur consumentur radicitus,
Trem. and Iun. notae in loc.] They shall be scattered, rooted up, and totally
destroyed: And yet alas, how wonderful guilty are we of this sin? I may cry
out with the Prophet, the whole head is sick, and heart faint, from the sole of
the foot, the lowest of the people, to the crown of the head* they that sit
on the throne, there is no soundness, but wounds, and bruses, and putrified
soars, Esaias 1. 5, 6. made by this sin, as my Minor will prove.

The Minor.
The Minor to be proved. But we of this Kingdom, both Magistrates, Ministers,
and People, have despised Gods Word, and the sincere preaching thereof,
together with the Ministers that brought it. The Conclusion then will
certainly follow. Therefore destruction is coming on us, both on our
Magistrates, Ministers and People.
FOr first, have we not undervalued the Gospel, and lowly esteemed of the
inestimable benefit (the powerful preaching of the word) by loving, honoring,
and respecting of our selves, honors, pleasures, profits, sins, more then
that, whereby our obedience thereunto is slackened, his word disobeyed, and the
preaching thereof vilified? Let your Majesty judge, for, have not too many with
Ely, pampered and spared their lusts, and pleasures, though they knew them
sins, as he cockered his sons, though he knew their iniquity? Why are the
Papists tolerated, and their Mass allowed to be practiced, when our Church
condemns it for Idolatry? Was it not to promote your Majesty's honor, in
Marrying with one of the house of Austria, whom you could not obtain, without
this toleration, [Vide the Articles of the Marriage in Mr. Pryns Royal
Favorite.] Was it not for her Birth and Dowry, rather then for Gods glory, and
your Convenience, that she was chosen? surely Gods word was despised, who
prohibits such marriage, 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15. and 1 Cor. 7. 39. Mal. 2. 11. Ezra
9. 2, 14. Nehem. 13. 25. that your own pleasure, or profit might be fulfilled;
for, warning was given before hand, both of the sin, and danger, and yet
contemned, or at least not harkened to, [Vide the Archb. Abbots reason against
the Marriage, and Vex Populi.] Was it not self respect, (contrary to Gods
word, and the Declaration of the Biships in Ireland) [Vide the Declaration of
the Irish Bishops in Mr. Pryns Introduction to the Archbishops Trial.] that
caused your Majesty to connive at a toleration there? And, was it not for
favor to the Queen, contrary to the law of God, 2 Cro. 15. 13. Psalm. 101. 8.
1 King. 20. 42. and of the Realm, [Vide the Stat. against Jesuits and Sem.
Priests, Anno 1. 3. 13. Elizabeth: and the 1. 3. 5. Jacobi.] that Jesuits and
Priests were permitted to say Mass, were connived and spared, pardoned, and
let out of prison; as twenty Jesuits, within three days after the Match, [Mr.
Pryns Introd. to the Archb. trial, page 71, 72.] and afterward? Were not the
enemies of our Religion, Priests discharged, Recusants protected,
notwithstanding the Parl. Petition against them, and your gracious Answer
thereunto, and your Proclamation against them, which was most miserably
neglected? [Mr. Pryn ut supra, page 74. to page 148. but especially page 122,
123. etc. to 137. Are not those members of that man of sin, and son of
perdition, still protected by your Majesty as the faithfullest of your
subjects, peace made with them, large promises granted unto them, even to the
toleration generally of their Idolatry, and taking away all the penal Statutes
against them, and to make a peace with them whatsoever it cost, [Vide your
Majesty's Letter to Ormond, Feb. 27.] nay, is not promise made to join with
those monstrous Rebels, and in humane cut throats, yea, and put in execution to
fight against your Protestant subjects the Scots, and the Lord Inchequin? [Vide
your Majesty's Letter to Ormond, Feb. 16. 1644.] Is not this for your own
honor, to destroy Religion? for the maintenance of your pleasures, to despise
the Rule of his word? (in not punishing such monsters) in not defending your
oppressed subjects, in countenancing Papists, and undervaluing the purity of
the Gospel, in warring against your religious Parliament? only to please and
enjoy a Popish Princess favor, and love: so much your Majesty has confessed,
that as diverse men proposed several recompenses to themselves, for their
pains, and hazard in this Rebellion; so her company was the only reward you
expected, and wished for, [Your Majesty's Let. to the Qu. dated June 9. 1645.]
and again, all you expected in this war, was only the enjoying of the Queens
company, without which nothing can be contentment to you, [Your Maj. Let.
March. 30. 1645. without her return, you can neither have peace, nor comfort in
your self, [Your Maj. Let. dated Febr. 15. taken at Nazeby sight.] Again, that
you love her above all earthly things; (the flourishing of the Gospel, the
peace and happiness of the kingdom not excepted;) and therefore your
contentment is unseparably conjoined with hers, and all your actions must tend
to serve and please her: [Your Majesty's Letter, April 9. 1645.] But, was not
this Solomon's fault? his carnal love to his strange and Idolatrous wives,
caused him to contemn Gods Word, and to commit great folly in Israel; in so
much, that God rented the kingdom from him in his sons days? 1 King. 11. 2.
4, etc. to the 12. And surely, I desire the Lord to avert the like judgment
from you; for I cannot wholly free you from the sin: For, is not the
continuation of the wars, more for you own honor, then for Gods, for the
maintenance of human ordinances, as of Bishops and the old Lyturgy, then for
the advancement of Christ's Ordinances prescribed in his Word? Is it not out of
love to your Queen, rather then to your subjects? and to defend the Prelates,
rather then your Parliament? which is a sure testimony, that some about you
would persuade you rather to part with your faith, then with your pretended
friends; with your Religion, as Jehu did, then with any part of your royal
prerogatives; to secure which, no matter, say some, though the kingdom flow in
blood, though the Papists have all the power in Ireland, and all the
Protestants there in be destroyed, though the Laws of God and the Realms be
trampled underfoot; Nay, I have heard some say and wish, they would rather have
the Turk overrun the whole kingdom, then the reformation intended, should be
settled, [Rent. Woodman.] O let your Majesty consider seriously, whether
joining in marriage, and affinity with Papists and bloody rebels, to oppose the
Protestants in point of Reformation, for honor, power, pleasure, profit, or
any other self-respect, be not a departing from the truth, and an embracing of
this present world with Demas, a forsaking of the assembling of the Saints, and
despising of Gods Word. Did Jehu well in maintaining his sin, to maintain his
honor? to establish himself in his kingdom, to establish the sin of Jeroboam?
2 King. 10. 29. Is it godliness to maintain greatness in state, to maintain
greatness in the Church, to uphold absolute Monarchy, to allow of that wicked
Hierarchy? Iehu indeed, for destroying Baal, according to Gods will, was
granted this privilege, that his seed should reign after him; but because he
did it for his own ends, and not with an upright heart, God threatened to plague
him for his cruelry, Hosea 1. 4. his throne should continue but to the fourth
generation, 2 Kings 10. 31. [Though the blood was shed by Gods own appointment;
yet, because Jehu obeyed not Gods command, so much as his own ambition and
pride in shedding of it, therefore God will punish it as disobedience, so Mr.
Dike on the Heart, page 113.] For, though it was justice in God thus to punish
Ahab, and his posterity, yet it was cruelty in him to do it for his own ends to
obtain the kingdom, and to settle the crown the faster on his head.

The same may be said of our Henry the eighth, King of England, who destroyed
the Monks and Friars, renouncing obedience to Rome; the Lord for this deed,
granted his throne to be established to three of his generation, viz. King
Edward, Queen Mary, and Q. Elizabeth. But, because he sought not the Lord with
a perfect heart, nor did perform that work for Gods glory, but rather to
satisfy his own lusts, about his incestuous marriage; and also still retained
many Calves, Idolatrous worship, for the maintenance of his crown and state;
therefore in the next generation, his name was put out, Psalm. 109. 13. and
Prove. 10. 7. Surely, if all our actions tend not to Gods glory, they miss of
their right end, and so carry with them the guilt of sin, 1 Cor. 10. 31. even
fasting, prayer, almesgiving, if done for vainglory, is but hypocrisy, Mat.
6. 2. 5. 16. in Christ's judgment, and much more are evil actions sinful,
which are directed to an evil end. Bloodshed, and theft, acted to maintain
Pride and Idolatry, makes those sins of a deeper die then otherwise they would
have been, and contempt of the Gospel, and despising the powerful preaching of
the Word for our own ends, increases the sin to a greater height; and yet
alas, the disease is Epidemicall. I may justly complain, as sometimes Gildas
did of his contrymen, the [Britones propter avaritiam, and rapinam,
principum propter iniquitatem, and injustitiam judicum, propter defidiam
predicationis Episcoporum, propter luxuriam, and malos mores populi patriam
perdidisse: Mr. Fox his Acts and Mon. vol. 1. page 98. printed 1610.] Brittons,
that these ^^rs and plagues amongst us, are the punishments of our disobedience
to Gods Laws, and of our great contempt of the Gospel; these are still
maintained, by reason of covetousness and rapine of the Princes and Nobles,
who by policy and cruelty, seek to uphold an Arbitrary power, to make
Prerogative above Law, and by the iniquity and injustice of the Judges, both
Civil and Ecclesiastical, (who upheld Ship Money, and made many unjust and
ungodly Cannons, contrary to law, out of flattery, fear, profit: who took
bribes, allowed of usury, and exacted intolerable fees, committing symonie, in
making Ministers, who oppressed the innocent, grownd the faces of the poor,
orphants and widows, did all sorts of injustice in all Courts; but especially
in the High Commission, [Vide Mr. Newcomens Sermon preached before the House of
Commons, on Nov. 5. 1642. page 30.] Star Chamber, Court of honor, in the
Chancery, Court of Wards, and generally in all Ecclesiastical Consistories) by
reason of the pride, covetousness and idleness of Bishops and Prelates, who
neglected the sound and sincere preaching of the Word for saving souls, and
minded these earthly things, whose bellies was their god, Phil. 3. 19. whose
glory is now their shame, who sought themselves riches, honors, and not the
things that be Jesus Christ's, starving the flock committed to their charge, for
want of preaching, and feeding them only with a few read prayers, and that too
by their Curates, by means whereof, grew luxury, Ignorance, covetousness, and
all sorts of sins in the people, which they quickly learned from the evil
examples of the evil Governors, both in Church and State; which sins has so
besotted most men's hearts, and the custom therein so hardened them, that they
care not for the Word, nor for the preaching thereof in power, no^ will they be
directed hereby, but generally they cared for worldly things in the first
place, fixing their hearts on their wealth; and when either for fear or shame,
they dared not but come on the Sabbath days to Church; then also they did but
draw nigh to God with their mouths, their hearts were far from him, Isai. 29.
13. It was seldom they had a Sermon, (once a month the Law, [Vide the 46.
Can. made at London, 1603.] exacted no more;) and then too that work was done
carelessly and negligently, or oratorically, and vaingloriously, which very
little informed the understanding, by reason of the excess of speaking in an
unknown language, or in a strange dialect, with Rhetorical phrases, and using
many sentences of Fathers, very needless and unprofitable; and seldom, or very
shortly applying the doctrine to the souls of the auditors, for reformation of
their lives; Nay, men were grown to that profaneness, that they would take no
pains, nor be at any cost, for the gaining of the knowledge of God, they would
not go a furlong to hear a godly Preacher, nor meditate on the Word when they
did hear, much less practice what was taught them; but like the Gadarens, they
esteemed their Hogs, Luke 8. 37. [Gergeseni hi sunt homines, qui cum meliora
norint, and approbant tamen lucri cupiditate commoda externa preferunt; malunt
exulare ab illis Christum quam damna porcorum perpeti, malunt carere Christo,
quam gratia principum and ventris voluptatibus, Aretius com. in Mat. 8.] before
Christ and his doctrine; and like those in the Gospel, Luke 14. 18. make
excuses, why they could not labor after knowledge, and come unto Christ's
Supper; one has a Farm to look unto, he cannot tend to read and meditate on
the Word, and hear Sermons; another has Oxen and Sheep to look unto, and
Horses to dress, he cannot instruct his family, nor pray daily with them, nor
prepare for the Lords day, nor sanctify the Sabbath; another has married a
wife, and he cannot come early to Church to hear or pray: thus all have
business in their heads to look to, pleasures in their hearts to be fulfilled,
and lusts in their affections whereunto they are wedded, to be obeyed; few or
none care for holiness, and to put on the Lord Jesus Christ, laboring to have
the Word dwell richly in them, Col. 3. 16. But they trampled like Swine these
precious pearls under feet, Matthew. 7. 6. or else they heard it as Herod did,
who liked some things, and did some things, so far as it agrees with their
profits, honors, pleasures, Mar. 6. 20. [Tyrannus libenter audiebat in se
sententiam ferri, sed semen cadebat in loca petrosa.] But let their beloved
sins be touched, and they are ready upon a fit occasion, with him to casheer
their Teacher, and if their honors, and pleasures stand in the way, care not,
with Herod, though they strike off his head.

So mad are most grown in love with these onions, garlike, and fleshpots o^
Egypt, that with the Israelites the heavenly Manna is despised, Numb. 21. 5.
his ordinances slighted, the Lords Supper which in the Primitive times was
every day, Acts 2. 46. celebrated, is scarce once a year by many, and but once
by most received. Demetrius and Diotrephes in all places for their honors, and
profits, cry up the Diana of Episcopacie and that Hierarchy; together with the
ignorant, if not superstitious service of their forefathers, and to maintain
these, raise up many uproares against the faithful and conscientious Ministers
of the Gospel, who reprove their sins, Acts 19. 24. 27. [Si pergant illi totus
hic questus peribit.] for they know if Sermons be preached constantly, they
cannot then follow their pleasures as they have done, if Ministers shall not
have two benefices, their income will be much decreased, if Episcopacy and that
Hierarchy be abolisht, their honors and ambitious designs are vanished
[Hypocritae far non possunt ullos sese meliores aut majores cum modestia
singular Dei ministrorum ornamentum est, Mat. 23. 11. qui maximus est vestrum
sit vester minister, Bezae not in loc.] If ignorant and profane persons are
suspended from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, they shall be shamed, Romans 6.
21. and excluded, if godliness be countenanced, and good men only honored,
they shall be lightly esteemed, and disgraced. [Nam ambitiosos, and gloriae
inanis mancipia cura and solicitudo dies noctesque excruciat, dum honores
ambiunt, and ideo ab omnibus sibi metunt, quos vel virtute sua gradum quem ipsi
affectant mereri, vel ad illum aliis artibus contendere vident. Gualt. in Romans
Hom. 33.] If wickedness be zealously reproved and punished, they must not
escape censure, and pain; [Via Domini cum sit malista malis impugnari solet,
reprehendit enim Idololatriam quaestum, avaritiam adulteria scortati op^m and
similia in quibus mundus libere cupit vivere. Aretius Com. in Act. Apost. cap.
19.] to prevent which they cry down all Reformation, and cry up so mightily
the discipline that was in Queen Elizabeth's days: for well they know, that if
the Gospel be planted in the power and purity thereof, the greatest persons
lives and actions shall be subject to the censure of the Church, and not escape
scotfree (though guilty of blasphemy, adultery) in regard of their honor and
greatness, as formerly they have done; your gallants shall not imbroyder their
conferences with cursed oaths, and new coind imprecations, without reproof,
nor truant their time in carding and dicing, hawking, and hunting (as if
idleness were the Deity they adore, and unlawful immoderate and unseasonable
recreations, were their proper vocation) without control, Ministers shall then
be advanced for their merits, not money as before, for their gifts, graces and
labors, shall be rewarded, and not for their friends sake, or greatness be
respected; they shall be known to be sent of Christ, by the execution of their
Pastoral charge, in preaching and praying, from those who wanting ability
herein, declare plainly they crept in at the window, for profit or honor, Joh.
10 1. for wanting these gifts in some measure, they run before Christ sent
them, Acts 1. 4. and Mark 3. 14, 15. for he never sets any on work, whom he
furnishes not with abilities for his employment. By this means all dumb
dogs, lazy laborers, and buyers and sellers shall be cast out of the Temples.
Carnal Protestants, hollow hearted hypocrites, dissempling time-servers, and
Church Papists, shall be discovered and punished; [Veritas contraria docet,
obest nostris commodis, tollit nostram religionem, ergo non est ferenda hinc
nos discimus quam verum sit in mundo quemvis ad suum quaestum esse calidum
oportere. Aretius Com. in Act. 19] profane persons, and lukewarm Christians
shall not as before profane Gods Sabbath, with lascivious dancing, malicious
Cudgell-playing, gluttonous eating and drinking at their wakes, and revells,
hiding their eyes from the knowledge of that Commandment, and contemptuously
violating the same. Envious and malicious persons, raylers, oppressers, shall
not be permitted to eat and drink their own damnation, 1 Cor. 11. 29. nor
shall adultry and fornication, chambring and wantonness, obscene and
scurrilous talk, pass for sins of youth, Ephesians. 5. 6. be satisfied with
pecuniary mulcts or commuted with, for making a Case way to a Cathedral. A
twefthpenny forfeit shall not excuse the common swearer, nor ten groats
payment the ordinary drunkard. Usury and bribery in contempt of Gods word,
shall not be accounted lawful for politic ends; nor shall the covetous
worldling, or deceitful Tradesman, be assured of heaven on his deathbed, if he
will give some means to the Church or poor, to raise a Prebend, or build an
Almes-house, or help maintain a College. In a word, the vicious person
knows, or at least fears, he shall lose his beloved, pleasant, profitable
sin, his ignorance in heavenly matters shall be made known, John 3 20. [Sola
pravita in causa est cur homines oblatam lucem repudient. Bezae not. in loc.]
his formal profession shall be discovered, the vizard of his hypocrisy shall
be pulled off, his secret despising of Gods word, and Ministers shall be made
manifest, and those ungodly ways whereby he came to obtain his honors,
wealth, place, pleasure, worldly prosperity shall be condemned. [Causam
assignat quare Christum lucem aversentur homines, quia mala diligunt opera,
didicerunt sic male agere, ut non solum bona non possint, sed ne velint quidem,
ratio est quia lux perdit operam malitiam, ideo fugiunt lucem ne lux adhibita
monstret reliquis quam hi sint faedi. Aret. Com. in fo. 3.] And therefore it is
that he is so great a hinderer of Reformation, so great opposer of the truth,
so great an enemy to good men, and to the powerful preaching of the word by
them, so great a hater to the discipline of Christ, and of the best reformed
Churches, for if Gods glory were sought more then our own, if the profit of
our brethren were regarded before our own, if we sought Christ's will, and not
our own, [Opes honores amicos patriam, etc. diliguntur pro Christo, hoc
monstrat quam faedum sit quam detestabile coram Domino, hoc mundus far non
potest. Aret. ut supra.] we could not despise his word, and the purity and
power of his ordinances, as we have formerly done, and still continue in the
same: for what is it the Parliament have desired of your Majesty which a godly
Prince may not grant? what is it the Assembly of Divines have agreed on which
is not agreeable to Gods word, and the best reformed Churches? have they
desired the nullifying of all oaths, declarations and proclamations against
them and their proceedings? Did not your Majesty promise and solemnly engage
your self on the word of a King, [Vid. your Majesty's answer to the
Parliaments Petition for a guard in the packet of letters taken at Nazby, page
51.] that the security of every one of them, was and should be ever as much
your care as the preservation of your self and your children? did they desire
your Majesty to swear and sign the solemn League and Covenant, and by an act
to enjoin the taking thereof by all the subjects of the three Kingdoms? Did
not godly King Asa do the same with consent of his Nobles, and that on pain
of death, 2 Chronicles. 15. 12, 13. for refusing? and did not Nehemiah that godly
governor, with the Princes, Levites, and Priests together with the people,
enter into a Curse and into an Oath? Nehem. 10. 29. is not the pious example of
your learned Father a good president, fresh in memory, who to the glory of God
and the good example of all men, with the three estates of that Realm
protested and subscribed [Vide The confession of the Church of Scotland
subscribed to at Edinburgh, Jan. 28. 1581. in the Harmony of Confess. printed at
Camb. 1586. ad finem.] irrevocably? and in particular for the abolishing of
Episcopacie and that Hierarchy, which in the Convention of Scotland, April 24.
ann. 1576. appeared to have no footing in the Scripture, but to be a humane
fiction and invention received into the Church to the great hurt thereof; and
so again confirmed in the assembly at Glasco ann. 1581. April 24. wherein the
Presbyterian discipline was agreed on; and your Royal father and his subjects,
by the Kings command, to the form of faith then agreed on, subscribed and
sealed, swearing solemnly to defend the said Discipline to their last breath.
[Altare Damascen. in epist. Philad. p. 6. Glascue An. 1581. April 24. hanc
formulam fidei Rex Jacobus and subditi Regis jussu chyrographo consignarent
sancte jurantes se hanc disciplinam ad extremum balitum propugnaturos.] Which
Discipline was after many times confirmed, as An. 1587. and 1589. and 1592. and
1595. and 1596. Fourthly, is not the desire of Confirming by an Act, the
calling and sitting of the Assembly of Divines, such men as are upright in
heart, and have sanctified themselves, more reasonable then to have a
Convocation of Bishops and Prelates (who were the persons to be censured) and
therefore could not be judges in their own cause, who had been the chief
cause of all our corruptions in Church and State, and therefore most unfit to
correct or reform others. The good King Hezechiah caused the Levites to help
forward the work of the Lord, because the Priest were polluted, 2 Chronicles. 29.
34. Fifthly, was it not fit that all means against Jesuits and Popish
Recusants (the plotters and chief agents in this horrid confusion and Civil
War) should be put in execution, which might tend to their utter destruction
out of this Realm, [Vide the book of prayers set out by King James after the
Powder plot.] which is the sum of the prayer for the fifth of November, and
that your Majesty should assent to your Parliament herein, as good King Josiah
did? 2 Kings 23. 5. 20. Is there not great need, that an Act pass for the due
observation of the Lords day, which has been so horribly profaned, after the
example of good Nehemiah? Nehem. 13. 22. which is a most necessary and
Religious duty, which God expects from you in justice; and are not the
suppression of innovation in Church, in and about the worship of God,
Pluralities, non-residency, superstitious and simoniacall customs in the
Universities, and Schools; of Stage plays, of the injurious oppressing Court
of Wards; all Acts of Justice, and piety, they being all contrary to the word
of God, and hateful to good men, [Numb. 15. 39. Acts 20. 28. 2 King. 23. 24.
Deuteronomy. 22. 5. Esaias 58. 6.

Did not the former abuse of Officers of State, whereby your Majesty was abused,
and Subjects greatly wronged, call for an Act to take the accounts of the
kingdom? 2 Kings 12. 7, 10. and does not the present miseries of sundry godly
persons, who have ventured their lives, and fortunes, for their Religion and
Liberty, and public good of the kingdom, require an Act to relieve sick and
maimed soldiers, widows, and children of soldiers deceased? Esaias 1. 16, 17.
and another Act for the [Nehem. 5. 4. etc. to the 13.] payment of public
debts, and damages of the kingdom? and is it not fit the Treaties of both
Kingdoms be inviolably confirmed, for the public good and peace of the
Kingdoms? as David dealt with the Nobles of Israel, after Ishbosheths death, 2 Samuel 5. 3. Or can your Majesty with conscience or honor, deny Justice to be
done on those bloudthirsty Rebels of Ireland, whose lands your Majesty has
already sold, and persons resigned over to your Parliament to punish, and that
by a special law? [The Act made for the sale of the Rebels lands, wherein the
managing of the war against them is wholly referred to the two Houses] does not
Gods word require the blood of those to be shed, who have been chief actors and
fomentors of this bloody and unnatural war? wherein many thousand innocent
souls have been butchered and murdered? Genesis 9 6. Numb. 35. 31. [Though he
could give all the riches in the world, and though the Avenger of blood were
willing to free the murderer, yet he was to be put to death, because the soul
of the party slain is in the possession of God, Maimon. vide Ains. expos. on
Genesis 9. and does not Solomon command, to take away the wicked from the King,
and his throne shall be established in righteousness? Prove. 25. 4, 5. and who
may do this but the supreme Court of the Kingdom, who have the power
committed to them from God and man? (so that whosoever will not do the law of
God* and the law of the King they are to execute judgment speedily upon him,
whether it be unto death, or unto banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or
to imprisonment, Ezra 7. 26. unto whom can your Majesty more safely commit the
arming and training of your forces, both by sea and land, then unto your Grand
Council? when Solomon tells you, Without Council purposes are disappointed,
but in the multitude of Councillors there is safety, Prove. 15. 22. and 11. 14.
And again, by wise counsel thou shall make thy war, and in the multitude of
Counselors there is safety, Prove. 24. 6. and where no counsel is the people
fall: For, every purpose is established by counsel, and by good advice make
war, Prove. 20. 18. [Id est, in amplo conciliario prudentibus conciliis
variisque instructissimo, Trem. and Jun. not. in loc.] Nor is it fit, your
Majesty should bestow honor on those persons that fear not God, Psalm. 15. 4.
such vilde persons (who have by their fair speech caused you to be partaker of
innocent blood, enwrapping you and your friends in remediless calamities,
beguiling with falsehood and deceit of their lewd disposition, the innocence and
goodness of your own nature; Ahashuerus sets it forth by his own example in
Haman: [In the 2. book of Esther, chap. 16.] such in your sacred eyes, ought to
be disesteemed, as godly King David dealt with some of his Courtiers, 1 King.
2. 6. 9. and promised to cut off all the wicked doers from the city of the
Lord, Psalm. 101. 4. 8. he will not approvingly, know a wicked person, a
practice worthy your imitation; for flatterers always will frequent the Court,
[Ananilans adulatores assimulabat per omnibus qui triticum nacti non discedunt,
donec vacuum reddiderent: sic illi divitum substantiam rodunt, Lycost. Apoth.
de Adulat.] and ambitious spirits attend great Personages; and therefore sees
they often are cheated in choice of their officers, and so the Commonwealth is
oppressed, (they seeing for the most part, with others eyes, and hearing with
others ears,) therefore who more fit to nominate public officers of State,
then the grand Council, to whose wisdom the difficult matters of the kingdom
is committed, by whom all causes, both criminal, capital, and ecclesiastical
are to be dermined and judged, and from whom there lies no appeal; [Vide Mr.
Pryns Sovereign power of Parliament and Kingdoms, page 32.] Who can be so fit
Judges to choose Tutors and Governors for the heirs of the Kingdom? and to
find out convenient matches for the honor of God and the public good, then
they who are generally interressed, and cannot so easily be byased amiss, for
honor or profit, as private persons may? Is it not high time for your Majesty,
and all Protestant Princes, firmly to unite themselves, when the Papists are
swollen so high with malice and envy? and the Turks and Tartars are invading
Christendom, [Vide the Moderate Intelligencer for April and May, 1646.] Does
not nature oblige your sacred Majesty to defend your sister and her progeny,
though the two Princes little deserve that favor from this kingdom, in being
instruments of so much bloodshed, and mischief? Prove. 17. 17. For a brother is
born for adversity, to rescue him from his enemies, if he can, as Abraham did
his Nephew Lot, Genesis 14. 14. And is it not a special means to preserve peace
to forget as well as to forgive the injuries offered one another in this civil
war? As Christ forgave us, so must we our brethren, Ephesians. 4. 32. Now, he
passes an act of oblivion, Jer. 31. 34. and Heb. 8. 12. the like must we; and
if we have wronged any person, we must make restitution, either in word, or
deed, as Zacheus did, Luke 19. 8. Lastly, is it not fit, if we will enjoy
peace, that the Armies which disturbed us, be disbanded, and that those
prescribe both the time and manner, who are entrusted, both by your Majesty and
subjects, for the good of the Kingdom (as the Princes of Israel determined
about the captives and their soldiers), 2 Chronicles. 28. 12. 15. and much more for
the confirming of the Charters, Customs, and Liberties of the City of London
already granted, (which have so firmly stood to the Parliament in this just
war,) and for granting what other propositions may make for the safety,
welfare, and government of that city; beside those there specified, which both
Houses of Parliament shall approve: as Artaxerxes with his seven Counselors,
granted unto Jerusalem for the service of God, and welfare of that city, Ezra
7. 11, 12, 13. to the 27. at Ezdras request. And as the Parliaments desires are
just and laudable, so are the Assemblies actions approved by Gods Word, and
confirmed by the practice of the best reformed Churches: [Vide the Harmony of
Confessions, and the best example of the best reformed Churches.] which is too
tedious to particularize, the grounds of abolishing the old Lyturgie, and of
prescribing this present Directory, being hereafter in this present Declaration
more largely treated on. Give me leave only to show you how greatly true
invocation of Gods name, by fervent and devout prayer, has been contemned,
whilst reading stinted prayers are exalted chiefly, and commanded, when there
is no precept nor pattern throughout the Word, no example nor president in the
Word, of any holy man that ever read a prayer in stead of calling on Gods Name;
(though this humane practice through the deceiveablenesse of the man of sin,
has for a long time blinded the multitude of the Christian world, as Saint
Paul foretold) 2 These. 2. 10* For, to pray aright, is to invocate the name of
the true God, Heb. 11. 6. through the mediation of Christ, 1 Timothy 2. 5. in
spirit and in truth, John 4. 24. with heart, and sometimes with voice, 1 Samuel
1. 13. for our present wants, Psalm. 50. 15. James 1. 5. Luke 11. 12, 13.
according to the Will of God, 1 John 5. 14. assisted by the Holy Ghost Romans 8
26. 1 Cor. 15. 15. Jud. 20. Ephesians. 6. 18. Gal 4. 6. which cannot be performed
so well in reading prayers, as without book it may. We have the example of
Christ, his Apostles, the Patriarchs and Prophets of old, who all prayed
without a book, by the assistance of Gods Spirit in them, whose examples we
ought to follow; yea, all spiritual men, who can alone discern of spiritual
gifts do all acknowledge, that read prayers are not so pleasing to God as other
are, 1 Cor. 2. 14, 15. and therefore none (unless some weak Christians) make
use thereof in private, (nor public, I believe willingly): For the holy Ghost
and our spirits, are as the soul and life of prayer, as Zanchy [Sanctae preces
debent a sancto spiritu proficisci sine quo caret anima, Zanch. comment. in
Ephesians.] calls it, as our soul, and Gods powerful providence, are the form and
life of our body; therefore, as the body without the soul is dead, James 2. 26.
so are our prayers, without the heart be lift up to God by faith, and by the
Holy Ghost: But a dead and stinking carcass in Gods sight. The Papists
themselves acknowledge, that it must be Gods Spirit which must stir us up to
pray, and teach us what to pray for, [Orate in spiritu sancto, i. e. in spiritu
sancto monente ad orandum, and docente quid orandum, Gor. Expos. in Epist. Jud.
20.] For, how else can we pray with the Spirit, and with understanding? This
reading disgraced, and not instructed the Church and Ministers, as if they had
not had the Spirit, or at least knew not how to pray; Nay, the common sort,
both of Ministers and people, grew into such Atheism, that very few learned
all the days of their life, to power out their souls aright unto God, which
has generally brought the whole kingdom into such Atheism, that not scarce
one Minister of a hundred, it is Doctor Featleys own comparison, has any
tolerable gift of conceived extemporary prayer, [Vide Dr. Featley against the
Anabaptists, in justifying set-form of prayer.] And if it be so rare in the
Ministry, what must it be in the people? Surely he is a rare man that has this
gift; and yet it is one of the principal duties required of all Ministers, to
give themselves unto prayer, Acts 6. 4. incessantly, with all diligence, as the
word in the original emphatically signifies, (...), forti animo assidue
perdurabimus. Passer Lexic.] The mischief and inconveniences which accompanies
this tradition, our Reformers (as well as the Ministers in other Churches,) saw
not, the long and general continuance of Church Lyturgies, having dazzled their
eyes, that they could not see this truth, which out of doubt, had they lived to
our days, to have seen the experience of it, they would have joined with this
learned and religious Assembly, to have corrected this offense, [Vitium quod
inebriat multitudinem examen amittit veritatis, Musc. in loc commun. de
Sabbat.] which has so intoxicated the multitude.

The properties of true prayer, cannot be performed so well in reading prayer;
for a man cannot be fervent, striving and contending both in heart and word, to
prevail with God, as is required by the Apostle, Romans 15. 30. nor can he
continue instant in prayer, that is tied to read any set-form, and no more,
verbatim, as is commanded. Romans 12. 12. nor continue in prayer, and watch in
the same, Col. 4. 2. nor insist by perseverance, as Christ teaches, without
fainting, Luke 11. 5, 6. and 18. 1. unless he use vain repetitions of his
stinted prayers, reading over till he sweat, the same, and the same thing,
thinking with the Heathen, to be heard for his vain babbling, as the Jesuits
disciples do in their Rosary, [Vide Rosarum vel Psalterium Jesus.] which Christ
forbids, Mat. 6. 7. Nor can they pray always, on all occasions and
opportunities, who only read stinted prayers, because the particular fears,
temptations, dangers and wants of every man, cannot be known, but varies, and
changes continually, as he grows in grace, or falls into sin; and therefore
not by rote, or as his book teaches him, but by the Holy Ghost, as he moves
him, and as his present estate and condition requires, is he to pray, opening
his wants, pleading his cause, and appealing to God for help, Ephesians. 6. 18. and
Col. 4. 2, 3. In every thing by prayer and supplication, his request must be
made known unto God, Phil. 4. 6. and this also must be done effectually, James
5. 6. with motives, reasons, and arguments to persuade God to hear him: as the
Holy Ghost moves him, which cannot always agree with the time, person, place,
and several conditions of men; and therefore cannot be penned absolutely.
Christ, when he taught his Disciples to pray, it was, Say after this manner:
or, say these word, Our Father, etc. Luke 11. 2. and Mat. 6. 9. But never he
commands them to read these words in stead of praying: For, in so doing, they
may say the Lords Prayer, but may not pray the prayer of the Lord, as he taught
them, as one well observes, [Mayrs Catechism in his Exposition on the Lords
Prayers:] For to pray those words rightly, we must in some measure understand
them, and have the mind taken up with them in the uttering, the heart still
conveying it self into the meaning of every petition, which that it may be
done, there must be used good deliberation, and understanding in him that
prays; I will add also, the help of Gods Spirit, to stir up in him both
matter, and also affection, agreeable to the words spoken, without which, we
cannot pray as the word requires, viz. in the spirit, Ephesians. 6. 18. Jud. Epist.
20. nor by the Spirit, Romans 8. 15. 1 Cor. 12. 3. Gal. 4. 6. nor with the
Spirit, 1 Cor. 14. 15. Romans 8. 26. but must needs pray cursorily,
hypocritically, or vainly, which alas is the daily practice of the world, who
cry out for these read prayers, but are altogether unfit for the exercise,
being either ignorant of this spiritual duty, or else hypocritical in the
service: or, Lastly, sinful, and incredulous, all whose prayers are
abomination to the Lord, Joh. 9. 31. Prove. 15. 8 and 21. 27. Esaias 66. 3. and
Esaias 1. 15. Mat. 6. 5. Heb. 11. 6. and because they are unable to pray
otherwise then by book; therefore it is, that both lazy, ignorant, and
licentious Ministers and people, cry up this reading of a set form, instead
of praying, and despise true invocation, and cry against the spiritual
performance of this duty, which indeed they cannot discern; it seems
foolishness unto them as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 2. 14. because they want
this grace which God only conferres on his elect children, Gal. 4. 6. Zach.
12. 10. and because they want also Christ's Spirit, without which no man knows
the things of God, 1 Cor 2. 11. But this truth has God revealed unto his by
his Spirit, which searches all things, even the deep things of God; therefore
in despising this truth, they despise Gods Ordinance, and in speaking against
his Ministers, they speak against Christ, Luke* 10. 16. and in defending read
prayer, as absolutely necessary, they defend a humane, if not Popish tradition,
a Gentile custom, [So Dr. Hammond confessed, citing two places to prove it,
one of Plato, l. 7. de legib. the other in Alex. ab Alex. l. 4. cap. 17. That
the Gentiles read their prayers out of a book before their sacrifices. View of
the Direct. page 18.] if not a Sathanicall invention, which antiquity, custom,
and multitude of examples cannot make lawful, which are the old pleas of
Popery, and Idolatry. But I would not be here mistaken, as if I condemn all
reading of other men's prayers, or of the prayers penned in Scripture by the
Holy Ghost, or the using of any godly man's set forms, or of the Churches
appointment, as if all set forms were vain, superstitious, or sinful, I
cannot comply so far with the enthusiasts, for I know, that both matter,
words, and expressions may be learnt thence, and both Ministers and people may
thereby be directed to keep like soundness in doctrine, and prayers. The
general heads, sense, and scope of prayers may thereby be known to all: And
hereby there may be a consent of all the Churches in the substance of this
spiritual service; and from these forms (as the Preface in our Directory
speaks well) Christians may if need be, have some help, and furniture, and
yet so, as they become not hereby sloathfull, and negligent, in stirring up the
gifts of Christ in them, but that each Christian by reading, and often
meditating, and hearing of the word, and by wisely observing the ways of
divine providence, and of his own wants and necessities, may be careful to
furnish his heart, and tongue, (Gods Spirit helping him) with other materials
of prayer, as shall be needful on all occasions; but it is the opinion of
necessity of reading of set forms in the act of prayer, which I condemn,
whereby the heart is distracted, and the eyes always, and mind too often
withdrawn from God, contrary to David's gesture in prayers, Psalm. 5. 3. and
123. 1. At best as Master Perkings accounts them, they are but crutches, and
staves for weak and lame Christians to rest on, as he styles them, in his
Cases of Conscience, [Mr. Perkins Cases of Conscience, in question concerning
reading other men's prayers, circa finem] and so unfit for Ministers and strong
Christians to use, who should not still stand at a stay, but should grow in
this grace, as well as in others, having all of them the spirit of prayer given
to them, Gal. 4. 6. Zach. 12. 10. [Id est, gratiosum spiritum Regenerationis
qui ex gratia Dei and in gratia Dei est ac proinde recipiscentes a peccato suo
adducit ut deprecentur ipsum and implorent ipsius misericordiam, Trem. Iun. in
locum.] and a promise of assistance Romans 8. 26. herein, and therefore we ought
carefully to labor after it, and not to be children in understanding, 1 Cor.
14. 20. still learning their A B C, saying their lessons within book, or by
rote, but to be men in understanding, such as are able to digest strong meat,
being of full age, able not only to power out petitions for our selves, but to
teach others how to pray, having our senses exercised, to discern good and
evil, Heb. 5. 12, 13, 14. But alas, the love of men's sins, pleasures, profits,
honors, the love of ancient Customs, Traditions, and to follow the way of the
multitude, and the examples of Superiors; besides, self-conceitednesse,
neglect and contempt of reading, meditating on the word, and of harkening to
reproof, and a trying our worship by that touchstone: besides, men's ignorance,
and wilfulness, in this holy duty, (lest their sins should be discovered
herein) so blind their eyes that they will not give way to this pure Ordinance
of God. They are altogether for the discipline of the purest times of Queen
Elizabeth, and indeed are alike to the people in her days, if not worse in
this sin, for then says Mr. Dent. [The Plain man's pathway to heaven, p.
122.] It was most lamentable to consider how lightly men esteemed of the
Gospel, they regarded it (to use his own words) no more then an eggeshell,
they think it not worth a Gally halfpenny, they will not go to the door to
hear it, they take it to be but a breath from us, and a sound to them, and so
the matter is ended, they esteem it but as a noise, or empty sound in the air,
or as a voice afar off, which a man understands not, they never felt the
power of it in their hearts, therefore they prefer their sheep, farms, oxen,
their profi^^ and pleasures, yea every thing before it, they know not the
virtue of this precious pearl, therefore like filthy swine, they tread it
under their feet, though all the Merchandise of gold, silver, precious stones,
are not to be compared unto it, Prove. 3. 14. yet these beasts, hogs and dogs of
the world, contemn it, they esteem a cow more then Christ's glorious Gospel,
they are like Esop^ Cock, which made more account of a Barley corn, then of a
precious stone; like children, they esteem rattles before gold, they are like
the Gadarens, which esteemed their hogs, more then Christ and his Gospel,
they make nothing of it, they think it not worth the while. Many of them sit
idle in the streets even upon the Sabbaths whilst the Gospel is preached in
their Churches, many are at cards and tables in Alehouses, many upon the
Sabbaths sleep upon their beds all the Sermon while in the afternoon; many
will hear a Sermon in the forenoone, and that, they take to be as much as God
requires at their hands, and that he is somewhat beholden to them for it: but
as for the afternoon, then they will be at bowls or tables; these men serve
God in the forenoone, and the Devil in the afternoon; some run after whores
and harlots on the Sabbaths, some run to dancing, and Beare-baytings, some sit
upon their stalles, some sit in their shops, some by the fireside, some sit
idly in the streets, some go to the stoole-ball, and others look on: O
miserable wretches! O cursed catiffes! O monstrous hell hounds, which so
grossly and openly contemn the Gospel of Christ! what will become of them in
the end, for assuredly their damnation sleeps not? A thousand deaths wait for
them: they lie open on all sides to the wrath of God, and we may wonder at his
mavelous patience, that he does not throw down balls of wild fire from
heaven, to consume them, their shops, and their houses, and even make them
spectacles of his vengeance for so notorious contempt of such sacred holy
things. And whether this age does not outstrip our forefathers in the
profanation of the Sabbath, and despising the sound and sincere preaching of
the Word, let the ancient godly that lived in those days judge? For now is
fulfilled that of the Apostle: men make a show of godliness, but deny the
power of it, 2 Timothy 3. 5. this grace of God is turned to wantonness, Jude 4.
they profess they know him, but deny him in their deeds, Tit. 1. 16.
[Infelices illi quorum confessio superficialis, operatio infidelis conscientia
ab minabilis incredulitas obstinata conversatio reproba, Gorr. Expos. in
Titum.] being abominable, disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate. They
so far only hear it, receive it, embrace it, as it hinders them not in their
pleasures, deprives them not of their profits and honors, as it agrees with
their humors, lusts and likings, as it thwarteth not their credits, polices,
and beloved sins; but let these be touched, and presently the Minister
preaches false doctrine, is a schismatique, or a mad fellow, as Jehues
companions counted of the Prophet, 2 King. 9. 11. a hole is picked in his coat,
and fault is found with his life or doctrine, and thus the Word is to all
worldlings the savor of death unto death, 2 Cor. 2. 16. Alas, our Governors
with Saul, have spared the Papists, as he did Agag (whom he devoted to
destruction) Rev. 18. 6. sparing the fattest of the cattle, the wealthiest of
them, that with their revenues they may be able to sacrifice to God, 1 Samuel 15.
11. and might enrich themselves.

We have despised prophsying, it is cast out of our Church, as an unnecessary
duty, 1 These. 5. 22. and 1 Cor. 14. 3. 31, etc. once a quarter was enough pains
for a Bishop to preach. Once a year it came to a Prebends turn, [So it was in
many Cathedral Churches; yea, diverse Prebends, at the Cathedral of Sarum, had
no day to preach at all:] For which, perhaps, he had a corpse worth three or
four hundred pounds yearly, when many laborious Ministers had not thirty
pounds; and yet the one, for his oratoricall strains, or strong lines, and
strange language, is admired, when the other, like Christ, being daily heard,
and reproving boldly men's hypocrisy and sins, is hated, Mat. 15. 24. And do
not the people generally hear the Word, pretend to obey, and do nothing less?
but like the Elders of Israel, they come to Church to enquire of the Lord, and
sit before the Preacher, but they despise his judgments, and walk not in his
statutes, but pollute his Sabbaths, and set up their Idols in their hearts,
Eze. 20. 1. 16. whom God refuses to be enquired of; have we not lost our first
love of those zealous and devout martyrs in Queen Mary's days, who perfectly
hated the whore, and laid down their lives for the testimony, of Jesus and of
the truth? [As Cranmer, Latimer, Hooper, Ridley, Philpot, etc.] Are we not
become like Laodicea, lukewarm, neither Atheists nor zealous, but between Popish
and Protestant, both in discipline and doctrine; as has been clearly and
plainly evidenced by many godly Ministers, which God has raised up amongst us?
[As Coleman; Burton, Hallinsham, Benson, in the 11. year of Eliz. so Bakers
History of her reign.] (though we would not hear them,) who made profession of
the pure Religion, and would allow nothing but what was directly taken out of
the Scriptures; and therefore openly condemned the received discipline of the
Church of England, as savouring too much of the Romish Religion; we have
generally been like the Pharisees, making a great outward show of holiness and
love to the Word, but loath it i^ our affections, deny it in our actions; for
within we are all full of hypocrisy and iniquity, Matthew. 23. 2, etc. per totum.

There are too many amongst us, who have known the truth, but with Demas, for
profit have embraced the present world, and with Diotrephes for prehemimence,
have prated against the Ministers of Christ with malicious words, 2 Timothy 4. 10
and Jo. 3. epist. 9. 10 For in Queen Elizabeth's reign, diverse Ministers
foretold of this War, [Mr. Brightman on the Apocal. Mr. Dent in his Plainmans
pathway. The Admonition to the Parl. and the defense of the Admon. Mr. Fox in
his Acts and Mon. Mr. Ainsworth Count. poison.] and openly proved the
Ecclesiastical form of government to be a thing polluted with Roman dregs;
but the Bishops hated this light and the Parliament: regarded not their
admonitions, lest their deeds should be disclosed to be evil, Ioh. 3. 20. Not
long after some of these came forth the Book called Martin Marprelate, and a
demonstration of the discipline, by Mr. Penry, Mr. Udall, against the
government of the Bishops, desiring the discipline of Genevah, and their
abettors were Sir Knightly, and Sir Wigstone Knights, and Mr. Cartwrite, Mr.
Snape, Mr. King, Mr. Pradlow, Mr. Pain, and others, who though persecuted and
imprisoned, yet to the death maintained the truth, [Bakers Chron. in the life
of Queen Eliz. p. 114. 115.] But the Prelates, and those luke warm Magistrates
in those days with Alexander, greatly withstood their words, whom without
doubt the Lord has rewarded according to their deeds, 2 Timothy 4. 15. for they
like the false Apostles amongst the Corinthians, beguiled with subtilty, the
hearts of the Civil Magistrates from the simplicity of the Christian doctrine
they taught, disgracing them, and their Ministry, 2 Cor. 10. 10. being
deceitful workers, transforming thmeselves into the Apostles of Christ, 2 Cor.
11. 13. [Aperte tandem istos coloribus suis depingit predicens fore ut
quantumcunque zelum gloriae Dei simulent, tandem seipsos prodant, sic Beza in
locum.] when indeed they were ravening wolves, devouring his flock; for as
Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so did these the truth by their false
glosses, oratoricall expositions, 2 Timothy 3. 8. bending their tongue like their
bow for lies, Ier. 9. 3. and not being valiant for the truth, they hated him
that reproved in the gate, and they abhorred him who spoke uprightly, they
could not endure to have any one preach against their superstitious worship,
their proud Hierarchy, to tell the King hereof it was conspiracy, Amos 5. 9.
As Christ for declaring to the world his spiritual Kingdom, was cried up for a
traitor, Io. 19. 12. St. Paul for preaching the Gospel, by the Jews is
counted a pestilent fellow, a man of sedition among the Jews, throughout the
world, a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarens, Acts 24. 5. The Christians
are accused for rebellion against Cesars decrees; for men that turn the world
upside down; Act. 17. 6, 7. and thus amongst us, have the most Orthodox
Pastors, and conscientious Christians been accused for rebellion, sedition,
schism, both in Queen Elizabeth and King James his reign, and even at this
present day its verified. The Reformation now in hand, is counted an odious
rebellion, [Vide your Majesty's Proclamation against taking the Covenant, the
21. of June, in the 19. year of your reigne] the Reverend Assembly is reputed
a seditious Conventicle, [So Mercurins Aulicus often styles them.] A Consistory
of persecuters, [Hammonds Preface in his view of the Directory.] and their
chief act, an Ilogicall conclusion, because one of the three motives is not of
strength to bear such a structure, therefore all three together are
insufficient. But surely, the Dr. has forgot his logic [Vid. cap. 1. in that
book.] about Fullacia divisionis, and that thing may be Been Conjunctim, which
is Male divisim, [Though 2. be not, 5. nor 3. 5. yet 2. and 3. is 5.] (although
either of the three be strong enough to ground the abolition on) But the Dr. I
fear, is of the number of those who say to the Seers, see not, and to the
Prophets, prophecy not unto us right things, prophecy unto us deceit, Esaias
30. 10. get ye out of the way, turn ye out of the path, like the Scribes,
Pharisees, hypocrites, who shut up the kingdom of heaven against men, they
neither went in themselves, nor suffered them that were going in, to go in,
Mat. 23. 13. for so, our Prelates neither preach themselves, nor suffered those
that would preach the Gospel, to preach; but put down all Lectures, as a
company of vagrants, and forbad preaching in the afternoones, and silenced most
of the conscientious Ministers of the land, [Newcomens Sermon before the house
of Commons the fifth of November, page 26. Anno 1642.] and would not suffer any
things against Arminianisme to be printed, or preached, but as many for it as
would, [Vide the Autidote against Arminianisme in the Preface] the Press was
open: so that truth failed in the streets, and equity could not enter; yea,
truth failed, and he that departed from iniquity made himself a prey, Esaias 59.
14, 15. in so much that men dare not for politic ends to be accounted
religious, or precise, men were ashamed to be esteemed zealous Protestants, they
were nicknamed for Puritans, Precisians, it was a reproach to the godly to
hunger after the word, and carefully and painefully to seek after the food of
their souls: A Sermon at the next Church (as one calls it) [Nucomens Sermon,
ut supra, page 29.] was the forbidden fruit, when they had none at home, or
worse then none; and for the godly to meet to pray, and confer, was peccatum
irremissibile, thus they suppressed not only private, but public assemblies,
so far were men from trembling at the word, and weeping when they heard the Law
read. Esa. 66. 2. and Neh. 8. 9, 10. which condemned their sins, that they
hated those that observed this duty, as the hypocrites in Israel, Isa. 66. 5.
and cast them forth of the Church, saying, Let the Lord be glorified, thinking
that hereby they did do God good service, as Christ foretold of such, Joh. 16.
2. to his Disciples, who should put them out of the Synagogues, and kill them
under that pretense, as if God could not be glorified but by them, and by their
service, which they have prescribed; for, are not many amongst us so proud and
disdainefull that they boast, that God would lose his glory, and be
dishonored? yea, The glory would depart from Israel, [So the Dr. in his
Preface upon the view of the new Directory his sixth Note] and Atheism and
profaneness, would necessarily follow the abolition of their Idol Liturgy,
without which they think God cannot be served, and wanting this their Religion
is lost, [Fastuorum hypocritarum verba qui Deum in glorium and in honoratum
fore jactant nisi ab ipsis colaretur aliorum cultum per suo nihili faciunt and
Deum perinde sibi obstrictum putant ac si in aere ipsorum esset, Trem. and Jun.
notae in Esa. 66.] for they esteem others worship, nothing in comparison of
theirs, and think God so much obliged to them and their Liturgy, as if he
were tied to their pocket prayer book, and were engaged to them for the work
done: therefore I concer^e its so carefully enjoined, that none of the prayers
must be left unread, when it is no matter whether there be any Sermon preached, or
Chapter expounded.

Making preaching of the word, which God commands to be in season, and out of
season, an indifferent service, 2 Timothy 4. 2. which all his Ministers must be
instant in; and causing reading Prayer, which God never commanded, (but is a
humane, tradition) to be constantly every day used, [Vide the last note in the
Preface before the view of the Directory] as his only worship: And thus they
made the commandment of God of none effect by their traditions, Mark 7. 9.
13. full well as Christ says, Ye reject the commandment of God, that ye may
keep your own traditions; By means whereof, the preaching of the word, which
is the only ordinary means of faith and salvation, was too much neglected, or
hastily, and perfunctorily slubbered over, at least carelessly, and
irreverently, in most places both preached and heard; for, few came to it with
contrite and prepared hearts, having before laid aside all filthiness and
superfluity of naughtiness, James 1. 21. desiring it as newborn babes do the
milk, 1 Pet. 2. 2. that they may grow thereby, a very few took heed how they
heard, as Christ commanded them, Luke 8. 14. [Bonorum proprium est, ut sint
solliciti de successu canent quo fructu audiunt. Aretius comment. in locum]
with reverence, affection, devotion, and fruit, that so the word may come unto
them in power, and in the holy Ghost, and in much assurance with joy, as the
Thessalonians did, 1 These: 1* 5. 6. who received it not as the word of men, but
as it is in truth the word of God, which effectually works in all that
believe; 1 These. 2. 13. but generally they heard, as the Jews did our Savior,
carelessly, maliciously, unfruitfully, or as the Athenians did S. Paul, Acts 17.
19. and the Jews Ezekiel, wantonly for novelty sake, or for elegancy of phrase,
to please their fancies, Ezekiel. 33. 31, 32. or hypocritically only, for
fashion, custom, to save their purses, at least lukewarmely, as Agrippa,
Herod, Acts 26. 28. hearing, but not doing them, or at least but half doing
them, Mark 6 20. most men herein, being openly profane, like the barren
ground, which openly rejects the word; or like the stony ground, which receives
it for a little while, but wanting root, in times of temptation it falls away;
or like the thorny ground, who suffers the cares, and riches, and pleasures of
this life to choke the word, so that it brings not fruit to perfection; very
few heard it, and received it as the good ground, in an honest and good heart,
keeping it being heard, and bringing forth fruit with patience, as Christ
shows in his parable, Luke 8. 11, 12. to the 16. and the Parl. men, and godly
of the kingdom, have confessed in their solemn League and Covenant, [Vide the
solmne League and Covenant for reformation and defense of Religion, etc.]

We profess and declare, before God and the world, our unfeigned desire to be
humbled for our sins, and for the sins of these kingdoms especially, that we
have not as we ought, valued the inestimable benefit of the Gospel; that we
have not labored for the purity and power thereof, and that we have not
endeavored to receive Christ in our hearts, nor to walk worthy of him in our
lives, which are the causes of our sins and transgessions, so much abounding
amongst us; we have served God for the most part, only with a partial and
outward worship, and have not served him in spirit and in truth, Joh. 4. 24.
with true faith and prayer, as he requires, [Veritatem vero, quae opposita est
Hypocrisi, quoth. d. seria, and ex animo colent Deum vera fide, invocatione sine
operibus illis hypocriticis, and ceremoniarum. Aretius, in comment. in Joan.]
For, have not some former chief Magistrates of this kingdom, with Zedekiah,
made a fair show of love to the Word, and to the messengers that brought it,
Jer. 38. 15, 16. but with him, when they knew it they loved it not, nor obeyed
it: King James, after his coming to this crown, desired the puritan Ministers,
(as he called them) to exhibit their conclusions, and to dispute the
differences; at what time was presented to him these four petitions, or
desires: First, that the doctrine might be preserved in purity according to
Gods Word: Secondly, that good Pastors might be planted in all. Churches to
preach the same: Thirdly, that Church Government might be sincerely administered
according to Gods Word: Lastly, that the book of common prayer might be fitted
to more increase in piety, in regard of the corruptions and needless
ceremonies enjoined therein, [Vide Bakers Chron. in the beginning of King James
his life, and the desires of Dr. Reynolds, Dr. Sparks, Mr. Knewstub, and Mr.
Chadderton,] but these were slighted over, and not harkned unto; yea, the
contrary things were confirmed and practiced, out of a carnal fear, or shame,
or out of a slavish love to himself, or his Courtiers; and has not your
Majesty with him, trod in the same steps? following the counsel of the
Papists and Bishops (who pretend as his Courtiers did, loyalty and service to
you, for maintenance of your prerogative) contrary to the wholesome advice of
your grand Council of the Kingdom, and by this means, are not your feet sunk
in the mire? have not all the misery you have undergon, been drawn on you by
your evil counselors? have they not hazarded often your person, eclypsed your
honor, made you violate your promises? and as Johanan did, cause you to
condemn the Prophets of the Lord for speaking falsely, Jer. 42. 5. 6. 20, 21.
because they have not pleased your humors, or have opposed their lusts and
desires, [Vid. his Majesty's Proclamation, forbidding the taking the late vow
and covenant, 21. of June, 1644.]

Nay, have we not all too often, drawn nigh to God with our lips, when our hearts
have been far away from him? Isai. 29. 13. Our fear toward God, having been
taught by the precepts of men: as in our praying, fasting, sanctifying the
Sabbath, almesgiving, hearing, receiving the Sacraments, the outward part of
these services, most of us have performed, but we have failed in the inward; in
prayer few have lift up a pure heart in faith without wrath and doubting, 1 Timothy 2. 8. In fasting, few have afflicted their souls, left their beloved sins;
Isa. 58. 6. 7. In the Sabbath we have all found our pleasures and recreations,
spoke our own words, and done our own works, and have not called it a delight,
the holy of the Lord, honorable, observing both the public and private
duties he requires therein; our alms has been given rather for fear of man's
law, then Gods, or else rather for our own glory, Mat. 6. 2. then his, we have
been forgetful hearers, and not doers of the Word, James 1. 22. Lastly, we
have received the Sacraments many of us, unworthily, and administered the same
as carelessly, and unfaithfully; so that our coming together, has been for the
worse, 1 Cor. 11. 17. and not for the better? Is not the formal Protestant
accounted now the only true Christian amongst us, and he that is zealous of
good works, is a precision, or a puritan, though Christ redeemed us to that end?
Tit. 2. 14. [True godliness is despised, zeal abhorred, sincerity snuffed at,
uprightness loathed, Prayers contemned, professors disdained, and almost all
good men had in derision, Den. in his plain-mans pathway.] Alas, we take Gods
word in our mouths, but hate to be reformed, and cast his covenat behind our
backs, Psalm. 50. 16, 17. for to be baptized in his infancy, and taught by rote
to say the Catechism, the Lords Prayer, the Creed, and the ten Commandments in
the English tongue, to be confirmed by the Bishop when he can say these, and
then to hear a Sermon once a month, and to follow his Church twice on
Sundays, and Holy days, to pay duly his tithes to the Parson, and at Easter
to pay his offerings, and to receive the Sacrament, and to eat of the holy loaf
(as the vulgar calls it;) this man is a complete Protestant in the worlds
esteem, though he know not the nature and use of baptism, nor the benefits
sealed therein, nor end wherefore he was baptized, though he has no knowledge
in the Word, and consequently no faith, and therefore is unfit to pray, or to
be confirmed, and much more to receive the Lords Supper, [Vero invocatio est
verae fidei testimonium, vera autem sides verae vocationis, vera autem vocatio
verae electionis. Bezae not. in Romans 10. 14. 3.] Surely such services God
hates, they are a trouble unto him, he is weary to bear them, Isa. 1. 14. he
scorns such service, that men should continue in ignorance and sin; and yet
presume they please him with their outward work, Jer. 7. 9. for such fools
consider not that they do evil, Eccles. 5. 1. and that such services are an
abomination unto God, Prove. 15. 8. and 21. 27. and 28. 29. and Isai. 66 3. But
alas, this is an Epidemicall disease, that has overspread the whole body of
the Realm; it is ^ general sin, reigning in all persons, and degrees of men,
both Magistrates, Ministers, Masters, servants, parents, children, but in some
more then others, and in them most dangerous, who think a partial obedience
sufficient; [For, they blindly imagine, that if they come to the Church, and
hear Sermons, they are discharged of their sins, though they leave them not,
they imagine they have given God ^is full, and therefore may be bold to sin
afterward. Mr. Dents Plain-mans pathway, against contempt of the Word.] A
lukewarm love to the Word enough, and ^^re not for universal sincere obedience
to all Gods precepts, nor strive not to be zealous in good works, denying
themselves, and forsaking all to follow Christ, though it be through
afflictions; surely, too many such we have amongst us, who knowingly hug their
beloved sins, hiding it under their tongues, will not forsake it, Job 20. 12.
And I pray God your Majesty, in regard of temporal honor, or earnest desire
of an Arbytrary power, or in regard of carnal love to your Queen, or worldly
fear, or shame, may not be guilty in this sin, in opposing the reformation
intended, according to the rites of Gods Word any longer, by following the
counsel of evil persons; for know assuredly, if you love the world, the love
of the Father is not in you, 1 John 2. 15. and James 4. 4. If you be a friend
of the world, you are an enemy to God. If you will not forsake all to follow
Christ, you are not worthy of him, Luke 14. 33. if you hate not father and
mother, wife and children, brethren and sisters; yea, and your own life also,
you cannot be his Disciple, Luke 14. 26. The performance of outward duties of
piety and charity are nothing without these, Mat. 7. 22. 21. 23. for these most
of us have done, which are the lesser: 1 These. 2. 12. 15. [Palliabant
suascelera titulo Ecclesiae and populo Dei: Apostolus ergo detrahit illis hanc
larvam monetque Deum hos titulos nihil morari, sed propter scelera illos odio
habere. Zanch. Expos. in locum.] But the weightier things of the law, as faith,
repentance, charity, righteousness and holiness, and the spiritual service
of God, these we have not labored after, that so we may walk before him, as
being still in his sight, and may be upright. No, we have in the last place, to
fill up the measure of our sin, and to fit us for judgment, which the Jews
openly, Matthew. 23. 23. lothed and rejected the word, and the sound and sincere
preaching thereof, and proudly opposed and gainsaid the truth, and the
faithful Ministers that preached it; either because it condemned our beloved
sins, or hindered us from enjoying our pleasures, profits, honors, or
condemned our unlawful traditions, human inventions, and superstitious
ceremonies; thus did that mad Prelate of Cant. with Amaziah, silence those that
preached against Popery and Arminianisme, [Vide the Preface in the Antidote
against Armianisme, and Mr. Newcom. Sermon. No. 5. 1642. p. 28.] at the Court to
preach against lovelocks, [Vid. the Arch. dealing with Mr. Prin for his book
called, The unlovelinesse of lovelocks.] and long hair, were he the Apostle
Paul, his ears should be cript for it, though their hair still remain
uncropt, shameful in the sight of a heathen, 1 Cor. 11. 14. [Inculcat
argumentum a communi natura sensu sumptum, Beza in loc.] as the Apostle
confesses; and to speak against those whorish Stageplayes and lascivious
Maskes, [Vide the causes of Mr. Prins, Dr. Bastwicks, and of Mr. Burtons
sufferings.] wherein wantonness is acted, evil words pronounced, uncleanesse
practiced, and all sorts of the lusts of the flesh enticed unto, this is little
less then petty treason censured, when indeed the doing of them, if not the
permitting, be high treason against the King of heaven, who will call the
Princes and Nobles of the world to an account, even for their idle words, Mat.
12. 36. much more for their scandalous actions, and immodest gestures,
unlawful clothes, and misspent time: have not our Kingdoms with the old world,
been disobedient almost these sixscore years to our Noah's Preachers of
Righteousness? 2 Pet. 2. 5. Have not our Magistrates, with the Scribes and
Pharisees killed the Prophets, persecuted Christ's Ministers, forbidding them to
speak to the people, that they might be saved, Acts 5. 28. 40. besides what
has been said already, and the abundance of bloodshed in Queen Mary's days
by those ravenous wolves that devoured the flock of Christ [As Bishop Bonner,
Gardener, and Vid. Mr. Fox his Acts and Mon. Vol. 2.] (which has not yet (as
ever I heard of) been publikly repented of by this Kingdom.

Come we to King James his time, and we shall find in Scotland, Anno 1610.
that for the instituting and erecting of Bishops again in that Kingdom, the
godly Ministers are driven from their flocks, [Vide Altar Damas. initio lib.
lectoribus benevol. p. ult.] yea in the second year of his reign in this
Kingdom three hundred Ministers were either silenced from preaching or
deprived of their livings, or stricken with the thunderbolt of Excommunication,
or cast into prison, or else driven into banishment, so that as my Author
affirms, [Anno secundo Jacobi in Anglia 300. Ministri vel liberate
concionandi mulctati, vel beneficio privati, vel excommunicationis fulmine icti
and vix reperire potest gravior persecutio, sub ullo principe fidem orthodoxam
profitente. An. tertio Iacobi eadem persecutio caepit in Scotia grassari
Episcopi optimos quos que ejiciunt juxta Dolmanni Iesuita concilium sub
Puritanorum nomine.] there can scarce be found a heavier and grievouser
persecution under any Prince professing the Christan faith. And in the next
year the same persecution followed in Scotland, so that the Bishops under the
name of Puritans, according to the Council of Dolman the Jesuit, cast out the
most religious and holy Ministers out of their cures and overthrew the well
stablisht policy and government of that Church; Earl Morton being one of the
chief actors herein with the Bishops, which on his deathbed he lamentably
bewailed, and with most earnest prayers craved pardon for [Altar. Dam. ut
supra.] the same. And I hope King James was as happy in his repentance, as he
was with him guilty of the sins, for once he did with the estates of Scotland
in express words abhor and detest all Popery in general and in particular
heads; even as they were then damned and confuted by the word of God, and Church
of Scotland, and especially the Popes supremacy his usurped authority on men's
consciences, his tyrannous Laws, made on things indifferent against our
Christian liberty, his blasphemous Letanie, his wicked* Hierarchy, and all
rites, signs, traditions, brought in the Church without, or against the Word
of God, and doctrine of this true Reformed Church, wherein we join our selves
willingly in doctrine, faith, Religion, discipline, and use of the holy
Sacraments; as lively [Vide the General confession of the true Christian faith
and Religion according to Gods Word and Acts of Parliament, subscribed by the
Kings Majesty and his household, etc. at Edinburgh the 28 of Ian. An. 1581.
printed in the Harmony of Confessions in Engl. at Cambridg. 1586.] members of
the same in Christ our head, promising and swearing by the great name of the
Lord our God; that we shall continue in the obedience of the doctrine and
discipline of this Church, and shall defend the same according to our vocation
and power all the days of our lives, under the pains contained in the law,
and danger both of body and soul in the day of Gods fearful judgment. And
willing to take away all suspicion of hypocrisy or double dealing with God and
his Church, we therefore protest, and call the searcher of all hearts to
witness, that our minds and hearts do fully agree with this our confession,
promise, oath, and subscription, so that we are not moved for any worldly
respect, but are persuaded only in conscience, through the knowledge and love
of Gods true Religion printed in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, as we shall
answer to him in the Great day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be
disclosed. Now how this does agree with his after-practise, the world knows,
and your Majesty may judge by those oaths he took in favor of the Papists (if
that be true which is related in the Popish royal favorite) First, that all
laws against the Romish Religion shall not at any time hereafter by any means
or case whatsoever directly or indirectly, be commanded to be put in execution,
against the said Romish Catholics, and we will cause our Council to take the
same oath. [Vide the Popish royal favorite in page 48. 49.] Secondly, that no
other laws shall hereafter, be made anew against them, but that there shall be
a perpetual Toleration of the Romish Catholic Religion within private houses
throughout the three Kingdoms. Thirdly, that we will not treat any thing, or
attempt it privately or publikly with the Lady Infanta Donna Maria, which shall
be repugnant to the Catholic Romish Religion, nor will we by any means
persuade her, that she should ever renounce, or relinquish the same in
substance or form. Fourthly, that we will interpose our Authority, and do as
much as in us shall lie, that the Parliament shall approve, confirm, and
ratify all and singular Articles in favor of the Romish Catholics
capitulated between the most renowned Kings, by reason of this marriage, and
that the said Parliament shall revoke and abrogate the particular laws made
against the said Romish Catholics, and that we will not consent that the said
Parliament should ever at any time make or write any other new laws against
Romish Catholics, we accounting all and singular the preceding Articles,
ratified and acceptable, out of our certain knowledge, as far as they concern
us, our heirs, or successors, approve, ratify, applaud, and promise bona
fide, and in the word of a King, by these presents inviolably, firmly, well,
and faithfully to keep, observe and fulfill the same, and to cause them to be
kept, observed and fulfilled, without any exception or contradiction, and do
confirm the same by our oath upon the holy Evangelists not withstanding any
opinions, sentences, or laws whatsoever to the contrary; and that Apostaticall
speech of his to the Privy Council, [Vide The Popish Royal favorite, ut
supra, and page 46. 47.] and cursed definitive sentence (if true) that it
should be reputed high treason, to molest the Catholics in the exercise of
their Idolatrous Mass.

But leaving this in dispense, certain it is, he introduced Bishops, and that
wicked Hierarchy into Scotland which before he had objur'd, [Vide Epist
Philadel. vindi. page 80.] and upheld those rights, signs, and traditions which
were, if not against, yet without the word of God, as the Cross in Baptism,
Surplices, painted Glass in Churches, bowing to the Altar, to the verbal name
of Jesus, and kneeling at the Sacrament, etc. and persecuted those to
confiscation of goods imprisonment, banishment, who would not observe these;
[Altare Damas. page ult. in Prefatione lectorum] But yet enlarged Recusants at
the same time out of prison, by his letters to the Lord Keeper Williams, [Vide
the Popish royal favorite, page 43 and 44.] and earnestly desired upon most
wicked terms to marry your Majesty with a Papist, and at the last effected it,
though he were before warned of it [By Abbots Archb. of Cant. and Vox populi,
and Dr. Hacwels book against the match.] both of the unlawfulness of it, and
of the dangerous consequences of it, and how it would bring the judgments of
God on the whole Realm in general and on himself in particular, sure I am he
lived not long after: But I dare not judge of his end, I may [Vid. Mr. Prins
introduction to the Archb. trial.] of our miseries, that our National sins
and this most especially of contempt of Gods word, and particularly in this
Popish marriage, and refusing to set up the discipline of Christ in that
Kingdom, and putting it down, when it was well stablished in Scotland, and the
endeavoring to make them, as superstitious and vain in their worship as our
selves, by intruding on them that refined Massebooke of the Archbishops, have
been the chief causes and grounds of our divisions, and Civil War, and of
Gods judgments on the three Kingdoms, and on your Majesty in particular, as
was before threatened; [Vide vox. pop. Dr. Hacwel, etc. ut supra.] for in the
Preface to the admonition to the Parliament, the Ministers that were then most
godly said, Either must we have a right Ministry of God, and a right
government of his Church according to the Scriptures set up (both which we
lack) or else there can be no right Religion, nor yet for contempt thereof,
Can Gods plagues be from us any while deferred [The Preface of the Admon. to
the Parl an. 1672.] for as they there, seeing with hatred we have not detested
the Romish Hierarchy and worship perfectly, nor with singular love embraced,
and carefully endeavored, to plant the true discipline of Christ amongst us,
we are without excuse before the Majesty of God. [Vide the Admonition to the
Parl. page 1.] The godly in Queen Elizabeth's days did justly fear, some great
judgment of God to be very near unto them, yea even to hang over their heads
for the contempt of his Gospel and Ministry, [Mr. Dent in his Plainmans
pathway to heaven, p. 130.] and Reverend Beza said, when he heard flocks were
deprived of their Pastors, because they would not wear a Surplice, and hungry
sheep were deprived of the Lords Supper rather then kneeling should be
omitted, which things says he, if they should be there done amongst you (as
God forbid that I should think they are done) surely they would be the
beginnings, not of former but of far greater calamities, which now by woeful
experience we find to be true; [Beza epist. to the Archb. of York, 1566.]
for in the same letter he says, I foresee, that either the same, or more
grievous punishments do again hang over most part of people, which at the
first with great affection embraced the Gospel, and now by little and little
fall from it; [Vide The Advertisement to the Parl. of England, page 29.] with
Joash your royal father in his younger years declared a great deal of zeal
and godliness, whilst his Tutors lived: [As Knox and Mr. Buchanan, and other
godly Nobles.] But seduced by evil Counselors, [Dr. Andrews, Duke of Buc.
Earl of Bristol.] his piety soon decayed, his zeal slackned after their
departure, and his promotion to this Kingdom: and the Nobility and Clergy they
followed the example of the Court, [Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis.]
which sins, certainly, have highly provoked Gods wrath, as Beza foresaw, these
two plagues, (that is to say, the dishonesty and ambitious flattery of the
Bishops; partly abusing the virtuous Princes, and partly serving their evil
affections and vices) had utterly undone the Church, and was likely so to do
in England; [Beza epist. ut supra, prin. Engl. 1644] for surely then are our
sins come to the height, when we not only despise his Gospel, but persecute
and destroy the messengers bringing it, detaining the truth in unrighteousness
out of a love to our honors, pleasures, profits, or sins, Romans 1. 18. and
yet into this sin did the ambitious Prelates run into, imprisoning and
persecuting the godly Ministers, even because they reproved their pride, and
covetousness, and hypocrisy; with Saint Paul the godly Ministers were become
their enemies, because they told them the truth, and spoke against pluralities
of Benefices, Non-residencie, licenses for marriage, and to eat flesh, and such
like, which as Beza speaks, and that with honor, is not a corruption only of
Christianity, but a manifest falling away from Christ, [Beza in epist. u^
supra.] a sin which the Prelates knew well enough, but they received not the
love of his truth, nor believed the same, because they had pleasure in
unrighteousness, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. 12. nor could they believe the same, because
they sought honor from their fellow-Ministers, and Churches of Christ, or at
least from one another, and sought not that honor that came from God only,
Joh. 5. 44 [Ex appetitu honoris vani redditur homo instabilis ad fidem
veritatis. Gorranus in locum.] And therefore with Demetrius they did, and to
this day still do make uproares against the godly Ministers for their Dianas,
Act. 19. 20. of Episcopacie, Prelacie, like the Mrs. of the Damsel possessed
with the spirit of Python, Act^ 16. 19. [Cupidit as quaestus est persequendae
veritatis occasio. Bezae not. in locum.] they knew, if this evil spirit be cast
out, the hope of their gain is gone, those bribes and unconscionable fees for
ordination, institutions and induction are vanished, their Courts and Coffers
are casheer'd, their Manors, Prebends, Liberties, Royalties and Dignities are
to be better employed, therefore they cry out to your Majesty, and other
Magistrates (and in Queen Elizabeth and King James his days did the same)
[Vide Bakers Cron. in vitis Eliz and Jacobi, in matters concerning the Church.]
against these men for exceedingly troubling the Commonwealth, and for teaching
customs which are not lawful for us to receive in a Monarchy, much less to
observe, in regard diverse laws, statutes, and customs have relation to them,
where indeed these are but pretenses to cloak their secret pride,
covetousness and malice to these men, and hatred to their doctrine, [Avaritiae
praetexitur tum publicae pacis tum etiam pietatis studium. Bezae not in Act.
16. Vide etiam epist. Philact. vindiciae. 1.] but this is an old argument of
Satan, as Beza calls it, to plead antiquity and public custom without any
other respect against truth (though but newly revealed) for the divulging of
the Gospel, does raise up divisions, not of it self, it being the word of
peace, but by accident, in regard of men's corruptions who have such soar eyes,
that they cannot look upon this light, nor will they come unto it, because
their works are evil, John 3 19, ^0. so the light it self says, Men love
darkness rather then light, because their deeds are evil, for every one that
does evil hates the light, neither comes he to the light, left his deads
should be reproved; for this cause he says, I came not to send peace but a
sword, Mat. 10. 34, 35. [Christus qui proprie est pacis auctor, occasio est
turbarum propter hominum malitiam. Camer.] I am come to set a man at variance
against his father (both natural, temporal, spiritual,) and the daughter
against her mother, and the daughter in law against her mother in law, a man's
foes shall be of his own house, [Evangel^i predicationem civilia dissidia
consequuntur. Bezae not. in Mat. 10.] So that civil dissentions are but the
effects of preaching the truth; we find it so this day by woeful experience,
that those are imprisoned, fought against, that cry against the Altars of
Bethel, the Idolatries, and superstitions of this kingdom, 1 King. 12. 26. and
13. 4. And I wish your Majesty were free altogether of this sin.

But I fear least that complaint be just of the Assembly of Scotland, [Vide
the Remonstrance of the General Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland, sent to his
Majesty from the Committees of both Kingdoms, June 12. and published by
Authority, July 5. 1645.] that there is a guilt which cleaves fast to your
Majesty, and your Throne, which is such, as (whatsoever flattering Preachers.
or unfaithful Councillors may say to the contrary) if not repented timely,
cannot but involve your self, and your posterity, under the wrath of the
everliving God; for your being guilty of the shedding of the blood of many
thousands of your Majesty's best subjects, for your permitting the Mass, and
other Idolatry, both in your own family, and in your dominions; for your
Authorizing the book of Sports, to the profanation of the Lords day, for your
not punishing public scandals, and much profaneness in and about the Court,
for the shutting of your ears from the humble and just desires of your
faithful subjects, for your complying too much with the Popish party many
ways, and namely, the concluding the Cessation of Arms in Ireland, and your
embracing the counsel of those, who have not set God nor your good before
their eyes: for your resisting and opposing this Cause which so much concerns
the glory of God, your own honor, and happiness, and the peace and safety of
your kingdoms, and for what other causes, your Majesty is most conscious, and
may best judge, and search your own conscience; for, is it not to secure your
honor and pretended friends, rather then to promote Gods glory, or advance his
Gospel, that the wars continue, and that wicked Hierarchy, and their
superstitions are still maintained? and that nothing may be condiscended unto
more then was offered at Uxbridge? [Vide the Letters taken in the North from
the Lord Digby] Episcopacy, nor the sword may not be quitted, [The Postscript
of your Majesty's Letter to the Queen from Oxon, Jan. 9. 1644.] This was
Jeroboams policy, 1 Kings 12. 27. to maintain his Calves, lest the peoples
heart should turn to the Lord, and then kill him: And surely most of your
Counsel are led by the same Genius, and have too far prevailed with your
Majesty, even with Herod to send out your men of war to massacre the
Innocents, Mat. 2. 16. amongst whom Christ is new formed, Gal. 4. 19. [Christus
in vobis per peccatum deformatur, per fidem and gratiam reformatur sicut
formatur sigillum in caera, Gor. in locum.] and acknowledged as their supreme
King, 1 Timothy 6. 15. and received as the only Archbishop of their souls, 1
Pet. 2. 25. fearing the loss of their own lives, and flattering your Majesty,
as if the Discipline intended, would abolish your liberty and power, [Vide the
Vindication of Episcopacy, page 16. 20. 28. 30.] and the reason hereof, is it
not because it opposes their unlawful traditions, humane inventions, and
superstitious Ceremonies? yes surely, because the godly Ministers, with St.
Paul will not give place by subjection, no not an hour to subscribe to their
articles (though Peter and Barnabas) some holy and religious men have formerly
herein too much dissembled with them, for fear, or favor, Gal. 2. 14.
[Galatarum nomine omnes gentes intelligit. Bezae not. in Gal. 2. 5.] that so
the truth of the Gospel, both in doctrine and discipline, may continue with the
people, and therefore they withstand them to the face, as he did Peter, (being
indeed more blameworthy herein) for, hereby they bewitched their auditors
hearts, that they should not obey the truth, Gal. 3. 1. as the false teachers
amongst them did, bringing them into bondage, to those weak and beggarly
elements, as St. Paul calls them, Gal. 4. 9, 10. [Egena and impotentia vocantur
elementa in sese, and seorsim a Christo deinde quod ea ratione ipsi sese egenos
esse in Christo testarentur, quam tamen a Christo ad ceremonis relabi nil aliud
sit quam relictis opibus inania sectari. Camer. in locum:] those Ceremonies of
days, months, meats, and clothes, which were antiquated and abolisht in
Christ, and after the divulgation of the Gospel, not only dead, but deadly; for
this persuasion comes not of God, and therefore must proceed from Satan, or our
corrupt hearts, as a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, so will this
little corrupt doctrine, or practice, infect the whole mind, Gal. 5. 9. and
therefore, by his Apostolical authority he pronounces, that the maintainers
of Ceremonies, shall hear their own judgment, and wishes they were cut off
that troubled them, so heinous and dangerous was this sin in his eyes: and
such zeal did the godly Pastors in the Primitive times express, that they
would not yield to the least corruptions herein. Excellent was the resolution
of Saint Basil to the president of Valens the Emperor, who desired him to yield
to some moderation, and not to make such a rent in the Church, for small
subtilties: Those who are thoroughly seasoned with true Religion, will rather
suffer all kinds of death, then give way for the altring of one syllable, [Vide
Doctor Craloners Sermon, No peace with Rome, printed at Oxon, 1629.] It was but
a little loto between (...), and (...), yet the right believers would never
omit the one, or admit of the other, [Theodoret, ut supra, page 330.] So the
martyrs in Queen Mary's days, though they allowed of a real presence in the
Sacrament, yet rather then they would confess a corporal, they would embrace
the stake, [Foxes Acts and Monum. vol. 2. in Cranmers disputation at Oxon.] S.
Paul esteemed sitting down at the Idolatrous feast, (though without any intent
to honor the Idol) Idolatry, 1 Cor. 10. 14. 20. and having fellowship with
Devils; those who urged the ceremonies amongst the Galatians, did overthrow the
Gospel of Christ, Gal. 1. 6. why says S. Chrysostom, [Qui pusillum quiddam
perperam admixtum induxerit totum corrumpit. Chrysostom in locum.] they retained
the Gospel, only they would have brought in a Jewish rite, or two, and yet the
Apostle says, hereby the Gospel is subverted; to show, how but a little
thing, being mingled untowardly, mars all: For, as in the Kings coin, he that
clyps off but a little of his Image stamped thereon, imbaseth the whole piece:
so if any shall overthrow but the least parcel of the truth, its wholly
corrupted from these beginnings, proceeding always to worse things. Where are
they now, who condemn us as contentious? because of our disagreement with
heretics, who can condemn us justly for schismatics? for our opposing Jewish
rites and superstitious ceremonies? when Saint Paul says, they did overthrow
the Gospel, who brought into the Church but a little innovation; For well he
knew, as Mr. Dike well observes, [Mr. Dike of the deceit of the Heart, page
191.] that if we sip of the cup of error, we will not leave till we have drunk
our full draught; and perhaps, till we are mad drunk therewith; having nibbled
on these poisoned cates, (of human inventions, and wilworship) we will not give
over till we have surfeited of them, as by woeful experience the Church of God
has found true in all kingdoms, and we especially in ours, those few Altars,
(or at least Communion Tables placed in the Altars romes, and standing after
that fashion) which escaped the zeal of our Reformers, were made presidents for
our railing and worshing the Altar, or some thing on it, or at least for our
superstitious turning of it altarwise, and cringing and ducking to it, [Mr.
Newcomens Sermon on the 5. of November, printed 1642. page 27.] Those few
Images that escaped the statute of King Edw. against the same, [Vide the
statutes of Edw. the 6. An. 3. c. 10.] were made examples for other Churches to
have the like, and were new trimmed, scoured, and painted, as is manifest in
most Cathedrals, and Collegiate Churches and Chapels; our maintaining of
Prelacy, and too indulgent favors to the Papists, caused them to hope still
for our reconcilement to Rome, [Vide Contz. Pol. and Newcom. in his Sermon, ut
supra, page 29.] And therefore we have in all times had so many reconcilers,
who labored to join Popery with Protestanisme, seeing already the true
Ministers were too far obliged to Antichristian Prelates, as Cassander, Andreas
Frisius, Bartholomeus Nervus, Seravius, Modestus, he that proves the Hugonets
of good right to be members of the Roman Church, [Vide Doctor Chaloners Sermon
ut supra, page 132.] Franciscus de Sancta Clara, Manwaring, Mountagu, Haywood,
Heylin, Cossens, Pocklington, and that archleader of this rabble of Arminians,
or Antichristians, if you please, for they would not have the Pope to be
Antichrist, but allow the church of Rome a true Church, contrary to the
doctrine of this Kingdom, [Vide the Homily of peril of Idolatry, the prayers
for the 5. of Novenber set out by King James,] who were so strict for bowings,
crossings, kneelings, coaps and surplisses, and so zealous for Altars,
raylings, candles, and other Popish ceremonies, depriving, excommunicating,
imprisoning, and banishing those godly persons that opposed them herein: But as
God in the old Testament forbids sowing mesling, and wearing garments of
linsiwoolsie, Deuteronomy. 22. 9, 10, 11. So Eliah prohibites serving God and Baal, 1
King. 18. 21. Christ will not have God and Mammon joined, Mark 6. 24. nor
Saint Paul Iudaisme with Christianity, Gal. 5. 1. For, as before, when it was
joined with Paganism, it brought forth that deformed brat of Samaritanism, so
now of Turcisme; for a Jew, a professed Christian, and a Pagan, were the
compilers of Mahomets damnable Alcaron, [Mahomet compiled his Alcaron by the
help of Sergius a Monk, John of Antioch an heretic, and a Jew a Magitian:
Vide Smiths arrow against Atheists, Purchase Pilg. Fox acts and mon. vol. 1.
page 676. printed 1610.] in the primitive times it brought forth
semipelagianism, and Semiarrianism; and in our days, what monsters has it
produced? for too many have been of Herod's mind, at the same time to build a
temple to God, and Caesar, to beautify Paul's, and erect the Queens chapel for
the Mass, and to compound popery with our Religion, make traditions an
Appendix to the Word, and stricter to enjoin ceremonies then Gods commands.

But this devilish policy has still in all ages bin resisted by the godly, and
though worldly princes may think hereby to secure their estates the better, yet
are they greatly herein deceived: For, first hereby they bring the judgments
of God on themselves, and their kingdoms, because they retain not the love of
the truth, but depart from Christ to Antichrist; (as has already been showed)
yea, God himself affirms there is no peace to the wicked, Isa. 48. 22. and 57.
21. [Ac proinde ne copulemini cum illis, aut consortium habitote, sed fugite.
Jun. and Trem. in locum.] for punishment lies at the doors of sin, and
inseparably follows it as the wages thereof, Genesis 4. 7. Romans 6. 23.
[Impossibile est esse culpam in aliquo, quin ad ipsam poena inseparabiliter
sequatur. Bonavent.] Secondly, hereby they bring themselves, crowns and people,
under the Popes girdle, his jurisdiction and tyranny; nay, under Satan's power,
who rules in all the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. and 2 Timothy 2. 26.
and who so serves him, shall be tormented by him in the lake that burns with
fire and brimston for ever, Rev. 19. 20. and Matthew. 25. 41. Thirdly, by working
us to agree with them in some things, by degrees we shall be brought with them
to agree in all, as a just judgment of God on us for detaining the truth in
unrighteousness, and not receiving the love of it, 2 These. 2. 10. 11, 12. 3.
Romans 1. 18, 19, 24. etc. and from losing our first love, we shall come to
lukewarmnesse, thence to coldness, senslesnesse, Atheism, and to a reprobate
mind, and vilde affections; and what can be looked for then, but misery and
destruction, as was well declared by a learned Doctor, in the beginning of your
reign, to the University? [Doctor Chaloner, in his Sermon, No peace with Rome,
printed 1629. p. 133.] those times he called dangerous, (and yet many of our
false doctrines were not then broacht, nor superstitious ceremonies openly
practiced and maintained) wherein too many did fall from coldness, to
benummednesse; from slacknesse to defection; from indifferency to senslesnesse,
and to a loathing of all religion; yea, to a hating of the truth, and to a
Persecuting of the professors, and practisers thereof: we have, as Beza,
[Beza's Letter, printed in English at the end of the Advertisement to the
Parliament, 1572.] feared, begun in the Spirit, in our Reformation in King
Edwards days, but with the Galatians, we fall back again, and end in the
flesh, cleaving to trifles and trash of men's traditions; like the Pharisees,
whose rule was tradition, and practice a voluntary austerenesse, [Vide Godwins
Jewish antiquit.] and under the color of Religion, and pretense of devotion,
they did slay and kill the Prophets, thinking thereby to do God good service:
Joh. 16. 2. and Acts 4. 18. and 7. 58. so have our Popish and ambitious
Prelates, like their predecessors, under pretense of Gods service and zeal for
his glory, persecuted the Orthodox Ministers, and professors of Christianity,
because they consented not to their traditions, humane inventions; yea,
doctrine of Devils [Singuli suas omnes vires contulerunt conspiraruntque, ut
signis sermon opere in eandem pernitiem, etc. Atque haec temporu^ nostroru^
descriptio. Iun. in Apoc. 16. 13.] for so he calls abstinence from meats and
marriage (which savor one would think of great mortification) 1 Timothy 4. 1. 3.
and Col. 2. 16. 20. yet no better term will be allowed those ancient
traditions (vented in the Apostles days, and long before practiced lawfully by
Gods command:) For as the Gentiles in their Idol-worship sacrificed to Devils,
1 Cor. 10. 20. and Jeroboam in his will worship, ordained Priests for Devils 2
Chro. 11. 15. so Saint John tells us, there should be such in the Church of
Christ, who should forsake the true service of God in spirit, and should
worship devils, Rev. 9. 20. for Antichrists kingdom was to be managed by the
spirit of devils, Rev. 16. 13. 14. and therefore Rome, sometimes a glorious
Church, is proclaimed by an Angel to be an habitation of devils, Rev. 18. 2.
and those who worship the Beast and his Image, or take his mark, follow him in
doctrine, or discipline, in his traditions and ceremonies, and persecuting
those that oppose them as he does, are surely ruled by the same spirit, though
the Devil in them be transformed into an Angel of light, and they make show of
being the Ministers of righteousness, yet God has, and will discover them
every day, more and more, and their end shall be according to their works, 2
Cor. 11. 14, 15. We have borrowed our discipline, service, traditions, and
ceremonies from them, and they, the Word testifies, had them from Satan,
witness our cannon law, Episcopacy, and that Hierarchy, our book of common
prayer, our licencers for marriage, meats, our feasts, holy days, our
crossings, cringings, coaps, surplisses, candles, altars, corporasses, organs,
singing-men, vicars choralls, processions, etc. For Anastatius an. 401. decreed
m^n and women should stand at the Gospel, and why not at any other part of the
word as the Jews in Ezras days, Nehem. 8. 5. Innocentius his successor in
the Romish sea consecrateth oil? [Vide at large Dr. Chaddertons table of the
Church and Mon. of the succession of Patriachs and Prophets, Judges, Kings,
Emperors, learned and holy Fathers, Councels, persecutions, heresies, printed
at London, 1572. Vide Platina de vitis Pontificum.] And Zozimus the next Bishop
the paschall candle at Easter.

Leo the sixth made the Mass a sacrifice, Anno Dom. 444. And Hilarious his
successor has the Cross in reverence, An. 465 Not long after, Agapetus
confirmed Procession on Holidays about the year 535. and Vigilius (his
successor save one) instituted the feast of the Purification of the Virgin,
whence sprang our Churching of women, he ordained candles to burn at the
saying of Mass, but especially on that day. Gregory the Great was the compiler
of the Massebooke, and especially invented the (...), and the Allelujah
therein; his successor Sabinian, Ann. 605. brought in lamps, and Bells into
Churches. And as Higinus long before brought in Godfathers at Baptism, so
Theodatus superstitiously forbad Gossips to marry, An. 615. Boniface the fifth,
established Sanctuaries, and his successor Honorius prayers to Saints, an. 623.
Pope Martinus brought in cream, and shaving, and Vitellianus shortly after in
all Cathedralls, ordained singing and Organs, an 657. Benedict the second,
calls himself Christ's Vicar, and decreed Coaps and Surplices, and vestments
for Priests, an. 687. Pope Sergius brought in Agnus Dei into the Mass; and
shortly after, John the 6. portureth tombs and garnisheth altars. Gregory the
third, instituteth Mass for the dead, an. 7. 31. and after him Paschalis
ordains veneration of Relics, an. 816. Clemens the third, brought singing
cakes into the Mass, and Pope Innocent the third, hanged up Christ in a Box,
shortly after Innocent the fourth commands adoration of the Sacrament, an.
1243. about which time came in that gross error of Transubstantiation.
Damasus brought in Gloria Patrs to be added to the Psalms, and they to be sung
by turn, as in Cathedralls they are still with us used. [Platina de vitis
Pontif. Damas 1.] Pope Marcus would have the Nicene creed sung after the
Gospel. [Platina in vita Marci primi.] Anacletus thought fit the Priests and
people should salute one another, with the Lord be with you and with thy
spirit. [Jacob. Manlius and Ainsw. proving that the Ministers ans.
insufficient.] Telesphorus ordained the fast we call Lent, [Platin in vita
Teleph. and Calist. 1.] and Calistus the fasts called Imbring weeks or days:
and Innocent the third, [l 3. decretal. Greg.] commanded fasts on holy day eyes
as Silvester the first before, [Bergomensis lib. Council.] required fasting from
flesh Wednesdayes, Fridayes, and Saturdayes weekly; Pope Felix the third, made
holy the day of the Archangell, [Bergomen, ut supra.] and Boniface the eight
showed like honor to the four Evangelists. [Fasci. temp.] Constantine Pope
ordained adoration of Images, an. 707. [Chaadertons table, ut supra.] Boniface
the first obtained by bribery (at Phocas hand who murdered his Lord and
Emperor) to be received as chief and universal Bishop over the Church, [Fox
Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. page 108.] and Boniface the second appointed a rood lost
to separate the Chancell from the Church. [Ainsworth ut supra.] But at li^^
came the Council of Trent, who received all traditions and ceremonies then in
use in the Church, with equal affection and reverence as they did the holy
Scriptures, [Vide Council Trident.] yea and punished the violation of them with
greater penalty; so that though men did walk blamelessely with Zachary and
Elizabeth in the commands of God, and were without spot in the world, yet if
they would not acknowledge the Pope for Peter's successor, and the head of the
Church, then were they heretics and no true members thereof. [Bellar. lib. 3.
de membris Ecclesiae and cap. 19.] Thus this Apostaticall Church is become the
habitation of Devils, and the hold Rev. 18. 2, 3. of every foul spirit, and a
cage of every unclean and hateful bird, for all Nations have drank of the
wine of her fornication, and this Kingdom especially, to whom she has
granted the title of defender of her faith, and as we have still (since
Reformation) maintained and allowed of the title, so also have we still
retained and observed her relics and rites, as next heir of Romes
constitutions, [Ainsworths book, called Counterpoysen, page 236.] as one calls
us, so that the Papists insult, and say [Pap suppl. An. 1604. Reason of
Religion. 13.] that from their treasure house the Religion now established, has
learned the form of Christning, marrying, Churching of women, visiting the
sick, burying, and sundry other like, as the books translated out of theirs
do declare, yea almost all things says learned Ainsworth in their Liturgy,
are done according to the doings of that spiritual Egypt, the Romish Church
wherein they dwelt; [Ainsw. ut supra, page 236.] they have imitated her
worship, orders, ceremonies, etc. retained her Ministry, Prelacie, Courts and
Canons; only the Latin is turned into English, and some gross superfluities
left out: nay with them they have persecuted and killed those that opposed
them, it is excommunication ipso facto, to speak against any of these, when it
is but a pecuniary mulct to abuse Gods word and Ordinances. [Vide the 12. first
Canons made at Land. 1603. and the Statutes against swearing made in your Maj.
reign] By reason whereof the truth have been evil spoken of, and the
professors thereof scorned, derided, punished, destroyed, yea still to this day
do they persevere in these sins with feigned words, beguiling souls, and
through covetousness, making Merchandise of them, but their damnation who
wilfully persist, slumbreth not, their judgment lingreth not; [Deus enim suos
electos ab is^ is erronibus liberabit and injustos illos semel destruet. Beza
in 2 Pet. 2.] God has begun to disgrace them and plague them, and we also for
partaking with them in this sin, and for not departing out of Babylon as we
were commanded, Revel. 18. 4. your Majesty have they taken in their pit, and
made you the head of their Army, to war against the Saints; and your own
conscience can best tell the sins and miseries whereinto they have led you, to
the reproach of your Honor, the hazard of your person, the hatred of your
people, the loss of your estate, the ruin of your subjects, cities, ships,
castles; and certainly, without repentance, to the destruction of your soul (if
this, after all other warnings, be despised, which God forbid,) and to the no
less loss, of both your leaders, and followers then of their souls also, in
the infernal lake, though some may have a fewer stripes then others sinning
ignorantly, Luke 12. 47. [Ignorantia purae negationis excusat a tanto licet non
a toto Aquinas Sum. 12 dae q. 74. Ar. 1. 2^.] which in part excuses.

O, then dread sovereign, as the Ambassador of Christ, (who has all power
given unto him, both in heaven and in earth, and is the searcher of the heart
and reins, to whose sight your inmost thoughts, Heb. 4. 13. are naked and open,
and who shall be, and is the Judge of the world;) In his stead, I beseech you,
by the tender mercies of God, and in the bowels of Jesus Christ, to be
reconciled unto God, 2 Cor. 5. 20. For, the axe of Gods justice, is now laid to
the root of the trees, and every tree which brings not forth good fruit, shall
be hewed down and cast into the fire, Mat. 3. 10. I wot, that through
ignorance, you and many thousands more of this kingdom, have continued in
these sins; that so God might fulfill what before he decreed and revealed, that
the kings of the earth, Rev. 17. 10, 11, 12, 13. should have one mind, to give
their power and strength to the Beast, until the Words of God be fulfilled,
and they had warred against the Lamb, which is Christ in his members, and the
Lamb should have overcome them, which sees now by experience you may find
true. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out,
when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, and he
shall send Jesus Christ to judge both quick and dead, who will then destroy
every on that will not hearken to his Word now, Act. 3. 19, 20, 21. 22, 23.
that so your Majesty may be one of those ten horns foreprophesied of, Rev.
17. 16. who should hate the whore, make her desolate and naked, eating her
flesh, and burning her with fire: [Vt enim hi prius excaeci perpenderint a nutu
bestiae meretricem at tollentis, sic postea dicitur fore, ut refiliant
discessionemque faciant ab ea mutatis in melius animis per Dei gratiam and
misericordiam. Iun. in locum.] the fulfilling of which d^ed, and word, is now
in agitation, and every day shall more and more be promoted; [Hujus autem
facti, atque eventus complementum in dies provehitur hoc nostro seculo. Idem ut
supra.] Come out then from amongst their society and friendship* as now in
person (blessed be God) you have begun, Rev. 18. 4. and touch no unclean thing;
partaking with them in any of their sins, or errors; and then God will receive
you into his favor, and will be a father unto you, 2 Cor. 6. 17. and you shall
be his son. Let the times past of your Majesty's reign be sufficient, to have
wrought the will of the Papists, (whilst they by your abused power, oppressed
your subjects in their liberties and consciences, persecuting their persons)
and run no longer with them in the same excess of their wickedness, 1 Pet. 4.
3, 4. but with Josiah, humble your self for your sins past, and let your heart
melt into grief, in regard of them, and produce the true fruits of godly
sorrow as the Corinth: 2 Cor. 7. 9, 10, 11. did, both for your self, and
others; as first, a care of advancing the Gospel, and preaching thereof, in
purity and power; to which end, let me entreat your Majesty, to hearken to the
humble petitions and desires of your Grand Council, for the abolishing of
Episcopacy, and that Hierarchy, which is the seat of the Beast, the pillars
that uphold him, [Vide Mr. Cotton on the seven Viols.] and which has been the
seminary of all our miseries, and of the great contempt of Gods word; then let
care be taken that a learned and religious Ministry be placed in every parish
in the kingdom, and that special choice be made of the Ministers in every
parish by the Congregation, that so having been chosen by them, they may be
presented unto, approved, and consecrated to that Office, by the Presbytery,
being found fitting for the same, Acts 6. 3, 4, 5, 6. Then thirdly, let
Advowsons, Patronages, and Impropiations be taken away, as merely
Antichristian, simoniacall, invented only to fill the Popes Coffers, [Fox his
Acts and Monum. vol. 1. page 7. printed 1641.] Let all Pluralities both of
Livings and Lecturies, Vicaridges, and Donatives, be made void, as things
contrary to the word of God, Acts 20. 28. [(...), in the singular number, viz.
the particular Congregation over which the holy Ghost has made them Bishops]
and tithes, (which without doubt, either in specie, or in equality are due to
those Ministers alone that preach the word of God) be paid, without fraud or
deceit, according to the Apostles, yea, Christ's ordination, 1 Cor. 9. 14.
[(...) 4. 60.] for otherwise, God must be robbed, or the Country, when men pay
tithes to those who deserve it not, nor to whom it does not belong: for, if
tithes be due jure divino, as it seems they are, by the payment of them before
the Law, Genesis 14. 20. and chap. 28. 22. [It was a sign of homage and
thankfulness to God, for as tribute is paid to Kings for their attendance on
the affairs of the Commonwealth, so tithes were paid in the Law, being holy
an heave-offring to the Lord, so Levit. 27. 30. unto the Leviticall Priesthood,
and before the Law paid unto Melchisedek, who was a type of Christ, and so to
his Ministers who are after that order, Heb. 7. 4. etc.] then is it not in man's
power to take them away from the owners; and if they be not due, then is it an
heavy exaction, and grievous oppression on the Commonwealth, that poor men
should pay so much out of their estates, without just cause. Fourthly, let
there be a more equal division of Parishes, and sufficiency of maintenance be
allowed to one, or more Ministers, according to the multitude of the several
Congregations, as it was in the Apostles days, Phil. 1. 1. and Acts 8. 14. and
4. 35. Fifthly, let your Majesty pass the Bill against scandalous Ministers,
and for the confirming the Assembly of Divines, and pass an Act for the
allowance of the Directory, and another Act for setting up the Presbyterian
Discipline, as shall be agreed on by the Assembly of Divines, and approved of
by your Parliament. Let the solemn League and Covenant be taken by your
Majesty, and enjoined, [As Josiah enjoined, and made all that were present in
Israel to swear to serve the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 34. 33. Addixit quemque, idest,
regia sua auctoritate obstrinxit, compescuit ad hibendo severitatem
disciplinae, Trem. and Jun. not. in loc.] and be tendered to your whole
kingdom, and let such as refuse be punished, as the wisdom of your Grand
Council shall think fit, as they did in good King Asas days, 2. Chron. 15. 9,
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Let the Sacrament and Censures of the Church be
administered purely, according to the word, and in the plain simplicity
thereof, without any humane inventions, superstitious Ceremonies, or Popish
kneeling, Crossings, [As was petitioned for in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, by the
godly Ministers] Let the severity of Discipline be practiced on the despisers,
and contemners of Gods holy word and Ordinances, Heb. 12. 25. and 2 chap. 1, 2,
3. Deuteronomy. 18. 19. and Luke 10. 16. and Mat. 18. 17. and let men be made
constantly to frequent their parish Churches early, on pain of the Laws, and
other Ecclesiastical censures: if those will not serve, Deuteronomy. 12. 5. Prove. 8.
34. Nehem. 13. 21. Let your Majesty take special care that Antichrist be
perfectly rooted out of this kingdom, both head, and tail; Rev. 14. 9, 10.
And lastly, let men be enforced with some severer penalty, to sanctify the
Lords day, our Christian Sabbath, both in public and private, Nehem. 13. 17.
etc. and let a day of humiliation be set apart for our former contempt of Gods
word, and horrible profaning of his day, Levit. 26. 40. 41, 42. and 2 Kings 22
13. Ezra 9. 1, 2. etc. and then let both your Majesty, and people, confess all
your sins unto God unfeinedly, but those especially wherein the kingdom has
been remarkeably guilty, and for which God has sent his judgments on us.
Thirdly, let us all be angry with our selves, [Qui paenitet peccasse pene
est-innocens] for our offenses, as being a foolish and ungrateful, people,
Esaias 1. 4. Jer. 7. 28. who have thus requited the Lord, rendering him evil for
good. Fourthly, let us fear for the time to come the dreadful Majesty of God,
Jer. 5. 22. and Mat. 10 28. against whom we have sinned, and tremble at his
word, and his judgments whilst they hang in his threatenings, before the
sentence come forth, Ezra 9. 4. and Esaias 66. 2. fearing to dishonor God,
because we love him* Psalm. 130. 4. and tremble at his word, out of conscience
to the justness, holiness, and goodness of it, Romans 7. 12. and Psalm. ^19.
94. and in love, and obedience to the Commander, Genesis 39. 9. Fifthly, let as
vehemently and sincerely desire to be rid of the guilt, and punishment of our
sins, Psalm. 6. 3. and 51. 14. and 77. 1, 2. and to be reconciled unto God by
the blood of Christ, Psalm. 143. 1, 2. 6, 7. Acts 2. 37. Psalm. 42. 1, 2. and to
obtain sanctification throughout, both in soul, body, and spirit, 1 These. 5.
23. 2 Cor. 7. 1, And sixthly, let us be zealous of his glory, Revel. 3. 19. Tit.
2. 14. and to promote his Gospel, and declare the same by our high esteem of
the preaching of his word, and love thereunto, which we must declare four
ways.

First, the manner of receiving it, we must not hear it as a profane history,
for novelty of matter, as the Athenian did Saint Paul; Acts 17. 21. nor for
carnal delight, as those who heard the Prophet, Ezekiel. 33. 32. nor rashly and
foolishly without preparation or devotion, Eccles. 5. 1. but we must come to it
with pure and prepared hearts, James 1. 21. laying aside all filthiness and
superfluity of naughtiness, and receiving it with meekness; and as St. Peter
advises, we must lay aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisy, and
evil speaking, 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2. And as new born babes desire the sincere milk
of the Word, that we may grow thereby, hungring after it, as the food of our
souls, delighting in it, and exercising our selves therein constantly, Psalm. 1.
2. our souls should break for the longing desires it has thereunto at all
times, Psalm. 119. 20. even in affliction and persecution, we must not go back
from the commands of his lips, but with Job, Job 23. 11, 12. we must esteem the
words of his mouth more then our necessary food, ^^r feet must hold fast his
steps, and keep his way, and not decline on either side; receiving the Word
from his messengers, as if he himself had spoken immediately to us from heaven,
as the Thessalonians, heard Saint Paul, 1 These. 2. 13. highly prising the
powerful preaching of the Word, as our lives, Deuteronomy. 32. 47. better then
thousands of silver and gold, Psalm. 119. 72. 111. and sweeter then honey, or
the honey comb, Psalm. 19. 9, 10. accounting all things as dung in comparison
hereof, Phil. 3. 8. It should be our inheritage, and the very rejoicing of our
hearts, Psalm. 119. 111. which we should delight in; his commands should not be
grievous to us, 1 John 5. 3.

Secondly, we should not only sincerely and sensibly grieve for our own
failings and transgressions against the Word, (with S. Paul, crying out, O
wretched men that we are) Romans 7. 24. but also we should bewail other men's
despising and contemning of the Word and Gospel, and not keeping of it, as the
King after Gods own heart did, Psalm. 119. 136. rivers of water ran down his
eyes, because they kept not Gods Law: Thus also did those marked by God for his
own, in the public destruction, Eze. 9. 4. even they did sigh and cry for the
abominations that were done in the land. Also we must grieve for the famine of
the Word, or want of success in the use of it, when we do enjoy it, Amos 8. 5.
fainting for thirst of this water of life, and pining for lack of this bread of
life, Psalm. 42. 2, 3. yea, lastly, taking a holy revenge on our selves; with
zealous Ezra, both for our own and others sins, who rent his garment and
mantle, and plucked off the hair of his head, and of his beard, and sat down
astonished, Ezra. 9. 3, 4.

Thirdly, we must declare our love and fear of the Word to all and every
precept therein, loving the glass of the Law, that shows us our spots, as well
as the doctrine of the Gospel, that divulgeth Christ's righteousness to cover
them, [Na^ quod in uno latet, in ultero patet, ejusdem sunt verba authoris, and
potentiae,] we must delight as well in the purges and corrasives of Gods
judgment, and threatenings, as in the cordialls and leatives of his free grace,
and glorious promises, Psalm. 119. 86. 128. approving and commending those
Ministers that sharply reprehend our sins, as Saint Paul did St. Peter's, Gal.
2. 11, 12, 13, 14. compared with that of 2 Pet. 3. 15. and pondering of the
words we hear Luke 2. 19. hiding them in our hearts, that we may not sin
against God, Psalm. 119. 11. but may redress our ways, by taking heed thereto,
Psalm. 119. 9. and may prove his will, and do what is acceptable in his sight,
Ephesians. 5 10, 11. learning the truth, that we may be delivered from the slavery
of sin, Joh. 8. 32. that it reign not in us, Romans 6. 12. Isai. 52. 7.

Lastly, let us so love the Word, that we love fervently the messengers that
divulge it, Romans 10. 15. receiving them as the Angels of God, even as Jesus
Christ himself, Gal. 4. 14, 15. as the Galatians did, being ready to do any
possible courtesy for them, and esteeming of them highly for their works sake,
1 These. 5. 13. and 1 Cor. 16. 10, 11. giving them double honor, 1 Timothy 5. 17.
obeying them in the Lord, and submitting our selves to them that watch for our
souls, Heb. 13. 7. 17. receiving them in the Lord with all gladness, holding
such in reputation, Phil. 2. 28, 29. and communicating to them in all good
things, Gal. 6. 6. Also we must love and honor those that are begotten by the
Word, Psalm. 15. 4. and 5. 1. and 4. 20, 21. and separate our selves from the
wicked, that may hinder us from keeping it, Psalm. 119. 115. and 101. 4, 5, 7.
hating and forsaking all our former ill courses and sins, to keep this Word,
Psalm. 119. 101. and Tit 2. 12, 13. and 1 Pe. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. yea, all our old
companions, or followers, forsaking all to follow Christ, and obey his Gospel,
Luke 14. 26. Mat. 16. 24. Mar. 10. 21. 28. that so this Word may work in us an
awful reverence of his Majesty and presence; that we may fear the glorious and
fearful name of the Lord our God, Deuteronomy. 28. 58. to stand in aw and sin not,
humbling our selves in dust and ashes when we hear him speak, as Job did, Job
42. 6. and Abraham and Habbaccuk Genesis 28. 27. and Habb. 3. 16. and rightly
considering of his presence, and justice, to cause us to walk before him, and
to be upright, Genesis 17. 1. Mich. 6. 8. doing justly, and loving mercy, walking
humbly with our God, abstaining from all sin, Prove. 3. 7. and the appearances
thereof 1 These. 5. 22. Lastly, let us use his Ordinances with zeal, sincerity,
simplicity, fear and faith, as did Levi. Mal. 2. 5. who feared the Lord, and
was afraid before his name; for the Law of truth was in his mouth, and iniquity
was not found in his lips; he walked with God in peace and equity, and did turn
away from iniquity; and then, when we love and fear his Word, and tremble at
his glorious presence, we may be assured his fear is in our hearts, and his
covenant of peach s^all be with us, he will never depart, nor turn away from
doing us good, nor shall we depart from him, I^r. 32. 39, 40. he will rejoice
over us to do us good, he will assuredly reward us with grace and peace here,
Prove. 13. 13. and with glory and peace hereafter; Luke 11. 28. which the God of
grace, peace, and glory, send unto us all, and to your Majesty in particular,
and that for his sake, who is our peace, and eternal King of glory, Jesus
Christ our Lord; To whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be rendered as due
is, All honor and glory, power and praise, world without end, Amen.

Major. To join in friendship, much more in marriage with Idolaters, is a
great sin, and brings the judgments of God upon a man or Nation. Minor.
Conclus. But we have joined not only in friendship, but marriage with
Idolaters, Ergo, We have greatly sinned, and justly brought Gods judgments on
us.


Major proved.
GOD the Creator of all things, the supreme Lord of heaven and earth, having
showed the severity of his justice on the Angels that 2 Pet. 2. 4. sinned,
whom he spared not at all, but cast them down to hell, and delivered them into
chains of darkness, to be reserved unto the judgment of the great day (in
regard they willingly rebelled against him without any others solicitations,
and repented not of their wickedness, but being full of malice set themselves
as enemies against God, and his creatures) yet in the mean space they have
looseness and liberty to range abroad in the world, and to go about seeking
whom they 1 Pet 5. 8. may devour; which liberty, God permitted unto them, to
tempt and try our first parents, thereby to declare his justice and mercy, and
Satan's malice and cruelty, and though one Devil be principal, yet has he
many partners, which are called his Mat. 25. 41. angels, all of them unclean
and malicious spirits, by whose suggestions and deceit, our first parents being
overcome, whereas they were promised to Genesis 3. 5. be as Gods knowing good and
evil, fell by this means into corruption and misery, and became like devils,
without Ephesians. 2. 12. God in the world, subject to the horror of Gods wrath, and
to eternal condemnation; for which offense of the devils, God presently
sentenceth him, he having none to [Hic Deus statim ad serendam sententiam,
venis, quia nullus est diabolo aut transferendi crimen aut recipiscendi locus*
Trem. and Jan. in loc.] accuse for this fact, Genesis 3. 14. nor place to repent;
therefore forthwith judgment passed on him as the only author of sin,
although the Serpent also is punished, as the instrument he used therein, Genesis
3. 15. The substance of which curse Moses describes in these words, I will put
enmity between thee, and the woman, and between thy seed, and her seed, it
shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. By which sentence, he
brake the cursed amity between men and devils, and between the Serpents seed
(that is wicked men and reprobates who are named the sons of Beliall, Deuteronomy.
13. 13. and 1 Jo. 3. 10. and of the devil) and the woman's seed (that is Christ
and his Church, even all that should believe on him, who are Eves seed and
Abraham's seed by faith) Gal. 3. 29. and denounced Satan's overthrow and
destruction in respect of his power and works, Jo. 12. 31. and 1 Jo. 3. 8. for
the head being bruised, strength and life is perished, and so the Jewish
Doctors expound it. [So its in thargum Jerusal. vid. Ainsworth in loc.] The
woman's children shall be cured, but thou, O Serpent shall not, for though Satan
should bruise Christ's and his childrens Heb. 2. 13. heel, surprising them by
affliction, troubling them with temptations, bringing on them persecutions and
death (with all that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer.) Yet as
Christ has crushed his head, and dissolved the work of the devil, spoiled
principalities, Col. 2. 15. and powers: so also shall all his people, (who
resist him steadfastly in the faith) 1 Pet. 5. 9. verse. prevail against him,
the God of peace shall shortly bruise him under their Romans 16. 20. feet. Until
which time God has proclaimed open war to all his people against their
Ephesians. 6. 12. spiritual enemies the world, the flesh, and the devil, their
presse-mony they received in Baptism, and there they promised to fight under
his banner faithfully unto their lives end. By which promise according to Gods
ordinance, they are obliged to forsake al fellowship, Ephesians. 5. 7. and communion
with the wicked, sees the love of them is I am. 4. 4. enmity with God, for
such is the friendship of the world, 1 lo. 2. 15. as God by his own example
teaches, who for the good and preservation of his Church, cast forth that Genesis
4. 14, 15. wicked one (the first seed of the Serpent, and eldest son of Satan)
who slew his righteous brother, and gave Genesis 4. 25. Seth unto Eve, the mother
of all living, for the increase and propagation of the Church, which was from
time to time (during the old world) propagated and governed by ten holy
Patriaks in their Genesis 5. per totum, generation, who were by Enoch, Jude epist.
14, 15. verse. a Prophet of Gods warned [Ainsworth in the communion of Saints,
chap. 8.] not to join with the wicked seed of Caine, in regard God would
destroy them in the appointed time: But the sons of God being ensnared through
their own lusts, and enticed by the external beauty Genesis 4. 22. [Id est
amaeham speciosamque hic enim jam invaluerat insana ambitio forma. Trem. and
Jun. in loc.] of the daughters Genesis 6. 1, 2. of men, (Satan tempting them
thereunto) would neither hearken to the word of God prohibiting their ungodly
friendship and marriages with Cains Idolatrous progeny, nor yet would they be
ruled by the motions of his good, Genesis 6. 3. spirit in them, striving against
that sin, but being besotted with the beauty of women, [Modo forma placuisset
sibi uxores adjungabant nulla side aut pietatis ratione habita seque
intrudebant temere in conjugia and ^^fidelium necessitudinis. Jun. in Genesis 6.]
and covetous after wealth and honor of the world wherein Cains posterity, Genesis
4. 22. excelled, they took them wives even as their lust led them, [Gen. 6. 2.
They followed their own affections, and chose to themselves wives not
regarding the counsel of their godly parents, nor the will of God who forbad
such profane marriages. Ainsw. in locum.] and so grieved and quenched his
Spirit, whereupon he set the world a determinate time or space for them to
repent otherwise he would for this and other sins destroy them all, Genesis 6.
1. 2, 3. for Naamah, the sister of Tubalcaine was so, Genesis 4. 22. [The Heb.
Doctors say of this Naamah, that all the world wandered in love after her: and
that of her were borne evil spirits into the world. Ainsw. in locum.] named by
reason of her excellent beauty, and then began this poison to infect the world
which could not be purged out but with the flood. For the sons of God (which
should be one spirit with the Lord) hereby became flesh, corrupted their ways,
which brought a flood upon 2 Pet. 2. 5. the ungodly. Therefore Solomon the
wisest of men, tells us, Prove. 29. 27. and that by the Spirit of God, that an
unjust man is an abomination to the just; and he that is upright in the way, is
abomination to the wicked. What friendship or marriage, can there be, where
abomination and hatred abides? Jehu 2 King. 9. 22. tells Joram, there can be
no peace so long as the whoredoms of his mother Jezabell and her witchrafts
were so many. The godly are made light, the wicked Ephesians. 5. 8. are darkness.
Christ dwells in the 2 Cor. 13. 5. one. Satan Ephesians. 2. 3. in the other. The one
are made righteous by faith, yea the righteousness of 2 Cor. 5. 21. God in
Christ. The other are unrighteous, yea full of all unrighteousness, Romans 1.
29. The one are the sons of God, Io. 1. 12. the other children of the Devil,
Joh. 8. 44. Hence follows St. Paul's sequel, 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15. etc. Be not ye
unequally yoked with unbeleevers in friendship, viz. nor in marriage, for what
fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion has
light with darkness? and what concord has Christ with Beliall? or he that
believes with an Infidel? and what agreement has the temple of God with
Idols? For ye are the Temple of the living God, as God has said, I will dwell
in them, and walk in them, I will be their God, and they shall be my people.
Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and
touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you: And will be a father unto you,
and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty: yea there is
blessedness pronounced to him that walks not in the counsel of the Psalm. 1.
1. ungodly, nor stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the
scorner. Therefore says the wise King, Prove. 4. 14. Enter not into the path of
the wicked, and go not in the way of evil men, avoid it; pass not by it,
turn from it and pass away, for [Vt homo jejuno stomacho vix potest
indormiscere sed subinde excitatur fame: ita sunt isti qui maleficia cibo and
potui anteponunt ac proinde nunquam conqui^scunt nisi ipsi perp^traverint
maleficia aut alios ad ea perpetranda: adduxerint. Trem. and Jun. notae in
locum.] they sleep not unless they do evil. Either thou shall act with them
in sin, or they will allure thee to act for them. Therefore David will have
no familiarity norcompany with them, but hates vain Psalm. 26. 4. 5. persons, he
will not go with dissemblers, he hated the congregation of evil doers, he
would not sit with the wicked; nay he will not have a wicked servant in his
house, much less a wicked man for his friend, he will not know a wicked
person, nor suffer him to live in his Kingdom, much less will he hug an
Idolatrous wife in his bosom, Psalm 101. 3, 4, 6. 7. 8. For if their company
and society be a sin, much more is their friendship or marriage; therefore
God sharply threatened that good King Jehoshaphat for joining in friendship with
Idolatrous Ahab, 2 Chro. 19. 2. should thou help the ungodly and love them
that hate the Lord, therefore is wrath upon thee from the Lord. And when he
would not be reproved by the Prophet, but after Ahabs death joined in affinity
with his Idolatrous son Ahaziah. Eliezer prophesied against him, saying, 2 Chronicles. 20. 37. Because thou have joined thy self with Ahaziah the Lord has
broken thy works. For long before this had God commanded the Israelites
utterly to destroy all Idolaters, whether they were of the cursed Nations Deuteronomy.
7. 2, 3. of Canaan, with whom they were to make no Covenant, nor marriages with
them, or of their own people, or other Nation; nay though they were never so
near or dear unto them, as thy brother, son, daughter, wife of thy bosom,
friend which is as thine own soul, they were to be stoned to death, Deuteronomy.
13. 6. 8, 9, 10, 15, 16. And if it were a whole City that had committed this
thing, the inhabitants were to be smitten with the edge of the sword,
destroying it utterly, and all that was therein, and to burn the City and spoil
thereof, with fire, this was to be done without pity or mercy. How then could
they possibly join in friendship or marriage with those, they were commanded
thus to destroy, without committing great wickedness? How can a godly man
choose such a wife to be a help meet for him as Genesis 2. 18. a wife ought to be?
therefore as a thing impossible to be done without sin. The Apostle, 1 Cor.
7. 39. [Idest, religiose and cum timore Dei. Beza nota in locum.] commands a
woman to marry only in the Lord, being of the same Religion and mind, and
doing it in the fear of God, and to his glory. [Cul^^s dispurit as matrimonium
proced^us impedit ne contrahi possit. Aqui. sup. ^. 59. 1. ^.] 1. The very
Papists themselves tell ^s so much, that difference in Religion before
Matrimony, hinders such marriage. For what communion is there between light
and darkness, but the greatest communion that is, is between man and wife. If
he which is in the sight of faith cannot marry with an unbeleever, much less
with an Idolater: And the Schoolemans reason is good, [Cum conjuges in fide
dissentientes prolem ad Dei cultum aeducare nequeant disparit as matrimonium
precedens impedit ne infidelis cum fideli contrahere possit. Aqui. us supra.]
Because there will dissentions arise between the married persons in what
Religion the children begotten by them shall be brought up. Nay there are more
and better reasons, as namely: First, The will and glory of God, who requires
us to be holy as he is holy, 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. and has severed us from other
people that we should be his, Levit. 20 26. Now he will have no Idolater nor
unbeleevers come Revel. 22. 15. nigh him, nor shall they stand in his sight, he
hates them, and therefore has no affinity with them, Psalm. 5. 4, 5. Now we
ought to be perfect, as our Father in Heaven is perfect, for he has not
called us unto uncleanness, but unto 1 Thessalonians. 4. 7. holiness, that so he
might marry us in Hosea 2. 19. faith, we performing the Covenant we betrothed
with him, of making no Covenant or League with the wicked, nor giving, nor
receiving marriages from them, as he required of the Jews; the equity whereof
belongs to us, for on the same conditions is the Covenant made with us, 2 Cor.
6. 17. Come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and
touch no unclean thing and I will receive you, and will be a Father unto you,
and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty-Secondly,
God forbids this, lest by familiarity with wicked and Idolatrous persons we
should learn their wickedness, and commit Idolatry with them, which God has
declared to be unavoidable, Deuteronomy 7 4. Exodus 23. 32. Thou shall not make
marriages with them: the reason God gives, for they will turn away thy son
from following me that they may serve other Gods. And for this reason Solomon
forbids Prove. 22. 24, 25. us friendship with a wicked man, lest thou learn his
ways, and get a snare to thy soul. As did the Israelites who were mingled
among the heathen and learned their works, and they served their Idols which
were a snare unto them, Psalm. 106 35, 36 [Scandalum illis fuerunt quibus in
multis inciderunt miseriis: sic septuaginta vertit, (...) ut Judge. 2. 12, 13,
14. invenerunt.]

To prevent which Moses enjoynes, Deuteronomy. 4. 3. the Israelites, to look on Gods
judgments executed on those who joined themselves with the Midianitish women,
and to remember Zimri and Cozby, for all the men that followed Baalpeor, the
Lord thy God has destroyed them from among you; and lest we should think
this concerns us not, St. Paul remembers us with the same, 1 Cor. 10. 8. 11.
showing that these things happened unto them for examples, and were written for
our admonition, on whom the ends of the world are come. Jehoram King of Judah,
who would not take warning by his father King Jehoshaphat, but not only joined
in friendship as his father before, but also in marriage, with Ahabs wicked
progeny, (an Idolater though no Heathen) by her means, he did evil in the
sight of the Lord, fell to Idolatry, and so lost the kingdom of Edom, who
revolted from under him, yea, lost his God, his Religion and soul together;
for, he walked in the ways of the Kings of Israel, as did the house of Ahab,
and the reason the holy Ghost gives, for the daughter of Ahab was his wife, 2
Kings 8. 18. And why did Ahab sell himself to work wickedness, but because
Jezabell the daughter of Ethbaall King of the Zidonians enticed him 1 King. 21.
25. thereunto; yea, why did that godly governor Nehemiah contend with the
Rulers, Nehem. 13. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. revile the people, and smite certain of
them, and plucked off their hair? was it not because they had married wives of
Ashdod, of Amnon, and Moab, which were all Idolatrous, therefore he made them
swear they should not do the like any more, and gives the reason ab exemplo,
did not Solomon king of Israel sin by these things? yet among many Nations was
there no king like him, who was beloved of his God, and God made him king over
Israel, by his immediate appointment, nevertheless even him, who was so wise,
so beloved, so firmly stablisht and honored, did outlandish women cause to
sin, shall we then [Dissimulantes aut ferentes factum vestrum quod est contra
faedus Dei quod rup^stis and a quo improbe descivistis. Trem. and Iun. not. in
locum.] hearken unto you, to do all this great evil, to transgress against
our God in marrying strange wives?

For, though great men for honor, wealth, fashion, or other respect may make
slight hereof, yet God counts it a heinous offense: so the Prophet Mal. 2. 11.
Judah has dealt treacherously, and an abomination is committed in Israel and
Jerusalem, for Judah has profaned the holiness of the Lord which he loved,
and has married the daughter of a strange god, and what was this, but in
joining in [Illegitima eorum connubia damnat tum propterea quod contra faedus
Dei cum infid^l^bu^ inibantur, tum etiam quod contra fidem justae uxori datam.
Iun. and Trem. not. in locum.] affinity with the Idolatrous Nation, and in that
those of the Captivity had married strange wives of the people of the land? for
which Ezra confesses the Lord would be angry with them, Ezra 9* 2, 3, 14, 15.
if they should continue in it, till he had consumed them, so that there should
be no remnant nor escaping. The first hearing of this sin, made this Scribe
of the hoiy Ghost to rent his garments and his mantle, to pluck off the hair
off his head and heard, for grief, and to sit down astonished with heaviness
and affliction, ^uch holy zeal and godly sorrow was stirred up in him.

And in^^^d, every Christian ought so highly to be in love [Cum sanctitatem
adeo deb^^rat amare quisque, ut illius studio, omnibus aliis amoribus
renuntiaret, and quod iis diligentissime abstineret, aliter demonstrat
Propheta, injuriam fieri Deo, v. 11. as proinde ul^urum ipsum seq. verse. deinde
injuriam fieri uxori, v. 13, 14. ac postremo natura ipsae, and naturali
co^^^biorum legi, verse. 15, 16. Trem. and Iun. not. ut supra.] with holiness,
that he should renounce and abstain from all other love, as fleshly and
sinful, otherwise as the Prophet Malachy speaks, he does injury to God in
profaning his holiness, which he will certainly avenge.

It has been an old trick of Satan and his adherents, to procure Matches and
mixtures with Idolaters, or those of a corrupt Religion, to hinder the growth
of truth, and spreading of the Church, and especially to ensnare those, who are
eminent in the Church, or Commonwealth. Such were those he caught, Genes. 6.
4. in this snare, in the old world, mighty men, and men of renown, Eliashib
the high Priest, Nehem. 13. 28. and diverse other of the sons of the Priests; so
Zimria Prince, Numb. 25. 14. of a chief house of the Simeonites. So Sampson
Judge of Israel was entrapped by Dalilah, Judge. 16. 19. Solomon, 1 King. 11. 1,
4. by cleaving in love to strange women, his wives turned away his heart after
other gods, who was the richest, and wisest, and greatest king of the world in
those days.

This was Revel. 2. 14. and Numb. 31. 16. the devilish counsel of that
diviner Balaam, which for hope of honor and reward, he gave to Balac King of
Moab, against Israel, as Moses expresses, have ye saved all the women alive?
Behold, these caused the children of Israel through the counsel of [Quo
anctore puellae in sacrificiis Baal-Pehoris summissae sunt ad corrumpendum
Israelem, Trem. and Iun. not.] Balaam, to commit a trespass against the Lord:
So Valens the [Theod. 4. 11.] Emperor, before his marriage with an Arrian
Lady, was Orthodox, but through her persuasion, became a persecutor. By
Theodora the wife of [Evag. 4. 10.] Justinian, was the Eutichian heresy
advanced, for by her means Severus came to be Bishop of Constantinople. What
abundance of mischief did Iustina do, by the ill tutoring of [Theod. 5. 2.
Vide Mr. Newcomens Sermon of November. 5. printed 1642.] Valentinian the Emperor
in Arrianisme^^, to the Church? As Saul gave Micholl to David by Satan's
suggestion, (the evil spirit that vexed him) to be a snare unto him, 1 Samuel
18. 21. so often gives he his instruments the same counsel, to ensnare his
people, to be as thorns in their sides, as Joshua Joshua 23. 13. speaks of
the Canaanites, which was after fulfilled, Judge. 3. 6, 7, 8. they shall be
snares and traps unto you, and scourges in your sides, and thorns in your eyes.

So are always Idolatrous women to their husbands, and such fruit friendship
with Idolaters brings, viz. Gods temporal judgments and plagues, yea, and
sometimes spiritual and eternal ones; for those sins which the godly party is
too often drawn into by the advice, persuasion, allurements, and examples of the
Idolatrous party, as my Major affirms, That this sin brings Gods judgments on
a man or Nation. It was not the least cause of the greatness of the old worlds
wickedness for which God brought the flood, Genesis 6. 2. 5. 3.

It had almost cost Iehoshaphats life, 2 Chronicles. 1^. 31. however there was wrath
2 Chronicles. 19. 2. on him for it from the Lord: for shortly after God brought that
great Army against him, which brought him in great fear and distress, as in
the next chapter. And because he after joined with Ahaziah King of Israel, (who
did very wickedly) to go to Tarshish, God broke their ships, and spoiled their
Navy, they 2 Chronicles. 20. 35, 36, 37. were not able to go.

God will not acknowledge them for his temple, his children, nor will be their
father, nor dwell with them, nor 2 Cor. 6. 16, 17. walk in them, unless they
separate themselves from such matches, and touch no unclean thing. The people
of God must come out of Babylon, and not be partakers of her sins, lest they
receive of her plagues, Revel. 18. 4.

The judgment fell heavy on those that joined themselves to the Midianitish
women, Numb. 25. 4. they all perished, 23000. in one day by the plague, besides
1000. of the chief that were commanded to be hanged up unto the Lord, who were
ringleaders in this sin. Dalilah proved Sampsons ruin, Judge. 16. 21. and so
did the Canaanitish women to the Israelites, for, thereby they did evil in the
sight of the Lord. Therefore the anger of the Lord was hot against them, and he
sold them into the hands of their Judges 3. 7, 8. and* 2. 14. enemies. God was
angry with 1 Kings 11. 4, 6, 8, 9, 14, 23, 24, 26. Solomon for it, so that he
rent his kingdom from him, and gave it to his servant, in his sons days. Yea,
the Lord stirred up adversaries unto him, as Hadad the Edomite, and Rezon the
son of Eliadah who went to Damascus, and reigned there. And Jeroboam the son of
Nebat who made Israel to sin.

Was it not this caused Iehorams subjects of Edom to 2 King. 8. 18, 20, 22.
revolt from under him, and to make a King over themselves? And did not Libnah
revolt from him at the same time? Was it not an horrible judgment denounced by
Eliah on Ahab for his wickedness he did by the instigation of his Idolatrous
Queen? 1 King. 21. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. Surely it makes ones care to tingle,
for it was not only on him, and her, but on all his posterity.

God will cut them all off, and that with a miserable destruction; for him that
dies of Ahab in the City, the dogs shall eat, and him that dies in the
field, the fowls of the air shall eat. I need not speak of the great
trouble and misery came on those who married strange wives in Ezra, and
Nehemiahs time; nor how it cost Balaams life for wicked counsel. The whole
nation of the Midianites were destroyed for this fact, that so Israel might
avenge themselves on them for their sinful stratagems, Numb. 31. 2. and the
Prophet says, Mal. 2. 12. The Lord will cut off the man that does this, the
Master and the scholar out of the Tabernacle of Jacob, [Id est, non tantum
ipsum perfidum verum etiam defensorem omnem adjutoremque and patronum
p^rfidiae, etiam quum numeribus oblat is Deum sibi placare vide bitur. Trem.
and Iun. not.] Valens, Valentinian, [Vide Theod. Evag. Zozom.] Justina and
Theodora, and Severus, though they brought great persecution on the Orthodox
Christian; yet most of them came to miserable and sudden ends, and brought on
themselves perpetual infamy and shame, for their deceiving, and being deceived.

It was an Idolatrous match of Vortiger, King of the Britains here with us,
who married Rowen, daughter of Hengist, Commander of the Saxons, both an
Infidel and Idolater, (whose aid also he craved against Aurelius and Uter, the
two lawful heirs to the crown) by means of which Saxons, Vortigern, and the
greatest part of the Nobility, being by treachery slain at Stonehenge: [Fox in
his Acts and Monum. vol. 1. page 97. printed 1610.] they were driven out of
their country, leaving an example to all ages and countries, as Fox, [ut
supra, page 102.] speaks, what it is, first to let in foreign nations into
their dominion; but especially, what it is for Princes to join in Marriage with
Idolaters and Infidels, as this Vortigern did with Hengists daughter, which was
the mother of all this mischief, giving the Saxons not only strength, but also
courage, and occasion to attempt what they did; neither was this unconsidered
before of the Britain Lords and Nobility, who worthily being there with
offended, justly deposed their King, and enthroned Vortimer his son in his
room. Did not Archbishop Abbat tell King James, that such a match, and the
toleration of Popery, would draw upon the kingdom in general, and on himself
in particular, Gods heavy wrath and indignation: [Vide Bishop Abbats
Remonstrance to King James, in Mr. Pryns Hidden works of darkness, page 40.]

Was not Offa, [Fox Acts and Monum. ut supra, page 101.] King of Mercia, so
deeply plunged in sin and misery by the wicked counsel of Kemiswing his wife?
that having secretly and cruelly murdered the good King Etheldred of the
Westangles (who for his holiness and godly virtues, is counted for a Saint,
innocently coming to Offa, to marry with Althrid his daughter) after for shame
and sorrow, he went to Rome, left his kingdom, and there made himself ^ Monk;
and the aforesaid Queen (worker of this villainy) lived not three months after,
and in her death, [Fox Acts and Monum. vol. 1. printed 1610. page 117.] was so
tormented, that she was fain to bite and rent her tongue in pieces with her own
teeth: [Fox Acts and Monum. ut supra, page 101.] Red waldus also, King of the
Eastangles, being converted in Kent, by his Idolatrous wife which he married,
was persuaded to join Idolatry with Christianity, and so continued till his
death, which was not long after.

So that what the French wiseman spoke of ill marriages, is herein to the full
verified: Hom^ homini Lupus, it is a rough and dangerous match, and a galling
burdensome tie: [Pet. Ch^^ron. lib. 1. de Sapi^^tia, cap. 46.] Adam found Eve
so, after she was deceived by the Serpent, she deceived 1 Timothy 2. 14. him, and
so brought misery and mortality on all mankind. The very Papist, [Nubat in
quam tantum in domino, i. e. viro sua religionis nam in disparicultu prohibitum
est in lege matrimonium. Deuteronomy. 7. Gorran. in 1 Cor. 8.] themselves confess the
sin, and punishments.

Thus having proved the Major, let us see whether the Minor be true or no, viz.
But we have joined not only in friendship, but marriage, with Idolaters; we may
confess with Daniel, Dan. 9. 7, 8. O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee,
but unto us confusion, as at this day; to the men of Judah, and to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem; to our King, to our Princes, and to our Fathers,
because we have sinned against thee; for with the Israelites we have not only
joined our selves in affinity, but marriage with the Papists, who are not only
Idolaters, but members of that man: 2 These. 2. 3. 4. 8. of Sin ((...), that out
law. (...), that son of perdition, who opposes and exalts himself above that
is called God; [Omnes norunt qui sit ille quise dicit posse pro arbitrio coelum
reserere, and aperire qui in m^narchas sumpsit imperium.] or is worshipped:
(...), 1 John 2. 22. The Antichrist, who denies the Father, the Son) whom by
thy Spirit thou command us to forsake, Rev. 18. 4. and to have no fellowship
with, Ephesians. 5. 11. But said, Come out of her my people, that ye be not
partaker with her of her sin, and ye receive not her plagues. But alas, too
many have thrust themselves and their children, through the bond of wedlock: To
use learned Bullingers [Bulling is Apoc. cap. 18. Sermon. 78.] words, into the
midst of Papistry; neither have we regarded any thing else herein, but riches,
and worldly honors, and friendships.

Against all these, the Prophets, with the Apostles, and at this present,
Christ the Son of God, from the right hand of the Father, thundreth and cries
out alond, Come away from her, my people, and be not partakers with her sins;
which words admit not any witty or civil reasoning, nor carnal, nor crafty
qualifying; for it follows, Lest ye receive of her plagues: For, if ye like
Rome if ye like the Romish Religion; if Romish Prelacy, riches and promotion
please you; if the Romish corruption content you, let the judgment, pain and
damnation due to Antichristianity, content you also: hac ille, we have death
like the Israelites, who for a little while served the Lord, during the days of
Joshua, and all the days of the Elders that outlived Joshua, Judge. 2. 7. who
had seen all the great works of the Lord that he did for Israel, in delivering
them from the Egyptian bondage, in feeding and preserving them in the
Wilderness, and in wonderfully destroying most of the Canaanites before them,
as God commanded them, Deuteronomy. 7. 2. and Exodus 23. 31, 32, 33. utterly to be
destroyed, seeing their sins were Genesis 15. 16. full, and to make no covenant,
Exodus 34. 12. 15, 16. much less marriage with them; and by Joshua, Josh. 23.
11, 12, 13. warned them in any wise, not to go back, and cleave unto the
remnant of these nations that remained amongst them; nor to make marriages with
them, nor to go in unto them, nor they unto you; for know then for a certainty,
that the Lord your God will no more deliver out any of these nations from
before you, but they shall be snares and traps unto you, and scourges in your
sides, and thorns in your eyes, until you perish from off this good land,
which the Lord your God has given you, which accordingly came to pass, as may
be seen throughout the whole Book of Judges, Judge. 2. 12. and 3. chap. 5, 6, 7.
and 4. chap. 1, 2. and 6. chap. 1, 2. and 8. 33, 34. and 10. 6, 7. and 13. 1.
And have not we outstripped them in this sin? although God graciously and
miraculously delivered us out of that more then Egyptian bondage of
Antichristian tyranny, wherein we lay under that whore of Babylon, which
spiritually is called, Rev. 11. 8. Sodom, and Egypt, even that great city, Rev.
17. 18. which reigns over the Kings of the earth; and an Angel from heaven
with a loud voice, Rev. 14. 9, 10, 11. proclaimed it; that if any man worship
the Beast, or his Image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or his hand, the
same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is powered out without
mixture, into the cup of his indignation, and he shall be tormented with fire
and brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the
Lamb; and the smoke of their torments shall ascend for ever and ever, and they
have no rest, day nor night, who worship the Beast and his Image, and whosoever
receives the mark of his name, which our first Reformers were very zealous and
careful of, as many as had seen the great deliverances, and mercies which God
wrought for his kingdom, in the time of blessed King Edward the sixth, and
that Phoenix of her age, Queen Elizabeth, woe was, if you will believe Mr. Cotton,
[Vide Mr. Cotton on the seven Vials. printed 1641.] The fourth Angel pouring
out his Vial on the Sun, in the first beginning of her reign, and held so,
whilst those holy martyrs and zealous confessors, (which were tried in her
tyrant sisters days) remained alive: but those being dead, the Amorits began
to get some footing again, and the Popish party had friends at [Vide the great
Papists that abod in her Court.] court, and not a few amongst the Clergy in
[Such as Whitgift, Gifford, Andrews, and those Bishops that persecuted the
Ministers of Christ in her reign, about Popish ceremonies.] the Synod, (from
these we being delivered) God required we should have utterly rooted them out,
and have made no affinity with them, much less marriage, but to have destroyed
them out of the kingdom, as enemies of Christian Religion, and upholders of
that man of sin, such as are by the Word commanded to be Psalm. 137. 8, 9.
destroyed, or at least fore-prophesied so to be with a promised happiness to
the executor of justice; for happy 2 Pet. 2. 12. shall he be, that takes and
dasheth thy little ones against the stones: For, they are as natural bruit
beasts, made to be taken, Jude 4. and destroyed; as the form of prayer set
forth in your learned and royal fathers days, King James of famous memory for
the fifth of November shows, where is this clause, [Vide the Book of prayers
set forth to be read for the fifth of November, immediately after the
Powder Plot.] To that end strengthen the hand of our gracious King, the Nobles
and Magistrates of the Land, with judgment and justice, to cut off the workers
of iniquity the Papists, whose Religion is Rebellion, whose faith is faction,
whose practice is murdering of souls and bodies, and to root them out of the
confines of this Kingdom.

Yea the forms of prayer set forth in the beginning of your Majesty's reign
for those [Vide the prayers set out by Bishop Abbot for those dangerous days
in the beginning of his Majesty's reign.] dangerous times prove the same. For
there is an ingenious confession to God, and reason rendered to move God to
hear us from the malice and wickedness of these Papists our enemies; viz. For
the taskemakers of Egypt vexed thy people only with bodily pressures, but never
as these, compelled them to defile their souls with their Idoll-worship,
wherefore stretch out thine arm, O our jelous and just God, and suffer not the
vilifiers of thy sacred Oracles, the innovators and forgers of new faiths, the
corrupters of thy Sacraments, the polluters of thy holy worship, and the
abandoners of thy Catholic Church to triumph over us.

But if any scruple remain in your Majesty's heart doubting whether the
Papists be Idolaters or no, [Vide the third part of the Sermon against peril
of Idolatry, page 72. printed at London, 1623.] Our book of Homilies may
confirm it fully, which proves them plainly to be worse Idolaters then the
heathen, and to be that very Antichrist Daniel foretold, Dan. 11. for the
Priests with a solemn pace pass forth before these golden puppets, and fall
down to the ground on their marrow bones before these honorable Idols, and
then rising up again, offer up odours, and incense to them, to give the people
an example of double Idolatry, by worshipping not only the Idol, but the gold
also and riches with which its garnished.

And again they teach [Homil. ut supra, page 73.] most horrible and filthy
Idolatry, which the devilish schoolmaster Satan has penned; for his dastardly
disciples and scholars, even the lewd lessons of wicked Idolatry, and herein
they pass the folly and wickedness of the Gentiles, that they honor and
worship the relics and bones of Saints which prove that they be mortal men
and dead (and therefore no gods to be worshipped) which the Gentiles would
never confess of their gods for very shame. [Homil. ut supra, page 53, 54.] O
wicked impudent and most shameless men, the devisers of these things! O feely
foolish and dastardly dawes, and more beastly then the Ass whose tail they
kissed, that believe such things! They have been by their wicked teachers made
more wicked then the Gentiles Idolaters, yea no wiset then asses, horses, and
males, which have no understanding.

For they have not only made Images, and set them up in Temples (as did the
Gentiles Idolaters their Idols,) [Hom. ut supra, page ^4, 55, 56, 57, etc.] but
^^so have the same Idolatrous opinion of the Saints, to whom they have made
i^^ges, which the Gentile Idolaters had of their false Gods: And have not only
worshipped their images with the same rites, ceremonies, superstition, and all
circumstances as did the Gentiles Idolaters their Idols, but in many points
also have far exceeded them in all wickedness, foolishness and madness.
And if this be not sufficient to prove them idolaters, I desire your Majesty to
peruse the said Homily, wherein both by Scriptures and Fathers its confirmed at
large, which testimony of our whole Church is the same with that of other
Protestant [Vid. the Harmony of Confess. the confess. of Sweaveland de
imaginibus, sect. 2. cap. 12. and confess. of Wirtenb. sect. 2. cap. 23. and
the latter confess. of Helvetia, sect. ^. cap. 4.] Churches.

Therefore sees after a while we forgot Gods great deliverence from these
Idolaters, and broke our covenant which we made with him, of forsaking the
devil and all his works, the pompes and vanities of this wicked world; and
for wealth, peace or honor joined with them, not only in friendship, but
marriage; God has made them to be snares and traps to us (as well as the
Canaanites were to the Israelites) to be scourges in our sides, and thorns in
our eyes, witness those many conspiracies and treasons against our Princes and
Estates throughout the reigns of your noble Predecessors, Q. Elizabeth and K.
James, especially those famous Mr. pieces of theirs, of the Spanish invasion in
88. and that horrid Gunpowder Treason, wherein your Majesty's person was also
engaged.

After which heinous and inhumane deeds (which now are slurd over, and almost
forgotten. By Parliament it was enacted [Vide 35. Eliza. cap. 2. and tertio
Jacobi cap. 5.] that all Recusants should be restrained to some place of abode,
and be confined to their private houses in the Country, and not at any time to
pass or remove above five miles thence, under pain of forfeiting all their
lands, chattells and goods during life, and that none of them should remain
within ten miles of the City of London, nor come into the place where the
King or heir apparent to the Crown was; nor to keep Arms, nor any
Ammunition, neither by themselves, nor others for them. But alas, we have gone
on in paralling the Israelites, Psalm. 18. 32, 33, 34, 35, etc. when by these he
show us, we sought him, and returned and enquired early after God, and
remembered that God was our rock, and the high God our Redeemer, nevertheless
we did but flatter him with our mouths, [For what Nobles or Magistrates
labored according to their power to root them out of these confines, as
persons hateful to God. and hurtful to men and Religion, as in our prayers we
confessed.] and lied unto him with our tongues; for our hearts were not right
with him, nor were we steadfast in his Covenant, [made a^ our Baptism, and on
condition employed when we prayed.] But he being full of compassion forgave us
our iniquity, and hitherto has not destroyed us, but turned away his anger,
and did not stir up all his wrath. Although we have with them not only
joined in familiarity and friendship, but also marriage; not only joined in
league with these Idolatrous Papists, and their wicked Ahabs: But have
contracted marriages with them, even your Majesty who are the 2 Samuel 21. 17.
light of Israel, and should be the vigor of the law, a nursing Esaias 49. 23.
father to the Church, the Defender of the faith, as you are entitled, by ill
Counselors in your youth have been led away into this sin, and have
married not only an Idolater, but on most wicked and impious conditions have
took her [Vide the Conditions confessed both by Mr. Pryn and his Answerer, in
the Roy. Favor. wherein both the Idolaters and their Idolatries are allowed
and permitted to be brought and used openly in this Kingdom, without control
or punishment, as in the Articles appears, page 48, 49.] to wife, to the great
and open dishonor of God and his truth, who hates these Idolaters and their
Idoll-worship, in whose sight such as Psalm. 5. 5. wilfully sin shall not stand.

But he will wound the heads of his enemies, Psalm. 68. 21. and the hairy scalp
of such as continue in their sins wilfully, who bless themselves in their
hearts hearing the words of this curse, saying, They shall have peace, though
they walk in the Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20. imagination of their own hearts to add
drunkenness to thirst, the Lord will not spare such, but his anger and his
jealousy shall smoke against them, and all the curses written in Gods Book
shall lie upon them, and the Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven:
For the Spirit of God pronounces openly that the favorers of the Romish
Church shall be damned; so zealous [Bulling. in Apoc. cap. 14 ser. 64.]
Bullinger Revel. 18. 4. And who am I then to say the contrary, or what men will
pronounce otherwise? let us therefore hear the sentence of the just judge, and
believe the word of the Son of God, and beware of the Popish Religion, for he
[Bulling. in Apoc. cap. 13. sermon. 61. has the number of the name of the beast,
who has a society with the beast, which society that number bewraieth or
shows.

Yet such was the cursed flattery of those counselors both in Church [Vide
the Articles for the Match in the Royal favorite. page 49.] and State, in your
noble Fathers declining age, and in the beginning of your Majesty's Reign,
that not only a Popish Princess was entertained for your consort, but also
her Idolatrous Priests were allowed, a Popish Bishop for her Almoner, and no
less then 28. Priests, who were with Jezabels fed from her table, permitted
for the service of Baall. Yea from your Majesty's revenues they had their
maintenance; and as Solomon's for his wives gods, 1 King. 11. 7. so there was a
Chapel erected for the celebrating of Idolatry, and altars made for the Mass
and Breaden god, the abomination of the Romanists (even in your Majesty's
Royal City) and a Papist was entertained, not only in your Court, and
presence; but even in your Chamber, Bosom, contrary to the Law Genesis 6. 2. and
Mal. 2. 11. and 1 Corinthians. 7. 39. and 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 17. and Revel. 14. 9,
10. and 18. 4, 5. of God, and former statutes, [Vide the Statutes of Eliz. and
Jacobi, made against Priests, Jesuits.] of this kingdom; and though in humane
policy great and many benefits be pretended to the kingdom to paint over this
corrupt plastring, I will answer such statesmen with that of the Apostle, Their
damnation is just, 1 Romans 3. 8. who plead we may do evil, that good may come
thereby. Surely, the wisdom of man is always foolishness with God: For, in
stead of good, much evil has come thereby; Antichrist has thereby set his
foot again, [Vide the Letter of Grace and Protection, set forth by Mr. Pryn,
and allowed by his Answerer in the Royal favorite.] the Papists have been
connived at, and [Vide Pulfords Declaration to your Majesty.] favored, most of
the laws made against them, lying dead, or dormant.

The Pope has reigned again, [Vide the Declaration of the Parliament October. 5.
and that other Answer to your Majesty's, October 23. 1642. and the oath which
the popish Priests take, in Mr. Pryns Hidden works of darkness, page 82.]
secretly in this kingdom, as the Parliament has declared, many by the Queens
example, [Vide the effect of the marriage in Mr. Pryns Royal Favorite: and the
Remonstrance of the House of Commons, July 11. 1628.] have been countenanced,
encouraged, multitudes of later days have been seduced from our Religion to
their Idolatry; yea, too many for honor and profit under her Majesty's
service, or hope thereof, have been allured thereunto, and turned Renegadoes:
Popish Priests have been allowed, and freed out of prison, by special Warrants
from your Majesty, and by your Secretary, Judges have been inhibited to proceed
against them according to the Law: By your Royal pretended command, [Vide King
James, your Majesty, and the Lords oath, for the suspension of Laws, in Mr.
Pryns Hidden works of darkness.] Pensioners, have been allowed in London, for
the Queens Chapel, granting four shillings weekly to old women, and ten groats
weekly to the younger sort, thereby alluring them to adhere to Popery, and to
forsake the true Religion, [Vide the fifth effect of the marriage in Mr. Pryns
Royal Favorite, and the warning to the Protestants of England.] Rochel, and
many Protestants in France have been lost and undone, whilst your Majesty's
ships, were, as is reported, lent to fight against them. Irish rebels have been
emboldened in their cruel rebellion and blody massacre, pretending they fight
under the Queens [Vide the Remonstrance of the Church of Ireland, page 5.]
banner and protection: most of the Papists now in England, are [Vide the
'Declaration of the Parliament October. 5. and their Answer to that, October. 23.
1642.] armed, and in high command and esteem in your Majesty's army, to fight
for the maintenance of the Protestant Religion, and privileges of Parliament,
just as the devil strove with the Angel, Jude 9. Michael to bury the body of
Moses honorably, to make the Israelites thereby commit I dolatry: And as the
adversaries of Judah, Ezr: 4. 3, 4. pretended to join in building of the
Temple, but were not permitted, for they had no such deadly enemies; so surely,
neither has your Majesty: The Parliament, nor the Protestant Religion,
witness eighty eight, the gunpowder-treason, and the devilish rebellion in
Ireland, and the fruits of that peace (which they say) your Majesty has made
with those monsters, shall witness, whose damnation slumbereth not, whose sins
cry for vengeance, nor shall the guilt thereof be washed away, nor punishment
be remitted, till the sword of divine vengeance light on them, and wrath fall
upon the chief actors thereof, to the uttermost, if not also upon the
upholders, and favorers of such men, who partaking with them in their sins,
shall also in their Rev. 18. 4. [Vide the judgment of the Bishops in Ireland,
concerning a toleration of Popery, in Mr. Prynnes Discovery, page 83.] plagues.

For what can be expected but Gods judgments on us, for this wicked friendship
and marriage? so that the thing we have desired should ruin us, and that we
chose for our welfare, should destroy us. Surely, unless your Majesty repent
and amend the same, it is to be feared, itmay rent your kingdoms from you, as
it did from Solomon and Jehoram, 1 King. 11. 4. 11. and Chron. 21. 6. 10.
theirs. The judgment is falling a pace, and God will not stay the revenging
Angels hand, unless with David, you repent of this sin, and confess the same
to the Lord God of your fathers, and do his pleasure; yea, until we all
separate our selves from these Papists that trouble the land, and from the
strange wives; that so the fierce wrath of God for this matter may be turned
from us as Ezra, Ezra 10. 11. speaks: For we remain yet escaped, as its this
day: Behold, we are before thee in our trespasses, but we cannot stand before
thee, because Ezra 9. 14, 15. of this; for all such friendship is accursed, all
such marriages [See how heinous it was in the eyes of Nehemiah, 13. 25. and of
Ezra, 9. 3.] abominable. There Is no peace to the wicked, Isai. 48. 22. says my
God; yet if her Majesty will dwell with you peaceably, without offense, Saint
Paul, 1 Cor. 7. 12. advises not to put her away, but her Idolaters must be
left, otherwise, with Asas mother, she may not be Queen, 2 Chronicles. 15. 16. nor
be kept company with, no, 1 Cor 5. 11. nor to be eaten with. An heretic (as
all Papists Tit. 3. 10. are) are to be abstained from, after the first and
second admonition: Nay, if our brother bring any other Gospel then what Christ
and his Apostles preached, we are not to bid him God speed, Joh. 2 Epist. verse.
10. In a word, all communion, not only with the Canaanites, but also with all
other Idolaters was forbidden, Deuteronomy. 29. 16, 17, etc. Numb. 25. 1, 2, 3. Hosea
9. 10. Mal. 2. 11. to the Israelites, and in them to us.

Which humbly I beseech your Majesty to observe and keep fully, and I pray God
that reproof of Eliah to Ahab, 1 King. 18. 18. Iehu, to Ioram, 2 King. 9. 22.
have no analogy to you nor the Queen. I confess, this will be a harsh lesson
to flesh and blood; but if you will be Christ's Disciple, you Mat. 16. 24. must
deny your self, take up your Cross, and follow him, and hate father mother,
brethren, Luke 14. 26. sisters, wife, children, yea, and your own soul,
otherwise you cannot be his disciple; for whosoever matcheth himself with the
ungodly: Idolaters, filthy and unclean persons, receaveth the same reward with
them, namely in this life present cursednesse, a reprobate mind, and sundry
calamities, and after this life, everlasting torments, [Bullin. in Apocal. cap.
18. ser. 78. ^^medio.] So reverend Bullinger, neither is there any respect of
persons with God, Romans 2. 11. and Deuteronomy. 10. 17. [(...).] for with Kings, his
eyes are on the Throne, he does establish them, and they are exalted; if they
be bound in fetters, and holden in cords of affliction, then he shows them
their works and their transgressions that they have exceeded, he opens their
ears to discipline, and commands that they return from iniquity; if they obey
and Job 36. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. serve him they shall prosper, they shall spend
their days in prosperity, and their years in pleasures.

But if they obey not they shall perish by the sword, and they shall die
without knowledge. If against this any shall object your love, Honor, wealth
will be hereby endangered, to those I answer with our Savior Jesus Christ who
is truth it self, What shall it profit Mat. 16. 26. and Mark. 8. 34. a man to
gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? If others object, your faith,
credit, and promise is engaged, for her, or their toleration in Idolatry, or
for friendship, peace, pardon, with them, or to them; Nay, though there be many
Oaths to confirm the same, yet are they not to be kept, being things
unlawful, which God hates; as our Church [Vide the Homily against swearing 2.
part. page 49.] of England teaches by the example of Herod, who, as he took a
wicked Oath, so he more wickedly performed the same, and cruelly, Mat. 14. 9.
slew the most holy Prophet; and by the example of Judge. 11. 38, 39. Ieptha, who
fondly and unadvisedly slew his one and only daughter, for the promise which he
made most foolishly to God, against Gods everlasting will, and the law of
Nature, he most cruelly performed. So committing against God a double offense:
and therefore concludes, whosoever makes any promise, binding himself
thereunto by an oath, let him foresee that the thing which he promises be
good, and honest, and not against Gods command, and that it be in his own
power to perform it justly, such good promises and Oaths, are all men bound
to keep evermore Psalm. 15. 4. and 66. 14. and 76. 12. and Jer. 4. 2. and Mat.
5. 33. assuredly. But if at any time, either through ignorance, ill counsel,
over-perswasion, vehemence of temptation, for love, or malice, or any other
unjust means, any man promise and swear to do any thing, which is either
against the law of God, or not in his power to perform, let him take it for an
[Homil. ut supra, page 50.] unlawful, and ungodly Oath, and repent thereof,
and break it.

Now this is contrary to the law of God, viz. Tolerating Idolatry, pardoning of
Murder, Blasphemy, Sacrilege, Rebellion, and Treason in the highest degree,
all scarlet crimson crying sins. Nor is yet in your Majesty's power to perform
it, viz. The allowing of Mass being said, and of Seminary Priests to abide in
the Realm, both being contrary to the laws of this Kingdom, which punish such
[Vide Stat. made in the 23. Eliz. cap. 1. page 27. called an act against
Jesuits and Seminary Priests] persons and [The Acts made Jacobi tertio, called
for the better discovery and repressing Popish Recusants, and diverse other Acts
against them.] actions with death. To the maintenance of which laws, yea, and
observance, your Majesty is as well [Fox Acts and Mon. vol. 2. edit. 1641. page
879. 880. Bract. l. 1. c. 8. f. 5. and l. 3. c. 9. f. 107.] obliged, as your
subjects, nor is it in your power to alter [As appears by common practice in
all Kings reigns.] or repeal them, without the parliaments consent, who, with
your Majesty, were the makers of them. But more particularly, you cannot grant
peace or pardon to these monstrous persecutors, and inhumane blood thirsty
Rebels, (who are enemies to God and his truth, fighters against all good men)
when you have already passed over your power by an Act [Vide the Act made this
Parliament, for the speedy and effectual reducing of the Rebels of Ireland to
their due obedience to his Majesty and the Crown of England.] of Parliament
since this horrid Rebellion, unto your Parliament to punish them, and maintain
war against them; and have sealed an Act to many thousands of your loyal
subjects [Vide the Statute before herein] who have disburst their moneys for
the Rebels lands long since, both which Acts are just and irrevocable, and not
for any new promise or Oath to be altered or changed.

For a King, (as the ancient laws [Fox Acts and Monum. Vol. 1. page 159.
printed 1610.] of King Edward has described him) ought above all things to
fear God, to love and to observe his commandments, and to cause them to be
observed through his whole Realm; Item, he ought to do Judgment and Justice
in his Kingdom, by the Council of the Nobles of his Realm, All these things
ought the King in his own person to do, taking his Oath upon the Evangelists
before he be crowned. And then how can a new promise, or Oath frustrate or
annihilate the old, without perjury, as God calls it in the Princes of Israel?
whom he severely threatens, Ezekiel. 21. 23, 24. [Perjuris istis infamibus qui
toties jurati Deo and hominibus impudentissime sese polluerunt and semper
perierant ultro, denique animos gerunt perfidiosissimos and jusjurandum quasi
mantile adhibent quo novae noxae quotidie extergeantur. Trem. and Jun. not. in
locum.] for their sworn Oaths, he will call to remembrance their iniquities
that they may be taken, nay, they shall be taken, with the hand, as being most
infamous perjures, polluting themselves with their most impudent treachery,
for, having so often sworn to God, and protested to men, they willingly violate
their Oaths, and bear most perfidious hearts in them, yea, they use an Oath,
as a Napkin whereby they daily blot out their new sins, and errors.

Therefore if your Majesty have made any such ungodly promise or [Aquin.
secundae q. 89. Ar. 3*] oath, it ought not to be kept, but presently to be
violated. [Jun. and Trem. not. Numb. 30 5.] The Schoolman will inform so much.
A turpi voto muta decretum; and quod in caute vel imprudenter jurasti ne
persolve. Yea God himself Ier. 4. 2. requires we swear in judgment, justice,
truth, otherwise we shall declare either our rashness, wickedness, falsehood,
all which are hateful to God and good men, though too much used by almost all
sorts and degrees of men, For which the land mourns.

For this also is a crying sin, and pulls down vengeance on a man or Nation.

Major. To use the name of God vainly, rashly, or falsely, is a great sin,
and brings the judgments of God on a man, or Nation. Minor. But we are guilty
of this sin, Conclus. Ergo, Gods judgments are on us.


GOD the just Judge, Genesis 18. 25. of the whole world, the King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords; the one Jam. 4. 12. Lawgiver, who is able to save, and to
destroy, has openly and plainly forbid this sin in the third Commandment,
Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain; and Christ the
substantial word of his Father, who is his [Quia Deus nullibi certius and
perfectius cognoscitur quam in filio Jesu Christo idem hic quoque Dei nomen
propriissimum est. Gualt. in Rom.] Name, in whom, he wholly reveals himself,
he being the express image of his person, Heb. 1. 3. and the brightness of
his glory, has commanded all his people not to swear vainly, rashly, or
falsely, but advises all to let their Mat. 5. 33, 34, 35. communication be
Yea, Yea, Nay, Nay; as being the issue of that wicked one, for whatsoever is
more then these, comes of that evil one; for Christ does not here abolish
any part of his Fathers divine worship such as is reverent swearing by Gods
name, Deuteronomy. 6. 5. 10, 20. upon just and necessary occasions, but to prevent
[Non jurare omnino prohibuit sed occasionem perjurii and promptitudinem
jus-jurandi. Chrysostom. in Mat.] all occasions of perjury, and to affright the
common swearer from pulling down vengeance on his own, and his neighbors
head, by his polluted mouth; therefore he gives this general prohibition,
which his humble and reverent Apostle follows lovingly, entreating all
Christians above James 5. 12. all things not to swear, in regard the guilt
thereof, sticks so close to the soul, that without a great deal of washing
it with tears of contrition, it will not out.

It Is not a twelfpenny matter given to the poor, will purge this sin, nor a
whipping, or three hours penance in the stocks, will make atonement with
God. Present death by God was Levit. 24. 16. established as a law amongst the
Israelites for the punishment of the blasphemer, and without great repentance
eternal death follows as the punishment of this sin, for the curse Psalm
119. 21. and Gal. 3. 10. of God is the wages Exodus 20. 7. and 5 11 thereof.
God will not hold them guiltless. Nor does the punishment rest till hereafter,
but often divine vengeance falls suddenly on the heads of swearers, both in
particular and general plagues here in this life. For, when the sin grows
public and general, and both rulers and people become guilty hereof, then
most commonly destruction follows on that family, Nation or Kingdom. The
Prophet Zachary Zach. 5. 1. etc. saw the Roll flying twenty cubits long, and
ten cubits broad, which was the curse going forth over the face of the whole
earth, for every one that steals shall be cut off on this side according to
it, and every one that swears shall be cut off on that side according to it;
I will bring it forth, says the Lord of hosts, and it shall enter into the
house of the thief, and into the house of him that swears falsely by my
name, and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and shall consume it
with the timber thereof, and the stones thereof. [Volumen amplissimum, quorum
innumera peccata hominum tum infinita maledictio continetur copiosissime. Trem.
and Jun. not. in locum.]

The Roll is large and broad enough to meet with all swearers, and it carries
in it an infinite curse even the eternal wrath of the everliving jealous God,
and the Prophet Jeremiah complains, Jerem. 23. 10. That because of swearing
the land mourns, the pleasant places of the wilderness are dried up, viz.
with drought, and famine, Continens, pro re contenta, the place for the persons
contained therein, Gods judgments had already seized on them. As the Prophet
Malachy, Malac. 3. 5. witnesses. And I will come near to you in judgment,
and will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, and against the
adulterers, and against false swearers, and against those that oppress the
hireling in his wages, the widow and the fatherless, and that turn aside the
stranger from his right, and fear not me, says the Lord of hoasts. Against
which fear the vain swearer, curser, perjurer, hardens his heart, and causes
Gods judgments suddenly to arrest him. As he threatened also by the Prophet
Hosea, Hos. 4. 2, 3. By swearing and lying, and killing, and stealing, and
committing adultery, they break out, and blood touched blood, therefore shall
the land mourn and they that dwell therein, shall languish with the beasts of
the field, and with the fowls of heaven, yea the fishes of the sea shall also
be taken away, [Id est, horrebunt and vasta erunt omnia prosopopeia
hyperbolica. Sic Trem. and Jun. not. in loc.]

Lo here swearing is the Captain and leading sin, in his cursed company;
for which God irrevocably has threatened to bring utter ruin on the land where
these sins abound; for so heinous and contagious is the fact, so direful and
grievons the punishment, that a curse shall fall on the unreasonable creatures
which shall consume them; as for Adams sin at first the earth was cursed,
Genesis 3 17. and all the creatures therein made subject to vanity, Romans 8. 20. to
declare both the foulness and filthiness of this sin, and how horribly God
was displeased at it. [Vt conditoris imperio obsequantur est ipsarum vanitate
ostendere quantopere esset homine offensus. Bezae not. in locum.] The very
heathen accounted it (...). A fearful thing to call their gods to witness,
and therefore the wisest of them allowed not of swearing in ajust cause,
[Jusjurandum oblatum duobus de causis fide firmandum esse suadebat Isocrates
vel ut ipsum turpi suspicione liber^s vel ut amicos ex magnis periculis eripias
pecunia^um vero gratia etsi justam causam habens, non perdeas jurandum dicebat.
Stobe. ser. 25.] unless it were in a weighty and necessary matter, as the
vindication of a man's fame, or life, or redemption of his friend, but by no
means for money sake, much less in vain to no purpose; it is in St. Austens
[August sermon. 28. de verbis Apost.] opinion, as a dangerous medicine never to
be applied but in a desperate disease. Pithagoras was so strict in this point,
that when he might have avoided a mulet of three talents, if he would have
sworn, he chose rather to endure the penalty, then to hazard the infamy, that
his word should not be as good as his oath; and the Scythians replied to
Alexander, who would have obliged them with an oath, Our [Quint. Curt. l. 7.
Nos Religionem in ipsa fide novimus qui non reverentur homines fallunt Deos.]
Scythians faith is our band, our promise, our oath.

For those who blush not to break their faith with men, will make no scruple
to forswear themselves by their gods; if the light of nature taught the
heathen so much, shall not these rise up in judgment against many thousand
Christians, and condemn them, who rap out oaths without allowance, and think
they grace their speech with them, who torture and crucify every member of
Christ's body apart, and shed his precious blood again, trampling it under
foot, in their cursed and damned language: And so as one [Dr. Featly in his
lawfulness of oaths taken before the Magistrate.] says, turn Christ's
meritorious sufferings in all his parts, into blasphemies, and wound his very
wounds: But these men's damnation slumbereth not, nor yet are they free from the
temporal curse, for our just God has threatened, that if we will not fear,
and dread the glorious and fearful name, Deuteronomy. 28. 58. 59. etc. of the Lord
our God, he will make our plagues wonderful, and of long continuance,
descending even on our posterity, to the third and fourth generation of them
that hate him.

Other sins God may connive at, and spare a while, but for this he will not
hold them guiltless that take his name in vain, Ezod. 20. 7. Therefore he
crie^ out by the Prophet, Jer 5. 7. 9, 10. How shall I spare thee for this? thy
children have forsaken me, and have sworn by them that are no gods; that is, I
cannot spare thee, as the verses following prove: Shall I not visit for these
things, says the Lord? And shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as
this? Go ye upon her walls, and destroy. And God, in plain terms, threatens
vain swearers, Amos 8. 14. that they shall fall, and never rise again: I or, he
will surely cut them off* as the Prophet Zephaniah also witnesses, Zeph. 1. 4,
5. Punishment inseparabh follows at the heels of this sin, and lights either
invisibly on the souls of them, b^ blindness of mind, or obduration of heart,
or loss of grace, and of Gods spirit* or of his love, favor; or else hereby
Satan takes full possession of the soul; or at least has power to terrify the
conscience, to wound the spirit, or inflict some other spiritual judgment; or
else it falls on their persons, estates, good names. children, friends, or some
thing that is near or deer unto them: or, lastly, they fall into condemnation,
James 5. 12. For, if idle words, Mat. 12. 36, 37. [Sitale sit judicium de
otiosis, quid dicendum pernitiosis est verbis? Gorr.] must be given account of,
and for them men shall be condemned? how much more for vain oaths, blasphemous
speeches, and cursed execrations and imprecations? God is jealous of his
honor, and will not give it to any other; therefore the Hebrews, [Cum in
Sinai darentur tabulae statim ut lata lex est de perjurio totus concussus est
orbis. Pet. Martyr. loc. com. clas. 2. cap. 7.] write, that when the Law was
given in mount Sianai against perjury and vain-swearing, heaven and earth
shook, as it were, trembling at so horrid a crime: For, its the proper dialect
of the damned crew, who are impenitent, to blaspheme the name of God, who here
speaking out of the malice and wickedness of their hard and impenitent heart,
as the Devil gives them utterance, Matthew. 5. 37. (...); do every day hereby
treasure up unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of
the righteous judgment of God, and shall hereafter have their portion with the
father of these oaths, in that lake which burns with fire and brimstone for
ever.

Saint James says, their tongues are set on fire of hell, James 3. 6. the
curse of the Law is prepared for such perjured persons, says 1 Timothy 1. 10.
Saint Paul. And as David, Psalm. 119. 17, 18, 19. prays, or rather prophesies,
so shall it happen to them, as he loved cursing, so let it come into him; as he
delighted not in blessing, so let it be far from him; as he clothed himself
with cursing, like a garment, so let it come into his bowels, like water, and
like oil into his bones; let it be unto him, as the garment which covers him,
and for a girdle wherewith he is girded continually: For, Deuteronomy. 5. 11. the Lord
will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain; as he dealt with
Clomenes, [Plutarch. in Lacon*] and Rabshekah, 2 King. 19. 35. amongst the
heathen, whom he corrected from heaven, and with Zedechiah, Judas, 2 Chronicles. 36.
13, etc. the seven A^^s 1. 18, and 19. 16. Exorcists, whom he plagued here on
earth, with the kingdoms of Israel, Hosea 4. 2, 3. and Judah, Jer. 23. 10.
which mourned for these sins, as has been showed, and which is threatened to
all persons and nations by their 1 Cor. 10. 11. and Romans 15. 4. examples. And
are we free of this sin or plagues? Surely we are horrible guilty of the one,
and it is just with God we should feel the other; for what horrid blasphemy,
cursed swearing, direful imprecations, and strange oaths (which I tremble to
speak, and indead its a shame to repeat) is heard almost in all places, both in
Court, City, and Country? what damning and confounding themselves and others,
are founded forth in most of your Majesty's Garrisons and Armies? they are
heard louder then their trumpets, or cannons, and those who should reform and
punish it, are presidents, coiners, and tutors of it; in so much, that its now
made a mark amongst many, of a true subject, whose mouth relisheth an oath or
blasphemy, and he is reputed a Roundhead, if not a rebel, that dislikes or
reproves the dialect, or roundly cannot brave it in oaths, according to the
garb of the Cavalliers; so monstrous are most gallants grown in impiety, that
they glory in their Phil. 3. 19. shame, and by this cursed deadly sin at once,
deride Gods [Vir qui multum jurat, plenus est iniquita^e, and non abscedat a
domo ejus flagellum quum abundavit peccatum ejus in ipso, etiamsi despexerit
peccat dupliciter, quod si inaniter juravit, justus non habebitur ^am
implebitur domus ejus inductis flagellis, est sermo circum vestitus morte, viz.
juramentum ejusmodi. Jun. in Ecclus. 23. 10, 11, 12.] justice and omnisciency,
his truth and omnipotency: For, by their hellish oaths, and devilish wishes,
they deny his omniscience, as if he heard them not, or his justice, that he
would not punish them; at least, they conceive him either false, in not pouring
down his judgments threatened; or impotent, as not able to inflict them; either
of which to conceive, is no less then blasphemy: So that as much as in them
lies, they baffle the Almighty to the face, they war against heaven, and
strive to un-God him, by their open Atheism and profaneness; by their deep
hypocrisy, and horrible abuse of his name, titles, attributes, and Word; and
yet, which is worst of all, they presume to come to his ordinances whom they
tread under foot, sinning wilfully, accounting his blood, wherewith they were,
or at least should be sanctified, an unholy thing, Heb. 10. 26, 27, 28, 29.
[For, if there be any wilful sin, this must needs be; for from this, of all
other, we have most power to abstain, and also of all others, the fewest
temptations to it, and cause to use it; and thirdly, of this more then of any
other of the ten commandments its said, God will not hold them guiltless that
commit it.] and so doing despite unto the Spirit of grace, we have too many
knights of the post, sons of 1 King. 21. 10. Belial, who swear against their
conseiences for fear, or favor, for profit, pleasure, honor, and then put it
off by a Jesuiticall trick of equivocation, or mental reservation, when both
our Savior and his Apostle will have our yea, to be yea, and our Mat. 5. 37.
nay, nay; as its in our hearts, so it must be in our words; and as in our
words, so in our works, beause what is more, is of the Devil, and leads into
condemnation: for what are they but deformed brats, which our own lust, being
mother and parent to them, having conceived by Satan, she brings forth, and
this sin when its finished, brings forth James 1. 15. death? thus doing the
works of their father, Christ will tell us whose children Joh. 8. 44. they are,
who at once violate their piety to God, their faith to men, that love and truth
they ow to themselves.

For by their oaths, they acknowledge his sovereign Majesty, profess his
allseeing Wisdom, invocate his sin-revenging justice upon themselves, who dare
put his holy and reverent name to that which their conscience tells them is a
falsehood, or at least, a matter of no weight or consequence, which needed not
thus to be backed and confirmed; and thus they make God the patron of Lies, by
their perjury, or use his name threadbare, (which Augustus [Pretoribus Romae
scripsit, ut ne ^bsole fieri nomen ejus permitterent. Sueton. in vita August.]
C^sar forbad to his name:) and often pull down vengeance on themselves by their
devillis^ wishes, and cursed blasphemies, as the woman that brought her
daughter to the Divines of Wittenberge, [Vid. the memorable wonders of our
time.] whom she had cursed in her rage, the Devil take her, and immediately
he entered into her; or as I by experience in my time knew one who hearing his
wife was with child [One John Pruet of the Parish of Britford in the County of
Wilts, Anno Dom. 1643.] and being poor, wished he might not live to see it
borne, and within two hours after, was suddenly sick taken, and shortly after
sweld, and died. That swearer, in [Vide Mr. Perkins of the government of the
tongue.] Cornwall, whose horse on a bridge being frighted with his oaths, leapt
over into the water, and he cried out, Horse and Man, and all to the Devil:
or, the example of her that bought flax: [Vide the Practice of piety.] and
wished to God she might sink into the earth if she had not paid for it, which
accordingly came to pass: or, lastly, (though many more examples may be
brought) that serving-man, [Vide Dr. Mayrs Exposition, James 2. Doctr. 8.] who
used to swear by the wounds of Christ, and blood of God, and in his bed, his
blood gushed out in sundry parts of his body at once, whereof presently he
dyed, according to his sin, all the veins of his body tearing in pieces.

And yet, though the hand of divine justice often takes such men, ipso facto, yet
are they desperate in this wickedness, and the custom herein has taken away
all feeling and conscience of it: [Leviter jurare generat facilitatem,
facilitas consuetudinem consuetudo perjurium, and perjurium est precipitium,
and qui jurat prope est, qui non jurat long, falsa enim juratio, exitiosa vera
periculosa nulla secura. August. in James 5. 12.] And under the number of
these, I comprehend those, who having taken an oath, and vow to defend your
Majesty's person, fight against your Regal power, to maintain the privileges
of Parliament, and then take a second oath to destroy the Parliament, [Vide the
force of that oath, taken by the Devonshire and Cornish-men, and begun in
Wiltshire.] men, to uphold the Protestant Religion, and yet with the Papists
their sworn enemies, join in league to murder the most orthodox Protestants.

These men, contrary to their oaths of Supremacy, and Allegiance, persuade
your Majesty, that the Papists and Prelates are your best Friends, and the best
way to protect your subjects, and defend the true Religion, is to arm the
Papists [Vide the book p^^nted at Oxon, showing the causes of the Irish
Rebellion; as also that book called the Roundheads Catechism.] against your
Protestant Parliament; yea, to bring that cursed crew (and monsters, not men,
of the Irish Rebels) to s^^tle the Church, and State, and all this, out of
pretense to defend your Majesty's person, and Prerogative, and that Coronation
Oath you took in your coming to the Crown.

But how far these men have betrayed your honor, and trust reposed in them,
and de^^ded your hope, brought disgrace, trouble and sorrow unspeakeable on
your person, if not the guilt of sin, and blood, (as the Assembly of the Church
[Vide the Remonstrance of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland,
printed July 5. 1645.] of Scotland have declared) on your soul, ruin and
misery on your kingdom, the great cry and groans of your oppressed subjects,
the extreme hazard and danger of your Majesty's life, and of eternal
happiness without repentance. The breach of your Majesty's word, promises,
that I say not Vows, Protestations, and Oaths will declare to the world.

For in your gracious Answer to the Petition of Right, in the third year of
your Majesty's reign, it pleased your Highness graciously to affirm this
undoubted truth, that the highest [Vide the book of Statutes in his Majesty's
Answer to the Petition of Right.] point of your Prerogative, was to maintain
the Liberties of your subjects, and the chiefest part of their Liberties was,
to maintain your just Prerogative: how have these by their ill counsel
violated this twisted Band, which whilst it persisted wreathed, made you
glorious, and your subjects happy, admired you were and honored both by your
friends and others, envied and feared by yours and the Protestants enemies, but
now we are made a scorn and a derision to all that are about us, we are become
the pity and subject of good men's lamentations, the prey and portion of
blood-thirsty Papists, and profane Atheists, the talk and songs of Rebels and
drunkards; in your Majesty's demanding the six accused members, and departing
from your Parliament, and raising arms [Vide the Declaration and Resolution of
the Lords and Commons in Parliament concerning his Majesty's late Proclamation
for suppressing the present rebellion under the command of Robert, Earl of
Essex printed August 15. 1642.] to break it off, (as they say) that firm bond
being hereby untwifted, all other bonds of nature, Religion, and humane society
are dissolved, and an open passage is made to heresy, Idolatry, murder, and
hellish confusion; for he that now departs from iniquity, and will have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, makes himself a prey, Isai.
59. 15. the proud are esteemed happy, and they Mal. 3. 14, 15. that work
wickedness are set up; yea, they that tempt God are even delivered, and it is to
be feared, they have drawn your Majesty into this sin of taking Gods name in
vain, by their equivocations, pretenses, and false suggestions, flattering
promises, and slanderous accusations, and slanders, to save themselves in
truth, from the hands of justice, [Vide the Remonstrance of the Lords and
Commons, November. 2. 1642. in answer to his Majesty's Book.] their Idolatry from
extirpation, their symoniacall means, from the right owners, and their errors
from the sword of Gods Word, and shame of the world.

For, the commandments of God, do as well oblige your Majesty to obedience, as
your meanest subject, there is no respect of persons with God in this case, Romans
2. 6. 11. for he will render to every man according to his deeds; and
therefore, advises Kings, Psalm. 2. 10, 11, 12. to be wise, and to serve the
Lord with fear, and to rejoice before him with trembling, and to kiss the Son,
lest he be angry, and so they perish from the right way; for if his anger be
kindled but a little, it is not their honors, wealth, Psalm. 33. 16, 17. power,
can help them, they only are blessed that put their trust Isai. 30. 18. and Romans
9. 33. and Psalm. 2. 12. in him.

If then by your Majesty's coronation oath, which you have, or ought as King to
take, there lies an obligation on you, to pass such [Vide the Remonstrance of
the Lords and Commons in Parliament, November. 2. 1642. in answer to his
Majesty's book.] laws as are offered to you by your Parliament, in the name,
and for the good of the whole kingdom; and by that same oath, as appears:
[Vide Mr. Pryns ninth Reason, proving the chief legislative power to consist in
the people, and both Houses of Parliament, in his book, called The treachery
and disloyalty of Papists to their Sovereign, page 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30,] you
are bound to accord with your people in Parliament, to make remedy and law upon
such mischiefs and damages as may happen to your kingdom, as the Declaration
of both houses in Parliament, November. 2. 1642. does at large prove; then surely
those men, who have persuaded you to a contrary practice, are at once traitors
to God, your Majesty, and this whole kingdom; and as much as in them lies,
have drawn your Majesty's faith into question, both with God and men, which may
be a chief cause of Gods judgments on this land and people; I am sure it was
not the least spark that kindled the fire of this civil war; and as likely is
it the fire of Gods wrath, as sometimes it did on the kingdom of Israel for
Saul's breach 2 Samuel 21. 1. of covenant (with the Gibeonites his own subjects)
which the Princes of the congregation had sworn Joshua 9. 19. unto, although
they by craft obtained that oath of them.

Yet were the chief Magistrates in Israel, and consequently Saul who was
King, obliged to the performance of this Covenant and oath, which his preceding
governors had taken some hundreds of years before; and therefore in a blind
zeal, [Quum Pythones and ariolos exterminaret e terra istius Zeli commune fuit
gentes and gentium studia e medio Israelis tollere. Trem. and Jun. not. in
locum.] he doing contrary hereunto, God sent a famine of three years on the
land; And surely though your Majesty has not taken this oath, yet if as you
are King, you are obliged unto it as appears by the constant custom of former
Princes, although others may persuade you out of a blind zeal, that it will
be derogatory to your prerogative, yet ought they not to be hearkened unto; for
your Majesty is the Minister of God to us Romans 13. 4. for good, and therefore
you ought to be very tender in denying both Houses of Parliament in any thing
that concerns the public government and good of the Kingdom, and as in their
Declarations they rightly conclude, your Majesty ought to deny your self, and
your own understanding very far, before you deny them: And that on this
ground, because you lie under the obligation of an [Vid. the Remonstrance of
the Lords and Commons in Parl. November. the 2. in Ans. to his Maj.] oath, to
pass such Laws as shall be just and good for the Kingdom.

And therefore it ought to be a tender point both in regard of your honor,
justice, conscience to judge otherwise of those laws that are presented unto
you by the Representative Body of the Kingdom: It was Rehoboams fault of old,
2 Chronicles. 10. 13. and Richard [Mr. Fox his Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. page 372.
printed 1610.] the second of late, and it rent both their Kingdoms from them;
Christ is a pattern worthy of all Princes imitation, who laid aside Phil. 2.
7. 8. his glory, and made himself of none account for his Churches good, and
not such headstrong Princes as were the two former mentioned, who despised the
grave and grand council of their Kingdoms, and so brought ruin on themselves
and subjects, by overthrowing the customs, privileges, rights, and liberties
of their subjects; [Mr. Fox Acts and Mon. ut supra. page 91. Vol. 1.]
Constantine the Great was used to say, that a King ought to refuse no labor,
for the profit of the Commonwealth, yea to adventure the manacling of his body,
for the remedy thereof; but if otherwise it may be helped to cherish the same:
for a Kingdom says St. Austen, [August. contra Cresc. Epist. 49. and 50.] is
given by the determinate counsel of God, that he to whom it was given, should
so employ his diligence, that he might be thought worthy of the same at the
hand of the giver.

Reason teaches of two evils to choose the least, [De duobus malis minimum est
eligendum. Keckermans Ethick.] and it is Christian wisdom to permit some
inconveniences then to [As David spared Ioab and Shimei who both deserved
death.] bring a greater danger, destruction, and effusion of Christian blood,
it is better to save a Nation with loss, then to destroy it for private honor
or respect and that some few Gavestons and Spencers perish, then that the whole
Kingdom should be made desolate by Civil War.

Therefore if you expect a blessing from God on your person, Kingdom,
posterity, or look to enjoy heaven when you dye, you are bound to observe all
your oaths and promises which are lawful, though they prove to your own [Non
est propter damnum abstinendum a benefactis, Christianus est Paradoxus. Trem.
and Jun. not. in Psalm. 15. 4.] Which was most famous in that noble Roman Marcus
Attilius Regulus, who performed his oath made to the Carthaginians, though he
lost his life thereby.] hurt, Psalm. 15. 4 which godly duty these perjured
persons and most wicked counselors have hitherto hindered your Majesty from
learning, being helped thereunto by Satan's suggestions and your own lusts,
which I beseech you in the bowels of Jesus Christ to consider of, and repent
speedily, as you hope for mercy: (for our God is a consuming fire, Heb. 12. 29.
he will not be mocked, Gal. 67. he cannot be deceived; look what a man sows
that shall he reap, for he will destroy them that Psalm 5. 6. speak leasing,
the Lord will abhor the bloody and Psalm. 12. 3. deceitful man, the foolish
shall not stand in his sight, for he hates all the workers of iniquity.) For
where as your Parliament before your departure, petitioned for suppressing
Papists, and feared the bringing in of foreign forces in regard the Popes
Nuntio dealt with the French, [Vid. His Maj. Declarition from Newmarket, Mar.
9. 1641*] and Spanish for 4000. men a piece, your Majesty answered, That it was
improbable in it self, and scandalous to you, for which you desired
reparation, sees no sober, nor honest man can believe, that we are so
desperate, or so senseless to entertain such a design as to bring in
foreign forces, which would not only bury this our Kingdom in distraction
and ruin, but our own name and posterity, in perpetual scorn and infamy.

And yet lo now by special order from Parliament printed in the packet of
letters which were taken at Nazby fight, it appears that you employed Coll.
Cockram to the King of Denmark, for men, money, and arms, [Vi^. the
instruction to Col. Cockram to be pursued in his Negotiation to the King of
Denmark in the packet of letters.] and sent to the Queen to have an army of
the Duke [Vid. the letter your Majesty sent to the Queen lune 9. 1644. in the
packet of letters taken at Nazeby.] of Loraines to pass through France to you
of 10000. men, and to have of the Irish Rebels an army brought by Coll.
Fitz-williams [Vide the 21. letter in the packet what Colonel Fitz-williams
propounds.] of 10000. and more. Secondly, whereas in your Declaration to the
Parliament [Your Maj. Declaration published the 16. of ^une 1642.] fearing the
alteration of Laws, and Religion, and making War against them, your Majesty did
in the presence of Almighty God, your Maker, and Redeemer, assure the world,
you had no more thought of making war against the Parliament, then against your
own children.

And that you will maintain and observe the Acts assented to by you, this
Parliament, without violating; and that you had not, nor should not have, any
thought of using of any foree unless you shall be driven to it for the
security of your person, and for the defense of Religion, Laws, and liberties
of the Kingdom, and the just rights and liberties of Parliament: And in the
same of the 16. of June, 1642. we profess before God, and declare to all the
world, that we always have, and do abhor all such designs, and that all
our endeavor tends to the firm and constant settlement of the true Protestant
Religion, the just privileges of Parliament; the liberty of the subjects, the
law, peace, and prosperity of this Kingdom.

The same did the Lords profess before God, and testify to all the world in
your Majesty's behalf; and yet the War went on, and your Majesty sent over the
Queen to Holland, who brought back men [When she landed at Beverley.] and
Ammunition, and on this Coll. Cockram was sent to Denmark, and shortly after
your Majesty set up your Standard within two months, as appears by the Vote
[Vide the resolution of both houses in answer to that Message.] of the
Parliament, on your message to them, Aug. 27. 1642. who would have the Standard
taken down, before they would treat.

Yea Propositions were made to the Gentry in [Vide the Declaration of the
Parliament in November. 2. 1642.] Yorkshire, to assist your Majesty in a way of
force against the Parliament, before any answer was, or could be received from
them, and ever since, has not the War been upheld against them for their
dissolution, let your own letter [Your Majesty's letter to the Queen dated
Feb. 19. 1645.] speak, be confident, that in making peace, I shall ever show
my constancy in adhering to Bishops and all our friends, and not forget to put
a short period to this perpetual Parliament.

By what distinction can you put a period to this Parliament, without violence,
which is so contrary to your former vows and protestations? nay you did engage
your self solemnly in the word of a King, that you would be as [Vide your Ma.
answer to the Parl. petitioning for a guard.] careful of the security of every
one of the Parliament men, as of the preservation of your self and children;
which how faithfully these men have persuaded you to observe, your hostile
actions best testify. Thirdly, after the Irish rebellion (by reason of the
toleration and favoring of Papists) broke out, and the Parliament had declared
to your Majesty [Ma^. 9 1641 the Kings answer to the Parl. Declarat.]
concerning it, to which you answered, Our faithful and zealous affection to
the true Protestant Religion, and our resolution is to concur with our
Parliament in any possible course for the propagation of it, and supressing of
Popery: and in prosecution hereof, in the next month, you called God to
witness with this assurance, That you would never consent (upon whatsoever
pretense) to [Your Ma. declarat. in Ap. 25. 1642.] a toleration of the Popish
profession, or abolition of laws now in force against Recusants.

God so deal with us as we continue in these professions; also, in your
proclamation of pardon to [Vide the Proclamation of pardon to the City of
London, dated October. 29.] London, you avowed, that all the professions you had
made in your several Declarations for suppressing of Popery, and maintenance
of Religion and Laws, should be as inviolably observed by you, as you expected
a Blessing from God, and obedience from your subjects. But alas, how strangely
have these men changed your resolutions, annihilated your professions, and
justly caused God to bring down your imprecations (which the Lord in mercy
avert) on your own head and posterity?

For, first have you not rejected the Parliaments Propositions [Vide the 6, 7,
8, 9, and 10. Propositions, or humble desires of the Parliament, for a safe and
well grounded peace, presented to his Majesty at Oxon, November. 24. 1644.] for
disabling Priests, Jesuits, Papists, etc? from disturbing the state and
deluding the laws, or at least refused it, to concur with them in their 6, 7,
8, 9, and 10. Propositions presented at Oxon the 24. of November. 1644.

Surely you have not according to your pious Resolution concurred with the
Parliament in any possible course for suppressing of Popery, but contrariwise
have favored, preserved and defended them; yea, armed them to fight against
them: For, persons of the Popish Religion, have been principally employed in
your army, as your forces in the North, under the Earl [Vide the Declaration of
the Parliament, in answer to his Majesty's Declaration after his late victory
the 23. of October, 1642.] of New castle; and the forces in Monmouthshire and
Wales under the command of the Lord Herbert, Robert [Vide the book, entitled
The Converts Letter to his old friends.] Welsh, and Richard Power, are knighted
for their good service: in these wars against the Parliament, and the one had a
Brigade of horse, the other was made Govenour of Barkley castle, Sir Arthur
Ashton is made Governor of Oxon; and Mr. Gage his Assistant; the Marq. of
Winchester keeps the Garrison of Basing, Sir John Winter has great command in
the Forest of Dean, Captain Prater was Governor of Nunny castle; yea, all
Papists are invited, and [Vide his Majesty's Letter under his signet at
Chester, 27. of September, in the 18. year of his reign, to the Papists of
Lancashi^re.] commanded to take up arms, that cursed crew of the Irish are not
excepted; but are invited and promised for the same ^ toleration in their
Religion; [Vide the Earl of Glamorgans negotiation, his commission, and
agreement with the rebels.] if they assist your Majesty accordingly, as
appears by your own Letters, contrary to your former Declarations and
execrations: For under hand you give power to [Your Majesty's Letter to the
Queen, March 5. 1645. in the packet of Letters taken at Na^^by printed.] the
Queen, to promise in your name (to whom she thinks most fit) that you will take
away all the penal laws against the Roman Catholics in England, as soon as
God shall enable you to do it; so that by their means, or in their favors, you
may have so powerful assistance, as may deserve so great a favor, and enable
you to do it. Here Is a promise of a toleration to the English Papists; and which
is most strange, the same favor is proffered to those blood-thirty Irish: So
your Letter to the Marquess of Ormond, the 27 of Febr. 1645. If the suspension
of Poynings act, for such Bills as shall be agreed upon between you there, and
the present taking away of the penal laws against Papists by a law will do
it; I shall not think it a hard bargain, so that freely and vigorously they
engage themselves in my assistance: and again, in your Letter to him, December.
15. I do hereby promise them, and command you to see it done, that the penal
statutes against Romish Catholics, shall not be put in execution, the peace
being made, and they remaining in their due obedience; and further, that when
the Irish gives me that assistance which they have promised, for the
suppression of this rebellion, and I shall be restored to my right, then I will
consent to the repeal of them by law. My Lord, O King, I beseech you consider,
how basely these counselors have betrayed your honor, these protestations and
croscentred actions defiled your conscience, blinded your understanding, and
hebitated your memory, [Your Majesty's Declaration, October. 27. after the
battle at Edgehil.] For once you said, you should never forget your several
oaths in your several Declarations: You presumed then you were too much a
Christian, to believe you could break those promises, and avoid the justice of
heaven: [and in the form of prayer, set forth by your special command before
the treaty at Vxbridge, there was this clause, And if any shall be averse from
peace, O thou that art the wonderful Counselor, turn their wisdom into
foolishness, confound their practices, and let their mischief return on their
own heads.] And surely, you may find it by experience, his justice has not
since been hid, witness Nazeby, and Lamport fights, the taking of Bridgewater,
Pomfret castle, Scarborough, Chester, Belvoire, the overthow of the Western
army and L. Ashleys, Carlisle, Bath, Sherborne, Bristol, Barkley castle, the
Devize, Lacock-house, Cardiffe castle, Winchester, Basing-house; you see the
blessing from God, and obedience from your subjects, is answerable to the
faithful observance, of what before you protested and swore, viz. to suppress
Popery, and concur with your Parliament therein, and not to grant any
toleration to Papists, or suspension of the laws of the kingdom against them.
O therefore, since the Lord has stricken you be you grieved, fith he has
consumed your army, refuse not to receive correction, and harden not your heart
any longer, refusing to return to God for mercy, and to your Parliament for
peace and unity; lest you become like Jerem. 5. 3. the obdurate Jews, who the
more they were punished the more and more they did revolt, ^ill the Isai. 1. 5.
whole head be sick, and heart faint, and then there be no remedy.

But, let your Majesty call to mind your former oaths, protestations and vows,
which are good and lawful, and observe them faithfully; but especially that
vow in baptism to God, and that oath at your coronation, which was made to
your subjects, and those protestations for the advancement and increase of the
Protestant Religion, the suppression of Popery, the maintenance of the laws of
the Land, and privileges of Parliament, which you have made to them: The due
observance whereof, is the only means under God, to establish a firm peace, and
to make your Majesty, and your posterity, and kingdom happy, as it did David's,
2 Samuel 21. 1, 2, 12, 13, 14, etc. when those were punished which were
consenters belike; or, [Quae Sharli adhaerebat sanguinem, and caedes spiranti,
and post Sharlem Ishboshetho contra institutum Dei. Trem. and Jun. not in loc.]
counselors to the violation of that oath of Saul's to the Gibeonites: and as
Hezekiah prospered after he had renewed the oath and covenant 2 Chronicles. 29. 10,
11. of his fathers, which Ahaz his predecessor had greatly violated, and
thereby averted the fierce wrath of God: So shall your Majesty do the like, by
entering now into a solemn league and covenant (with your Parliament and three
kingdoms) with the Lord God of Israel, that his fierce wrath may turn away
from us, and by encouraging your Ministers that are on your side, that they be
no longer deceived, [Id est, ne perstetis in errore, in quo cultum Dei ad quem
electi estis omisistis. Trem. and Jun. in locum.] but that they should join
with the Assembly of Divines, and other godly inferior Ministers, who have
been more upright then the Prelates and the Bishops of this kingdom, as the 2 Chronicles. 29. 34. Levites were better, wiser, and more holy, then the Priests in
this good Kings reign; and therefore more ready to sanctify themselves,
otherwise it is to be feared, lest that judgment of Zedekiah's (when he broke
his oath which he made to Nebuchadnezzar,) fall on you, which the Lord avert
from your Majesty, and make you ever to be of the number of those that fear
Eccles. 9. 2. an oath, and to be careful that none in your Majesty's name
enforce your good subjects to commit perjury, or take unlawful oaths, which is
not only condemned by God, but held unlawful by the laws [Vide the Petition
of Right in the second year of your Majesty's reign.] of this kingdom, and
which necessarily will bring vengeance on it for the same: For the name of our
God is wonderful, Psalm. 8. 1. 9. and glorious, he is jealous of his honor,
and a Heb. 10. 31. and 12. 29. consuming fire, into whose hands to fall, is a
fearful thing; nor will he hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain;
therefore lastly, let your Majesty join with your Parliament for a day of
humiliation, to be set apart for this sin, in special of profaning Gods holy
Name, and let there be a more severe and stricter law made against perjury and
vain swearing for the future; the pain, loss, or fear [Oderunt peccare mali
formidin^ poenae.] whereof, may afright the most wicked from acting so foul a
sin.

And care be taken, and command enjoined of sanctifying the fearful and
glorious Name of the Lord our God, and of speaking of all his attributs, and
word, with reverence, affection, and devotion; that so, God seeing us zealous
of his Name, and honor, performing what he requires of us, viz. to speak
every man Zach. 8. 16, 17, 18. truth to his neighbor, to execute the judgment
of peace, and truth in our Gates, to imagine none of us evil in our hearts
against our neighbor, nor to love any false Oath.

That he may in mercy avert the judgments he has brought on us, and withdraw
those we have justly deserved, and may power down his blessings spiritual and
temporal on us, to the increase of the honor and greatness of your Majesty,
and Royal progeny, of the peace, wealth, and plenty of your subjects, and
godly people, and to the joy and comfort of all sincere Christians and
faithful Protestants, to the suppression and extirpation of Popery and
superstition, and to the terror and amazement of all your Majesty's and this
kingdoms enemies; which the Lord of his mercy grant, for his sake, who is the
Judge of the world, the Governor of all Nations, the Lord of Lords, and King
of Kings, the Savior and Redeemer of his people, the only chief Bishop and
shepherd of our souls, our Lord Jesus Christ; to whom with the Father and the
holy Ghost, three persons in trinity, and one eternal and everliving God in
unity, be rendered as due is, all honor, and glory, power, majesty, and
dominion, obedience and thanksgiving, by us and his whole Church, now and for
ever, Amen.

Major. To profane the Sabbath with unlawful works, sports, or recreations,
is a great sin, and brings Gods judgments on a man or Nation. Minor. But we
have profaned it so. Conclus. Ergo, the judgment is come justly on us.


IT is a truth confessed by all that acknowledge a Deity, that the law of Nature
requires some time [Aretius problem. loc. 55. de Sab. observat.] to be set
apart for the worship of this God; for, take away time from solemn worship,
and that falls to the ground. The Philosopher will tell us nothing can be done
in an instant, and so take away solemn worship, and you are without Jer. 10.
25. God, and so under Satan, Acts 26. 18. Now the time of solemn worship,
which God has allotted to man from the beginning of the world, to continue
unto the end of the same, is a whole day of seven, or every seventh day, so
Moses, Genesis 2. 2, 3. and on the seventh day God ended his work, and he rested
on the seventh day from all his work which he had made, and God blessed the
seventh day, and sanctified it, viz. He appointed it to be a fountain of
blessing to the observer^ thereof, and commanded it to be set apart by men from
common business, and applied to holy uses. So S. Cyprian, [Cyprian de Sp.
fancto.] This sacred number of seven obtained authority from the creation of
the world, because the first works of God were made in six days, and the
seveth day was consecrated to rest as holy, and hallowing, honored with the
solemnity of abiding, and entitled to the Spirit the sanctifier. So Origin,
[Origen cont. Celsum, lib. 6. fol. 81.] As Soon as the world was made, God made
the Sabbath, in which men rest to God, and keep that day a festival to him,
having dispatched their works on the six day. So S. Chrysostom. also, [Chrysost.
Tom. 1. in Genesis Sermon. 10. sc. editio Savilian.] what is this he sanctified, he
separated it, the divine Scripture, teaching us the cause thereof, because in
it he rested from all his works which he began to make.

God hereby darkely instructing us to set apart, and separate one day in the
circuit of every week, to the use of spiritual things. So also faithful
Athanas^^^ [Athanas. de Sab. and Circums.] shows, that the seventh day had
his observation among all men of those generations, from the Creation, to the
Resurrection of our Savior. Of the same mind S. Jerome, [August. ad casul.
Epist. 86.] Austin, and before them Ireneus, [Iren. cont. Haeres. lib. 4. cap.
3.] Philo, [Philo de mundi opific.] Tertullian [Tertul. contra Judaeos.] of old.

And our late Writers, [Mr. Byfields vind. of the Sabbath, in Answer to
Breerwood] Beza, Calvin, Zwinglius, Iunius, and Tremelius, Ursinus, Zanchy,
Bullinger, Piscator, Aretius, Hospinian, Bertram, Chemnitius, and diverse others
beyond sea, and amongst us those famous Worthies, Babington, Willet, Greenham,
Perkins, Bound, Gibbens, Williams, Esty, Dod, and Clever, Mayr, Byfield, etc.
Yea, by the glimmering light of Nature, the Gentiles said so much, some shreds
of the law of Nature, (though broken in very small pieces) remaining still in
their hearts, whence they had stative Holy Days consecrated to the service of
their Gods, both monthly, yearly, and weekly, amongst which was the seventh
day, so [(...).] Hesiod. says, the seventh day is a holy day, and was the day
in which all things were perfected, and on which we departed from hell.

So does Callimachus say, that its the birthday chief, and perfect, as he is
cited by Clemens [Clem. Alex. strom. lib. 5.] Alexandrinus who affirms, that
not only the Hebrews, but the Greeks knew the seventh day holy, and [Euseb.
de preparat. Evang. lib. 13. cap. 7.] Eusebius confesses that all, as well
Poets as Philosophers, knew that the seventh day was more sacred, therefore
Philo [Philo lib. 2. de vita Mosis] interrogates, Who does not honor that
sacred day with returns every week? which day of the Jewish Sabbath, was by
the Gentiles [Aretius problem. loc. de Sab. obser.] consecrated to Saturn
their Prime god, from whence the day has its name with us of Saturday, or
Saturnes day, whom they honored with tapers lighted on his altars being
offered to him, in imitation of the burning lamps which were in the Tabernacle.
This day they consecrated to rest, thinking it unfit for civil actions and
warlike affairs, and fit only for contemplation, and to implore the divine
patronage of their gods, against danger and misfortune.

Nor did they only observe part of the day, but the whole, as God required the
whole seventh Exodus 20. 8, 9, 10, 11. day, in the fourth commandment to be
sanctified: So the Diurnall sacred things [Macrob. saturn. lib. 1. cap. 16.]
amongst the Romans were continued all along, from the beginning of the day,
until the middle of the night: And thus St. Paul continued in preaching till
Acts 20. 7. midnight on the Christian Sabbath at Troas: As [Macrob. saturn.
lib. 1. cap. 7.] Macrobius brings Vettius pleading their custom on that day,
to spend it wholly in learned fables, which they conferred on, as signs to be
explained, or riddles to be expounded; Yea, they were almost as exact as the
Jews, for no work might be done thereon, so a Crier proclaimed the day before,
borrowing their rites many of them, from them, or at least the Devil, who is
Gods ape, teaching them his service, after some Analogy, as God taught the
Jews to proclaim their feasts with, Numb. 10. 10. trumpets; he that profaned
the day through neglect, or ignorance, was to be fined, and to bring his
sacrifice for expiation, as the Levit. 4. 2, 3. Jews also were.

But the wilful offender could have no expiation; so neither could the
presumptuous prophaners of the Sabbath; he was to be cut off from Israel, as he
that gathered Numb. 15. 36. sticks was stoned to death, but they denied that he
that does work about holy things is poluted, and so Christ justifies the
Jews, that they killed the sacrifices, and are Mat. 12. 5. blameless. Lastly,
they allowed only works of piety, necessity and mercy. In a word, that which
would hurt, [Macrob. saturnal. lib. 1. cap. 6. and cap. 7.] if it were undone,
and here they were better informed then the Scribes and Pharisees informed the
Jews, whose false glosses, Christ corrected and reduced the Matthew. 12. 1, 2,
etc. to the 14. works of the Sabbath, only to works of piety, by the examples
of the Priests, to works of necessity, by the example of David, eating the
shewbread, and his disciples plucking the ears of corn, to works of mercy and
charity by the example of curing the withered hand, approving it lawful to
heal on the Sabbath, to pull an Ox or an Ass out of a pit, to lead cattle to
watring, etc.

So precise were the Gentiles for the whole day, that it became a proverb, to
show a care of omitting nothing, [Lipsius in Senic. Epist. 26.] Conficienda
sunt sacra, as Lucius Accius, in his Annals relates, that in Athens, and
through all the cities of Greece, they celebrated the day to Saturn, in which
feasts the Masters, and servants banqueted together, [Vt cum dominis famuli
epulentur. Ibid. Macro. lik. 1. cap. 7.] and [Joseph. lib. 2. cont, Ap.]
Josephus is home in this matter; nor is there any city of the Grecians, or
Barbarians, nor any nation, to whom the custom of the seventh day (in which we
rest,) has not come. Thus we see the law of nature in general, requires of
all men the sanctification of a seventh day, and the reason of it is, because
[Vide Mr. Byfield, cont. Breerwood, page 37] God exacts some part of our lives
and times, by way of perpetual homage, never to be dispensed withal, nor
remitted.

Now, Gods works and our own, cannot be done together, therefore did God by a
law of nature, instruct the Gentiles, (the command given to Adam in Paradise,
being almost quite forgotten by all) and by lively voice in the Wilderness
instruct the Jews, and by his Son, his substantial Word instruct us
Christians, to sanctify the seventh day, and to rest therein: So that all men
created, redeemed, sanctified, are obliged unto this worship of God, it being a
law of nature, eternal, and moral, which belongs to us Christians, as well as
the Sabbath legal did belong to the Jews, or the natural Sabbath to the
Gentiles, so does this Evangelicall Sabbath to us; from which, though
Breerwood, Heylin, Pocklington, and such vain disputers of the world, hide
their eyes: As is the phrase of the holy Ghost, Eze. 22. 26. [plane polumque
contra faciunt quam ipsis imperavi lege* Trem. and Jun. not. in locum.] being
unwilling to be informed of the authority and service thereof, opposing
blasphemously the known truth of God and our Church, as shall more after
appear, speaking evil of those things they know not of; but what they know
naturally, Jude 10. 11. as bruit beasts in those things they corrupt
themselves, and therefore without repentance, woe unto them, for they have gone
in the way of Cain, and have murdered the souls of many a brother, and have
run greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and therefore now are like
to perish in the gainsaying of Chore: which is evident not only by the Word of
God, and example of our Savior; But by the writings and practice of the godly
in all ages since Christ's time, unto our days, together with the
constitutions, and laws of godly Emperors and Councels, in ancient times:
Besides the place before quoted of Moses, Genesis 2. 3. wherein the institution
and sanctification of the Sabbath is required, we have the direct commandment,
Exodus 20. 8, 9. of God, and a memento put before to teach the importance and
[Ainsworth his Eposition on that place.] antiquity of it, as being from the
creation, and for that it was to be kept but one day in seven, that so when the
time came, it might not be forgotten, or neglected; and also foreseeing the
great profaneness thereof, which should happen by Jews, and Christians,
diverse of whom have made this divine precept of the moral law, to be of none
effect by their, Matthew. 15. 6. tradition.

Also he adds, Observe and keep the Sabbath, which God expounding by the
Prophet, Isai. 58. 13. faith, it is to call the Sabbath a delight, The holy day
of the Lord, honorable, all which shows the weight of this precept. Its one
of those ten words Exodus 34. 29. and Deuteronomy. 4. 13. and 10. 4. or Commandments
which God wrote on the Tables of stone in Sinai, which is to continue as long
as any of the rest, placed the last though not the least in the first Table, of
all which Mat. 5. 18. Christ says, Heaven and earth shall pass away, but one
iota of the Law shall not fail.

Neither does any word or letter fall to the ground, by Christ changing of the
day from the seventh, to the eight; for though after the work of Creation, and
Gods resting, he sanctified the seventh, yet does it not derogate from his
truth, or justice, that after the work of Redemption, he might not translate
that day, who was the Lord of both works, and Author of both days. The Moral
law which is the eternal rule of Justice, and Gods will, is not frustrated
hereby, but the better strengthened, as was his institution of this law in
Paradise confirmed, and not cancelled, by the promulgation of the law to the
Jews: for, as their deliverance from Egypt was a second obligation, Deuteronomy. 5.
15. [Singularum ipsi prae aliis diebus sanctimoniam indidit facto institutione,
and virtute sua, ac proinde cum haberi sanctum and in sanctis solum consumi
rebus voluit: his autem causi^ secundae aliae postea accesserunt una civilis
altera humanitate spectans ut quiesca^ servus tuus and ancilla tua sicut tu,
Deu. 5. 20. altera ceremonialis ad solenne^ commemoratione^ mirificae
liberationis ex Egypto. Tr. and Iun.] with their first to creation, to bind
them after Gods example to rest on the Sabbath day, so also our Redemption by
Christ's death and passion, and our justification witnessed by his resurrection,
is a most strong tie, to obliege us to our duty herein: for the seventh day was
therefore enjoined, because it was the Sabbath, Exodus 20. 11. of the Lord: And
so here the eighth day is required of us by Christ, because it is the Sabbath
or his day of rest, from the work of our redemption. Therefore as excellently
Mr. Byfield drives home this [Byfield cont. Brier. page 117, 118.] argument,
God says not, remember thou sanctify the seventh day, and keep it Sabbath;
nor, thou shall do no work on the Sabbath day, because it is the seventh; but
he says, Remember the Sabbath day, to sanctify it, and thou shall do no
work on the seventh, because it is the Sabbath; so that it was because God the
Father rested, therefore he sanctified the Sabbath, and hallowed it; and so
because God the Son rested, therefore he sanctified the Sabbath, and hallowed
it, for he was Lord of it.

For the Lords resting, blessing and sanctifying the day, instituted it. The
institution of this day is clearly then in the very work of Christ's
Resurrection, as the institution of the seventh, was in the work of finishing
the Creation. Therefore says S. Austin [August. ad Jannuar. epist. 119. cap.
13. and Tom. 2. Epist. 86. ad casul. page 248.] the Lords day is declared to
Christians by the resurrection of the Lord, and from that it began to have its
festivity; and again, the Lords day, by virtue of the Resurrection, is more
holy, then the old Sabbath, and is preferred before it, by the faith of Christ
risen. So that the fourth Commandment stands in force to us, as well as to the
Jews, as learned Zanchy well observes; Yea, we are more obliged, then were
they; indeed before the Law was given in Mount Sinai, they had a twofold
obligation to tie them to the sanctifying the Sabbath, besides those general
reasons given by God to all mankind at the first institution thereof, and both
of them were Ceremonial.

The first is their deliverance from the bondage of Deuteronomy. 5. 15. Egypt,
therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep the Sabbath day. The second
in Gods liberality toward them, in feeding them from heaven with Manna, giving
them on the sixth day, the bread of two days, therefore the Lord requires that
they abide every man in his place, Exodus 16. 29. [Vide Jun. in loc.] and let no
man go out of his place on the seventh day, so the people rested on the
seventh day.

Now both these being Ceremonies, were abolished in Christ the substance,
therefore Christ freeing us from the thraldom of sin and Satan, whereof the
Egyptians deliverance [The overthrow of the Egyptians was a figure of Christ's
victory over our spiritual enemies, by subduing our iniquities and casting all
our sins into the depth of the sea, Micha 7. 15. 19. Ainsw. in Exodus 14. exp.]
was a type, and in the day of his Resurrection, giving us the true heavenly
Manna, John 5. 31. 35. 49, 50, 51. to be fed on with our souls by faith, has
more firmly engaged us, for the sanctification of his Sabbath, then were the
Jews for the sanctification of theirs, in as much as spiritual and eternal
blessings, are more excellent then natural, and corporal, and the substance
exceeds the shadow. For, as much then as Christ being risen from the dead,
rested from the works of our Redemption, rejoiced in it, and blessed it, with
that work, Mat. 28. 1. and with diverse apparitions John 20. 19. 26. of
himself, afterward on that day, which he sanctified, both by his precepts to
his Apostles, Mat. 28. 20. and by his own John 26. 21, 22. 27, 28. example,
spending it among his Disciples in his bodily presence now glorified, in
heavenly exposition and operations upon their hearts; but especially on this
day sending the holy Ghost, when the Disciples were met together to solemnize
Acts 2. 1. this day: this is sufficient to apply, and determine the Sabbath, to
that seventh day we now observe.

But to give more clear light to those, who will not wilfully shut their ears
against this truth, and hate it, because their deeds are evil. I find this
day in the Old Testament typified and foreprophesied of: typified it was, says
S. Cyprian [Cyprian Epist. 58. sc. edit. Pamel.] in circumcision, which was
enjoined to be on the eighth day, for, because the eighth day, that is, the
first after the Sabbath, was to be the day in which the Lord should arise, and
quicken us, and give us the spiritual circumcision, this eighth day, the first
after the Sabbath, and the Lords day, went before in the shadow, which shadow
ceased, after the truth came upon it, and the spiritual circumcision was given
us. St. Ignatius [Ignat. ad Magnet. (...)] says, that the Prophet expecting
this day, entitled some Psalms [76. Vide Psalm. 6. and Psalm. 12.] for the
eighth; and S. Austin [August. Sermon. 15. de verbis Apost.] agrees to both
these typified, it was in the eight souls that were saved in [August. ut
supra.] Noah's Arc.

It was also foreprophesied Psalm. 118. 24. This is the day which the Lord has
made, we will rejoice and be glad in it: for making, is to prefer in honor
[Vide Ainsworth in locum.] above others; so 1 Samuel 12. 6. also the sanctifying
and observing of it, Deuteronomy. 5. 15. Exodus 34. 21. both which are applied to the
Sabbath. And so, S. Austin interprets that Psalm, which by all Expositors is
acknowledged to be a famous prophecy of Christ. The Hebrew Doctors have a
saying, [Thal. Sanech. l. thelet.] That the world was not created, but for the
Messiah. If therefore the bringing of Israel out of Egypt, was such a work as
God for a memorial of it, made that day and month the beginning and head of
months of the years, otherwise then they had been before, as appears, Exodus
12. 2. how should not our redemption from death and hell, manifested in the day
of 1 Cor. 15. 14. 17. Christ's resurrection, deserve much more to be remembered
in the day thereof? and the creation of the new world be celebrated (which was
prophesied of long before, finished when Christ rose) as well as the creation
and finishing of the old. Again, in Psalm. 110. 3. is a famous prophecy, by the
consent almost of all Expositors of the Assemblies of Christians in the beauty
of holiness, and the time is also specified in the day of his power or army,
as Psalm. 33. 16. viz. when he sends forth his most [Vide Jun. and Trem. in
Psalm. 110. 3. Ainsworth in Col. and Vatablus, etc.] powerful Gospel, and has
by his holy ordinances rightly administered, which we know is most usually on
the Lords day, as the general [Dominicos dies orationi tantum, and lectionibus
vacant. Hieron. ad Rust.] custom of the primitive Church can testify.

Lastly, the Prophet Hagge, 2. 6. compared with Heb. 12. 26. says, yet once
more, it is a little while, and I will shake the heavens and the earth, which
shows a dissolution of all the ceremonious worship, and time thereof, which
the Jews used under the old Testament, and a changing of them, amongst which,
this first seventh day enjoined was one, as has been showed; that so, as the
Apostle says, all things in the kingdom of Christ, that cannot be shaken,
might remain; and those things that are shaken might be removed. Therefore, as
the other Jewish sabbaths were figurative, and had Col. 2. 16, 17. end in
Christ; so the seventh day in the Jewish sabbath delivered to them, was also
figurative, and is ceased, but the Sabbath still remains under Christ. I
might add that place of the Prophet, Zach. 14. 20. [Maxima ministrorum omnium,
and ministerii totius in Ecclesia commoditas. Trem. and Iun. not. in locum.]
Zachary, who prophesies of a day, in which upon the bridles of the horses
shall be holiness to the Lord, and the pots in the Lords house, shall be like
the bowls before the altar, which is by most interpreted of the Church under
the new Testament. It was on the eighth day, Lev. 9. 1. Moses called Aaron and
his sons to offer the first sacrifice for themselves and the people, they
abiding seven days and nights Lev. 8. 35. before at the door of the
Tabernacle, for their consecration; which eighth day, was indeed the first
after the Priests consecration; for all creatures, for the most part, were in
their uncleanness and imperfection seven days, and perfected in the eighth,
as children by Lev. 12. 2, 3. circumcision, young beasts for Lev. 22. 27.
sacrifice, persons that were unclean by leprosies, Lev. 14. 9, 10. and 15. 13,
14. and so Numb, 6. 9, 10. issues, and the like; nor were the Priests until
the eighth day, permitted to minister in their office, whereby the day of
Christ was foreshadowed, who by his resurrection, the day after the Sabbath,
has sanctified his Church and ministry, and all their actions, and made us an
holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices 1 Pet. 2. 5. acceptable to
God in that day, and the vision which was showed to the Prophet Ezekiel, makes
it plain, which is spoken concerning the spiritual instauration of the Church,
by the Gospel of Christ shadowed under corporal types, and figures, in regard
of the time and people, to whom he spoke: As learned [Nunc demum instaurationem
spiritualem Evangelio Christi ad Ecclesiam ipsius perventuram adumbrat typis,
and figuris rerum corporalium pro ratione temporis, and populi apud quem
agebat, etc. Trem. and Iun. not. in Eze. 40. 1.] Iunius and Tremelius observe.
Now, there its said, seven days shall they purge the altar, and purify it,
and they shall fill their hands, and when these days are expired, it shall be
on the eighth day, and so forward: the Priests shall make your burnt offerings
upon the Altar, and your peace offerings, and I will accept you, says the Lord
God, which was a figure of the time, when Christ's Ministers should chiefly
execute their service, viz. on the eighth day the Lords day, or Christians
Sabbath, whereof the Leviticall ministry was a type, being performed on the
eighth day, Quod in uno latet in altero patet. Aug.

But leaving the old Testament, lest us come to the new, wherein that is
plainly opened, which lay obscurely hid and veiled in the other: our Savior
tells his Disciples of their Sabbath day, Mat. 24. 20. in which they ought to
pray; that they might not fly at the destruction of Jerusalem, which could not
be meant of the Jewish Sabbath, which was abrogated long before, as Saint Paul
witnesses, Col. 2. 16. and there fore must be meant of the Sabbath he himself
should institute, which is on the first day of the week, called therefore the
Lords day, Rev. 1. 10. in which, St. John being in divine contemplation,
received his Apocalypse; its called his day, [Dominicus vero denominative a
Domino dicitur. Aquin. 3. q. 16, Art. 3.] denominatively, because he was the
consecrator and institutor of it, as he was of the Lords Supper; for this
cannot be called the Lords day by creation, for so all other days are his, nor
by his destination, for that presupposes a time to come, as the day of
judgment, 1 These. 4. 2. is called the day of the Lord, and therefore must be
by his institution and consecration, as indeed he had power to do it, being the
Lord of Mat. 12. 8. the Sabbath, who renewed the world, and created Isai. 65.
17. and 2 Cor. 5. 17. a new heaven, and a new earth.

For, as our redemption was a greater work then our creation, so the
remembrance thereof deserves a greater contemplation; and as after the works of
the Fathers creation, the seventh was sanctified, so after the works of the
Sons redemption, the eighth day was sanctified, which is the Lords day, that so
all men might honor Joh. 5. 23. the Son, as they honor the Father, he on that
day having Mat. 28. 18. and Phil. 2. 9. Ephesians. 1. 20. received all power, both in
heaven, and in earth. On which ground, Christ commands his Apostles to teach
all nations those things which he commanded them, Mat. 28. 19, 20. and no more;
and they, like faithful Ambassadors, delivered only what they had received
from the Lord, either by word of mouth, or by his Spirit, as the practice of
the first general Council, witnesses, in which they profess to lay no
burdens on the disciples, but what seemed good Acts 15 28. to the holy Ghost.
And Saint John testifies as they did declare to the Church those things, which
they had 1 John 1. 1. 2. 3. seen and heard: Saint Paul delivered what he had
received 1 Cor. 11. 23, from the Lord, so that the Ordination was the Lords and
by tradition of the Apostles, delivered to the Church, and generally by them
received, as appears by their practice, Acts 20. 7. at Troas, where on the
first day of the week, (which is our Christian Sabbath) the Disciples came
together to hear, pray and celebrate the Lords Supper, passing over the old
Sabbath of the Jews without any such holy exercises, which plainly demonstrates
the Acts 20. 7. [Itaque jam tum caepit dies Dominicus celebrari a coelibus
fidelium sensim in olescente Sabbatho Judaico. Aretius in locum] cessation of
the one, and confirmation of the other.

We read therefore, that is was a general received observation of the Church 1
Cor. 16. 1, 2, 3. of Corinth; to sanctify this day in holy duties; and St.
Paul had given the same order to be observed in the Church of Galatia on the
Lords day, which is the first day of the week, called the first day [Syre in
omni uno, i. e. primo die in Sabbatho. sc. Septimanae Hebrea loquutio. Tree.
not.] of the Sabbath, after the custom of the Hebrews. And if Beza may be
credited, in an ancient Greek copy, its added: [(...), Vide Bezae not. in loc.]
The Lords day; besides, Christ is the only Prophet Deuteronomy. 18. 15. of his Church,
and Lawgiver James 4. 12. to his people, who reveals unto them the whole
counsel Deuteronomy. 18. 18. and Joh. 15. 15. of God, and was faithful as Heb. 3. 2.
Moses; therefore as Moses delivered the Ordinances for the time, and manner of
worship in the old Testament: so also did Christ in the new, otherwise he could
not be so faithful as Moses. Moreover, the Church of God cannot be without a
Sabbath; for take away time from the service of God, and there will remain
none; yea, one of the ten commands will fall to the ground; therefore, since we
may not observe the old, we must observe the new, otherwise there is no Religion
in us, as appears by Gods complaint on the breach of this command: How long
refuse you to keep my commandments and my Exodus 16. 28. [Cum statum religionis
funditus eversum, Deus apud Prophetas indignatur violata and polluta Sabbatha
conquiritur. Ramus com. de Christi Relig. lib. 2. cap. 6.] Laws, as if all
Gods precepts were broken by the violation of this one command, and the state
of Religion utterly overthrown, when this was polluted: Add hereunto the
reasons for the sanctification of the Sabbath, and we shall find them moral,
and immutable, and then consequently the preceept must be so:

As, first Gods resting from the work of creation.

Secondly, his instituting a day for a Sabbath in Paradise, and blessing it by
giving it this singular privilege to be a day of rest and holiness, and of
delight unto the world.

Thirdly, the equity, being one day of seven; and lastly, the ease of servants
and cattle, all which belong to us, as well as they did to the Jews; nay, the
work of our redemption, and the day of Christ's actual triumph over the world,
the flesh, and the Devil, the grave, and hell, deserve a more serious and
greater commemoration, then could the deliverance of Israel out of Egypt
deserve from them, which was but the type hereof, and is rendered as a reason
for the observance of the first command, [Vide Doctor Mayrs second reason on
the first Commandment, and the context, Exodus 20. 2, 3.] as well as for this;
and therefore also in the substance is immutable.

I will conclude therefore, that without question, by Christ's commanding the
Apostles, or by his Spirit inspiring them, did they, and the Christans in all
Churches observe the Lords day as the Christian Sabbath, after the example of
our Savior, who appeared on this John 20. 19. 26. Mat. 28. 9. Luke 24. 15. 36.
day, instructing his Disciples by giving Acts 1. 2, 3. commandments unto them,
and speaking unto them of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God; and
from the Apostles time, both the Greek, Hebrew, and Latin Churches observed the
same to this present day; neither did any religious, spiritual, and godly man,
but observe the same, it is only profane, erroneous, or licencious spirits have
made no conscience hereof, witness the testimonies of former Ages. Justin
Martyr [Justin Martyr Apol. 2 sub finem.] brings in his Apology, justifying
Christ commanding the Sabbath, and the general practice of the Christians
obeying the same. Ignatius [Ignat. Epist. ad Magnat.] Martyr, who was S. John's
Disciple confirms it. So did Ireneus who followed both these, [Iren. lib. 4.
cap. 19, 20.] in time and opinion [Origen. Homil. 3. in Exodus.] Origin, [Tertul.
lib. de Idolum.] Tertullian, and [Euseb. Eccles. Histor. lib 4 cap 23.]
Eusebius, and S. Ambrose [Ambros. Sermon. 62.] approve of the same. Cyrill
Cyrillus lib. 12. cap. 58.] speaking of the apparitions of Christ on the first
day of the week, says, By right therefore are the holy Assemblies kept in the
Churches on the eighth day. S. Austin [August. in Epist. ad san. 119. cap. 13.
and Epist. 86. ad Casul.] is full herein when he says, The Lords day is more
holy then the old Sabbath, and is preferred before it by faith of the
Resurrection. So also S. Jerome [Hiero. in vita Paula.] and Gregory, [Gregor.
lib. 11. Epist. 37.] S. Athanasius [Athanas. in front. Homil. de seme^^.] that
noble defender of the faith, says, That the solemnity of the Sabbath was of
great price with the ancient Fathers, and was translated unto the Lords day, by
the Lord himself, who instituted it. Learned Iunius [Iunius in Genesis cap. 2.
1.] says, not by humane tradition, but by the observation, and also
institution of Christ himself, was the Sabbath changed: See Tilenus, River,
Poliander, Walleus, Thysius, as they are [Byfields vindication of the Sabbath,
page 126.] cited by Mr. Byfield and Beza, Piscator, Rollock, Hooper, Fulk,
Scotus, Panormitane, Silvester, Faelicius, as they are quoted by Mayr, in the
Explanation of his English Catechism, published by Authority: and hitherto may
be added Bishop Andrews, Mr. Attorfall, Barker, Bound, Willet, Jones, Dod, and
Clever; but I will conclude with Mr. Budlinger, [Bulling. in Apoc. sermon. 4.
page 14.] When Constantine made certain holy days, and the Lords day for one,
its to be understood he renewed the custom of the Apostles, and Catholic
Church, and not constituted the same: For, that this day was solemnized and
consecrated for assemblies in the congregation of Corinth, is manifest, 1 Cor.
16. the same day also the faithful did celebrate their service, which Saint
Paul, in the 20. of the Acts: and for as much Saint John the Apostle, knew that
the faithful served God in all their assemblies on the Sunday, although he
could not be present with them in body, yet was he present in spirit and
contemplation. Now, since all these famous worthies, who were spiritual, and 1
Cor. 2. 15. able to discern the things that be of God, to whom Mat. 13. 11. Joh
7. 17. [Quod ab omnibus quod ubique quod semper creditum, etc. Vin.
Lyrinensis.] it is given to know the secrets of the kingdom, the consent of all
these is a strong argument to prove the truth; and if to these you add the
counsels, decrees and laws of godly Princes, and Synods, it will abundantly
confirm the same. The Affrican, [Concil. Affrican. Can. 52. and 62.] Council
forbade going to sights and interludes, because the mind was thereby drawn from
spiritual duties; and likewise in Concilio Cabilonensi, the Bishops desired
the King, that law^^ might be made against the same, [Doctor. Mayr on the 4.
Com.] Charles the great commanded his visitors, that all worldly business
should cease: [Concil. Dingulos. Can. 13.] the Beast that works, by an ancient
council, was forfeited on that day, [Concil. Matiscon. 2. Can. 1. and 4.] And
in a Council, 588. it was decreed, that no work on the Lords day be done; and
if any neglect this wholesome law, he was to be beaten with clubs, [Euseb. in
vita Constant. Zozomen. his Eccles. Hist. tripart. lib. 1. cap. 10.]
Constantine the great made godly Constitutions against the violation hereof:
and Leo the Emperor [Justinian. Tom. 3. page 459. Leoitem imper. constit. 54.
and consil. Laod. Can. 29.] ordained, that according to the meaning of the Holy
Ghost, and the Apostle thereby directed, that on the sacred day wherein our
integrity was restored, all do rest and surcease labor, to keep it singular,
and inviolable, without any incroaching on that day which God has consecrated
to his honor. Mr. Byfield, [Byfields Vindication of the Sabbath against
Breerwood, page 154. and 163, 164] cites many other Councels, as that of
Loadicea, and the general Synod held at Petricovia, beside the Council of
Nice. The Council of Paris, under Gregorius quartus, the Synod of Cracovia
generally received: Guntram, [Precept. Guntram. ad Episcop. dat. in council.
Ma^tiscon. 2.] King of France, commanded that no bodily work be done on the
Lords day, besides what was prepared to eat and maintain life conveniently:
Edward [Fox, his Acts and Mon. vol. 1. page 715. printed 1610.] the elder, and
Gythrum the Danish King, made a law against all labor, buying and selling on
the Sabbath, and no execution be done on the Sunday: King Edgar your
predecessor, made a Law that Sunday should be kept holy, from Saturday at
noone, till Monday morning; so did Canutus his successor, as Edgar had done
before, forbidding Markets, hunting, labors, and court-keeping, during the
said space: so did King Inas, [Fox, ut supra, page 714.] who reigned in this
land long before these, made a law, that no man, lay nor spiritual, free nor
bond, should work on the Sunday; nay, our Churches of England, Scotland and
Ireland, do all hold the Lords day to be directly grounded on the fourth
Commandment; and therefore are taught in the Lyturgie, [Vide the Book of
Prayer, Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.]
after the repeating of the same, to ask mercy and pardon for our transgressions
past, and grace to observe it for the time to come: And the Book of Homilies
[Homil. of the place and time of Prayer, page 125.] calls it our Sabbath;
saying, God has given command to all men, that upon the Sabbath, (which is now
our Sunday) that they should cease from all weekly and workday labor, etc. and
also give themselves wholly to heavenly exercise of Gods true Religion and
service, herein following the example of our gracious Lord and Father.

The [Vide the Preface of the Assembly at Perth.] Scottish Church also
teaches, that the sanctification of the Lords day is of divine institution, as
well by divine precept, as by practice of the Church. Lastly the Church of
Ireland [Vide the Articles of Religion in a Synod as Dublin, 1615.] teaches
the same doctrine; the first day of the week (which is the Lords day) is wholly
to be dedicated to the service of God; and therefore we are bound therein to
rest from our common and daily business, and to bestow that leisure on holy
exercises, has public and private. If then this Christian Sabbath be of
divine institution, and grounded on the moral law of God, it will necessarily
follow, that what God enjoined the Jews in that command, is required also of
us; and what was forbidden to them, is also forbidden to us, being both under
the same law. Now, the duty enjoined them, was to remember to sanctify the
seventh day, viz. to separate it from common works wholly, (such as pertain to
this natural life) and to consecrate it to God and holy works, such as concern
our spiritual life; as to assemble in the Levit. 23. 3. and Acts 16. 13. 2
King. 4. 23. Church, and in them, to pray, read, Luke 4. 16. 22. and Acts 15.
21. and expound the Scriptures, to dispute Acts 17. 2, 3. of matters of
Religion, to talk and meditate Psalm. 92. tit. cum Psalm. of Gods Word and works,
to do works Mat. 12. 10. 11, 13. and Luke 13. 10, 11, 12, 13, etc. of mercy,
both to man and beast, and all other like actions tending to sanctification.
And all this does God require of us to perform, and that not some part of the
day only, but the whole day must be sanctified; for how unseemly is the mixture
of high and low, of divine and humane* of heavenly and earthly things? We
cannot serve God Matthew. 6. 24. and Mammon together, nor follow the worship of
God and our own works at one time: we cannot sanctify a day to the Lord, and
yet find our own pleasures and recreations, God will not allow of any partner
in his worship, neither of Baal, 1 King. 18. 21. and 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15. nor
Satan, nor sin, nor yet in the time thereof, no work must be done therein,
which thou can properly call thine, or which tends only to thy natural life;
as buying, Nehem. 13. 16, 17. selling of wares, or victuals, carrying Jerem.
17. 22. of burdens, embalming Luke 23. 54, 56. of the dead, going Exodus 26.
29. and Acts 1. 12. of journeys, plowing, Exodus 34. 21. sowing, reaping, any
ordinary and not necessary labor, or any other thing that is of our own Isai.
58. 13. ways, or pleasures; nay, we may not speak our own [Vt supra Isai. 58.
13.] words, nor think our own thoughts, much less may we do our own works. The
Hebr. [Maimon Treatise of the Sabbath, cap. 21. 23, 24.] Doctors say, We may
not do things like unto works, as riding of an horse, climbing of a tree,
judging of civil causes, valuing of goods, separating of tithes, executing of
malefactors, marrying of a wife, contriving of business for the next day; yea,
St. Austen, [August. lib. de Civit. Dei, 22. cap. ult] says, the duties of
Gods worship and immediate service may be done on the Sabbath, that in doing
them, we do our own wills, and so break the Sabbath: God himself condemned him
that gathered sticks on the Jewish sabbath, and our Church has condemned those
that prank and prick, paint, and point themselves to be gorgeous on that day;
yea, those that toyishly talk, are worse then those that keep markets; and
those who rest in superfluity, in wantonness and filthy fleshinesse, by such,
God is more [Homil. of the time and place of Prayer, 1. part. page 126.]
dishonored, and the Devil better served on the Sunday, then upon all the
days of the week besides. And I assure you, the beasts which are commanded to
rest on the Sunday, honor God better then this kind of people, so far our
Homily. I find in Scripture four sorts of works, allowed on this day, and no
more. First, works of holiness, as Luke 4. 16, 17. Preaching, Acts 16. 13.
praying, singing of [Psal. 92. tit. cum Psalm.] Psalms, etc.

Secondly, works in their own nature servile, yet directly tending to piety,
as the killing and Mat. 12. 5. sacrificing of beasts, the blowing Levit. 23.
24. and Numb. 10. 2. of Trumpets, the compassing Jericho Joshua 6. 10. round,
carrying the Arc, the impotent man John 5. 11. that was cured by carrying his
bed, and of this sort is our tolling or ringing of a bell to call the Assembly,
our going or riding to Church, 2 Kings 4. 22, 23. etc. Thirdly, works of mercy,
both to man and beast, as feeding the hungry, Mat. 12. 4. and Mark 2. 25.
watring of Luke 13. 15. cattle, helping man or beast Luke 14. 5. out of a pit,
curing of wounds, Luke 13. 16. and Mark 3. 4, 5. or healing of the sick, and
under works of mercy are comprehended works of absolute necessity, as quenching
a house on fire, defending a man's self 1 Maccab. 2. 41. against his enemies,
tending of 1 Samuel 1. 22. children, etc. The Jews themselves acknowledge peril
of life, [Maimon. Treatise of the Sabbath. cap. 24. sect. 5. and cap. 2. sect.
1.] puts away the Sabbath; therefore to a sick person that is in danger,
they do all things needful for him on the Sabbath day. Lastly, works of common
honesty, as putting on of clothes, going to ease, dressing and preparing
convenient food, etc. are lawful, and approved. All other works, sports,
recreation and plays, are sinful and forbidden, though never so small,
whereby the mind is withdrawn from sanctifying the whole day unto the Lord.
Therefore [Tertul. 2. cont. Marcio.] Tertullian says, Thou shall do no work,
namely, thine own. Mr. Greenham [Greenhams Treatise of the Sabbath, page 169.]
says, That recreations, shooting, and the like, on other days lawful, are
now sinful; as we deny Church-feasts, Wakes, and Revels, as imitations of the
Heathen: so we deny Holy-day-Playes, as remnants of ancient profaneness. Mr.
Bullinger [Bullinger in Apocal sermon. 4. ad finem.] complains of those, who
abused the Sunday in gaming drinking, dancing, and worldly business. Godly Mr.
Perkins says, [Perkins Golden chain, page 150.] The Sabbath is polluted by
using Jests, sports, banqueting, or any other thing whatsoever, which is a
means to hinder or withdraw the mind from that serious attention, which ought
to be in Gods service. For, if the works of our calling must not be exercised,
much less these, whereby the mind is as well distracted from Gods service, as
by the greatest labor. The whole Sabbath, from the beginning to the ending
must be sanctified. Dr. Mayr [Mayr. Expos. of the Catechis. page 393.]
condemns all wordly speeches, and thoughts, whilst the day consisting of four
and twenty hours continues. If we muse or meditate upon any thing, yea, even
in our beds in the dark of the night, it must not be upon our worldy affairs,
but upon the word which we have heard, or read. Small works which come not
within the compass of Religion, mercy, or necessity, are forbidden on the
Sabbath: so Mr. Dod, [Dod and Clever on the 4. Com.] All civil works says the
Author of the practice [Practise of Piety, page 442.] of Piety, from the least
to the greatest, as studying of any books, but Divinity, all recreations,
liberal drinking, gross feeding, and talking about wordly things; yea, to be
merely vacant is absolutely forbidden, for it is to be sanctified. Therefore
Dyonisius Bishop of Corinth to [Euseb. lib. 4. c. 22.] Sofer Bishop of Rome,
says, We have spent the Lords day an holy day, after their ancient custom.
And Justin Martyr affirms [By fields vindication of the Sabbath, page 150.] of
the Christians, that after the performance of the works of piety, they spent
the rest of the day in godly conference, and works of charity. And S. Austin
says, If the Jews celebrated their Sabbath with such devotion, how much more
ought Christians to be vacant to God alone, on the Lords day, abstaining from
all earthly affairs, and enticements of the world? and reproves them of
telling of tales, slanders, playing at Dice, and such unprofitable sports, as
it one part of the day were set apart for duty to God, and the rest of the day,
together with the night, were for their own pleasures. And S. Ambrose his
teacher says, [Ambrose tom. 3. sermon. 33. page 259.] Let us all the day be
conversant in prayer, or reading, and he that cannot read, let him ask of
some holy man, that he may be fed with his conference, let no secular acts
hinder divine, let no table play carry away the mind, let no pleasurs of Dogs
call away the senses, let no dispatch of business pervert the mind with
covetousness, and so S. Jerome [Ierome ad Rustic.] says, On the Lords day,
they only give themselves to prayer, and reading. Constantine the godly
Emperor, although by an over great facility, being misled, under pretense of
the miscarriage of the fruits of the earth, to grant leave for husbandmen to
work, as our famous [Hooker Eccles. polit. lib. 5. sect. 71. page 385.] Hooker
speaks, yet being belike after better instructed, he made more religious
[Euseb. in vita Constan. and Zozom. hist. Eccles. tripart. lib. 1. cap. 10.]
constitutions afterward, that all should cease from suits, and other
business, and should be only occupied in prayer upon it. And that holy Martyr
[Ignat. epista. d Magnetios.] Ignatius wills the Magnetians, Lets not Sabbatize
after the Jewish manner, as rejoicing in idleness, but let every one of us
keep the Sabbath spiritually, rejoicing in the meditation of the Law, not in
the remission of the body; admiring the workmanship of God, not eating things
of the day before, nor drinking things lukewarm, nor walking measured spaces,
nor rejoicing in dancings, and mad shoutings, and clapping of the hands and
feet: Thus both Scripture, Councels, Fathers, have condemned as unlawful, all
works, sports, recreations, whereby the heart may be withdrawn any way from
holy duties.

Yea, the very [By fields vindication of the Sabbath, page 81, 82.] Heathen
observed their festivals with severe exactness from all work. I will conclude
with Musculus, [Wolf. Muscul. loc. com. in quartum preceptum, page 161.] This
is a sin which has made the multitude drunk, and so has lost the truth of
examining it: for, if a man go to plow or cart, he is we say a prophaner of
the Sabbath, but let him drink or dance, whore and play, fight and brawle, he
is not condemned for profanation, surely the beasts which do toward
sanctification, do better observe the sabbath then these men; for, if
necessary and lawful works are forbidden, how much more vain sports? He
which disobeyes Gods command is disobedient, and rebellious, but he which
herein will not imitate his example, degenerates from God, and openly declares
himself to be an alien to the Spirit of God. For, is there not need of the
vacation on the whole day: Consider what preparation is required before we
come into Gods Eccles. 5. 1. presence, what meditation after the hearing Deuteronomy.
5. 32. and 6. 6. and Psalm. 119. 11. Luke 2. 19. Acts 17. 11. of the word, that
we may chew the cud our selves, and after call our families to account as S.
[Chrysost. in Mat. cap. 1. Hom. 5.] Chrysostom exhorts, by the similitude of
one going into a Bath; and Mayr at large illustrates the [Mayr expos. on the
Catechis. page 390.] same, showing its our Fair day, to buy spiritual food,
wherein we ought not to be idle and negligent: God allows six whole days for
our bodies, and but one for our souls, and shall we curtaile that too? If men
will see that their servants work all the six in their business, will God
permit his servants to be idle, wanton, or slothful on this day? surely it is
just with God to make our six days labor unprosperous, when we are careless
of his seventh days work. For, it is a heinous sin of which he greatly
complains, and does punish, as by the Prophet Jer. 17. 21, 22. Jeremiah, that
they carried and bore burdens on the Sabbath, and did not sanctify it, as he
commanded them; but they obeyed not, nor yet inclined their ears, but made
their neck stiff that they might not hear, nor receive instruction. And so by
the Prophet Ezekiel Ezekiel. 20. 12, 13. and 20. 20, 21. etc. I gave them my
Sabbaths to be a sign between me and them, that they might know that I am the
Lord that sanctifies them; But the house of Israel rebelled against me in the
wilderness, they walked not in my statutes, they despised my Judgments,
(which if a man do, he shall live in them) and my Sabbaths they greatly
polluted, then I said, I will power out my fury upon them in the wilderness to
consume them, and the same lesson I gave to their children, but they also
walked in the steps of their fathers, and polluted my Sabbaths. Then I said, I
will power my fury upon them to accomplish mine anger against them in the
wilderness, yet God spared them then for his Names sake, lest that should be
polluted in the sight of the Heathen; yet he swore that he would scatter them
among the Heathen, and disperse them through the Countries, because they had
not executed his Judgments, but had despised his Statutes, and had polluted
his Sabbaths, and their eyes were after their Idols. And again, Ezekiel. 22. 8.
13. 15. Thou have despised mine holy things, and have profaned my Sabbaths,
behold therefore, I have smitten my hand at thy dishonest gain, I will scatter
thee among the heathen, and disperse thee in the countries, and will consume
thy filthiness out of thee. And in the next, Eze. 23. 38. 45, 46. ad finem.
chapter; Moreover, this have they done unto me, they have defiled my Sanctuary
in the same day, and they have profaned my Sabbaths, which God severely
amongst other sins, threatens to punish: the same you may see in the Prophecy
Amos 8. 5. 7. 8, 9, 10. of Amos; and God complains, that the Priests had
violated the law, and put no difference between the holy and profane, the
clean and the unclean, but they had hid their eyes from Ezekiel. 22. 26. his
Sabbaths, and he was profaned amongst them: And God spoke, Exodus 16. 28. unto
Moses, that he might speak unto the people, and show them this sin.

How long refuse you to keep my commands and my laws, he accuses them for the
breach of them all, when this is violated, and indeed in violating this, we
break all the rest, not only in regard of guilt, habit, or disposition; but
also actually: For, first, in following our pleasures or profits on this day we
set up other gods Ezekiel. 14. 3. before him in our hearts; and secondly, we fail
in the manner, Numb. 15. 39, 40. of his worship, by neglecting those holy
duties which he has required on that day; and thirdly, we take his name in
vain, professing our selves Christians, and yet not allowing Ezekiel. 22. 26. a
day for his service, which the very Pagans denied not to their gods: Fourthly,
we serve sin, Satan, and our own lusts, and not sanctify a Sabbath to the
Lord, when we follow our pleasures, sports, and pastimes, [Testium est quod
famulatum impendat majusque peccatum est in exercitu, similes infideliter agens
cum host pactum habeat, quam si in aliquo obsequio ducis deficiens inveniatur.
Aquin. Sum. 12 de q. 100. Ar. 6. c.] neglecting his household service, and
holding league with his enemies, which is a greater sin then the neglect of any
other duty enjoined by our captain. Fifthly, herein we transgress the command
of God our Father, Prove. 1. 8. and obey not the precepts of our mother, the
Church, who both commands the observance thereof, nay all superiors, that
transgress herein, teach a bad lesson against themselves, and give a worse
example for those under their charge to follow; and so sixthly, become guilty,
not only of their own souls blood, Matthew. 5. 19. [Nullus censebitur in
Ecclesia, Beza.] but also destroy those that follow their wicked example, and
so thereby lose their own souls; for he shall be called the least in the
Kingdom of God, that breaks the least command, and teaches men so; woe be to
that man then, by whom such an offense comes, it were better a Matthew. 18. 6,
7. millstone were hanged about his neck, and he were cast into the Sea, then
that he should offend one of Christ's little ones. Seventhly, hereby they commit
spiritual Hosea 2. 5. and Isai. 50. 1. adultery with their pleasures and
profits, and so reject Christ, who is their only Lord, Ephesians. 5. 32. and
husband; yea, by this sin, they defile their bodies, which should be the
temples 1 Cor. 3. 16. of the Holy Ghost, and so cause him to depart, making
them houses for Satan, Luke 11. 26. and Romans 6. 12. and sin to reign in.
Eigthly, they rob God of his time and service to be performed therein, which is
aggravated, in that God has given us six, and required but one day of us,
whereas he might have taken six, and have given us but one: Therefore it is not
only unreasonable, but horrible ingratitude, thus to recompense him evil for
good; this is a reason rendered in the command, Six days shall thou labor, but
the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God; nay, thou robst thy self
and posterity of Gods blessings, both here and hereafter, which he has
promised to those that delight to keep the Sabbath, as the Isai. 58. 13, 14.
and 56. 2. 6, 7. Prophets witness. Ninthly, hereby they lie unto Isai. 29. 13.
God, in baptism, having promised to keep Gods holy Will and Commandments; now
this being one, as has been proved, in wilfully violating the same by their
practice, they lie Acts 5. 3. unto the holy Ghost, violate their Psalm. 78. 36,
37, 38. covenant with God, and so make shipwreck of faith and a 1 Timothy 1. 19.
good conscience. Lastly, they covet after those things that are Gods, to employ
it on themselves, their lusts, profits, being weary of his Sabbaths, and
longing to have it overpast, like those in the Prophecy Amos 8. 5. of Amos:
For we being Gods obliged servants, both by Psalm. 110. 3. creation, and
redemption, 1 Cor. 6. 20. we may not the least moment of time withdraw our
selves from attending on his service prescribed us, in the day of his holy
assemblies, without being guilty of covetous and deceitful intentions toward
our Creator and Redeemer, which he accounts no less then rebellion, and
treason against his sacred Majesty; which offense, who so wilfully committed,
was by the Judicial law of the Jews, Exodus 31. 15. to suffer death: And we
see God himself giving sentence of stoning Numb. 15. 31. on the man that but
gathered sticks on that day: The Rabbis of the Jews, [Maim. Treatise of the
Sab. cap. 1.] understand it of the wilful open and presumptuous offender;
otherwise, if he offended through ignorance Numb. 15. 27. Levit. 4. 2. or
carelessness, he was to bring his oblation; but if it willingly was done,
though in private, God, they said, would secretly cut him off; and herein they
erred not, for it brings Gods judgments on a man, if it be particular, or
nation if general. God brought much misery and affliction on the Jews his own
people, slew them with the sword of their enemies, who carried them away
captive into a strange land, even for this sin, as they* themselves confess
their Nehem 9. 33. compared with chap. 10. 29, 30, 31. affliction just,
particularly for this sin, and therefore entered into covenant to sanctify the
Sabbath, and if the people of the land bring ware, or any victual on the
Sabbath day to sell, that they would not buy of them; and therefore that good
Govenour, Nehemia, Nehem. 13. 5. when he saw in Judah some treading of wine
presses, and bringing in of sheaves, and lading of Asses on that day, and
carrying of burdens, and buying of fish, and wares, he contended against the
Nobles of Judah, and said unto them, What evil is this that ye do and profane
the Sabbath? did not our fathers thus? and did not our God for the same bring
all this evil upon us, and upon this City? Yet ye bring more wrath upon
Israel, in profaning the Sabbath; therefore to prevent this, he caused the
gates of the city at even of the Sabbath, (when it began) to be shut, and not
to be opened, till after the Sabbath, setting his servants to watch that no
burden be brought therein, and threatening the merchants and sellers, if they
came again on the Sabbath, he would lay hands on them. And after that, he
caused the [Qui die quoque Sabbathi ut reliquis pro festis necessaria
comparabant. Trem. and Iun. not. in loc.] Levites to cleanse themselves, and
that they should come and keep the gates to sanctify the Sabbath. And indeed,
God threatened so much before unto the Israelites, Jerem. 17. 27. that if they
would not harken to him, to hallow the Sabbath day, and not to bear a burden,
even entering in at the gates of Jerusalem on the Sabbath day, then I will
kindle a fire in the [In toto termino est synecdoche pars pro toto. Trem. and
Iun. in locum.] gates thereof, and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem,
and it shall not be quenched: so by the Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 22. 26.
conjoined with 31. because the Priests hid their eyes from the Sabbath, and God
was thereby profaned amongst them, therefore have I powered out mine
indignation against them, I have consumed them with the fire of my wrath, their
own way I have recompensed upon their own heads, says the Lord: Have we not
also had many examples, both at home and abroad, of Gods justice on the
prophaners of this day, both for working and sporting? Doctor Mayr [Mayrs
Exposition of the Catechism, page 385.] relates of a Council in Paris,
wherein diverse honest men urged for some special decrees for the observation
of the Lords day, alleging, how some on that day intending their husbandry,
had been smitten with thunder and lightning, to the laming of some, and utter
destruction of others: Another carrying home corn, had both corn and barn
burned.

At Chemstat [Jo. Fincol. lib. 3. de Mirac.] in France, the woman and her
children, that would not be warned by the fire sent from heaven twice, for
picking of flax, in the third Sunday, were all most miserably consumed. The
[Mayrs Expos of the Catechis. ut supra.] Centuriators of Magdenburgh, report of
a Noble man, who daily went a hunting on the Sunday, neglecting Gods service,
therefore God sent him a child with a head like a Dog: The Miller [Idem ut
supra.] that would not cease from grinding on that day had both meal and mill
burnt: Come we nearer home, and at Teverton [Byfields Vindication of the Sabb.
p. 99.] in Devonshire four hundred dwelling houses were at once on fire, and
consumed for their horrible profanation of the Lords day, Anno 1598. in which
above fifty persons were burned: Mr. Byfield relates of them memorable
[Byfield, lib. ut supra. p. 101.] examples of Gods wrath revealed from heaven
against the ungodliness of men, in profaning the Lords day, which fell out
whilst he was answering Mr. Breerwoods Treatise, who wrote against it, the
one, December. 19. 1630. of one who on the Lords day, would ring a pig, his
daughter persuading him to let it alone till the morrow, because it would
hinder his going to Church, but he being inexorable, in the midst of his work,
was strick suddenly speechless, and never spoke more, but died within eight
days after, his name was John Hunt of Occham, in the County of Surrey. The
other, [By field, ut supra, page 102.] was Richard Roberts, Apprentise in
London, who was sent for a gown to Maldon, and returning home, his horse threw
him, and after rising, he presently sunk down and died: Also he relates, that
at Twickenham in Middlesex, 1626. the people, given to May-games on the
Sabbath, as they assembled to take down their old May Pole, a woman standing by
with a child in her arms, gazing on, one of the ropes broke that held the
pole, and so it fell down, and the edge [By field, lib. and page ut supra.] of
the Weathercock struck the child on the head, and killed it: In the same year,
to my knowledge, at Compton Chamberlain in Wiltshire, at the house (of that
profane Justice of the peace) Sir John Penruddocks, there was a dancing match
on the Lords day, there came a stranger of another town thither to dance, whose
name I know not, but after some time continuance there, as he was capering, he
fell down dead presently in the midst of the company, and left behind him a
notable example of Gods displeasure, both toward that ungodly [Vide Zanchy in
Epist. ad Ephesios, ^ur thorae sunt vitantae: 1. Quia sunt ^urpe ^^ homine
Christiano indigna: 2. Quia non convenient vocationi and professioni suae: 3.
Quia sunt contrariae gratiarum actioni: 4. Quia sunt fractus scor^ationis, and
immunditiae omnis: 5. Quia ad novas provocant immunditias: 6. Quia per haec
male audet Christiana religio apud Turcas, and Infideles: 7. Quia saepe sunt
causae rixae blasphemiae, homicidii habent speciem mali: 8. Nutriunt
concupiscentias carni^ oculorum.] exercise of mixed dancing, and also of
profaning his holy Sabbath: Also about 1635. [A ferufull example of Gods
justice at Sarum, in the County of Wilts.] a profane company of young men, on
the Lords day, early in the morning, went to Clarrindon park to cut down a
May Pole, and having loaded one, as they were coming down with him at Milners
bars, entering into the city of Salisbury, one of the cart wheels fell into a
rout belike, which caused the young tree in the cart, (which they had stolen for
a May Pole) to give a treat furge of one side, which struck one of the company
such a blow on the head, that it beat out his brains, whereof he presently
died. A fearful example of Gods wrath, both against that heathenish sport, and
wilful profaning of his Sabbath, whilst he makes the very thing they had
chosen for their sport and pastime, to be the instrument to execute his fury,
as appears in this and that other example at Twickenham, hereby making his will
known by the judgment which he executes, ensnaring the wicked in the works of
their own hands, Higg^cion, [Tis a matter of deep meditation, worthy to be well
minded, and spoken or s^^g with earnest consideration always. Ainsworth in
locum. Rem sum moditandu^: so Trem. and Jun. not. in locum.] Selah, Psalm. 9.
16. which requires our deepest meditation, as a matter that much concerns us,
when the Lord himself begins to work, seeing we have made Psalm. 119. verse. 126.
void his Law: And now indeed his judgments are over all the Land, seeing we
have generally trespassed against him herein.

For we have brought wrath upon our selves, in profaning the Sabbath; for did
good Nehemiah, Neh. 13. 17. grieve for this sin, and contend with the Nobles of
Israel, for permitting grapes to be trodden, burdens to be carried, and ways
to be sold on the Sabbath? (all which works were lawful on other days) what
would he have done, had he seen them carowsing, and dancing, fighting and
wrestling, and doing the works of the flesh, when he was so zealous for these?
which are the recreations and sports generally used on the Lords day, through
the kingdom? and countenanced, and approved by a Declaration, contrived by
these wicked Counselors, and sent out in your Majesty's name? enjoining all
Ministers to read it in their Churches, under a great penalty? which book was
blasphemous to Gods holy Commandment, his Word, and Honor, scandalous to all
the godly throughout the Christian world, most injurious to your Maties soul,
crown and dignity, and posterity, and hurtful, destroying many ignorant souls
for ever, and generally evil to the whole kingdom, bringing Gods judgments
on the land, as he has threatened, Jer. 17. 27. and Ezekiel. 20. 15. 21, and 22.
26. 31. and Nehem. 9. 33, 34. and 10. 31. and 13. 18. and Lev. 26. 31. 32, etc.
(in his Word) might he not justly censure us as Atheists? contemners and
depravers of his Word, wilful prophaners of his Sabbath, stealers of his time
and honor, Matthew. 15. 6, 7. and lukewarm, 2 King. 17. 33. Laodiceans,
professing our selves Protestants, Christians, but living like the Papists and
heathen, who know not God, who keep their feasts to their gods, with such
sports and sins, as to Bacchus and Venus, or to their Idolatrous Saints, which
is all one? in both which, [Quide de nostris feriis dicendum alium quam latins
esse, ut necessarii^ operibus vacetur, quam quod Baccho and Veneri, and omnis
generis delicii^ non Christo Domino, sed Sathanae servitur, non salus nostra
curatur, sed perditio conciliatur, etc. Musc. loc. com. in quart. precept. page
159.] Musculus in his time, grievously complained, not Jesus Christ the Lord,
but Satan was served and obeyed on which day our salvation is not cared for,
but our damnation is procured, Gods anger is not appeased, but provoked,
manners are not corrected, but corrupted, Gods judgments are not by our
prayers and tears diverted, but by our plays and laughters converted on us,
and that justly, for our horrible profaning this day, and in that most of our
Ministers that should have given warning of the sword, Ezekiel. 33. 6. coming for
this sin, have been blind Watchmen, and with the Israelitish Priests, have hid
their Ezekiel. 22. 26. eyes from the Sabbath, and have been leaders and teachers
to the violation thereof, becoming wolves, and not shepherds, the Bishops
giving an ill pattern to the Nobles, to sit this day at Council Table, when
there was no necessary urgent cause, which has made their counsel speed no
better; by reason whereof God has powered out his indignation upon us, and
consumed us with the fire of his wrath, for so he threatened Ezekiel. 22. 26. 31.
He would kindle a fire in the gates of such a people, and it shall devour the
palaces thereof, and shall not be quenched; and has he not fulfilled this
prophecy on us for this sin, by kindling, first the fire of jealousy, then
contention and war, which has burnt and flamed in all parts of the kingdom,
and yet remains unquencht; nor can it be, till the sins which is the fuel
that feeds it, be removed, otherwise the sword shall make us desolate, and then
the land shall enjoy her Sabbaths, because we did not, etc. Levit. 26. 31. to
the 36. for, shall we fight and kill, drink and dance, buy and sell, at least
vainly talk, sport, feast, walk, or sleep away that day which he has
consecrated to holiness, and to his peculiar service, and yet think we shall
have peace? Surely herein we do but mock God, and deceive our selves, do we
not know, as the Psalmist speaks, How all that work painful iniquity, that
eat his people eating bread, and call not on Jehovah, that they shall be
brought even there in great fear? Shall we, as learned Junius [Psal. 14. 4. In
bonos injurii est in Deum impii itae se confirmant in sua impietate and
injustitia ut commentationibus and libedini suae audeant indulgere deumque
ipsum contemnunt arrogantissime quasi retundentes stimulos conscient. Trem. and
Iun. not. in loc.] deciphers them, being hereby both blasphemous to God and
injurious to good men, confirm our selves in impiety, daring to continue in
our old profanation, by pampering our lusts, and pleasures, and so arrogantly
contemn God, searing our consciences that the pricks thereof may not enter, or
at least repressing the accusation thereof, persisting secure without remorse,
and so bringing more wrath upon our selves till we be destroyed? God forbid, a
better and more safe way is it for your Majesty and people, to hearken and do
what the book of [Homil. of the time and place of prayer, 1. part page 126.]
Homilies requires, namely, to lay our hands upon our hearts, to repent and
amend this grievous and dangerous wickedness, to stand in awe of the
Commandment of God, and gladly to follow the example of God himself, and not
to be disobedient to the godly order of Christ's Church, used and kept from the
Apostles time, unto this day, to fear the displeasure, and just plagues of
Almighty God, for our negligence in our labor and travel, and for our
wilfulness in out sporting and playing on the Sabbath day or Sunday, and in
not resorting together with repentant and prepared hearts, to celebrate and
magnify Gods blessed Name, in quiet holiness and godly reverence. Will ye
draw nigh to him with your lips Esaias 29. 13. when your hearts are far away
from him? even in the midst of your devotions, being carried away with the
thoughts of pleasure and profit, which after Service you use to practice, which
thorns Luke 8. 14. growing in your hearts, makes the word you hear
uneffectuall, and your prayers an Prove. 21. 27. abomination, because brought
with a wicked mind, or not delivered with 1 Cor. 14. 15. understanding and
Romans 8. 26. power of the Spirit, to Gods James 4. 3. glory, and yet think to
escape. No, no, Christ's blood 1 John 1. 7. and Revel. 1. 5. is the only liquor
wherewith we must wash away the filthiness of our polluted souls, with only
contrite Mat. 11. 28. and Esaias 66. 2. and 57. 15. hearts lay hold on, by a
lively faith, Acts 16. 31. and Ephesians. 2. 8. and John 3. 36. 16. 18. and the
tears Esaias. 28. 5. Jonah 3. 10. Joel 2, 12. 18. of a broken heart are the
only water to extinguish [Oratio Deum leuit sed Incrima cogit hac ungit, illa
pungit. Gregor.] the fire of Gods wrath, and assuage the flames of this Civil
war. Let your sacred Majesty therefore with Ephraim, now that both by
chastisement and reproof of Gods word, you are instructed, smite upon your
thigh, and be ashamed and confounded, in regard you have borne the reproach of
your youth. Let your former Declaration be recalled, and the Councillors
thereof (if not already) be severely punished; and a new Declaration be
published, condemning the old, and enjoining strictly the severe and exact
sanctification thereof, to be read in all Churches, that the Name of God may be
as largely glorified, as he was formerly 2 Cor. 7. 11. profaned, and with good
Nehemiah, Nehem. 13. 19, 20, 21. let your Majesty, with your two houses of
Parliament enact a new Law, with greater penalty then heretofore, for the
sanctification of this day, and let Officers be appointed to see the due
performance thereof, that so, such as offend wilfully, may be laid hands on,
and be severely punished, for contemning the commandments of God and the King,
as that pious Governor took care for Jerusalem. Lastly, let the Levits, the
Ministers of the Church (in their several Congregations where they read that
book) cleanse themselves from this sin, by a public, hearty, and sorrowful
Recantation of their error herein, and let them promise for the future, and
exhort also the people thereunto; to labor diligently to sanctify it
themselves, and to see it sanctified by those that are under their charge, that
so God may remember them concerning this, and spare them according to the
greatness of his mercy; and if any refuse to obey herein, let him be
suspended; and if they continue obstinate, let them be deprived both ab
officio, and Beneficio, until they shall revoke their wicked error. Then will
God, according to his promise Ier. 17. 25, 26. [Id est regnum totum permanebit
florentiss^mum. Trem. and Iun. not. in loc.] establish your Majesty's Throne,
and you and your posterity shall enter into the gates of your Royal City,
surrounded with your Princes, and Nobles on Chariots and horses, loved and
honored by all your loyal subjects, but [Homo pius optimus est subjectus sic.
Psalm. 101. 8.] especially by those who sincerely fear God, who will all bring
offerings, and sacrifices of praise to God, for putting this thing in your
Majesty's heart, and God himself will bestow a blessing both on Esa: 56. 2. 3.
4. 5. 6. 7. you, and them, and will give unto you an everlasting name that
shall not be cutoff, and will bring you to his holy Mountain, and on this day
make you joyful in the house of prayer, accepting your offerings and devotions
herein, which is the daily and hearty prayers of your most humble and faithful
Subject.

2. Cause. To permit, or commit Superstition, is a great sin: And brings the
judgment of God upon a Nation, if it be general, and public. But ^^ have
generally and publicly both permitted and committed Superstition. Ergo, Gods
judgments, are just on us.

SUperstition [saith Aquinus 22. q. 92. Art. 1. Superstitio vitium est
Religio^^ oppositum, quo quis divinum exhibet cultum vel cui non debet, vel non
co (...) quo debet.] is a vice, oppsite to religion, in the access, whereby a
man gives divine worship, either to whom he ought not, or not after that manner
he ought: So that the species of it, must cheifely be two which I call Idol
worship, and will worship; and in both these lies our offense. By Idol
worship, I understand, when men make any Image to worship it, or to worship the
true God by it, or to resemble God by that Image so made. This sin Moses forbad
the Jews with a strict caveat, Deuteronomy. 4. 15. 16. etc. 23. Take good heed unto
your selves, for ye saw no similitude etc. See the? second Commandment; for
to whom will ye liken me faith the Holy One? Esaias: 40. 22. This was the sin of
the Israelits in the Wilderness, when they (...) the molten calfe and
worshipped God in it, Exodus 32 4. 5. 6. following their old custom they used in
Egypt, for they changed their glory into the similitude of an ox that cateth
grass, they served the Idols of Canaan. Psalm: 106. 19. 20. 36. 37. This also
was Jerob^^ms sin, wherewith becaused Israel to offend, in making the two
golden c^^fes 1 Kings 12. 28. Resemblances, for the people to worship God by;
and this was Micahs Idolatry, in making a graven, and a molten Image, and
having an house of Gods, making an Ephod, and a Teruphin after his own fancy;
and confecrating one of his Sons to be his Priest, Judge: 17. 5. 13. [Hominis
imperi^i ser^^^ and in pi^t^^^^ parum instituti: Jun in loc.] and yet all this
he intended for the service of God, for now says he the Lord will be good unto
me; This was the sin of the heathen, Rom: 1. 25. they changed the glory of the
incorruptible God into ^^ Image like corruptible man, and to binds, and four
footed beasts, and cr^eping things: Nay to use the least gesture of love, or
reverence, unto such Images by whomsoever made, is Idolatry, a great sin. Thus
to kiss those Images, as those did that sacrificed to the calves, at Bethell,
and Dan, Hosea. 13. 2. [Hoc subjectionis symbol Dominum agnoscentes, as Joseph
was to be honored by the command of Pharoh, Gen: 41 40.] thereby testifying
their religious honor, and service, or to bow before them, Commandment the
second, Deuteronomy: 5. 9. 10. and 1 Kings 12. 30. Luke: 4. 7. to put off the hat to
them, kneeling before them, is to worship them as you may see in comparing Mat:
27. 20. with Nark: 15. 19. yea to be but present at the Idols service, or
feasts, 1 Corin: 10. 20. 21. for this the Apostle condemns as being pertaker of
the table of Devils; thus Israel joined themselves to Baalpeor, and eat the
offerings of the dead, Psalm: 106. 28. they burnt incense to other Gods, and
worshipped the works of their own hands. Jer: 1. 16. so also, Exodus 34. 15. Nay,
not only to commit, but to permit this Idolatry, is a crying sin, so God
requires, Levit: 19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart, thou
shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him, it is the
sum of the second table, to love thy neighbor as thy self, Luke. 10 27. 28.
Mat: 19. 14 [Ne dissimulato in co ullr^^ pecucatum quod non corripias, Jun in
loc.] Silence and flattry are both alike, hateful to God, therefore Ainsworth
well translates that place, least thou beat sin for him, to wit, the guilt and
punishment thereof. Jun: and Trem: renders it Neque ferto in copeccatum, by
conniving or dissembling, because he does not save a soul from death, as
every Christian is enjoined, James: 5. 20. nor perform that duty laid on him,
Heb: 3. 12. 13 and Mat: 18. 15. to admonish one another daily, privately to
tell thy brother of his fault, his blood therefore God will require at thy
hands. Ezekiel: 3. 18. Which though there, it be spoken principally of the
Minister, yet does it not exclude the Magistrate or neighbor, for whosoever he
be that reproves not, nor punishes sin, when he may, and ought, becomes
pertaker with him. Even to hold his peace, makes him guilty, [Qui ta^^t
censentire videtur, Deuteronomy: 22. 4. Psalm. 50. 21.] for silence argues consent.
Therefore says God, thou shall not see thy brothers Ox, nor his Ass
falldowne by the way, and hide thy self from them, thou shall surely help
him, to lift them up again: does God take care for Oxen? Or says he not this
for our sakes? For our sakes doubtless, as Saint Paul proves, 1 Cor: 9. 10.
[Cadit asina succurritur ei, cadit anima, non est qui relenat ^um. Ber: in
Cont: and Saint Bernard observes, with compassion, and pity. The Ass fells
and behold every one is ready to helps him up. But man's soul sins, and yet
none yields him aid to ^^ise. And if you look, into the Law, ye shall find,
that if the people of the Law, do any ways hide their eyes from the man that
offered his seed to Molech, which was one kind of Idolatry, Levit: 20. 4. they
became guilty of that sin, and so if any Idolatrous City should depart from
the Lord, and serve other Gods, The rest of Israel were to enquire, and make
search, and ask diligently, and behold if the thing be true which was heard,
or suggested, that such abomination was wrought, they were to smite the
inhabitants of that City, and to destroy it utterly, and all that was therein,
Deuteronomy: 13. 13. 15. with sword and fire; and this we find practiced on the Rumor
of the Altar, made by the two Tribes, and half, of this side Jordan. Josh: 22.
12. and for neglect hereof, Israel is put to the worst before the men of Ai,
Joshua not punishing, and the people not keeping Achan from his sins, as they
were enjoined 7. 1. 5. in any wise to keep themselves, and every one his
neighbor, from the accursed thing, Josh: 6. 18. 19. [Servate and (...) ipsos
singuli, and alii, alios. Igitur totus populus peccati unius hominis tanquam
membri ad universitatem pertinentis, rem effectus est contagione peccati, quia
neque H^canem servaverunt a peccato, neque se a contagione and reatu. Jun. in
locum. Vt disciplinam sanciret obedientiae quam non solum curare quemque
oportet in populo sed invicem adfibere diligentiam and tanquam unius corporis
ac unius hominis membra alia pro aliis esse soliceta. Aug.] for though their
conscience were not stained, with the knowledge of the sin, yet their hearts
were defiled, through their negligence in Gods command, in not watching
diligently, and hindering him from the sin. Therefore says Saint Austen, he in
his invisible and wise Counsel, punished many, temporally, for this sin, that
so he might strike terror in others, and stablish the discipline of obedience,
among his people, whom he will hereby teach, not only for themselves to be
careful in particular, but diligently to look one to the other, and to be
careful one for the other; as the natural members in man's body do: so would
we, being all members of Christ, and so each one of another Rom: 12. 5. and 1
Cor: 12. 25. 26. for surely it is an unhappy friendship, and no true love, to
favor thy brothers ears, and break thy own, if not thy brothers neck, by
thy silence suffering Satan, to prevail against thy brother, and to entrap
thee, ^^ Carthusian says, Quae illum quem diligit, tacendo, tradit diabolo,
Ephesians: 5. 7. 11. Saint Paul commands us to have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, nor to be pertakers with wicked men in their
sins, either by consenting, or rejoicing with them, Rom: 1. 34. or by holding
our peace, or secretly favoring them. 1 Timothy: 5. 20. But those that offend, are
to be reproved before all. Tim: must lay hands suddenly on no man, and though
unworthy men for lucre, or vainglory, will thrust themselves into the
Ministry, or foolish and corrupt Elders for fear, or favor, will suddenly
join themselves to ordain, whom they affect, yet he must not partake with
either of them in their sins. It was a fruit of a holy zeal stirred in the
Israelits, when they arose all as one man, Judge: 20. 1. to execute justice on
that horrid fact of the Benjamites, and therefore God approves the War, and
commands those of Jabesh Gilead that came not to it, to be destroyed. Judge: 21.
8. 10. [Omnes uno ore constituerunt sibi permanendum esse in illa ratione
divinitus ostensa consulendi reliquiis Benjaminitarum contumacis castigandi,
Jun: and Trem. in locum nota.] It Is a chief part of the Magistrates duty, who is
the Minister of God, to be the Avenger, to execute wrath upon him that does
evil, this being one special act of his power, to strike with the sword, as
occasion serves: That so he may be a terror to those that do evil. Rom: 13.
3. 4. 5. 6. And for not putting this in execution, the Magistrates of Israel are
called Rulers of Sodom, Esa. 1. 10. [Malitia atque sceleribus cum Sodomitis
comparandi quibus propterea non immerito gravissimum excidium importasset Deus.
Jun. and Trem. not. in loc.] as shameful in impiety and sin as they; and for
this cause, those thousand heads of the people are commanded to be hanged up,
who suffered the people unpunished to join themselves to Baalpeor, and to eat
the sacrifices of the dead, [Primarios multitudinis eoram qui ad Idololatriam
se contulerunt.] Numb. 25. 4. that so by their death, Moses might reconcile the
people unto God, by executing justice on them, according to Gods command: it
was no excuse for King Saul, to say, the people took of the spoil, when he
should have hindered them, and have punished them for it, 1 Samuel 15. 21. 23. for
the Prophet tells him to his face, because he had rejected the Word of the
Lord, and connived at the people, to do contrary to his command, for fear of
them, verse. 24. the Lord had rejected him from being King: For, as God will
require the blood of him that dies unwarned at the watch-mans hand, as it is,
Ezeek. 33. 8. and 3. 18. And therefore commands him to warn the wicked from his
way, that he die not in his iniquity: So also of the Magistrate, he expects
judgment to be done, for to punish the wicked, and to reward the good, by
executing judgment and righteousness, and deliver the spoiled out of the hand
of the oppressor, and to do no wrong, nor violence to any person, but most
chiefly to the fatherless and widow, Jerem. 21. 12. and Jer. 22. 3.

Great and grievous was the punishment threatened on Eli's house, in conniving
and sparing his sons sins: For, though he sharply reproved them, 1 Samuel 2. 23.
[Non ad hoc reliquum est peccatis sacrificium, nec quisquam pro eo apud Deum
intercessurus: quid ergo si sacerdos ipse peccet, cui sacrificiorum cura and
intercessionis munus commissum est. Cypr. lib. 1. Ep. 13.] by telling them,
that if a man offend against his brother, the law, either Ecclesiastical or
Civil, could bridle and restrain the matter; but if presumptuously and
willingly, a Minister of God will offend against his Lord and Maker, there
remains no sacrifice for his sin, for who shall entreat for him? yet, because,
as he was a public Magistrate, he did not punish them for their adultry by
death, a^ was commanded by the law, Lev. 20. 10. nor yet put them from their
office, as being polluted and profane; therefore, for honoring his sons above
God, 1 Samuel 2. 29. he is severely threatened and punished, 1 Samuel 2. 39. ad
finem, and 1 Samuel 3. 11. 12, 13, 14. [Ea severitate and modis quibus debuit pro
auctoritate patris sacerdotis and judicis ac scelerum magnitudine. Trem. and
Jun. not. in locum.] where is a most fearful judgment of a most just God,
punishing the accessory, as well as the delinquent; and indeed, it is justice
and law in this kingdom, to punish misprision of treason, and the receiver to
be as far guilty as the thief, and both to be punished alike.

Christ laid to the Angels charge of Pergamos, that he had them that held the
doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balack to cast a stumbling block before the
children of Israel, and to eat things sacrificed to Idols, and to commit
fornication; also he had them in his power, that held the doctrine of the
Nicolaitans, which thing, says Christ, I hate; and therefore tells him flatly,
that unless he did repent of this his damnable connivance, or at least
negligence, he would quickly come unto him, and fight against him, Rev. 2. 14,
15, 16. with the sword of his mouth: and so likewise he warns the Angel of the
Church of Thyatira, that because he suffered that woman Jezabel, etc. he had a
few things against him, Rev. 2 20. What was the cause of Joash apostasy? was
it not because the high places were not taken away in the beginning of his
reign? but the people were still permitted to sacrifice, and burn incense in
the high places, 2 King. 12. 3. that proved a snare to him, and to his
posterity, as its noted by the Holy Ghost, in rendering the cause, why Amaziah
his son, did not that which was right in the sight of the Lord, like David his
father, 2 King. 4. 3, 4. but did according to the corrupt ways of his father
Joash, because the high places were not taken away, but as yet the people did
sacrifice, and burn incense thereon: So also its a brand of ignominy and sin on
Amaziah his son, 2 King. 15. 3, 1. though he did many other things very godly;
yet because he permitted the people to sacrifice in high places, (although unto
the Lord their God only) contrary to his command, Deuteronomy. 12. 13, 14. and because
he usurped the Priests office, therefore he smote the King so, that he was a
leper unto the day of his death, for his heart was not upright in his coniving
and permitting of the people in their Idolatry and sin, and lo the Lord leaves
him to himself, and suffers him to offend openly, as a just punishment of his
former carelessness, and superstitious devotions, that so he might severely
punish him for both sins together, by depriving him both of health and crown,
[Justa est poena inflicta propter antecedentia peccata. Zanch. in Epist. These.]
for God often punishes one sin by another, as he did the Gentiles ingratitude,
and detaining the truth in unrighteousness, with giving them over to vilde
affections; so Romans 1. 24. 26. 28. So he dealt with the Israelites for their
Idolatry in the Wilderness, God turned and gave them to worship the host of
heaven; so Saint Stephen, Acts 7. 42. for God is very careful to forbid all
conniving, or permitting of sin; but especially of Idolatry in any, how near or
dear soever unto us: Deuteronomy. 13. 6. 9, etc. and Deuteronomy. 17. 2, 3, 4, 5.
[Supplementum est capitis 13. supra, quo d^cetur quid faciendum sit eo qui
alios quidem non seduxit, sed ipse seductus Idololatriam commitit. Trem. and
Jun. not. in locum.] For, if any mother, son, daughter, wife, or friend shall
entice thee to Idolatry, thou shall not consent unto him, thine eye shall not
pity, nor spare, nor conceal him, but thou shall surely kill him, thine hand
shall be upon him first; nay, not only the seducers, but those that are
seduced, be they what they will, man or woman (how near or dear so ever allied
by blood, or affection, or affinity) that has wrought wickedness in the sight
of the Lord thy God, in transgressing his covenant, and have gone and served
other gods, and worshipped them, either the Sun, or Moon, or any of the host of
heaven, which I have not commanded, and it be told thee, and thou have heard of
it, and enquired diligently, and behold it is true, and the things certain,
that such abomination is wrought, then thou shall bring forth that man, or that
woman, which has committed that wicked thing, unto the gates, even that man,
or that woman, and shall stone them with stones till they die.

And unto this had Christ reference, when he commands us to pull out the eye
that offends, and to cut off the right hand that offends thee; for it is
profitable for thee, that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy
whole body should be cast into hell, Matthew. 5. 29, 30. [Si oculus tuus dexter,
i. e. conciliarius tuus, ut pater, vel matter, vel socius te scandalizat ad
illicita trahendo, ^rue eum reprobando, resistendo, and projice abs te, a te
elongando, ipsum omnino fugiendo, Gorran. in loc. Christus hyperbolice docet
esse resecandum quicquid nos impedit, ne obsequium Deo praestemus quale
flagitat in lege sua.]

It was zeal and justice befitting a King which Asa did, who removed his mother
Maacha from being Queen, because she had made an Idol in a grove, which he cut
down, and stamped the Idol to powder, burning it first at the brook Kidron, 2 Chronicles. 15. 16. and 1 King. 15. 13. [Dignitate, and potestate eam privavit.
Trem. and Jun.] so severe is God, and zealous are his people against Idolatry
and superstition, that not only Plagues are due to the actors, but also to the
connivers and consenters thereunto; for they both are to be punished with the
same judgment: [Agentes, and consentientes pari poena puniendi sunt.
Justinian. Rev. 18. 4.] Therefore Gods people are commanded to come out of
Babylon, that they be not partakers of her sins, and that they receive not of
her plagues; we must depart from her in mind and manners, so that we may
abstain from all Idolatry and heathenish worshipping, so as we allow it not, so
as it please us not, so as we neither assent, nor frame our selves to the
manners of the ungodly; so as we betray not our Religion, either for men, or
for wordly gain: So Bullinger, [Serm. 78. in Apoc. mandati causae 2. tum ut
fugiatur contagium peccati, tum ut vitetur suppliciorum ex peccato
communicatio.] we must fly Papistry, that is to say, Popish Churches, none of
the godly ought for worshipping or obedience sake to enter in, nor to
acknowledge, nor to allow, or use any Popish rites, or ceremonies, but to flee
from their vices and corruption; so far as is possible, lest we be destroyed
with them, Jer. 51. 6. and 50. 8. flee out of the midst of Babylon, says the
Prophet, and deliver every man his soul, be not cut off in her iniquities, for
this is the time of the Lords vengeance, for judgment, both general and
particular are threaned, both on the actors and permitters of this sin; yea,
there is no sin in the sacred Sccripture more complained of, nor yet more
threatened, nor more severely punished. When the Israelites sacrificed to their
Calf, and went a whoring after their inventions, God had utterly consumed them
all, had not Moses stood in the gap, and turned away his wrath, Exodus 32. 10.
11. 28. and yet Moses like a godly Governor, suffered them not to go
unpunisht, but commanded the chiefest of them to be slain; so that there fell
of the people that day about three thousand: [These were the principal Authors
of the wickedness, though Aaron, and many more were also guilty. Ainsw. in
locum.]

When they joined themselves to Baalpeor, the wrath of the Lord was kindled
against them, so that he sent a plague amongst them, which destroyed 23000. 1
Cor. 10. 7, 8. besides, God commands one thousand of the chiefest to be hanged
up before the Lord against the Sun, Numb. 25. 4. Psalm. 106. 29. you may see the
curses are great and many threatened by Moses to follow on the heels of all
Idolaters, Deuteronomy. 28. 15 ad finem, both on their bodies, on their goods, their
children, their honors, their liberties, but on their souls especially.

Joshua also foretold the Israelites for this sin, that the anger of the Lord
would be kindled against them, and they should perish quickly from the good
Land which God gave them, Josh. 23. 16. for if they should forsake the Lord,
and serve strange gods, then will the Lord turn and do you hurt, and consume
you, after he has done you good, Jos. 24. 20. grievous is the woe that is
denounced to such, Jer. 9. 15. Behold, I will feed them, even this people with
wormwood, [Amarissimis rebus tractabo, nam amaritudinem absynthio comparat
Scriptu^a, ut Prove. 5. 4. Lam. 3. 15.] and will give them water of gall to
drink, I will scatter them among the heathen, whom neither they, nor their
fathers have known, and will send a sword after them, till I have consumed
them, and accordingly he performed his word, when they served strange gods, as
you may read in all the Prophets almost: For, when they served Baal and
Ashteroth, the anger of the Lord was hot against Israel; so that he delivered
them into the hands of spoylers, that spoiled them; he sold them into the hands
of their enemies round about; so that they could no longer stand before them,
Judge. 2. 14. for the King of Mesopotamia oppressed them eight years, Judge. 3.
8. 18. he made them servants to Eglon, King of Moab eighteen years; and again,
when they did evil, he sold them into the hands of Jabin, King of Canaan, who
mightily oppressed them twenty years, Judge. 4. 3. And again, he delivered them
into the hands of Midian seven years, Judge. 6. 1. and so throughout their
Judges reigns, no sooner was the Judge dead, that ruled them and delivered
them, but forthwith their devotion dies also, and the true worship of God
cease, and Idolatry springs up; you may read it at large in the history of
Gideon, Iepthah, Sampson, Bedan and others, which the Prophet in a short
compendium abridgeth, 1 Samuel 12. 9, 10, 11. Look on the Judgment of Jeroboam,
who made the two Calves, and its very bitter, 1 King. 14. 9, 10, 11. and on
Israel, (the ten Tribes) which were the worshippers of them, for God rejected
them, and afflicted them, and delivered them unto the hand of spoylers, until
he had cast them out of his sight, and land, 2 King. 17. 16. to the 23. The
like portion happened to Judah, who were partners with them and practiced their
patterns, they were utterly destroyed, and carried to Babylon, 2 Kings 25. and
indeed, God threatened so much in the second Commandment, The Lord thy God is a
jealous God, visiting the iniquities of the fathers on the children, etc. and
in the song of Moses, taught their fathers so much Deuteronomy. 32. 16. to the 27.
that he would for this sin abhor them, and hide his face from them, that he
would heap mischief on them, and burn them with hunger, and devour them
with burning coals, and with bitter destruction; that he would send the teeth
of wild beasts on them, with the poison of Serpents of the dust; the sword
should be without, and terrors within shall destroy both the young man and the
Virgin, the suckling, and the man of gray hayres, he would scatter them to
corners, and make their remembrance to cease. And this we find accomplished,
when they provoked him with their high places to anger, and moved him to
jealousy with their graven Images, Psalm. 78. 58, 59, 60, 61. when God heard
this then he was wroth, and greatly abhorred Israel, then follows the effect of
his wrath, and the punishment of this sin. Every Prophet brings his burden
against this sin, Esaias 2. 8. Deuteronomy. 4. 25, 26. and 27. 15. Psalm. 97. 7. Ier. 2.
11. 15. 20. 27, 28. Ezekiel. 3. to the 8. and 8. 18. Dan. 3. 29. Hos. 2. 5, 6. and
8. 5. and 9. 15. and 10. 1. per totum. Micha 1. 6, 7, 9. and 6. 15, 16: Naum 1.
8, 9. to the 15. Hab. 2. 18, 19. Zeph. 1. 3, 4, 5. Zach 10. 2, 3. Mal. 2. 11,
12.

And he that allows, tolerateth, or co^niveth at the same, becomes guilty
thereof, for not only they that do such things are worthy of death, and so of
the judgment before spoken, but also those that have pleasure in them that do
them, or consent with them, [Rom. 1. 32. (...), compared with Luke 11. 48.
approbatis opera patru^ vestroru^. Beza.] as the word is used, truly ye bear
witness and allow the deeds of your fathers, by approving their works; we may
see it in the judgments threatened, or executed on the permitters, or connivers
of the sins before spoken of.

God will require the blood of the people from the Watchmans hand, if they dye
unwarned, Ezekiel. 3. 18. and will severely punish the Magistrates if they
restrain not, or punish not sin in their subjects: you may see it rent the
kingdom from Saul, 1 Samuel 15. 23. without hope of recovery. It was no excuse
for him to say the people took of the spoil, when he should have hindered it,
If the people of the land any way hide their eyes from the man that commits
Idolatry; The Lord will set his face against that man, and against his family,
and will cut him off, and all that go a whoring after him Levit. 20. 4, 5.
[Populo illius terrae qui dissimulabit scelus synecdoche sic accipitur familiae
nomen. Mich. 2. 3. and Ier. 3. that wittingly connive and dissemble at his sin.

For, hereby the fierceness of Gods anger would burn against them, Deuteronomy. 13.
15. as it did sometimes against all Israel for Achans sin, Josh. 7. 12. nor
Magistrates, Ministers, nor people escape censure, yea, and judgment too.
Those Rulers of Sodom that refused to seek judgment, to releeve the
oppressed, to judge the fatherless, and plead for the widow, Esaias 1. 17. 20.
and so rebelled against Gods precept, are threatened to be devoured with the
sword. Elies conniving and permitting his sons in their sins unpunisht (as
before is showed) brought ruin to himself and his family. The evil both of
sin and punishment, could not be put away from the Israelites, unless the
Idolater, or Idolaters, few, or many, great or small be put to death, Deuteronomy. 17.
2. etc. to the 7. for so (says Moses) shall thou put away the evil from among
you: Solomon for building high places for his strange wives, which burned
Incense, and sacrificed unto their gods, for this deed his wives are said to
turn away his heart after other gods, for which fact God was angry with him,
and rent the kingdom from him, and gave it to his servant 1 King. 11. 4. 8, 9,
10, 11. [Minas enim suas non revocavit Deus ex recipiscentia Salomonis nam
Idolatriam non plane evertebat, nec cultum Dei redintegrabat. Jun. and Trem.
not. in 2 Chronicles. 11. 17.] for, though he repented afterward, as appears by his
book of Ecclesiastes, and 2 Chronicles. 11. 17. yet did not God reverse his
sentence; Because he did not utterly destroy the high places, and the Idols
which for his wives he had before erected, nor perfectly restore the true
worship of God.

Thus you see the Major most true, and is not the Minor also true, have we not
had Idols erected, both in stone and glass? let Paul's Church and the
Universities speak, whose rich windows, carvings, paintings, hangings,
pinched the poores bellies, whilst they laid it on their Idolatrous Saints
backs; the Leaders of this people honored the dead Images of the Saints, but
persecuted and spilt the blood of Christ's living members, as the Pharisees did,
Mat. 23. 29, 30. who built the tombs of the Prophets, and garnished the
sepulchers of the righteous whom their fathers slew, and boasted, if they had
been in their days they would not have been partakers with them, when
notwithstanding they killed Christ himself, and persecuted his Apostles, and
so filled up the measure of their fathers sins; so these seemed to honor the
Martyrs in their carvings and paintings, and condemned them as cruel that
murdered them, but in this act dishonored God, and in the mean time hated
and persecuted Christ's faithful Ministers and Members, that spoke against this
old kind of Idolatry, filling up the measure of those bloody Prelates their
predecessors, that so they might again introduce their beloved Popery, for
though for the present, they did not worship these Idols themselves: Yet did
they tolerate the Papists, in their adoring both to their Crosses, and Images,
else would they have destroyed them, as the godly Bishops in Edward the fixth
time [See injunctiones Edvardi sexti Regis and consilii ejus. The homily
against peril of Idolatry, printed by Queen Eliza. and King James as it was
set forth by Edw. the sixth 1562.] did, and not have new painted, and adorned
them: to allure and entice the more men to reverence, and bowing, for rightly
hereof speaks St. Austen [Lib. de Civit. Dei Cap. 4^ and in Psalm. 36 and 113.]
when Images are placed in Temples and set in honorable sublimity, and begin
once to be worshipped, forthwith breeds the most vile affection of error?
Surely there has not only been an allowing of old pictures inglasse, and
painted walls, of carved Images and Crucifixes in Churches, but there has been
a new painting and trimming of the old, and a forming, and setting up of new,
placing them in the eminentest place of the Church, cheifely in the Chancell,
and on or over the Communion Table, which has been cried up for an Altar, [Se^
Doct: Heylin and Pocklintons books, and the Archbishops of Cant: Common Prayer
books sent to the Scots, in the prayers at the receiving the Communion,] and
then necessarily, there must follow, a Sacrifice, but these are stumbling
blocks and occasion of Idolatry: Yea the very placing them in the Church is
unlawful, wicked superstitious, so our Church adjudgeth it, both in the second
and third parts of the Sermon against peril of Idolatry, and brings in the
judgment both of the ancient Doct: and of Ecclesiastical Historians,
concerning the same, which had our Prelates, rightly considered of, I could not
conceive with what face (being sworn men) they could have appeared in this
matter, or durst oppose by deeds, a truth so manifestly declared by their
Mother. But no marvel since they have rebelled against the command of God their
Father, that they feed ^f ashes, and their deceitful hearts has turned them
aside, that they cannot deliver their souls, nor say, is there not a lie in my
right hand, as the Prophet speaks? Esaias 44. 18. 19. 20. [Pr^^ep^ r^et in
perditionem suam ac, no cogitare quidem de salute velit aut falsitatem cui
adharit agnos^ere, excaecantur onim Idolis suis ipsorum occuli and corda and
indies obfirmantur ad suam ipsorum perditionem. Iun. and Trom. notae in locum.]
for God denounces him accursed, that makes the blind to wander out of his
way, Deuteronomy. 27. 18. and again thou shall not lay a stumbling block in thy
brothers way, Levit. 19. 14. for woe be to him through whom offenses come. Luke
17. 7. [Scandali zantis anima pro ejus eff^ditur quem scandali zavit. Origin.
But Pictures and Images in Churches and Temples, have been, and be, and ever
will be offenses, and stumbling blocks especially to the weak, simple, and
blind common people, deceiving their heatts by the cunning of the Artificer, as
the Scriptures expressly in sundry places do testify, and so bringing them to
Idolatry. Jeremiah 10. 3. etc. Esaias. 44. 9. etc. Psalm. 115. 4. etc. Esaias. 46.
6. 7. [Pictures were absolutely forbidden to be used in any religious manner,
so Levit. 26. 1. and Numb. 33. 52. The Israelits are commanded to destroy all
the Canaanits Pictures or their imagery works. Ainsworth in locum.] Therefore
woe be to the erecter, setter up, and maintainer of Images in Churches, for a
greater penalty remains unto him, then the death of the body: so says our
homily book, for as there at large its proved, it is impossible if Images be
suffered in Temples or places of Divine Service, that either by preaching of
Gods word, or by any other means, the people should be kept from worshipping
of them, and so from committing Idolatry, as by woeful experience the Christian
world found, after the 2. Council of Nice. [Dr. Chadderton in his Chron. of the
last age. Fox Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. printed 1610.] for the space of about 600.
years, to the utter subversion and destruction of true Religion in most places;
for it is impossible that Idolatry can be severed from Images any long time, but
that as an unseperable accident (or as the shadow follows the body when the
Sun shines) so Idolatry should follow and cleave to the public having of
Images and Pictures in Churches; therefore I may conclude with our Church, in
that homily, as Idolatry is to be abhorred and avoided, so are Images and
Pictures, which are inciters and causers of it to be put away and destroyed;
The very reading of that Sermon, will sufficiently instruct any man, whose
heart is not hardened both of the sin and danger therein. And yet so impudently
wicked, have too many professed learned, and wise men of our age been, that
they have not only in the Colleges of the Universities, and Chapels of the
Innes of Court, but in many if not in all Cathedralls, erected new Images, and
Pictures in glass, stone and needle work, yea and new painted, trimmed, and
scoured up the old which remained unbroken, [As in Christ Church, S. Io. Col.
Mag. Col. cumcaeteris, and in most of our Cathedrals.] and escaped the zeal,
of those famous Worthies and Martyrs, in K. Edward the sixth days. [Bishop
Hooper Martyr in his book of the Offices of Christ against Images.] By reason
of the cunning devices, and lukewarm profession, of many Civil, and
Ecclesiastical Governors in those dawning days of Reformation, but as the
high places in Judah were not taken away in many (though otherwise good) Kings
Reigns, and then in future time, they were made by their posterity use of to
Idolatry: So its to be feared, it may (and has too much already happened to
some) be our lot, and sin, if this scandalous evil be not speedily prevented,
for already we have had cringing, and bowing to the altar, at least toward it,
or before it, and the crucifixes painted above the altar, in the window, or
wrought on the cushion which was on the table, or altar, as it was styled by
them, as is openly and notoriously known in many Churches and Chapels. And
though uniformity was pretended by the Archbishop, in his book for adoration
toward the East, at the entering in of men into the Church, yet surely Idolatry
was intended by those Pictures, Images, and bowings, at least conformity
therein with the Papists, which differs not: [All nations were bound to punish
malefactors, it was jus Gentium, Ainsworth in Genesis 9. 4. The Hebrew Doctors
say, the men of Shechem were guilty of death, because Shechem had committed a
rape, and they saw, and knew it, and did not judge him for it. Maim. in his
Treatise of Kings, cap. 9. sect. 14. sic Ainsw. in Genesis 34.] why else in all
Cathedralls and Colleges did the Vicars chorall, Singing-men, Fellows of
Houses, Students, yea, and generally the whole seduced Clergy duck and bow,
not only at their entering into the Church, but whenever they moved out of
their places to read, sing, or perform any other business? Especially, why
should they cringe, or adore toward the altar thrice, at the least, whenever
they approached to it, to say the second Service, or to administer the
Sacraments? But that they had some Idol there, the naked Altar, or Crucifix
(enlightened in many places with burning tapers) show us, these must a while
serve the turn till the Breaden god, could by degrees be brought in to be
worshipped; surely the calling, and proving the Communion to be an Altar, the
turning it altarwise, and railing it, setting it in the place where formerly
the Popish altar was, are too evident proofs they intended a saerifice we all
must adore.

No marvel then, the destruction threatened is fallen on us, when the sin is so
evident, but if we can free our selves from acting, yet can we not from
tolerating many Images: when as the Papists had a free and general toleration
of all their Idol worship, openly solemnized in diverse places of this
kingdom: [Vide the Remonstrance of the House of Commons, July 11. 1628.] and
Dominion of Ireland, without [Vide the Proclamation, concerning the growth of
Popery in Ireland, April 1. 1629.] control? How many Friars were allowed only
for the Queen? the whole kingdom knows. A Chapel must be built for the same
purpose* even as Solomon did for his wives; a Bishop and Covent of Friars, no
less would serve the turn, who as Baals Priests, fed at Jezabels table, so did
these at her Majesty's allowance; besides infinite swarms of these Locusts,
which devoured in many places of the Land, many ignorant and superstitious
souls without control, [Vide the Bishop of Kilmores Letter to the Bishop of
London, April 1. 1630.] or punishment; the Laws against them lay dormant, the
penalties remitted, and if any vigilant or zealous officer apprehended or
imprisoned them, they were unjustly released, [Thus Secretary Windebank
threatened Gray and Harwood: Vide Works of darkness, page 122.] and the
officers thereby endangered, if not plagued. I need not speak of Ireland, where
more Papists were nusle^d up, and tolerated in their Idolatry, then Protestants
maintained in true piety, [Vide the Letter of the Bishop of Kilmore, ut supra.]
yea, to this day, are not the Papists allowed and protected, when those (whom
profane men call Puritanes) who are indeed the zealous Protestants, are warred
against, murdered, and reputed rebels? How then can we look for other then
ruin, 2 Cron. 34. 24, 25. when our Idols are so many? when we have so many
Masses, Crosses, Saints, Images, Altars, adored and bowed unto in most places;
there can be no peace, so long as these sins are allowed, maintained, as Jehu
answered Joram, 2 King. 9. 22. Surely God is just, in all that he has brought
on us; and if this fault be not amended, as it never was with the ten tribes,
though often they were admonished, and punished for it, surely, as it did on
them, so will it bring on us, utter ruin and extirpation: from which, good
Lord deliver, both your Majesty and people, and grant us all eyes to behold,
and hearts to lament our sins, in time to leave off our Idolatry, and to cast
away our Idols, lest his fury be increased, and then there be no remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. Amen.

Secondly, will worship is, that whereby any man, without the command of God,
or prescript rule of his Word, devises any thing of himself, to the intent to
worship God thereby: Col. 2. 23. [Superstitio est quando traditioni humanae,
religionis nomen applicatur, Glos. Amb. circa finem com. ad c. 2. Tom. 5.] For,
its no less then superstition, when the name of Religion is applied to humane
tradition. God has in his Word prescribed both the matter, and manner of his
divine worship, which to neglect, or exceed, is most pestiferous, [Exterioribus
praeceptis, circa hoc homines sunt instructi, quae preterire pestiferum est.
Aquin. 22^ae q. 93. A. 1. 2m.] For whilst man yields that reverence to his own
fancy, which alone is due to his Word, he becomes superstitious, Numb. 15. 39.
a sin forbidden; ye shall remember all the commandments of the Lord, and do
them: that ye seek not after your own hearts, and your own eyes, after which ye
use to go a whoring, etc. No humane invention of our own, is tolerable; for St.
Paul tells us, whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, Romans 14. 23. [Etenim opera
nostra Deo nunquam approbare poterimus, nisi nobisipsis conscii simus illa cum
ejus verbo, and veluntate convenire. Gualt. Hom. 84. in Epist. ad Rom.] Our
works can never be approved of God, unless we are conscious to our selves,
that they agree with his Word and Will. Now, faith is grounded on the Word of
God, which is the object of it; therefore, whosoever does ought in his worship,
which is not warranted by his Word, is superstitious, and becomes guilty of
this fact.

All fictitious worship of men's brains, this Text condemns* to the Law, and to
the Testament, says the Prophet, Isai. 8. 20. if they speak not according to
this word, it is because there is no light in them, neither of truth nor faith;
for for God requires we should observe to do whatsoever he commands us, neither
to add thereto, nor diminish from it, Deuteronomy. 12. 32. Matthew. 28. 20. and Christ
commands his Apostles, and in them all his Ministers, to teach them to observe
only those things which he had commanded them, and they as faithful teachers,
laid no greater burdens on the disciples, then those necessary things, which
seemed good to the Holy Ghost, Acts 15. 28. for the Scriptures, (as the Apostle
says) are able to make us wise unto salvation, and to make the man of God
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good work, 1 Timothy 3. 17. sure then,
what is more, is will worship, and comes of that evil one; for both voluntary
humility, the doctrines of men, Col. 2. 22, 23. (...), and will worship, are
all the fruits of a fleshly mind, vainly puffed up. Christ himself would put no
other burden on the Church of Thyatira, Rev. 2. 24. but what they had already
received from the mouth of him and his Apostles, or from the Scriptures, which
he commands them to hold fast till he come to judgment; therefore whosoever
serves God for custom, or after the old manner, making the example of the
multitude, or of his forefathers, or the tradition of man, or the constitution
of of any Council, or Church, the rule of his worship without or against the
prescript rule of Gods Word, transgresses Gods command, and becomes guilty of
this sin; for what other is this, but to fear God after the precepts of men?
like, the hypocritical Jews, Isai. 29. 13. who drew nigh to God with their
mouths, and with their lips did honor him, but removed their hearts far from
him, by reason their fear toward him, was taught by the precepts of men; this
sin Christ condemned in the Pharisees, Matthew. 15. 3. 6. who taught for Gods Word
man's traditions, and so made the Commandments of God of none effect, as Christ
there instanceth in the breach of the fifth Commandment: Thus also of old the
Samaritans feared the Lord, and served their own gods after the manner of the
nations, whom they had carried away from thence, 2 King. 17. 33, 34, etc. ad
finem capiti^. By reason hereof, it follows, they fear not the Lord truly,
neither do they after their statutes, nor after their ordinances, nor after the
law and command which the Lord commanded the children of Jacob, whom he named
Israel; for God will have no partner with him, neither our selves, nor the
world, Angels, nor Devils, the flesh, nor Mammon, nor any other creature; so
much Joshua told the Israelites, Josb. 24. 19. [Subandi Deos, alienos
retinendo, and eorum cultum cultui Dei commiscendo. Jun. and Trem. in loc.] ye
cannot serve the Lord, joined with other gods, nor after the manner of your own
wills; indeed the Samaritans, are said to fear God, but it was only in regard
of punishment, because of the Lions he sent amongst them, and they are said,
not to fear him, because they obeyed not his precepts, but honored their own
inventions, and worshipped God after the false manner of their fathers, 2 King.
17. 41. [Balaam before his sin, durst not in the least thing go beyond Gods
command, Numb. 22. 18. and the Angel enjoynes him to speak no other word.] You
may see how angry God is with the Jews for this sin, in that they had forsaken
his Law, which he had set before them, Jerem. 9. 14.

Who is a wise man, says God by the Prophet that he may understand this? and
who is he to whom the mouth of the Lord has spoken, that he may declare it,
for what the land perishes and is burnt up, as a wilderness, that none
passes through? And the Lord himself makes answer, it is because they have
forsaken my Law which I set before them, and have not obeyed my voice, neither
walked therein; but have walked after the imagination of their own hearts, and
after Baalam, which their fathers taught them; therefore thus says the Lord of
hosts, the God of Israel, I will feed them, even this people with wormwood, and
give them water of gall to drink; I will scatter them among the heathen, etc.
God says by the Prophet Amos, Amos 2. 4. I will not turn away the punishment
of Judah, because they have despised the Law of the Lord, and have not kept his
commandments, and their lies caused them to err, after the which their fathers
had walked. Saint Peter accounts of such a life, but a vain conversation, which
they had received by tradition from their fathers, 1 Pet. 1. 18. [Opponit autem
partim legales purificationes, ipsi rei, (i. e. Christi sanguine) partim etiam
humanas traditiones, quas ut prorsus vanas and superstitiosas damnat,
quantumvi^ sint inveterata. Bezae not. in locum.] for he opposes the legal
purifications in part, and also partly humane traditions to the thing it self:
(to wit, Christ's blood, by which we are redeemed) and altogether condemns
both, as vain and superstitious, though never so ancient, and generally
received: And Saint Paul testifies so much, concerning the observation of the
legal ceremonies, that if after the general publication of the Gospel, they
should still peruse them, Christ should profit them nothing, Gal. 5. 2. 4. [Si
tale sit judicium in licitis, quid dicendum est de votitis? Bezae.] Christ is
to such become of none effect, they are fallen from grace; if then the use of
those ceremonies, which were sometimes lawful, and commanded, were so
dangerous, yea deadly, surely then this sin must needs be aggravated, when men
borrow rites and observations from the professed enemies of God, to add them as
parts of his worship, as did the Israelites in worshipping the golden Calfe, or
God by it; after the custom of the Egyptians, Exodus 32. 6. 5. This was the sin
of King Ahaz, when he made his Altar to sacrifice on, after the fashion of the
Altar that was in Samaria, ^ King. 16. 10. by reason of which, by degrees the
Altar of God was removed, and his true service justled out.

Therefore the Lord brought Judah low because of Ahaz King of Israel, for he
made Judah naked, and transgressed sore against the Lord. 2 Cron. 28. 19. to
prevent this sin, God commanded all Monuments and places of Idolatry to be
destroyed, Deuteronomy. 12. 23. ye shall utterly destroy all places, wherein the
Nations which ye shall possess served their Gods, etc. the very name of them,
was to be destroyed out of that place, yea, God forbad all enquiry after any
false worship, or false manner of worshipping Deuteronomy. 12. 30. ad finem. and that
with a strict caveat, take heed to thy self that thou be not snared, by
following those Idolaters, after that they be destroyed from before thee, and
that thou enquire not after their Gods etc. whatsoever I command you observe to
do it, thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it, for the breach
hereof, God complains, ye have not walked in my statutes, neither executed my
judgdments, but have done after the manner of the heathen that are round about
you. Eze. 11. 12. v. 8. 9. 10. 11. Now that this sin brings the judgment of
God, you may see in the Chapter before quoted, ye have feared the sword, and I
will bring a sword upon you, says the Lord God: I will bring you out of the
midst thereof, and deliver you into the hands of strangers, and will execute
judgments upon you, ye shall fall by the sword, I will judge you in the
border of Israel, and ye shall know that I am the Lord, because of this sin,
and the punishment of it; and so the Psalmist speaks Psalm. 106. 39. 40. 41. of
the Israelites; they were defiled with their own works, they went a whoring
[Id est, misso conjugali erga Deum quidvis aliud, potius quam Deum, prolibito
sui animi amplectentes. Jun: in locum.] after their own inventions: Therefore
was the wrath of the Lord kindled against his people, in so much that he
abhorred his own inheritance, so that he gave them into the hand of the
heathen, and they that hated them oppressed them, and ruled over them, this sin
God also threatened by the Prophet Isa. 29. 13. 14. [Duae Judiciorum causae una
hypocrisis, altera superbia, non acquiescens praeceptis Dei, sed humana
anteponens.] in regard of their hypocrisy, and pride, in preferring their own
humane precepts before Gods, for as much as this people draw nigh to me with
their lips, and with their mouths do honor me, but have removed their hearts
far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precepts of men,
therefore behold, I will proceed to do a mavelous work among this people,
and a wonder; for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish; and the
understanding of the prudent shall be hid, which was accomplished after our
Saviors death, shortly after Saint Paul had cried out 1 Cor. 1. 19. 20.
[Aboue eleven hundred thousand of them were slain by Titus, besides what were
sold, 2000 carried with him in tiumph, which he gave to be devoured by wild
beasts, and above 17000 sold into parts about Egypt, besides those that were
killed by Vespasian in his subduing Galile. Fox Acts page 28. 1 p.] where is the
wise? Where is the Scribe? where is the disputer of this world? By Vespasian
and Titus his Son that Nation was utterly destroyed, the City and Temple was
burnt, and they miserably slaughtred, and sold, and even to this day remain
hardened, scattered in sundry parts of the world, feeling in their miserable
slavery, and hatred of all Nations, the greatness of Gods wrath powered on
them, as for others so especially for this sin, as God had long before
threatened Jer. 14. 10. 12. [Decretum Dei compensantis errores spirituales
populi suppliciis paribus, ipsi sunt in causa, errari amant huc. and illue, and
discursare ad Idola sua itaque faciam ut errent. Iun. notae in loc.] he would
consume them with the sword, famine, pestilence, because they loved to wander
after their own inventions; they have not refrained their feet from their
Idols, therefore the Lord will not accept them, he will remember their iniquity
and visit their sins in his due time: and so again by the Prophet Amos Amos
2. 5. I will send a fire against Judah, and it shall devowr the palaces thereof.

Eight woes Christ denounced against the scribes and Pharisees for this sin; and
for their hypocrisy, Mat. 23. 37. Mat. 15. 3. 6. for by their traditions they
made the word of God of none effect, and transgrest his Commandments as their
Fathers before them had done, therefore was wrath powered out on them to the
uttermost, so that he fed them with wormwood, because they walked after the
vain imaginations of their hearts, he gave them water of gall to drink, and
scattered them amongst the heathen whom neither they nor their Fathers knew: he
sent a sword after them, till he had consumed them, because they followed those
vain traditions and superstitions which their Fathers taught them, Jer. 9. 14.
15. 16. yea but to permit this sin brings judgment as before has been showed
in Idolworship, and is true in this will worship, which Hezekiah that good King
knew, who was the repairer of the breaches, and the restorer of Religion in
Israel, for he remo^ed the high places, he brake the Images, cut down the
groves, and brake in pieces the brazen serpent that Moses had made, though it
was a religious Relic and of great antiquity, commanded to be made by God
himself, and a special type of Christ, yet he spared it not, when it gave
offense, and caused much superstition, for unto those days, the children of
Israel burned incense to it, and he called it Nehushtan, brass, of the matter
whereof it was first made, 2 Kings 18. 4. Numb. 21. 8. [Christus pradicit ut
ipse foret per evang^lii predicationem, v^lut salutiferum signum attollatum, ad
quod totus mundus accurreret quod olim scrpentis erecta figura fuit in deserto
adumbratum. Bezae in Jo. 3. 14. notae.] And since we now see both the sin and
punishment, can we plead our selves guiltless?

Have we not devised things of our selves to worship God thereby, yielding that
reverence to our own fancies, which alone is due to his person and word? Is
not the Cross in Baptism a mere invention of humane reason, (which is
foolishness with God?) 2 Cor. 1. 20. Are not the Ministers enjoined by the
Rubric in the book of Common Prayer, to make a Cross on the child's forehead,
signing him therewith, in token that hereafter he shall not be ashamed to
confess the faith of Christ crucified, and to fight manfully under his banner,
against sin, the world, and the devil, and to continue Christ's faithful
soldier, and servant, unto his lives end? and this service must be observed,
[so the 30. Cannon of those agreed on, An. 1603.] as lawful, godly, and not to
be spoken against, as corrupt, or superstitious, under pain of
Excommunication, ipso facto [Cannon the 4. and 6.]

But, where has God, Christ, or his Prophets, or Apostles, ordained this kind
of worship? surely there is no mention thereof in the Scriptures, and therefore
cannot be religious, nor oblige the conscience of any man [Conscientia nunquam
obligat in virtute propria, sed in virtute praecepti divini. Anton. part 1.
tit. 3. cap. 10.] which is subject in divine matters only to the word of God,
which commands or prohibiteth any thing, [Sub hac condition quia est a Deo
praeceptum vel prohibitum. Aquinas 2. Sent. did 39.] and so being apprehended,
it seems good or bad. The Apostles Commission was no larger then to teach
those things which Christ had commanded them, Mat. 28. 20. and on that
condition, promised to be with them to the end of the world: neither did they
teach any thing of themselves, but what they had received from Christ, or his
Spirit. S. Paul Acts 20. 27. declared only the counsel of God, to the
Ephesians; what he had received of the Lord, he delivered to the Corinthians, 1
Cor. 11. 23. see the sum of his Gospel, 1 Cor. 15. 1, 2, 3. and he tells the
Galatians, that if he himself, or any other Apostle, or an Angel from heaven,
should preach any other then that, let him be accursed, Gal. 1. 8, 9. yea, he
doubles the sentence, to add weight to his censure. And we shall find by the
Apostles practice, Acts 15, 28. that they would not lay upon the Disciples any
greater burden, then those necessary things enjoined for a while, which seemed
good to the holy Ghost, therefore to bring this sign in Baptism, as another
Sacrament, to put us in mind of our duty to God, of our spiritual warfare, of
our perseverance in the faith, wherein we were baptized, what other is it but
pride, and presumption of men of corrupt minds, destitute of the truth, who
usurp Christ's office, of instituting a new Sacrament, and thereby nullify the
office of Baptism it self, which is to put us in mind of these duties, which
are ascribed to the sign of the Cross? for so the Apostle tells us, Romans 6. 3,
4. Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were
baptized into his death? therefore we are buried with him by baptism into
death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the
Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life; for if we have been
planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the
likeness of his resurrection, knowing this, that our old man is crucified with
him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not
serve sin; for he that is dead is freed from sin.

Lo, in Baptism we are ingrafted into Christ, baptized into his death,
therefore we ought not to be ashamed of Christ crucified, but to be crucified
with him, as S. Paul says he was, Gal. 2. 20. [Hujus sanctificationis tres
sunt parts, nempe veteris hominis, seu peccati mors and sepultura, and novi
hominis resurrectio, a Christi mortis sepulturae and resurrectionis virtute in
nos promanans, cujus benefic^^ pignus, and sigillum, est Baptismus noster.
Bezae not. in Romans 6.] to grow together with him, that we may receive power
from his death, burial, and resurrection, to dye to sin, and to fight manfully
under his banner against sin, the world and the Devil, and to continue
Christ's soldiers and servants unto our lives end; for there are two parts of
our sanctification, viz. The death and burial of the old man, or of the body
of sin, and the resurrection of the new, all which flow from the power of
Christ's death, burial, and resurrection flowing into us, the pledge, and seal
of which benefit, is our Baptism: yea, that is a sign, and representation
unto us of our profession, [Vide the exhortation given in the Common Prayer
book at the end of public Baptism.] which is, to follow the example of our
Savior Christ, and to be made like unto him, that as he dyed, and rose again
for us, so should we which are baptized, dye to sin, and rise again unto
righteousness, continually mortifying all our evil and corrupt affections,
and daily proceeding in all virtue, and godliness of living. If then Baptism
it self, be a sign, and seal of Gods own ordaining, and that, not a naked
and fruitless one, as is the sign of the Cross, but an efficacious and
powerful one, to effect, what it signifies, and represents; how durst
presumptuous man, without intruding into Gods seat of Justice, invent a sign
of his own, and give a law to his Church, contrary to our only Lawgiver.
James 4. 12. who has alone power to ordain Sacraments, and forms of his own
worship? 1 Cor. 11. 20. therefore, if we will not be wiser then Christ, nor
break the unity of his Church, as learned Zanchy says, [Quare ad unitatem
Ecclesiae servandam, neque alia sacramenta instituenda sunt, quam quae Christus
instituit, neque aliud in illis esse, aut per ea nobis exhiberi credendum, quam
quod Christus docuit nobis dari: sed neque hoc nega^dum est dari, quod omnino
Christus docuit preberi, and quidem eodem modo accipi, qu^ Christus praecipi
docuit.] We may not institute other Sacraments, then those which Christ has
ordained, neither is there any thing in them, or by them, by us to be believed,
to be done, then that which Christ has taught us, to be given unto us, both in
regard of the matter, and form, we may not deny to be given, what Christ has
taught to be given, and truly, after the same manner are they to be received,
as Christ has taught, and our Savior has given us a rule to discern the work
of his Spirit, from the delusion of Satan, or invention of man, which is, that
his Spirit speaks not of himself, but whatsoever he hears, he speaks,
Joh. 16. 13. and that he glorifieth Christ; for he shall receive of Christ's and
all things that the Father has, are Christ's, v. 14, 15. and he shows it to
his people, he being the Spirit of truth, shall lead them into all truth,
because he teaches nothing but according to the Word of God, which Word is
Truth, John 17. 17. by which Word, all spirits must be tried, whether they be
of God, 1 John 4. 1. This therefore having no foundation in the Word, and
usurping the office of Baptism, (the sign and seal which Christ has
ordained) it must needs follow, it proceeds from that evil spirit of error,
(who is the Father of lies;) for if Christ has afforded us his death, burial,
and resurrection, to be not only the efficient, but also the exemplary causes,
of our death, and burial to sin, and of our living to righteousness, as Saint
Peter shows, 1 Pet. 4. 1, 2. and has also given us Baptism, his holy
Sacrament, to signify and effect the same, to be a continual sign to us, of
our mortification and vivification, as its plain, Romans 6. 3, 4. Col. 2. 12. 1
Pet. 3. 21. To bring then, surely this new sign of the cross, to put us in
remembrance thereof, it frustrates one end of Christ's Ordinance, and is a mere
wilworship, which has indeed a show of wisdom, but is an abomination in the
sight of God: for hereby, (to dedicate the Infant to the service of him that
died on the cross, [See Cannon 30. made in the Synod of London, Anno 1603.] as
by an honorable badge) do not they make themselves wiser then Christ? who has
by Baptism marked and consecrated us to his service, as he did the Jews by
circumcision, Romans 4. 11. for, 1 Cor. 12. 13. by one Spirit, we are all
baptized into one body, and hereby distinguished from the Jews, Turks and
Infidels.

So that unless a man be born of water, and of the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter
into the kingdom of God, Joh. 3. 5. and whereas in the Cannon, they would have
the remembrance of the Cross precious to all that are baptized, surely they
derogate much from Christ's death, burial, and resurrection, and from Baptism
it self, the remembrance of which, should be much more precious, that so, we
may faithfully and sincerely keep our vows and promises therein made; for by
faiths daily applying the virtue of Christ's death, burial, and resurrection,
into which we were baptized, and again risen with him, we may receive power to
perform the same, Genesis 17. 11. [Sacramenta novi Testamenti dant salutem:
sacramenta veteris promiserunt salvatorem. August. in Gen.] Did God give the
Jews circumcision, to be a sign of the covenant which he made with the Jews,
and to distinguish them from other people? and has he not given us Christians
baptism, Col. 2. 11, 12. to perform the same? Did he command them to remember
all his commands, and to do them, and not to seek after their own hearts and
their own eyes, after which they used to go a whoring, Numb. 15. 39, 40. if
they meant to be holy unto their God? and has he not enjoined us, only to
observe those things which he has commanded us? Matthew. 28. 20. Did he in the
Leviticall law (which was a law of ceremonies, contained in ordinances) not
permit the faithful to observe the least ceremony, which he did not enjoin or
command them, but did nominate the number of the rings, loops, Exodus 36. 17.
and 37. 13. the places of the sockets, Exodus 36. 24. the wood of the bars,
Exodus 37. 31. of the sanctuary? and they made all the work according as the
Lord commanded Moses, Exodus 39. 42. and was not both the matter, manner, time,
and quality, of all their sacrifices expressed, which to omit, or add in either,
made them profane, as appears in the Book of Leviticus; and has he, not
taught us all things? Surely, if Christ had not taught us all things necessary
for his service, that of the Apostle could not be true, that the high Priest of
our profession, Christ Jesus, was faithful to him that appointed him, as Moses
was faithful in all his house, Hebr. 3. 1, 2, etc. But we believe that Moses
was faithful, as a servant, for a testimony of those things which were to be
spoken after; but Christ was faithful, as a son, over his own house, his
Church, whose house are we: Hebr. 3. 5, 6. and therefore we ought to harken
alone to him, who is the Lord and builder of his house, [Applicat suo fini
superiorem doctrinam verbis Davidis, omnes exhortans, ut jam filium ipsum
loquentem audientes, ejus verba plena fiducia acquiescant, cum aliter, non
possint in aeternam illam requiem admitti. Bezae not. in loc.] and fully to
rest in his words; since otherwise we cannot be admitted into his rest; how dare
men without great rashness, and impudent presumption, (when the ceremonial
law is quite abrogated, Gal. 3. 25. and 4. 9. and 5. 1. 2, 3. and Christ the
substance is come, who is the end of the Law, Romans 10. 4. who has by his own,
and his Apostles preaching, taught us all the counsel of God, Acts 20. 27.
Joh. 17. 8. For he spoke to the world, the things which he had heard of the
Father, John 8. 26. he taught the meaning and the end of the Law, urging the
sincere keeping of it in love, and freeing it from the false glosses, Mark 7.
6, 7, 8. 13. and leaven of the Pharisees, cutting down their traditions,) bring
in new rites and ceremonies of their own brains to be observed by the Church of
God? therein seeking after their own hearts, and going a whoring after their
own inventions, contrary to ^t. Paul's counsel, Heb. 13. 9. Be not carried about
with diverse and strange doctrines; for it is a good thing, that the heart be
established with grace, and not with human services, or ceremonial worship, as
he instanceth in meats, by one kind of will worship, condemning all, as Junius
well observes, [Ex una specie, nempe mundor um and immundoru^ ciboru^
discrimine intellige, omnem cultum ceremonialem, etc. Vide Bezae not. in loc.]
And Beza plainly condemns, as diametrically opposing the pure doctrine of
Christ and his Gospel; and therefore tells them, they cannot be partakers of
the benefits of Christ, who obstinately maintain those legal rites; Surely
Baptism is a sign, and seal of the covenant, which God has made with us, and
we with him, to the end that we remembering the same, and the promises therein
contained, and benefits conveyed and sealed, may give the more earnest heed to
the things which we have heard, received, and promised, lest at any time we
should let them slip. But he has neither by himself, nor by his Apostles, any
where enjoined us, to remember the sign of the cross, or to make use of it;
and therefore we may not without running into this sin, and incurring the
judgments threatened thereon, tolerate the same, (although thereby Christ, and
his benefits, may be understood,) no more then the brazen Serpent might be
worshipped, which was a type of Christ, and our salvation, by faith in Christ,
who was hanged on the cross, which the good King Hezekiah brake in pieces,
when the people committed Idolatry with it, 2 King. 18. 4. For, is not the
remembrance of our promises made in Baptism, a better means to preserve us
from being ashamed to confess the faith of Christ crucified, then the
remembrance of our being signed after Baptism, with the sign of the cross?
and is not the power of Christ's death, being still fresh in our memories, into
which death we were baptized, more able to keep us from being ashamed of our
profession, more able to help us to fight manfully under his banner against
sin, the world, and the Devil, and to continue Christ's faithful soldiers and
servants unto our lives end, then is the memory of the cross the Minister
makes on our foreheads? Indeed, from the power of Christ's death, we receive
strength to kill sin, Romans 6. 6, 7. and from the virtue of his resurrection, we
obtain ability to grow in grace, Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. Phil. 3. 10. [Finis justitiae
ex fide hic est, quod ad nos attinet, ut virtute resurrectionis ipsius ex morte
evadamus. Beza in locum. 1 Pet. 4. 1, 2.] Now baptism is a sign to represent
it, Romans 4. 11. a seal to confirm it, and an instrument to convey it, Romans 6.
4. and Gal. 3. 1. But from the sign of the cross, can flow no such vertve nor
efficacy, although the Papists say it will drive away devils, and ascribe a
great deal of holiness and strange virtue unto it, highly honoring it,
praying to it, and adoring it in their blasphemous hymns, [In hymnis per annum
ex aureo libello: o crux ave, spes unica, hoc passionis tempore, ange piis
justitiam, reisque dona veniam.] Hail, O cross our only hope in this passion
time, increase righteousness to the godly, and give pardon to the guilty; and
therefore they use it continually, going out, coming in, on all occasions, and
about nine and twenty times in saying the Mass, [Aquinas. 3. part. q. 83. Ar.
5.] But as our Church ingeniously confesses, such signing to be superstious,
so surely our signing with it, in, or after baptism, to the end there spoken,
is no less then wilworship, and so is accounted sinful, and superstitious in
Gods sight, and consequently, has been one means of bringing this ruin and
destruction which is now falling on us, and will surely come without repentance.

Secondly, Is there not bowing of the knee, or putting off the hat, or some
other due or lowly reverence commanded? [Cannon 18. made in the Synod of
London, 1603.] whenever in time of divine service, the Lord Jesus shall be
mentioned thereby, derogating from the honor due to all the other titles and
attributes of God and of Christ, alleging it to be a duty of the Text, Phil.
2. 10. [So Dr. Andrews sermon, Giles Widow, and his second of All Souls
College.] which is contrary to the opinion of the ancient Fathers, and of the
World it self, from whence the Apostle borrows it; for so learned Zanchy
says, [Zanchius in Philip. 2. page 120. Nomen, pro nomine filii Dei accipit.
Theod. sic fere omnes Graci and Latini. Amb. Hierom. Aug. and aliis ex nostris
non indocti: Alii pro nomine Jesu, sed minus commode] That Theodoret, and
almost all the Greek and Latin Fathers, did understand that place of the name
of God, or of the Son of God: so Scolia graeca, Ambrose, Hierome, Austin, and
others; and he himself says, that those who understand it of the name Jesus,
it was not so fit, nor profitable; nay, it is false, heretical, and
superstitious, as now its used, for the words are plain, [(...).] In, or at the
name of Jesus, and not at the name Jesus, as it must needs have been by
opposition, had it been spoken of that verbal name; and if it be objected,
that its not, nomen sine re, the name without the thing, it is not the name, but
the person they adore, by consequence it will necessarily follow, that we
should as well bow at the name of Christ, or of the Son of God, or of Emmanuel,
or any other title of Christ, as well as the name Jesus.

Secondly, the context here proves it, for so much this illative [(...).]
(...), in the Text inferres, wherefore God has highly exalted, and given him a
name, above every name; therefore he has given, because he has humbled
himself, and became obedient unto the death, even the death of the cross.

Now, the time when this name Jesus was given, was at his circumcision, as the
Angel commanded Mary, Luke 1. 31. and 2. 21. even at the beginning of his
humiliation, and therefore could not be the reward of it.

Nay, thirdly, the name Jesus was common to other men, as to Joshua, Heb. 4. 8.
Esd. 4. 49. 14. and 50. 29* Agg. 1. 1. Zac. 3. 1. Col. 4. 11. to Jesus the son
of Syrach, to Jesus the son of Iozedec, to Jesus Iustus, to Jesus the high
Priest; and therefore, it could not be a name above every name, when other men
partaked of the some.

Fourthly, the name given to Christ, was a real, not a verbal name, viz. that
glory, power, and dominion, which God conferred on his humane nature, when he
raised him from the dead, and set him in heavenly places, at his own right
hand, far above all principalities, and powers, and might, and dominion, and
every name, which is named, not only in this world, but in the world to come,
and has put all things under his feet, which is the interpretation of the
Author of this Text* Saint Paul himself, Ephesians. ^* 20. 21, 22. and of many
godly and learned Divines, both ancient and modern, [Non panci aliquet (hand
vulgares viri) volunt illo nomine intelligi gloriam and potestatem, and
dominationem, quae sit supra omnem creatam gloriam et potentia^. Zanc. in Phil.
2. interpreta io haec fuit tempore. Theo. So our reverend and learned Perkins
on the Creed, which name is his exaltation in Heaven, in full power and glory.
and so oftimes in Scripture, is the name, taken for authority and power, Acts
4. 10. 12. there is no other name, given under Heaven, among men, whereby we
must be saved: and by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, does this man stand
whole, for it is a kind of Haebraisme, [Non est alius, vel alia vis cujusquam
sive authoritas, ortum est autem illud genus loquendi Hebraeic familiare, eo
quod in periculis ii soleant appellari, a quibus ope^^ expectamus. Bezae not.
in Acts 4.] because in times of danger, we implore those men, or Gods names,
from whom we expect help, Jonas 1. 5. 6. and thus the Apostle says, Christ
has obtained a more excellent name, then the Angels, Heb. 1. 4. viz. a more
excellent dignity, and power; for to which of the Angels, said he at any time,
thou art my Son, or to which of them granted he divine worship, as he did unto
the Son, commanding the Angels themselves to worship him? v. 6. for the humane
nature of Christ, is so super exalted, and honored, that it pertakes of divine
worship, even the same with the Father, in regard of the Hypostaticall Union.
And this dignity and honor, has God given to Christ, as the reward of his
humility, and obedience; and indeed, it is a phrase we use in vulgar speech, viz.
Name, for Power. As to arrest a man in your Majesty's name, is to arrest him,
by your power, and authority, creditors use to make letters of atturny to
others, to sue the debtors in their name, in their power, and so in the 4. Acts
and 7. verse. They are made Synonimous, by what power, or by what name, say the
Rulers to the Apostles, have ye done this? To whom St. Peter answered; by the
name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the
dead, even by him, does this man stand whole before you all: which cannot be
understood of the verbal name Jesus, for then might the exorcists have thereby
dispossessed the Devils as they assaied, as well as the Apostles, Acts 19. 13.
for they called over them which had evil spirits, the name of the Lord Jesus,
but the Devil cared not for the bare word, when Christ had not committed unto
them the power of casting out Devils.

This name therefore is to be understood of his power, and authority, of which
Christ speaks. Mat. 28. 18. All power is given unto me both in heaven and in
earth, and indeed let this text be understood of Christ's power, and dignity,
and none but a Jewe, Turk, or Atheist, can deny the literal sense, which
ought cheifely to be chosen by the consent of all Divines, so it contradict not
the Analogy of faith, ^^so it ought here to be understood, he has given him a
name, viz. power and glory, above every name, viz. above all power and glory,
that at the name, viz. the power of Christ, every knee should bow both of
things in heaven, viz. the holy Angels, and glorified Spirits, and things in
earth, viz. both good men, and bad that are alive, and things under the earth,
viz. the Devils, and wicked men in the grave, or hell, and that every tongue
should confess, that Jesus Christ is the Lord, (which cannot be manifested,
without his honor and power) to the glory of God the Father, who has put all
things in subjection under his feet: 1 Cor. 15. 27. [Dignitatem and
celebritatem nominis, sed cum re ipsa conjunctam. Jun.] The accomplishment
whereof, cannot be till the end of the world, 1 Cor. 15. 24. [Nam omnis
creatura tandem, subjicietur Christo. Jun. in Phil. 2. 10.] when he shall have
put down all rule, all authority, and power. In his own person he has
already performed it, Ephe. 1. 20. 21. 22. Col. 1. 18. 20. and 2. 15. 1 Timothy 6.
15. Jude 25. Reve. 1. 5. but as yet, his members are not perfected, and
therefore he must reign, till he has put all his enemies under his feet, 1
Cor. 15. 25. Psalm. 110. 1. and so indeed the Apostle expounds it in the future
tense, as I live says the Lord, every knee shall (...) bow to me, and every
tongue shall confess to God, and shows the time when this shall be
accomplished, viz. not before the day of Judgment, Romans 14. 10. 11. we shall
all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ, for so it is written, Esaias 45.
23. every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall swear, which the
Apostle interprets, shall confess to God; and indeed to this end, Christ both
humbled himself, and became obedient unto the death, and rose again, he both
died, and revived, that he might be Lord, both of the dead, and the living:
Romans 14. 9. according to his diety, he is, was, and for ever shall be
glorified, and adored, with the same worship as the Father, and the Holy Ghost
are, in regard those three Persons, are but one essence, one God, as in the
Ephesine Synod it was, [Si ergo ad nomen Jesu debet omne genu se floctore,
sequitur totam personam hancesse aedorandam, ideoq^^ and carnem, una cum
deitate, idque una adoratione, ut definivit Council. Ephesinum. vid. Zan. in
Phil. 2. 10.] excellently defined, and as he was mediator according to both
natures, in the unity of his person, so is he to be adored, even the flesh,
with the deity: for by his humiliation, he is so far from deposing ^^ losing
that right of divine worship (belonging to him, from eternity, and common to
him with the other two persons.) that rather after a new, and certain manner,
he clearly and openly shows, that the same belongs unto him, viz. by his
resurrection, Ascension, and coming to judgment: when, though before, many
wicked, and ungodly men, will not bow to his scepter, no^ acknowledge his
power, and glory, yet then shall every knee Apo. 17: Zac. 12. 10. Mat. 24. 30.
nol^ns volens, bow to him, every eye shall see him, and they also which peirced
him: And all kinreds of the earth shall wail because of him.

Now the name Jesus, being Christ's personal name, and his whole person being
to be honored, with glory, and power: [Sicut una and eadem est persona, sic
una, and eadem adoratione adoranda est. Zanchy ut supra.] The Apostle says
that at the name of Jesus, every knee shall bow, to distinguish this power, and
honor, from the Fathers, and the Holy Ghosts, and to declare, that the same
Jesus, that humbled himself, and became obedient unto the death, even the
death of the Cross, is also superexalted, and shall be wonderfully honored,
but not fully before the day of judgment, when all Angels, men, and Devils,
shall bow down to his scepter, acknowledge his power, and confess his
soveraignety, to the glory of God the Father who has conferred the same on
him, committing all power, and judgment unto him; and this is a truth
generally confirmed by Scripture, Ephe. 1. 20. etc. Mat. 28. 18. Joh. 5. 22.
Col. 1. 17. 18. Joh. 13. 3. Heb. 12. 2. Dan. 7. 14. Luke 1. 33. Apoc. 19. 16.
and this is done in regard of his humiliation, and sufferings, as the Apostle
proves in that text, Phil. 2. 9. but more plainly, Heb. 12. 2. we see Jesus
who was made a little lower then the Angels, for the suffering of death crowned
with glory and honor. [Meritum humilitatis, est claritatis premium. Gor.
expos. in Phil. 2.] The joy of which, being set before him, caused him to
endure the Cross, and despise the shame, and now is set down at the right
hand of the Throne of God. Heb. 12. 2. To conclude this point, Christ himself
says, Jo. 5. 22. 23. the Father has committed all judgment unto the Son,
that all men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father, there fore
look what reverence, is to be used at the names, Titles, or Attributes, of the
Father, the same and no more is due to the Son, otherwise we should honor the
Son, above the Father: Now as to the names of God, Jehovah, Jah, Elohim, we bow
not the knee of our body, but that only of the mind, speaking of them
reverently, using them in judgment, justice, truth, with all possible
reverence, and devotion, due to so glorious a Majesty: Com. 3. Deuteronomy. 28. 58.
with the same affection, and fear, are the titles and names of Christ to be
used, as Jesus, Emmanuell, Lord, Christ, etc. and we may not make an Idol, of
the verbal sound of the word Jesus, as if there were efficacy, in the bare
hearing the word, as inchanters think in their charms, [As did the exorcists,
Acts 19. 13. Nihil sanctius est nomine Jesu, at illius hic vides abusum. Sic
hodie magi and incantatores utuntur Evangelio Johannis etc. Aretius in Acts
19.] and the Jesuits, in the often repetition of the same, [In their Jesus
Psalter blasphemously so called, wherein they begin with this text, in nomine
Jesu etc and so say together Jesus, Jesus, Jesus, mercy, Jesus, Jesus, Jesus, help
me, Jesus Jesus, Jesus strengthen me, Jesus, Jesus, Jesus, comfort me, Jesus, Jesus,
Jesus, make me constant and stable: each of these must be said 10 times over,
and yet this is but one part of the 3. Vide Henoch Clapham 4. part, of song of
songs.] and blasphemous abuse of that sacred name.

It Is confessed, in the Primitive times, the Jews, and Heathens blasphemously
scorned, and derided at the glorious name of Jesus, and the Christians (in
those days) to declare their profession, and faith in him, at the mention of
that name, adored his person, and uncovered their heads, as an outward
testimony of the affection of their hearts, as Zanchy relates: And this
custom, by the Church was confirmed, in regard of the Arrians, and other
heretics, that denied Christ's Deity. Hitherto things were not much amiss,
but afterward, it turned into superstition, as many other things, which were
holy, and godly, in their first institution, as that Orthodox Divine,
[Consuetudo non fuit improbanda, sed postea, est versa in superstitionem, ut
multa alia, pie, and sancte instituta. Zanch. in Eist. ad Phil. cap. 2. 10.]
confesses; and therefore till this superstition be taken away, God is robbed
of his honor, the Papists are emboldened in their Idolatry, many ignorant
people commit superstition, and many learned Idolize this name, and wrench the
Scripture, for the maintenance of this wilworship, and humane invention, when
they urge it as a duty of the Text, contrary to the opinion of the holy
Fathers, and of truth it self; therefore, since the Israelites, might as well
prove the adoring of the brazen Serpent, which was of Gods own institution, and
had as great antiquity as this, and a special command for making and looking
on it, which this has not, and yet good King Hezekiah destroyed it, when by
the superstitious, it was abused to Idolatry: so, it is your Majesty's part to
see, that this service be forbidden, this offense be removed, this will worship
be quite abolished, by making void that part of the Cannon that enjoynes it,
and by decreeing a new one, by the advice of the learned and religious Clergy
of the Land, [Whereby the people may be informed of the truth of this Text, who
ignorantly worship at every name of Jesus, which is spoken in the Church,
although it were not the name of our Savior, as of Joshua, of Jesus Justus, of
Jesus the son of Jozedek, of Jesus the son of Syrach, etc.] lest otherwise,
maintaining this humane invention, (which gives offense to the godly, and
causes many to be superstitious, and commit Idolatry) Gods judgments still
continue on us, till with others, this sin bring destruction to our Kingdom,
and Nation, from which, good Lord deliver us, even for Christ Jesus sake, his
merits and intercession, who now sits on the right hand of God, making
intercession for us, having all power and glory committed unto him. Amen, Amen.

Thirdly, have we not rested in the outward work of his service only, whilst
in the mean time we were not zealous to serve him in spirit, and in truth? In
our devotions, have we not prayed by book, rather then by heart, and with
understanding, and power of the Spirit, as Saint Paul requires? 1 Cor. 14. 15.
We have so much rested on the verbal Letany, that most of us, have forgotten
the mental Lyturgie; Our prayers (for the most part) have been a continued
wilworship, a mere lip-labor, instead also of the calves of our lips, Heb. 13.
14. we have offered the lips of calves; for we have been forced in our
devotions [Cannon the 4. of those made at London, 1603.] and tied to a form of
words therein, and in performance thereof, have placed the chiefest part of our
religion; Idolizing the book of Common Prayer, as if it had been made by divine
inspiration, as the Scriptures, 2 Pet. 1. 20. which holy men of God spoke and
wrought, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost; and has not the discipline of
the Church been maintained for Apostolical, without error unalterable? That
Diocesan Bishops, [Cannon the 7. made, ut supra, to affirm any thing contrary
thereunto, is excommunication, ipso facto, which is to continue on him, till
the person repent, and publicly revoke his wicked error.] are jure divino,
when it is apparently known, that the one, for the most part, was compiled out of
the Mass book of St. Ambrose: [St. Ambr. his Te Deum, Greg. Kirie Elison,
Agnus Dei, etc.] and Gregory, and has since caused great dishonor to God, and
offense to the godly, [Vide the Preface to the Directory.] and the other was
the invention of Antichristian spirits, by which that Beast at first erected
his throne, and now Lords it over all that are called gods, as shall appear:
For, the first, those two service-books in the beginning of Antichrists
kingdom, were in competition, which should be used, circa annum, 780. or there
about: Hadrian the first, then Pope, ordained, that Gregory's service should be
observed and kept universally, and so burned by his special friend Charles the
then Emperor, the book of Ambroses service, and with threats, and diverse
punishments, compelled the Priests to agree thereunto; for before that, Hadrian
had gathered a Council of his friends, to decide which of those two books
should be generally used: [Nauclerus and Jacob. de Voragine in vita Gregor. de
hoc: etiam, vide Fox Acts and Mon. 1. vol. fol. 117. printed, 1610.] All the
Fathers did consent and agree, that both the Masse-books should be laid on the
Altar of St. Peter the Apostle, and the Church door most diligently to be shut,
and sealed, and they would give themselves that night to prayer, that so the
Lord might reveal, and show unto them, by some evident sign or token, which of
these two he would have publicly used, (which was indeed, a means disallowed
of God, who has sent us to his word, and commands to search the Scriptures for
trial, Isai. 8. 20. Ioh. 5. 39. but the only means approved, and used by
Antichrist, for the establishment of his kingdom: for his coming is after the
working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders) 2 These. 2. 9,
10. and in the morning found both open, or rather, as some say, Gregory's book
plucked asunder, one piece from another, and the leaves scattered all over the
Church, but Ambrose his book, lay open in the same place, where it was laid,
which this Pope Hadrian, (who was the grand Patriot of Images, and Idolatry, in
that most wicked Queen, Eirenes days) expounded, that like as the leaves were
torn and scattered abroad all the Church over; so Gregory's book should be used
throughout the whole world, and Ambroses only at Millain, where he was Bishop,
which miracle and exposition, godly Mr. Fox, [Mr. Fox Acts and Monum. vol. 1.
page 118. printed 1610.] calls, a forged invention: another man, says he,
might percase, interpret the miracle otherwise, (who had the Spirit of God in
him, as this Pope had of the Devil) viz. that God was angry with Gregory's
book, and therefore rent it in pieces, and scattered it abroad, when as the
other, as good, or at least better, and more Orthodox then Gregory's, lay
sound, untoucht; surely, not till this time, (as that great Antiquary and godly
Historian observes) was there any uniform, order of prayers, or Masse-book
amongst Christian nations generally received; but now in this most Idolatrous,
and bloody age of Hadrian was it confirmed: and if such a Murderer, and
Idolater, was the confirmer of the greatest part of our book of Common prayer;
shall we think there is no fault in it? no, surely shall we not rather judge it
like the person, Idolatrous, at least in many places corrupt, and
superstitious, by reason of that darksome light, which was granted unto our
reformers of that book, who indeed are to be acknowledged, for excellent
instruments, raised up by God, to begin the purging, and building of his house,
according to the measure of knowledge granted unto them? and were they living
now, would certainly join, for the utter extirpation thereof, with other godly
Ministers, and Christians; for besides the many scandalous expressions, and
vain bablings, and unnecessary repetitions and erroneous sentences, in diverse
particulars of it, there are sundry reasons, why it ought wholly to be taken
away, and no longer to be tolerated.

1. Reason. Because it is made no better then an Idol, by many ignorant, and
superstitious people, who pleasing themselves in their presence at this
service, and their lip-labor in bearing part thereof, sought after no other
means of salvation, nor way of serving God on the Lords day, in spirit and
truth, (as Christ requires) John 4. 24. then what cursorily they heard at
Mattens, and Even-songs, (as they call it) so that they supposed, that if they
came to Church twice on the Lords day, to hear this Service, (no matter with
what affection or devotion, fear or faith) they had sufficiently served God
that day; (though the word they heard read, were as a book sealed) for how can
they understand, without an Interpreter, as the Eunuch told Philip? Acts 8. 31.
How can I understand, except some man should guide me? and how can they
believe, without preaching? Romans 10. 14. and so wanting faith, the mother
Grace, which purifieth the heart, Act. 15. 9. they needs must perish for lack
of knowledge, Hos. 4. 16. and err, both in life and doctrine, not knowing the
Scriptures, Mat. 22. 29. [Ignorantia cognitionis Dei, omnium est vitiorum
matter, and totius confusionis origo.] for so in the second place.

2. Reas. By reason of this book of Prayer, preaching was in many places much
hindered, and curtalized; yea, in some places, quite justled out, as
unnecessary, this, being (by double beneficed men) thought sufficient food, for
many Congregations, many weeks; yea, sometimes months together: For, if they
had a dumb Minister, a hireling that crept in at the window, John 10. 1. [Quum
per unum Christum pateat nobis ad patrem aditus, nec alii ulli sint very
pastores, quam qui ad Christu^ primi accidents, alios, eo etiam adducunt.
Bezae in loc. not.] for some eight or ten pounds stipend yearly, who could with
much ado read this book, the parish was sufficiently served, and so they
thought, God too, though there were never a Sermon at all; so that thousands of
people, many Lords days together, never received into their heads, much less
hearts, one lesson, either of duty to be performed, or of prohibition to avoid
this, or that sin: So that the preaching of Gods Word being neglected, men
heard, and cared only for this humane tradition of men.

3. Reas. For so thirdly, preaching of the Word, God commands to be in season,
and out of season; so Paul to Timothy, 2 Timothy 4. 2. reprove, rebuke, exhort,
with all long-suffering, and doctrine, and this he lays on him, [Summa, and
precipua omnium admonitionum, ac proinde gravissima obtestatione sancita haec
est, ut sancta etiam quadam cum importunitate, proponatur Dei verbum, prout
fert necessitas. Bezae not. in loc.] above all other his precepts; and
therefore gives him such a strict charge before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ,
who shall judge the quick and dead, at his appearing, and his Kingome, to
preach the Word, and to be instant, in season, and out of season; for well St.
Paul knew, that there was a woe provided, for all Ministers, that neglected
this duty, 1 Cor. 9. 16. There is a necessity imposed by Christ, on them all,
to look both to themselves, and to the flock, over which the Holy Ghost has
made them Bishops, the substance of which care, is to feed the Church of God,
which he has purchased with his own blood; therefore they are not to shun for
their own ease, or profit, to declare unto the people, committed to them, the
whole counsel of God, and to warn every one, night, and day, with tears, from
house to house, as Saint Paul, by his own example, taught the Ephesian Elders,
Acts 20. 27. etc. ad finem cap. Now this duty which was so necessary, for the
soul, as food is for the body, 1 Pet. 2. 2. was in diverse places, for many
weeks together, totally omitted, and this humane invention supplied all the
service; this, under pain of excommunication, ipso facto, must not be omitted,
and spoken against; [Cannon 4. made in the Synod at London, An. 1603.] though
at best but man's traditions: When zealous preaching, for the conversion of
souls, (if any thing long, above the prescribed time of an hour) was cried out
against; yea, derided, scoft at, and in some places the Ministers were suppressed
and punished: at best, preaching, which was Gods Ordinance* might be omitted;
and was accounted, far inferior, to the reading of the book of Common Prayer,
which was man's ordinance and invention; and thus, with the Scribes and
Pharisees, they made the Matthew. 15. 3. 6. Word of God of none effect, by their
traditions; yea, transgrest against it, by obeserving the same.

4. Reas. It was a heavy burden, for the most godly, and laborious Ministers,
to read all those Prayers, and after to preach, and pray himself, perhaps also
to baptize, two, or three, and to church as many, and sometimes to marry
others, and to bury others; yea, and after all this, to administer the
Sacrament to multitudes, many score of souls. Surely it must needs be a great
wasting, of his spirits, and a decay to his body, thus to be tied to the
largeness of those forms, and so its contrary to charity, or piety, [Christ
will have mercy, and not sacrifice, and the obedientiall knowledge of God,
rather then burnt offerings; but these, like Adam, have transgrest the
covenant, and dealt treacherously against me. Hos. 6. 6, 7.] It was indeed, the
invention of the Prelaticall party, who laid heavy burdens, and grievous to
be born, Matthew. 23. 4. on the inferior Clergies shoulders, but they themselves
would not move them with one of their fingers, they had their journey-men
Curats, and Singing men, as one wittily says, they were like the great brass
andirons in a chimney, only for show; and their Curates and Vicars, the little
Dogs who bare all the buthen, [Leves loquuntur Curae ingentes stupiunt.] and
extremest heat of the fire. Those that had scarce sufficient to live, must
read and preach much, but your Cathedral, and double beneficed men, their
mouths were stopped, they lived at ease, starving both the hireling, and their
flock, and thereby murdered both themselves and others: [Si homicida est, qui
hominis extinctor, eidem sceleri obstrictus est, qui peccat, quia seipsum
necat. Lactant.] the Apostles would lay no other burden then what seemed good
to the Holy Ghost, Acts 15. 28. nor Christ, would lay no other burden on the,
Rev. 2. 24. Church, then what his Apostles had done before; and surely those
that lay other burdens, they trouble the Church with words, and subvert men's
souls, (in the opinion of the Apostles) Acts 15. 24. by teaching them to
observe ceremonies, and humane traditions, all which are antiquated by Christ.

5. Reas. Fifthly, there were many unprofitable, burthenson, and superstitious,
or at least scandalous ceremonies in it, which occasioned much mischief; as the
cross in baptism, kneeling at the Sacrament, praying in some manner to the
Bread and Wine, or at least to the body, and blood of Christ severally, placing
more holiness at the East end of the Chancell, then elsewhere, and therefore
standing up at the Creed, with faces that way, and reading second Service in
that place, bowing to the name of Jesus, wearing of coaps, hoods, squared caps,
tippets, rochets, surplisses, which are all ornaments of Babylon, from whence
we borrowed them, or at least never departed from them, contrary to these
places of Scripture: 2 King. 17. 33, 34. Ezekiel. 11. 12. Deuteronomy. 12. 3, 4. 13. Rev.
18. 4. For this is some of the whores array, wherewith she deeked her self,
Rev. 17. 4. Also, that warning was sufficient after prayer, immediately before
the Communion, and so the Minister had neither leisure, nor time, to separate
the precious from the vile, (which is Gods injunction) Jer. 13. 9. [Vide the
Rubric before administration of the Lords Supper.] nor the people (that should
be found ignorant or profane) time, for due examination, or repentance.
Although he knew malice, and wickedness to reign in many, yet had he not
power to debar, them from the Communion, unless their offenses were adjudged
so, in fore exteriori, in their carnal, called, spiritual Courts. [Vid.
Lindwood and the general custom in all consistories. The clavis Jurisd. they
kept to themselves.] The great burden of Saints days and other holy days,
(which frustrated Gods command, six days shall thou labor,) and of fasts,
which must be observed, with a greater penalty on the breach thereof, then was
set by our Laws, on the profaning of the Lords Day; Childrens performing
faith, and repentance by their sureties. [So the Cathechisme in Ans. why then
are Children baptized? Women after Childbirth giving thanks with the words of
the 121 Psalm. [Hoc est canticum didascalicum, non gratulatorium. Trem. and
Jun. not. in Psalm. 121.] what godly discipline is that which may not be
restored, though it be much to be wished? Surely none other, I doubt but
auricular confession, and penance; [Which was greatly abused, and made a cloak
for much sin, by reason whereof. Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople abrogated
it, for that a Deacon had deflowred a noble woman in private shrift, Chadderton
in his 6. Ages of the World.] these, with other sundry things, disquieted many
godly Ministers, and People, who could not, in faith, yield unto them, by
reason whereof, many were deprived of the lawful Ordinances of God, which,
they might not enjoy, without conforming, or subscribing hereunto, yea sundry
holy, and zealous Christians, have been by means hereof, kept from the Lords
table, cited up to their Courts, excommunicated, imprisoned, if not murdered;
diverse able, and faithful Ministers, have been debarred from their calling, at
least from exercising thereof, to the endangering of many thousands of souls,
(in a time of such scarcity, of faithful Pastors:) They have been spoiled of
their liveliehoods, to the undoing of them, and their families, and many have
been driven to exile. Such a yoke and unsupportable burden has been laid on
the most zealous and pious Pastors, Christians, for it was the chiefest engine
the Prelates used, to dispossess many godly Ministers of their Livings.

6. Reas. The Papists, (Christ's, and our enemies) boasted, and that not without
just cause, that we complied [Vide Cassander, Andreus Frisius, Seravius
Modestus, he that proves the Hugonets of right, to be members of the Romish
Church, and our Franciscus de Sanct. Clara.] with them, in a great part of
their service* and that this, was the chief difference, theirs was in latin,
our book in english; and yet this, favor also, they grant, to some of their
own side, which thing, gave great offense to the conscientious, and zealous
protestants, both at home, and abroad, and became a stumbling block, to the
blind, and deluded generation, who, hereby, were not a little confirmed in
their old Superstition, and Idolatry, expecting daily our return to them,
rather then yielding one iota, or minding any return to the truth; for this
book was not excepted against by them, but contained in it either the same
matter, with their mass book, or at least it was such, as they disliked not
[Dr. Featly on Vertumnus Romanus, and Francis. de sanct. clara. Musculus de
missa Papist. in loc. com.] but more especially, was this strengthened in our
age, ever since, the Arminian faction bare sway, who all labored, to conjoyne
with them, as far as might be, in outward ceremonies, and some superstitions,
yea some heresies too, and surely it was long since doubted, and it is still to be
feared, that if God had not, or at least by reason of our formality, and luke
warmenesse, will not, by the wisdom, fidelity, and courage of this Council,
and Synod, prevent it, we may again incorporate into one body. For a temporal
pacification being granted with, and a spiritual toleration being granted,
unto those monsters of men, (the inhumanst, and worst of Antichrists members,
the Rebels, and bloody thirsty Locusts of Ireland,) and having gotten already
this sufferage to be your most loyal Catholic Subjects, what shall hinder,
but as now, with the Prelates, they are joined, armies in arms, the next
victory atcheived, the Prelates shall join with them, animis, in mind and
opinion, as indeed before, they were not far different, as appears by that one
conjunction, they already so long laid, for your Majesty, to join with a
chief member of their Church, which was a corner stone, in the foundation, of
all our misery; which though it was intended by the Jesuits, and Arminian,
Prelates, for our ruin, (yet blessed be God, who out of darkness, can extract
light,) has been one chief occasion, and means, of reedifying, the
Apostolical Discipline, and Doctrine amongst us, and of the purifying of those
things in both, wherein we were before, too much soyled, with the filth, of
Antichrists late footing here: for they, by the pretended warrantablenesse of
the old ceremonies, obtruded new inventions, of their own, on the Church, and
under the cloak of unity in all, declared their hidden malice, and hypocrifie,
to the purer party, and to truth it self: That so from lukewarmenesse, they
might bring us to coldness, to benumnesse; from slacknesse, to defection, from
indifferency, to sencelesnesse, and so to a loathing, of all Religion; and
then, Satan knows, it is just with God, to give such a people up to their own
hearts lust, sending them strong delusions that they should believe a lie ^.
These. 2. 11. 12. [Theres no peace to the wicked, nor with them, Esaias 48. 22.
and 57. 25. as Jehoshaphat, by experience found true. 2 Cron. 20. 37. ne
copulemi^^ cum illis, aut consortium habitote, sed fugite. Trem. and Jun. in
Esaias 48.] that they all might be damned, who believe not the truth, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness, and so received not the love of the truth, that
they might be saved.

7. Reas. The Prelates and their adherentes, labored to raise the estimation of
this book, to such a height, as though there were no other worship, or way of
worshipping God amongst us, by reason whereof generally, (and I speak it with
grief, and by experience,) the whole country hardened themselves in ignorance,
being unwilling, either through a wicked shame, or an ill custom, to ask
knowledge of their own Ministers, for fear of contempt, or lack of company; or
in regard of the Courts, [Who pronounced excommunication, ipso facto, on those
who spoke any thing against it, as corrupt, superstitious, or unlawful, Can.
4. made at London, 1603.] prohibition deterred, from seeking saving knowledge
abroad: For, as a reverend Divine well observes, [Newcomens Sermon on November.
5. before the honorable House of Commons, 1643.] two Sermons in a day, was the
forbidden fruit, and so was also catechizing out of the road-way; and to go to
another parish, to hear a Sermon, (though none, or worse then none, at home)
was a piacular offense: By reason whereof, the communalty, most of them, were
careless of the truth, and never labored to know the power of godliness, and
so wretchedly and securely perished, for want of knowledge, Hos. 4. 6. For, to
be baptized in infancy, to answer the Minister (though by rote) to the
Catechism enjoined, in childhood; to be confirmed by the Bishop, in youth, and
when come to manhood, to pay the Minister his tithes, and offerings; twice a
Sunday to come with the assembly to hear these prayers, and perhaps, once a
month to hear a Sermon, and now and then an Homily, and to receive the
Sacrament twice, or thrice a year, this man was accounted for a good
Protestant; and yet many thousands there are, that do not, or at least cannot
say so much, yet these men must pass for true Christians, and be buried, with
(in sure and certain hope of resurrection to eternal life,) although they were
all their lifetime ignorant, both of their natural estate, and of the nature
and punishment of sin, though they never knew what it was, seriously to
examine, confess, and heartily to bewail their sins, though they were
strangers to the covenant of Grace, never felt the joys of Gods Spirit, nor
labored after the assurance of their election, vocation, nor strived after
inward sanctification, nor endeavored to keep a conscience, void of offense,
toward God and man. Thus false teachers, having made an Idol of this Service,
they cry peace, Jerem. 6. 14. and 1 These. 5. 3. [healing the people slightly,
and crying peace, peace, when sudden destruction is coming on them.] peace,
unto souls, that know not the power of godliness, nor the way to serve him in
spirit, and in truth, in regard they can bear a part, in these written read
prayers, can say the ten Commandments, the Creed, and the Lords Prayer without
book, though they know not the extent of any command, nor labor sincerely for
Gods sake, to keep either, and are ignorant of the sense of those Articles, and
Petitions, and can in no other words, render an account of their faith, nor in
no other form make their requests known to God; and no marvel, since they
depend hereon, as sufficient; and this Catechism is necessarily enjoined to be
taught, without any exposition, but only to teach the bare and naked words,
just as the Bishops of Rome, [Bibliorum lectionem, gignere haereticos, si per
mittatur Laiicis ut illa libere legant. Muscul. in loc. com. page 402. in
Tract. de Script.] forbad the laity, the reading of the Scriptures, for fear of
errors and heresies, when, in truth it was, lest they should spy out their
errors and heresies, superstition and Idolatry.

8. Reas. The gift of prayer, (which is alone proper to all Gods people, Zach.
12. 10. Romans 8. 26. as he has promised, to power on them, the Spirit of Grace
and supplication, and by his Spirit to help their infirmities, and to make
intercession for them, with groans, and sighs, which cannot be uttered, but is
most eminent in his Ministers, who are to pray always, for the people
committed to their charge, Col. 1. 3. Phil. 1. 4. and remember them in their
prayers night and day, 2 Timothy 1. 3. Ephesians. 1. 16. Col. 1. 9. without ceasing:
It being one of the main duties of their Calling, as the Apostles told the
Primitive Church, but we will give our selves continually to prayer, and to the
ministry of the Word,) Acts 6. 4. this most excellent gift, was by very few
Ministers labored after, this necessary duty of their calling, was by most
neglected, and that in regard of this form of prayer, set to their hands; yea,
lately, before their Sermons, many used only the bare words set down in the
Cannon, [Cannon 55. set out, and made at London, 1603.] so that it was rather a
bidding of prayers, then praying indeed, with power and understanding, as we
are all enjoined, 1 Cor. 14. 15. So far were we from pouring out sighs, and
groans, and showing the fruits and power of the Spirit in us, and uttering the
same in a pure language, even the language of Canaan, Isai. 29. 18. [Illum
alloquentur ut populus ipsius, and fidem dabunt illi. Trem. and Jun. in locum.]
praying with all prayer, and supplication, in the Spirit, as the Apostle
exhorts, Ephesians. 6. 18. without distractions, 1 Timothy 2. 8. [For as the
distractions arising from passion, must be avoided so must all others. B^field
in loc.] Now, God looks at the fervency of the affection, and not at the
elegancy of our affected speech; he delights in the lifting up of our hearts,
and not of our voice: [Non vox, sed votum, non musica cordula sed cor, etc.
Oration, est elevatio cordis ad Deum. Aug. (...). per durabimus incumbemus.]
Surely, this book has quenched many good motions in Ministers hearts, and
stifled, the Spirit of prayer, in them that used it, as all conscientious
Ministers know, and have found it (many of them) by experience at best it
hindered, (in regard of the great time bestowed on it,) many godly, from
stretching out their affections in prayer, and pouring out their supplications
unto God, by making their request known unto him, and caused others rudely,
perfunctorily, hastily, to pass over this duty, or else to read it with
affectation, either of which, is no less then will worship.

9. Reason. It has been sacrilegious, in robbing the souls of the people, of
the praying gifts of their Ministers, upon any special occasion, but specially
at the administration of the Sacraments, which was one part of their Function,
to intercede between God and them, upon all occasions, and to praise him for
them, upon any special blessing received; Exodus 23. 31. Numb. 16. 47. Deuteronomy.
10. 8. 1 Chronicles. 23. 30. Acts 6. 4. Therefore neither Christ, nor his Apostles,
prescribed any set form, neither to pray, nor praise before the administration
of them, but only instructed us in the forms of consecration, without adding
any more; Matthew. 28. 11. and 26. 27. 26. Mar. 13. 22, 23, etc. hereby, teaching
those that are Dispensers of his mysteries, to pray, and praise God, with, and
for the people, according as Gods Spirit shall move, and enlarge their hearts.

10. Reas. It has been in every age, and would, if continued, be a cause of
endless strife in the Church, and of raising differences and discord amongst
the Ministers thereof, whilst some applaud it as good; others condemn it as
evil, and others connive at it, as tolerable; now, St. Paul advises us, Rom
14. 19. to seek those things which make for peace, and whereby one may edify
another withal; and Romans 12. 18. if it be possible, to live peaceably with all
men, and by no means to give 1 Cor. 10. 31, 32. [Sith it may be left off
without sin, and to retain it; is, and has been, occasion of sin, Ergo, it
ought to be taken away.] offense, either to the Jews, or to the Greeks, or to
the Church of God, but to do all to Gods glory, and the peoples edifying, in
faith, and love.

11. Reas. This books reading, together with the book of Homilies, was all the
service expected from many Ministers, especially from Vicars Chorals, and
country Curates, by reason whereof, idle, deboyst, at least illiterate, and
many handicrafts men, were continually chosen to be Ministers, and ordained to
be stewards of the mysteries of God, in as ample and large a form, as the most
grave, and learned of our Divines, there being but one manner of [Vide the
book of ordination of Ministers.] consecration, by reason whereof, God was
greatly dishonored, Acts 6. 3. Heb. 5. 4. Romans 10. 15. [How shall they preach,
(de jure) unless they be sent of God.] his Word contemned, Jer. 23. 31. 1 Timothy
3. 4. this sacred Function disgraced, [Ridiculosa res est, imo magis periculosa
speculator caecus, Doctor inscius, praecursor claudus, prelatus negligens,
praeco mutus. Gilbertus.] the souls, both of the ordainers, 1 Timothy 5. 22. and
ordained, Act. 8. 19, 20. hazarded, endangered, if not Zach. 11. 16, 17. Hos.
4. 5. Mat. 22. 29. starved to death, by reason of these blind and dumb
watchmen: For he is dishonored, when they run before they are sent, as they
must needs do, who are not qualified with gifts: his Word is contemned, when
they are not apt to teach; this sacred office disgraced, made ridiculous, by
setting a blind man to watch, when the Wolf comes, an ignorant Pastor, to
teach, by sending a lame man in a speedy message, a lazy Prelate to the great
work, or a dumb man, to reprove the people, and to instruct them; the ordainers
souls are hazarded, in laying hands suddenly on the unworthy and unfitting,
whilst the sheep perish for want of knowledge, for the hireling being fled,
the Wolf catches them, and scatters them: [Vide the harmony of Consessions,
Sect. 11.] For, except a Priest be ordained for the work of teaching, he cannot
take to himself the name of a Priest, or Bishop.

12. Reas. Lastly, the names, titles, and attributes of God, are hereby taken
in vain, for it is impossible, in that time which is ordinarily allotted for
this service, and as commonly, its usually read, that any man can with
understanding and reverence, and affection, as is due, relate, and read them
all, as in the book is prescribed. God commands our words to be few, Eccles. 5.
1, 2. [Vt commodius tibi caveas, a festinatione, and offensa ejus. Trem. and
Jun. not. in locum.] And the reason is added, because God is in heaven, and
thou art in earth; he is full of Majesty, and wisdom, and thou art an infirm
and sinful creature: Vain repetitions and bablings, declare thy infidelity, in
both these attributes; for either thou think to be heard with the hypocrite,
Matthew. 6. 7, 8. for thy much speaking, (as Baals Priests, did 1 King. 18. 26.
call on him, from morning to noon, O Baal! hear us: So we in our Letany, We
beseech thee to hear us good Lord; and Lord have mercy upon us, Christ have
mercy upon us, Lord have mercy upon us, which is above thirty times reiterated,
and the Lords Prayer five or six in every morning service,) or else thou
doubtest of his love, in granting thy first Petitions, and so ask without
faith, which is sin, Romans 14. 23. Heb. 11. 6. James 1. 6. Or, lastly, thou
questionest his omniscience, as if Christ's words were not true, your Father
knows what things ye have need of, before ye Matthew. 6. 8. ask, and whatsoever
ye ask the Father in my name, shall be granted, John 14. 13, 14. and 15. 7. and
16. 23. 1 Epist. Joh. 5. 14, 15. unto you.

Nay, it is to be feared, there is a great deal of sin in our prayers we use, in
directing our Petitions to particular persons in the sacred Trinity, excluding
the other two, or not using Christ as our Mediator in them, when as we are
taught, that the Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, is to be worshipped,
[Athanasius Creed, the Catholic faith is this, That we worship one God in
Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, without confounding the persons, or dividing the
substance.] and Christ has taught us, to direct our prayers unto his Father,
Mat 6. 9. in his Name, Ioh. 19. 23. being moved by his Spirit thereunto: In
that day, ye shall ask me nothing; verily verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye
ask the Father in my name, he will give it you; hitherto have you asked nothing
in my name, Ask, and you shall receive, that so your joy may be full: And so
the Apostle, Col. 3. 17. Whatsoever ye do, in word or deed, do all in the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ, giving thanks to God, and the Father by him.
[Besides, its enjoined by this book, to read Iowish fables, as Tobit, and
humane commands, contrary to Tit. 1. 14. excluding the reading of other
canonical Scripture; and reading the Psalms in the corruptest translation,
omitting the tit^^s, and some words in the body of the Text, adding and
detracting from the Word, which is every where forbidden, as Psalm. 9. 16. and
92. 4. contrary to Gods prescript, Prove. 30. 6. Deuteronomy. 12. 32.] To close up all,
if then this book be made no better then an Idol by many, whereby the vulgar
are Iull'd asleep in ignorance and superstition, in security, and
lukewarmnesse; if thereby Gods ordinance he hindered, justled out, or at least
shortened, neglected, and his Word made of none effect by this tradition, if it
be burdensome and injurious to the painful Ministers of Christ, and has many
unprofitable, superstitious, and scandalous ceremonies in it, (which has
occasioned much mischief, as in hindering the Ministers from the due execution
of their office, in being a means to raise persecution against them, whereby
they have been dispossessed of their livelihoods, and liberties; also being an
offense to the godly, both at home and abroad, and a stumbling block to the
Papists, hardening them in their Idolatry and impenitency) if it has hindered
the spiritual worship of God, in most parts of its service, and caused the
Ministers to neglect the gift of prayer, and the stirring up those gifts are in
them, and the executing the special duty of prayer imposed on them: if thereby
the people are deprived of the praying gifts of their Ministers, where they
are, or at least ought, or might be; if it has been, now is, and for ever, is
like to be, a matter of endless strife, [Vide the Preface to the Directory.]
and contention; if it has brought in an ignorant Mechanic ministry, and
thereby hazarded both the souls of the ordainers, and ordained, and of those
poor ignorant souls, that are under their charge: if lastly, Gods Word is
hereby corrupted, and the reading of it neglected, and Jewish fables read in
the place thereof, in Gods service, and hereby occasion is given of Gods name
being taken in vain, to the abuse of his titles, and attributes, and if hereby
the manner of his worship is not rightly observed, nor Word obeyed, as has
been declared, surely then, this book ought not any longer to be tolerated, but
totally, and speedily to be taken away, and his spiritual worship to be set
up, or else surely his judgments will fall on us for this will worship. As for
Episcopacy, and Church Discipline, are they not both as they are now exercised,
cruel, and Antichristian? cruel in their tyranny, Antichristian in their
ambition, and Prelacy? John Wickliffe (that great Champion of the Gospel, and
Martyr for Christ's sake) reckoned up [Fox Acts and Mon. vol. 1. p. 414. printed
1610.] the twelve disciples of Antichrist: as, 1. Popes: 2. Cardinals: 3.
Patriarchs: 4. Archbishops: 5. Bishops: 6. Archdeacons: 7. Officials: 8. Deans:
9. Monks: 10. Cannons and Prebends: 11. Friars: 12. Pardoners: this being one
of the Articles exhibited to the Council of Constance against him; nor is
there any of these named in the Gospel of Christ, (unless it be Bishops, as
they are Synonimous with Pastors, and Elders) and yet six of these we still
retain, contrary to the Word, and the opinion of other Protestant Churches, for
the latter Confession of the Church [Vide the harm. of Confess. printed at
Cambr. 1586. In the latter Confess. of Helv. p. 344.] of Helvetia, says of
Archbish ops, Suffragans, Metropolitans, Archdeacons, etc. governors of that
Hierarchy, both higher and lower, touching all these, we pass not a rush, what
they have been in times past, or are now; it is sufficient for us, that for as
much as concerns Ministers, we have the doctrine of the Apostles, and
therefore, knowing that those sort of Church Officers, are neither instituted
of Christ, nor his Apostles, we teach that they are so far from being
profitable, that they are pernicious, and hurtful unto the Church of God: for
the power that's given to the Ministers of the Church, is the same, and alike in
all, and in the beginning, the Bishops, or Elders, did with a common consent
and labor, govern the Church: No man lifted up himself above another, none
usurped greater power, or authority over his fellow Bishops; for they remembered
Christ's Mat. 20. 26. [Christus, hic non dehortatur, nequis Rex sit, aut
magistratu fungatur, sed dehortur, nequis inter ministros sui verbi quaerat
praecellentiam ac potestatem. Beza in loc.] words, he that will be chief among
you, let him be your servant: Therefore they kept themselves by humility, and
did mutually aid one the other in government and preservation of the Church;
notwithstanding, for order sake, some one of the Ministers, called the assembly
together, propounded to them matters to be consulted of together, did collect
and gather the votes, and sentences of the rest, and as much as in them lay,
provided that there might be no confusion, as Peter did, in the first Acts 15.
7. Council in the Acts: who, for all that, was neither above the rest, nor had
greater authority then the rest: so true is that of St. Cyprian, [Cypr. de
simpli. Cleri. Apostoli and Presbyteri non de honoribus and sessionibus, his
pugnatumest, sed summa humilitate convenientes ipsam causam inspexerunt.
Aretius in Act. Res prius in Apostolorum, and Presbyterorum conventu audita,
utraque part disceptatur, deinae cum plebo co^municatur, a Petro and Jacobo.
Beza in loc.] the same doubtless were the rest of the Apostles, that Peter
was, having an equal fellowship with him, both in honor and power, but the
beginning hereof preceedeth from unity; to signify to us, that there is but
one Church, and St. Jerome is very [Hierom. in Epist. ad Titum.] bold, before
(says he) that by the instinct of the Devil, there was parts-taking in
Religion, the Churches were governed by the common advice of Priests, but after
that, every one thought that those whom he baptized, were his own, and not
Christ's; it was decreed, that one of the Priests should be chosen, and set over
the rest, who should have the care of the whole Church laid upon him, and by
whose means, all schisms should be removed. But this order Jerome avoucheth
not to be of God; for he straightway adds, even as the Priests knew, by the
continual custom of the Church, that they were subject to him that was set
over them: So the Bishops must know, that they are above the Priest; rather by
custom, then by prescript rule of Gods truth; for they should have the
government of the Church in common with them, and therefore no man can forbid
by any right^ that we may not return to the old appointment of God, and rather
receive that, then the custom devised by men. So far that Church: yea St.
Hierome is [Hiero in Epist. ad Evagr.] plain, in the old time, Churches were
governed by the common consent of Priests, and at that time Bishops and Priests
were all one; after, by custom of the Church, and not of the truth of the
Lords Ordinance, Bishops were preferred before Priests, but yet, they must
govern Churches together in common.

Now that both the prelacy, and power, which the Bishops in our days arrogate
to themselves, is not Jure Divino, but Antichristiano, is manifest from the
word; for the Apostle tells us, 2 These. 2. 7. that the mystery of iniquity did
then work, only he who now lets, will let, until he be taken out of the
way, which learned Zanchy [Nos per mysterium iniquitatis, ipsum
Antichristianismum, furtim Serpentem, una cum Haereibus ei viam sternentibus
intelligamus: Jam enim fundamenta tirannidis Antichristi jaciuntur a Diabolo
sed quae adhuc clam serpunt, nullo propemodum hanc impietatem subodorante:
Zanch. in Epist. ad these.] expounds thus: by the mystery of iniquity we
understand Popery or Antichristianisme it self, which by stealth, creeps
together with those Haeresies, which make way for the same, for even now, the
foundation of Antichristian Tyranny were laid by the Devil, but yet so, as
they lied, and creeped closely, no man almost smelling the impiety thereof; Now
if you will know what these foundations were, godly Bullinger will tell you,
they were none other, but this Ambition, and Coveteousnesse, in the Clergy,
and the exalting of Episcopacy, above Presbytery. For from the exaltation of
Bishops, above Elders, or rather from the abuse of that custom, Antichrist had
his beginning, Bulling. Sermon. 58. in Apoc. for at the first says he, the
Apostles, and Apostolical men, were Ministers of Churches, and governed the
Church, equally, neither did one, take upon him, more pre-eminence then
another, which thing I am able to prove by many testimonies of ancient writers,
if need required. About the Council of Nice and a little before that time,
when Churches were greatly multiplied, were ordained, and customably received,
Metropolitans, (instituted indeed by a laudable, but yet man's Ordinance,) viz.
in every Province, or head City, was ordained a Bishop, or Pastor, which should
have, as it were the oversight of the rest, and should serve for the calling of
Synods, and Assemblies: Yet was it diligently provided then, that he should not
be called primate, (as our Archbishops are) because no man should think
himself preferred above others, in power, but in order: This was confirmed by
the Nicen Council. Socrates lib. 5. Cap. 8. Eccles. Hist. so far Bullinger.
Now these foundations of Antichrist being laid, Boniface the first, in the
reign of Theod. Jun. [Chadderton in his description of the 6. Ages.] began
first, to take upon him dominion over the Churches of Affaicke, but was
repressed by the sixth Affrican Council, whereat was St. Austen. [Bullinger
sermon. 58. in Apocal. pa. 177. English. After that began also the Bishop of
Constantinople, to challenge to himself supremacy, for this cause cheifely,
because that was the Courtly Palace, and Metropolis of the Empire, but he also
by many Bishops was resisted: amongst whom, Leo the first, Bishop of Rome was
chief, as appears in his Epistles to the Emperor, and to diverse Eastern
Bishops, and this hindered his Ambition; shortly after another Bishop of the
same sea, and spirit, afresh, required to have the supremacy given him, whom
Pelagius, and Gregory the great, Bishop of Rome withstood, yea so eager was
Gregory, that he affirmed, whosoever should usurp the title of general
Bishop, he [Grego. Epist. vide the harmony of confession, sect. 11. out of the
english confession page 361. printed at Cambridge. 1586.] was the forerunner of
Antichrist; that he did give unto himself a presumptious, profane, a
sacriligious, and Antichristian name, that he was also the King of pride, and
Lucifer, which prefers himself before his brethren; That he has forsaken
the faith, and is the vant curror of Antichrist: St. Cyprian [Cyprian de
simplic. cler.] says, all the Apostles were of like power amongst themselves,
and the rest were the same that Peter was, and therefore it was said
indifferently to them all, feed ye, indifferently to them all, go ye into
the world, and teach ye the Gospel: For there is but one Bishopric, and a
piece thereof, is perfectly, and wholly holden, of every particular Bishop; and
St. Hierome says, all Bishops, wheresoever they be, whether at Rome, or at
Eugubium, or at Constantinople, or at Rhegium, be, of all like pre-eminence,
and of like preisthood, [Harmony of confessi. sect. 11. out of the english
confessi. page 360.] But at last, Boniface the third, Bishop of Rome, by money
obtained of Phocas the Emperor, [Chadderton of the 6. Ages of the World, and
Mr Fox his Acts and Mon. vol 1. page 108. By Phocas his constitution, Rome
became head of all Churches, Heraclius the succeding Emperor cut off his hands
and his feet. Fox ibid.] (who killed his own Sovereign Mauritius by a
traitorous villainy to aspire to the Empire Anno 613. or 607. as others,) to be
called chief or universal Bishop) and thus Antichrist was enthroned; for
after that (says Bullinger) he was taken of most part of the Western Bishops
[Bullinger. in Apocal. cap. 13. ser. 58. page 177.] for Apostolical, and many
matters were brought before him to determine, whereby he got the favor of many
Princes, chiefly of France, by whose aid he drove out of Italy both the Emperor
of Greece, and the Kings of Lombardy, and brought Rome, and the best and most
flourishing parts of Italy, under his own subjection. Thus he that let in the
Apostles time, being taken away, lo 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. 8. that wicked one is
revealed, climing thereto by this usurped Prelacy.

Having thus proved the original of this Antichristian Hierarchy, please you
to see the confession of the rotestant Church of France, [Harmony of confessi.
sect. 11. Art. 29. 30.] we believe that this true Church, ought to be governed
by that regiment or discipline, which our Lord Jesus Christ has established,
viz. so, that there be in it Pastors, Elders, Deacons; and again, we believe
that all true Pastors, in what place soever they be placed, have the same, and
equal authority among themselves, given unto them under Jesus Christ, the only
head, and the chief and alone universal Bishop: And that therefore it is not
lawful for any Church, to challenge unto it self dominlon, or sovereignty over
any other Church: See also the Belgique Confession in this matter, [Harmony, ut
supra, the Confession of Belgiq. Art. 30.] The spiritual regiment which God
himself has delivered in his Word, and by which the Church ought to be ruled,
and governed, are Pastors and Ministers, which preach, and righty administer
the holy Sacraments, and Elders, and Deacons, of whom the Senate of the Church
may consist, that by this means true Religion may be preserved, sincere
doctrine in every Place maintained, and spread abroad, that vicious and wicked
men, might after a spiritual manner be rebuked and amended, (and, as it were,
by the bridle of discipline) kept within compass, that the poor in like
manner, and those that be afflicted may be relieved; either with aid or
comfort, according to the several necessity of every one: Again, [Harmony, ut
supra, Art. 31. page 263.] in what place soever the Ministers of the Word of
God do keep, they have all of them the same, and equal power and authority,
being all of them the Ministers of Christ equally, who is the only and
universal head of his Church: But leaving humane authority, I proceed to
divine.

1. Reason. First Christ forbids all Prelacy and superiority, amongst his
Apostles, Matthew. 20. 25, 26, 27. and consequently amongst his Ministers, who
succeeded them; it shall not be so amongst you (viz. to exercise dominion and
authority, one over another in the Church, as its in the State) but he that
will be chief among you, let him be your servant. There must be no Lording, or
overruling Gods heritage, 1 Pet. 5. 2. [(...).] much less over his
Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5. 20. who are all sent by one Commission, Mat. 28. 19,
20. in one Message John 3. 25. with equal power, Acts 26. 18. So that it was
neither lawful for Princes, to derive the power of civil Judicature, [Harmony
of Confession, sect. 11. 3. Observe.] unto Bishops, nor for the Bishops to take
it when it was offered, because our Lord has so distinguished these two, as he
has also severed them, the one from the other, he alone is both King and
Prophet of his Church, he is the universal and 1 Pet. 2. 25. chief Bishop of
our souls, whom all must hear, Matthew. 17. 5.

2. Reas. Secondly, if Bishops were an office [Priore loco, functiones
Ecclesiasticas partim extraordinarias, and temporaneas ut Apostolos, Prophet^^,
Evangelistas, partim ordinarias and perpetuas, ut Pastores and Doctores
comm^^^^ orat. Bezae not. in loc.] different from Elders, and Pastors, no doubt
but the Scripture would have distinguished them, when it records all sorts of
Church Officers, as 1 Cor. 12. 28. there are first Apostles, secondly,
Prophets, thirdly, Teachers, after that Miracles, then gifts of healing, helps
in government, diversities of tongues; here is no mention of Bishops, unless
they will understand them by helps in government which is three degrees below
Teachers, which surely the Bishops will never allow of: And so Ephesians. 4. 11.
there are Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, all which
Christ gave, and which indeed are sufficient, for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying the body of Christ, till we all
come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ; now
since the word of God which is able to make the man of God perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto every good work, has not distinguished them, but contrariwise,
where the office of a Bishop is spoken of, there every particular thing
required therein, belongs to every Pastor, or Minister to observe, as appears
1 Timothy 3. 2. to the 8 verse. And Titus 1. 6. to the 10 verse, as namely to be
blameless, The husband of one wife, having faithful children, not accused of
^yo^, or unruly, not self willed, nor soon angry, nor given to wine, no
striker, nor coveteous, but a lover of hospitality, and of good men, sober,
just, holy, temperate, holding fast the truth:) Ergo they are not different.
Christ's Bishops, Teachers, Pastors, are all one, though Antichrists be not.

3. Reas. Thirdly, the preaching Elders, we read of in the Scripture, were
Bishops, thus those Elders Titus was to ordain; in the 5 verse he enjoynes him
to ordain Elders in every City, and shows how [Titus 1. 5. 6. 7. it was in
the 5 (...) and its (...), in the 7.] they ought to be qualified, that are to
be ordained. Verse 6. if any be blamlesse, the husband of one wife, having
faithful children, not accused of riot, or unruly, and in the 7 verse he
changes the name Elders, into Bishops, giving a reason, why they must be thus
qualified, in regard of the office of a Bishop or Elder, who must be
blameless, as the steward of God, not self willed, not soon angry etc. And
so Acts 20. 17. St Paul sent to Ephesus and called the Elders (...), verse 17.
of the Church; and these men he bids to take heed unto themselves, and to all
the flock, over which the Holy Ghost had made them Bishops, (...), verse. 28.
to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood. Nor
were there any other Church Officers at Philippi, then Bishops Phil. 1. 1. and
Deacons: by Bishops, understanding those that ruled and taught them, by Deacons
those who were the Stewards of the Churches stock. So Beza expounds it.
[Episcoporum nomine, eos qui verbo and gubernatione praeerant, diaconorum, eos
qui Ecclesia aerarii essent oeconomi intelligit. Beza in locum.] it; and indeed
promiscuously in Scripture are these two names often taken, hereby showing, that
they both signified the same persons; nor does the Word of God declare to us
any other ordinary officers in the Church, then Bishops and Deacons, which are
sometimes called Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Ministers, Stewards, Ambassadors,
Doctors, of these two alone, the duty is prescribed; and because they were one,
therefore the duty of an Elder, or Teacher, is no where prescribed, but under
the office of a Bishop; Nor did the first Primitive Christians know any
difference between them; indeed, I find in the third Epist. of St. John, who
was the longestliver of the Apostles, that he therein blames Diotrephes, for
loving to have the pre-eminence. 3 Epist. Joh. verse. 8. [Ambitio and avaritia,
duae pessimae pestes, presertim in eis qui aliquod Ecclesiasticum munus
sustinent, in persona Diotrephis damnantur. Bezae not. in loc.] he was the
first upstart Prelate we read of, whom he there sharply rebukes, and threatens
to punish for his prating malicious tongue, and for his ambitious and
uncharitable deeds, and for his covetous and vainglorious heart.

4. Reas. Fourthly, we read of many: Phil. 1. 1. Acts 20. 17. 28. and 14. 23.
Tit. 1. 5. 7. Bishops together belonging to one Church, but never of many
Churches, much less of all the Churches in a large Shiere, or two, belonging
to one Bishop in the Scripture: Ergo, it was not from the Spirit of Christ, but
of Antichrist, that first ordained Prelacy and Episcopacy, as its now exercised
in most parts of the Christian world: For it is not without an Emphasis, that
which Saint Paul gives in charge to Titus, to place Presbyters or Bishops, in
Greek, (...), which Beza, and Erasmus render, Oppidatim, in every town, where
might be a convenient assembly, and these also in every town are (...), in the
plural number. So far was it from having oneman in a Province, or Country;
yea, St. Paul commands the Elders of Ephesus, to take heed to themselves, and
to all the flock, [(...),] not flocks, neither in the duall, nor plural
number; this was one special difference, between the Apostles and other
Bishops, that they had care over all other Churches of Christ, throughout the
world, 2 Cor. 11. 28. as St. Paul confesses; and Zanchy well notes, [Apostolus
non certi^ sedibus and locis aligaretur, sed ubique locorum auctoritatem
plantandi Ecclesias haberet. Zan. in Exp. Ep. ad Ephesians. c. 1.] that the Apostles
were not tied to any place, but every where had authority to plant Churches, as
is plainly manifest in the Acts of the Apostles; but Bishops were tied to some
flock, or someparticular Congregation.

5. Reas. Fifthly, there were no greater ordinary Church Officers or Rulers,
then those Elders who did labor in the Word, and Doctrine, who were therefore
accounted worthy of double honnour, 1 Timothy 5. 17. as St. Paul commands Timothy
to see performed; and therefore, either these were Bishops, or at least they
could not be exalted above them, nor were they in the Apostles times, but
afterward one of the Elders, (for the preservation of unity, and to avoid
schisms) by way of excellency, was called Bishop, for order sake, yet for many
years he did no act of power, but with the consent of Presbytery, and also with
consent, and in the presence of the people, [Euseb. Eccles. Hist. lib. 6. cap.
35. Cypr. lib. 3. Epist. 10. and lib. 1. Epist. 3. Causab. advers. Baron.
exerc. 15. Numb. 28.] For till Dionysius, Bishop of Rome, rashly and
presumptuously invented the Hierarchy of Angels, intruding himself into those
things he knew not, vainly puffed up with his fleshly mind; the Church knew no
distinction of Parishes, for two hundred years space; for it was he (they say)
distinguished and made division of parish Churches, [Chaddertons ages of the
world.] and Diocesses, circa Annum 277. and then shortly after came Gaius,
circa An. 295. and he distinguished the degrees of orders, to Priesthood in the
Church, [Chadderton, ut supra.] Now, if before there were no particular
parishes, nor distinction of Ministers, what power could the Bishops have over
their fellows, [Fox Acts and Mon. in the second Persecution. Par in parem non
habet imperium.] equals, or what power to visit other Churches, and execute
jurisdiction over those, were not? Christ wills, says Mr. Fox, [Fox Acts and
Mon. 1 vol page 6. printed 1610.] all worldly States to be subject under their
superior Rulers, and Magistrates, in whose regiment is dominion and
subjection: And which are not in the regiment of Christ's spiritual Kingdom. We
read often in the degrees of old Councels, that there was an equal degree of
[(...). ex Council* Constant. 2. cap. 36.] thrones, and of honor amongst
Priests, and Ministers. That all Bishops were of like merit, [Fox, ut supra,
page 8.] and of like honor, and all successors together of the Apostles,
(...), [Dion. Areop. in Mr. Fox.] (...) of equal order, and of like honor
amongst themselves.

6. Reas. Sixthly, the ^eys of the kingdom of heaven were equally given to all
the Apostles, John 20. 22, 23. and from them conveyed to all Ministers
successively, equally, and so to every Church, and Congregation; so that where
two or three are gathered together in Christ's name of these Ministers, Christ
is in the midst of them, and whatsoever they shall bind or loose on earth,
shall be bound or loosed in heaven, Matthew. 18. 17, 18, 19, 20. and therefore
the jurisdiction which our Bishops challenge herein, is fraudulent and
injurious; and the reason thereof is, because the government of the Church, was
of old, and is still committed to the Elders, Heb. 13. 17. and 1 Timothy 5. 17.
and how shall, or how can they govern without this power? Surely Christ never
severed the key of order, from the key of jurisdiction, but always joined them
together, when he gave them: as the Evangelists witness, Mat. 16. 19. and Job.
20, 22, 23. Indeed the lawyers amongst the Jews, Luke 11. 52. took away the
key of Knowledge from the common people, and so have the Prelates the key of
jurisdiction from the Elders: and doubtless there is a we belongs to both, in
that they sever those things, which God has joined together. [Illa autem
potestas communis est omnibus ministris. Camer. Promulgatio enim remissionis
peccatoru^ per fidem in Christ^^, and ira Dei, declaratio retinendis in
creduloru^ peccatis summa est Evangelicae praedicationis. Beza in Jo. 20.] But
this is a sin proper to Antichrist, who grants to Chancellours, Commissaries,
Officialls, the key of jurisdiction, who never had the key o^ orders, and
sacrilegiously take away the key of jurisdiction, (for to maintain their
Prelacy and covetousness,) from those Ministers, who are equally Ministers
with them; the confession of our Church is plain, though the practice be
contrary [Harmony of Conf. sect. 11. out of the English Conf. Art. 7.] and ill;
seeing one manner of word is given to all, and one only key belongs to all;
we say that there is but only one power of all Ministers, as concerning opening
and shutting: as touching the Bishop of Rome, for all his flattering Parasites
sing this in his ears, To thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven,
(as though these keys were fit for him alone, and for no body else) Except he
go so to work, as men's consciences may be made pliant, and subdued to the Word
of God, we deny that he does either open, or shut, or has the keys at all, and
although he taught and instructed the people (as would God he might once truly
do, and persuade himself it were at least any piece of his duty) yet we think
his key to be never a whit better, or of greater force then other men's; for who
has severed him from the rest? Who has taught him more cunningly to open, or
better to absolve then his brethren? all which may most justly be retorted on
the Bishops. For, seeing one manner of word is given to all Ministers, by God,
and one only key belongs to all, we conclude therefore, that there is but one
only power, belonging to all ministers: as concerning opening and shutting, and
as touching all Diocesan Bishops, although their flattering Chancelors,
Officialls, Registers, Civilians sing this in their ears, that the keys of
ordination, and jurisdiction belong alone to them, (as being fit alone for
them, and for none else) except they go so to work, as men's consciences may be
made pliant, and be subdued to the Word of God, we deny that they do either
open, or shut, or have the keys at all, and although they taught and instructed
the people, (as would God they would once truly do, and persuade themselves it
were at the least any piece of their duty) yet we think their key to be never a
whit better, or of greater force then other men's, for who has severed them
from the rest? or who has taught them more cunningly to open or better to
absolve then their brethren? surely not God, nor Christ, and if not, who then?

7. Reas. Seventhly, the Elders were to be ordained by the imposition of the
hands of the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4. 14. for that gift was conferred on Timothy,
by their laying on of hands: so Bamabas and Saul, (though Apostles) were
separated unto the work whereunto the Holy Ghost called them, by the Elders,
fasting and praying, and laying their hands on them, and after sending them
away, Acts 13. 2, 3. and Timothy is commanded to lay hands suddenly on none, 1 Timothy 5. 22. [Ne temere quosvis ad Ecclesiasticam ullam functionem admine
quantum videlicet in te est. Camer. Nullius hac in re stultitiae; aut minus
recto affectui favens alienam culpam in te derivato: si quid a collegis
perperam fiat tuam conscentiam puram servato. Bezae not. in Tim. 5.] and though
other more licentious, or covetous Elders, should by their laying on of hands,
consecrate unworthy and unlearned men, unto the Ministry, without his consent,
yet must not he be partaker of other men's sins, viz. neither of the persons,
who being unworthy are ordained, nor of these unwise Elders, who for fear,
favor or profit, ordain such men; which plainly shows, that even the power of
ordin^^ion (which is the chief thing our Bishops challenge to themselves) was
as well in the rest of the Elders, as in Timothy, though they might use it
unlawfully: A Priest, and a Bishop, says the Church of Wirtemberg, are all
one, [Harmony of Confess. sect. 11. out of the Confess. of Wirtemberg.] And
whereas its objected, that Timothy and Titus were Bishops of Ephesus and Creet,
as in the postscripts appears to their Epistles, and that they were commanded
by Saint Paul, to ordain Elders; and therefore that this power belongs only to
the Bishops, I answer: First, they were both Evangelists, as appears, 2 Timothy 4.
5. and Tit. 3. 12. and so as Evangelists, not Elders, or ordinary Bishops, were
not tied to any certain Church, but to attend and follow the Apostles,
finishing their work, in planting and watering Churches where they came, being
left in those places, to execute what was left undone by the Apostles:
Secondly, though they were, or might be chief in setting things in order in the
Church, both in ordination, and jurisdiction; yet did they not perform these,
but with the consent of the Presbyters, as appears in Timothies laying on of
hands with other Elders, 1 Timothy 5. 22. and in that other Elders might ordain
without him, otherwise he could not abstain from their sin. I will conclude
this point with the Observator upon the confession of Ausburg, [Harmon. of
Confess. printed at Cambr. 1586. sect. 11. out of the Confess. of Ausburg.] There
are three kinds of Bishops may be reckoned up: First, Apostolical, which is
indeed the Apostles Bishops, and is common to all persons and Ministers of the
Word: The second is Ecclesiastical, and is a Bishop in order, not in degree,
which came in by an old invention of man's appointment, and not of Gods
ordinance: The third is Satanicall, Tyrannical, Antichristian, whereby at
first, Diocesses, after Provinces; and at last, the whole Church, was under the
power and jurisdiction of one Bishop, which as yet flourishes in the Roman,
false named Church, which we detest, as a most certain pestilence of the
Christian Church; and yet this is the discipline, with vi, and armis, must be
maintained as Jure Divino, which plainly appears to be Antichristian, if not
diabolical; their cruelty in practice that use it, and impiety in doctrine,
will plainly declare the same, viz. That they are far from observing the
spiritual, regiment, which God has delivered in his Word, and therefore
justly has God powered out the vial of his wrath, as was fore prophesied Apoc.
16. 10. on the seat of the beast, which is this Episcopal and Prelaticall
power of the Clergy [Cottons exposition of the 7. vialls.] whereby the Beast
came to be enthroned in his seat, and continues there still sitting, so that
now their power and authority is ecclipsed, their monarchical government
darkened, Revel. 16. 10. 11. [Quinti Angeli Historia, duabus plagis Regnum
Bes^iae affigentis, foris tenebris, intus ulceribus doloribusque gravissimis,
in universo Regno, quibus malorum conscientiam afficeret and obfirmationem per
vicacissimam Idololatrarum castigaret, unde perturbatio orta est furibunda, ex
perturbatione indignatio, insaniaque (...) in Deum frendens, and in scipsam
injuria eff^ciem. Junius in locum.] and they are mad with rage against
themselves, in that they suffered the Puri^^ans at all to live, or made any
pacification with the Scots, or called a Parliament, and because of the pains
they suffer, both in their honors, goods and persons, they blaspheme the name
of God, writing, and speaking against the known truth, and hardening themselves
in wickedness, for the maintenance of their former honors, and revenews,
they have not repented of their sins formerly committed, to give God the glory,
by an open and humble confession thereof: for although their doings both in the
high Commission, Starchamber, and other inferior Courts, Conclaves and
Consistaries openly proclaim their cruelty, by molesting, silencing,
suspending, yea and depriving as much as in them lay most of the godly
Ministers of the Kindome (such as allowed not their superstitious and humane
inventions, and ungodly ceremonies) exposing them to their fury making them the
spectacle of their indignation, and accounting them as the offscouring of all
things, adjudging them as enemies to the State, disturbers of the Church,
schismatic Teachers, men unworthy to live, (who indeed then were holy, and
religious men, such as of whom the ungrateful world was not worthy) yet have
they not recanted of this their malice, and hypocrisy, covetousness, or
vainglory: Therefore as Christ says of the Pharisees, Scribes, and Doctors
of the Law in his time, who spoke against, and persecuted the known truth, so
may I of these men who have persecuted his members; and also of those who are
persecuted by them; Blessed are ye when these men hate you, and separate you
from their company, and excommunicate you, reproaching you, and casting out
your name as evil, for the son of Man's sake: Luke 6. 22. [Haec autem
sententia piis omnibus, praecipue vero electis Christi ministris maximam
consolationem adforre solet. Camerar.] rejoice ye and leap for joy, for your
reward is great in heaven. But unto those Bishops and Prelates of the
Antichristian Hierarchy (who loved the highest place in the Synagogues, and to
be called of men Rabbi, Rabbi, or Luke 22. 25. [Benefactores, pastores non ad
dominandum, sed ad serviendum vocati sunt. Bez. in. loc. Quoties auditis d^
Regno Calorum quod utique spirituale est, nec minus differt a Regno mundi, qu^^
terra differt a Caelo, nolite vobis fingere talem speciem rerum qualem videtis
in Regnis terrenis. Camer.] (...) gracious Lords, who enjoyed temporal
Lordships and usurped Dominions over their brethrens consciences, and means,
who declared their pride like Sodom, Esaias 3. 9. and with the Peacocke the
emblem of it, must have their silken trains carried after them, imitating
herein that Son of perdition, that man of sin (who cares only for great
revenews, and multiplying dignities, though got by murder, and cruelty, fraud,
and hypocrisy,) who have devoured the peoples goods, and nothing cared for
their souls, starving them by their seldom preaching, and less earing for
the flock; who kept their brethren as slaves, or at least their hirelings, who
followed Antichrists Laws, Constitutions, Decrees, and injunctions, for the
most part, flat contrary to Christ's Doctrine, and Word (as I will instance in
some few perticulars.) Consider how opposite they are to Gods Word in their
inventions, and practice: For besides their bowing down to Altars, erecting of
Images in Churches, bowing at the verbal name of Jesus, crossing in baptism,
and dedicating the infant to the service of Christ by that sign, and other
superstitions before mentioned, flat contrary to Gods word, Deuteronomy. 5. 8. and
Numb. 15. 39. 40. by reason whereof the two first Commandments are broke,
first in the third commandment, God requires not to take his name in vain,
but to swear in judgment, justice and truth, Jer. 4. 2. [Judicium
discretionis ex part jurantis, ut neque sit falsum, neque illicitum, quod per
juramentum confirmatur, and justitia per quam confirmat quod licitum est:
judicio vero caret juramentum incantum; veritate autem juramentum mendax,
justitia autem juramentum iniquum sive illicitum. Aquin. 22. dae. q. 89. Ar. 3.
c.] but these give and allow of general oaths ex officio, wherein the party
knows not what he swears to, and which cannot possible sometimes be kept,
without great sin, and danger: that impossible oath of Churchwardens and
Sid^men: also the blind oaths of Canonical obedience, to Ordinaries and to the
observation of the popish statutes of the Universities, and for the maintenance
of their pride, superstition, and ceremonies, and in all, or most of which, the
name and honor of God is profaned, polluted, men's consciences burdened, and a
great deal of sin committed, and so there wants judgment, truth, and
righteousness, which are the three proper ingredients for this physic.

Secondly, God commands us to keep holy the Sabbath Day, Commandment the 4.
[Heylin, Pocklington, Brierwood contra Byfeild, Dr Prideaux in lect. de Sab.]
They say there is no Sabbath, and there fore tolerate playing, dancing,
sporting, fighting, and finding their own recreations on that day, which is
opposite to his word, Esaias 58. 13. thou shall not do thine own ways, nor
find thine own pleasures, nor speak thine own words, but these Arminian
Prelates, made this command of God which is guarded of either side with three
other commands, to be void, and of none effect; but only of humane
constitution, and not from any obligation of the Word, or Gods command.

Thirdly, Gods requires or commands us, to hearken unto, and obey his Word
only, both in doctrine, Isai. 1. 20. and discipline, for this is able thoroughly
to furnish the man of God, and 2 Timothy 3. 17. to make him perfect to every good
work; they say, we must follow and obey the Cannons, Injunctions, and
Traditions of the Fathers, and of the Church, or rather of the Synod, of these
Bishops, Prelates; yea, they punish the violation, and speaking against these,
with far greater punishment then they do the violation and speaking against the
commands of God, as appears in their 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Eccles.
Cannons, agreed in the Synod of London, 1603. where excommunication, which is
the severest censure of the Church, is the least punishment, on the breach of
either of them; yea, and that in most of them, ipso facto, and no restitution
from this censure, but from their Pope, the Archbishop, being herein plainly
Antichristian: For, but to speak against any of their humane traditions, vain
ceremonies, as being either wicked, or superstitious, or such as godly men may
not with a good conscience use; this is excommunication, ipso facto, when lo,
let a man curse, or swear, abstain from his service, profane his Sabbath, be
drunk, lie, or commit fornication, etc. If he will pay his mulct in Court, or
compound secretly with the Chancellor, Archdeacon, Register; yea, sometimes, if
but with the Paritor, his offense is presently remitted; and for many of these,
never called in question; but if he be absolved, his fine being paid, presently
he has his pardon, or indulgence, although his own Minister be offended, and
the whole Congregation scandalized, and yet having his Quietus est, from the
Court, or Letters of dismission, he must be received to the communion, nihil
obstante.

Fourthly, Christ tells us, the labourer is worthy of his hire, Mat. 10. 10.
and it is St. Paul's command to all Christians, Gal. 6. 6. Let him that is taught
in the Word, communicate to him that teaches him in every good thing; nay, it is
Gods own ordination, 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14. that they which preach the Gospel,
should live of the Gospel, as they that wait on the Altar were partakers of
the Altar: Also that they are worthy of double honor especially, 1 Timothy 5. 17.
[honour double, of reverence, of maintenance.] who labor in the Word and
doctrine: For, thou shall not muzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the
corn; but these frustrate all these commands of God by their words, and doings;
for they say, ten, or twenty pounds stipend, is sufficient by the year, for a
Curate, the lesser and privy tithes belong only to the Vicar; it is for a
sacrilegious Bishop, or Lay-Gentleman, for a prelaticall Prebendary, or Monkish
Dean and Chapter to have the greater tithes; for perhaps, preaching once a year
at a Cathedral, or over-seeing a Curate read prayers, and getting a Sermon to
be preached once a month, and for this or the like only service, I have known
those have had six hundred, eight hundred, nay, thousands of pounds yearly: The
Bishop of Winchester, as I am informed by honest men, has had five or six
thousand pounds yearly income, seven years together, and yet never did preach
one Sermon in his Cathedral. But this sacrilege, and ungodly deeds of
Prelates, and double beneficed men* might not be spoken against, none of the
inferior Clergy might move their tongues against them, on peril of
suspension, [As of old the Prelates against the Lollards, Wicklivists,
Lutherans: So now of late, against the Puritans, Nonconformists, Calvinists, as
they styled them, when they vented their spleen and malice.] deprivation,
excommunication, loss of liberty, members, and sometimes life it self.

Fifthly, St. Paul commands, that a man, 1 Cor. 14. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. speak,
and sing, Col. 3. 16. and Epist. 5. 19. in the Church, that all may understand,
what is spoken or sung: For, if I (says he) know not the meaning of the voice,
I shall be to him that speaks, a Barbarian, and so he to me; for as we must
pray with the Spirit, and understanding, so we must speak, and sing with the
Spirit, and understanding; we must teach and admonish one another in Psalms
and Hymns, otherwise, though thou speak, and sing well, yet thy brother is not
edified; therefore the Apostle would rather speak five words with his
understaning, to teach others, then ten thousand words in an unknown tongue:
but our Bishops, and Prelates, are of a contrary opinion and practice; who have
their psalms, confessions; yea, prayers sung out with such theatricall music,
and voices, as sackbuts, organs, cornets, etc. That the ignorant, and vulgar
sort of people perceive naught but a noise, understand not a word, no, not so
much as Amen, it is so tossed and quavered up and down, with the warbling tongue,
and frisking of the air; so that should a Turk, or unbeliever, come into the
Church, they might well say they are mad, 1 Cor. 14. 23. For, instead of
teaching, and admonishing one another heteby, they corrupt and defile one
another; The [Cornel. Agrip. in lib. de vanitat. scient. cap. 17. circa finem.]
zealous Friar complained of it long since, that such liberty was used in
Cathedralls, that profane and obscene sonnets were played on the organs,
equally, in the midst, with divine service, and those pious duties, and holy
prayers, even that one not excepted, which Christ commanded to say, not sing
forth, are sung forth, not with humane, but rather belluine noyses, made with
lascivious music, and great cost, not for the better understanding of the
hearer, nor for the greater elevation of the mind to Godward, but rather to
provoke to uncleanness, and to stir up lust, whilst the Choristers neigh
forth the treble, others roar aloud the tenor, others baul forth the
counter-tenor, others bellow forth the mean, and others groan out the basse;
and so they cause indeed, a great noise to be heard, but nothing of the matter,
which is sung, is understood, no, not so much as the words: but the power of
judgment, is taken away together, both from the ear and mind; and indeed, [Cum
mihi accidit, ut me amplius cantus quam res quae canitur movet, poenaliter me
peccare co^fiteor, and tunc mallem non audire cantantem. Aug. Confess.] Austen
confesses, (who was no hater of Church-musick) when the melody of the music
moves me more then the matter sung, I confess my self to have grossly sinned,
and then my singing offends me; which is always in our Cathedralls, where men
unskilful in the art of music, cannot understand what is sung; and therefore
come often, more to be delighted with the melody of the music, and voices,
then with the divine matter of the Psalms and Hymns: Aquinas therefore calls
it Judaizing, which is, [In veteri testamento, instrumenta corporalia aliquid
figurabant: sed nunc uti Judaizare videatur; preterea tunc, populi duri erant,
and carnales, unde erant per ejusmodi instrumenta provocandus: sednuns non est
cadem ratio, nam musica instrumenta magis movent ad delectationem, quam per ea
formetur interius bona dispositio. Aquin. Sum. 3. par. q. 91.] not lawful
under the Gospel, nay, in truth, musical instruments, they allure rather to
carnal, then spiritual delight, instructing more the ear, then the heart, and
delighting the flesh, rather then the spirit; yea, there is this sin more in
it, that many tradesmen, and ignorant persons are made Ministers, and Deacons,
only to sing, that they may be capable of Vicars Choralls places, which is
quite opposite to Gods Word: our Bishops herein, laying hands on the unworthy,
1 Timothy 5. 22. and partaking with them in their sins, Tit. 1. 6, 7. making those
Pastors, or at least Deacons, who have no Acts 20. 28. flock to oversee, not
Acts 6. 2, 3. tables to serve. But this invention came from Satan, and by the
man of sin, into the Church, who instituted the Mass, which cannot be well
performed, without these inferior officers; for when Leo the ninth, degraded,
[Chaddertons ages in tempore Leon. 9] a Subdeacon for singing out of tune, or
at least not singing the Epistle in the Romish tune, the Archbishop departed
from the Altar, and said, he could not proceed in his mass, without his
subdeacon, and so the Pope was fain to restore him again to his former degree:
And how our Cathedralls can stand without these I know not: What a simoniacall
intrusion this is into the Ministry, every godly man sees, that such so
ordained, they are Antichrists, not Christ's Ministers, all whom he commands to
baptize, and to preach, and to feed the flock, Mat. 28. 20. which, how well
able these are to do, let the world judge: if Peter, adjudged it justly, a
horrible crime in Simon, Acts 8. 20. to offer money to obtain this gift, how
heinous it is for both the ordainers, and ordained, the one to give, the other
to receive this gift, only for to get money? singing will not serve the tum at
the day of judgment, Satan may say to these, as he did sometimes to the seven
sons of Sceva, Acts 19. 15. Christ's Apostles and Pastors I know, his
Evangelists and Deacons, but who are ye? who made you Ministers, Deacons, will
Christ surely ask? and then they must needs answer their voice, their profit,
or the like, made them give the Bishops their fees, and they entertained them
afterward in their quires; for they cannot say it was Gods call, or the motion
of his Spirit, who sets none awork, but furnishes them with gifts, and rather
then they shall want, will work a miracle, Acts 2. 4. But Aquinas, [Consuetudo
valde est reprehensibilis, ut in diaconatus ordine constitutus, modulationi
vocis inserviunt: quos ad predicationis officiu^ and studium Aelemosynarum
vacaro congruebant. Aqu. Sum. 3. par. q. 91.] long since, out of St. Jerome,
sharply censures such: yea, learned Zanchy, [Zanc. in Epist. ad Ephesians. cap. 5.
19.] tells us, that those songs which are studied, (as all pricksong is) in the
singing, to withdraw the singers mind, or else so warbled forth, as to hinder
the auditor from understanding it, whereby either of their devotions is
slackned, is naught, and to be left as sinful; therefore did holy Athanasius
(who was the mirror of faith in his age) altogether, and that justly, condemn
music in Churches, well knowing that God looks for our making of melody in our
hearts, our singing with grace in our hearts, making melody to the Lord, Col.
3. 16. [Non vox, sed votum, non mus^ca, etc.] And yet alas, these lazy
Songsters devour, too much of the Ministers holy things, having many of them,
more means for the profaning of Gods Word, and using it irreverently, without
understanding, then many godly and painful Ministers have, for preaching
sincerely the same; and yet this is the only, or at least the greatest care of
Cannons Residents at Cathedralls; these are the flock they oversee, the
succentor being one chief dignity in those Churches, and the Dean and Chapter
their Bishops or overseers to look that they be present, and sing lustily in
the quire, secundum usum Sarum, or Bangor, so purely Antichristian is our
Church in this thing.

Sixthly, Gods requires of all his Ministers, that which St. Paul did of
Timothy, 2 Timothy 4. 2. to preach the Word, to be instant in season, and out of
season, to reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long-suffering, and doctrine; and
this charge is given him in the presence of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ,
as he will answer it at the judgment seat in the last day, and as he hopes to
enjoy heaven; for he well knew, there was a heavy woe belonging to them, if
they preached not the Gospel, for such a necessity is laid on all Pastors 1 Cor.
9. 16. and Ezekiel. 34. 2. and cap. 3. 20. in their office, to take heed to
themselves, and to all the flock over which the Holy Ghost has made them
Bishops, Acts 20. 28. to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with
his own blood: Verbis and Exemplis, viz. with the sincere milk of the Word,
that they may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2. 2. in public speaking, as the Oracles of
God, 1 Pet. 4. 11. and in their lives, following St. Paul's example, who, though
he had the care of all the Churehes coming on him daily, 2 Cor. 11. 28. yet
when he resided at Ephesus, he kept nothing from them that was profitable, but
showed it them, and taught them, both publicly, and also privately, from house
Acts 20. 20. to house, and therefore commanded those Bishops or Elders he left
there behind him, when he departed, to [Non ad o^ium vocavit, sed ad
vigilantiam, quod esse Episcopum, ne putes dignitatis and honoris esse titulum,
falleris, laboris est nota, inspector debet esse, and lustrare passim, qua
part laboret grex, qua sit medicina illi occurrendum. Aretius com. in Act.
Apost.] watch, and remember, that for three years space he ceased not to warn
every one, night and day with tears, and yet he coveted no man's silver nor
gold, or apparel, but showed them all things, Acts 20. 31. to the 35. wherein
they ought to follow him in his example; but alas, how far is our discipline
from these divine injunctions? For many of our Bishops and Prelaticall Clergy,
and Bigamos Priests, preach very seldom, if at all; for having many Cures,
most of them, and dignities in Cathedralls, they either reside at your
Majesty's Court, ambitiously gaping for honor and preferment, or at least
attend on their Cathedral devotions overseeing the quire, and the letting
forth of their Manors and Parsonages impropriated: the best of them, reside
but now and then on their livings, nor is it possible that they can do
otherwise; for besides, that its contrary to their order (who were before
regular Monks, but are now secular Cannons, tied to some residence, and service
on their Cathedralls, as their very name Cannon residents implies) they cannot
be in diverse places on one ^unday, and so one of their flocks must want food,
and looking too that week; O, but they have their Curates, it may be answered,
it is true indeed, they have their hirelings, (the greater pity) who as Christ
says, Joh. 10. 12. seeing the Wolf coming, leaves the sheep, and flies, and
the Wolf catches them, and scatters the sheep; nor can there be much fault
found with the Curate, for Christ tells us, an hireling will fly, because Joh.
10. 13. [Verum quia illi ad mercedem recipient, illiusque respectu omnia
faciu^^, etiam negligentius labora^t, aut sedulius, pro ratione mercedis. Aret.
Com. in Eva. Jo.] he is an hireling, and cares not for the sheep, it is the
stipend and wages he looks for, as well as his Master; nor can he well, if he
would care for the flock, when his stipend will scarce afford him food and
clothing, and so want means to provide for books, and attendants befitting his
calling; his Master devoures the wool and the flesh, leaving him only the
locks and pickings of the bones, just like Ezekiels, Ezekiel. 34. 3, 4.
shepherds, who ate the fat, and clothed themselves with the wool, and killed
them that are red, but feed not the flock, by strengthening the diseased,
healing the sick, binding up the broken, reducing the strayer, seeking the lost
sheep, but with force and cruelty ruled them; great and grievous are the woes
threatened against false and foolish teachers in the Word, by the Prophet
Isaiah, they are called blind watchmen, because of their ignorance, dumb dogs
in respect of their Isaiah 56. 10, 11, 12. [Alii ignavia laborant, alii
ignorantia exc^^antur: avaritia alii astuant, alii perduntur luxu. Trem. and
Jun. not. in loc.] negligence, sloth, and voluptuousness, greedy dogs, in
regard of their insatiable covetousness and cruelty, and gluttony, where our
Prelates are painted out in their right colors, and the beast of the field
called to devour them; by the Prophet Jeremie, Jer. 23. 12. 13. 17, 21. 25.
they are called destroying Pastors, seducing Prophets, teaching lies,
strengthening the hands of evil doers that none of the people return from
their wickedness, Gods hates such, as bad, as he did the people of Sodom, and
Gomorrah, and therefore will feed them with wormwood and make them drink the
water of gall. By the Prophet Zachary, Zach. 11. 17. they are called idle
shepards, who leave the flock, the sword shall be on such an ones arm, and
upon his right eye, his arm shall be clean dried up, and his right eye shall
be utterly darkened, our Savior calls them Mat. 7. 15. ravenous wolves in
sheep clothing, false Prophets, theefs John 10. 1. and robbers, and St. Paul
calls them Romans 16. 17. Authors of divisions, offenses, false Apostles,
deceitful workers, transforming 2 Cor. 11. 13. themselves into the Apostles of
Christ, dogs, Phil. 3. 2. evil workers, men departed from the faith, giving
heed to seducing spirits 1 Timothy 4. 1. 2. 3. and 2 Timothy 3. 2. 4. 5. 8. and
doctrines of Devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their conscience
seared with an hot iron, forbidding to marry, and abstaining from meats, for
they shall be lovers of themselves, Coveteous, Boasters, Proud, Blasphemers,
Disobedient to parents, unthankeful, unholy, without natural affection,
truce-brea-kers, false accusers, incontinent, feirce, despisers of those that
are good, traitors, heady high-minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of
God, having a form of godliness only, denying the power thereof, being men
of corrupt minds, reprobates concerning the faith, for they resist the truth:
in St. Peter's phrase they are plainly called false Teachers, who shall privily
bring in damnable 2 Pet. 2. 1. Haeresies, even denying the Lord that bought
them, and bringing on themselves swift destruction; for woe be unto them says
St. Jude, they have Jude 11. 12, 13. [In his duobus locis graphica est ^orundem
pictura in quibus diversis similitudinibus eorum divers^ vitia palam
manifestantur. Bezae not. in loc.] gone in the way of Cain and ran greedily
after the error of Balaam for reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Chorah;
spots they are in your feast of charity, feeding themselves without fear,
clouds without water carried about with winds, trees without fruit, withered,
twice dead, plucked up by the root, raging waves, of the sea, foaming out
their own shame, wandering stars, to whom is reserved the blackness o^
darkness for ever. Now whether many of these crimes which the word of God does
tax in false Teachers, and periphrases, and signs, which the Holy Ghost has
given to know these corrupt Pastors by, may not, and does not justly belong to
the greatest part of our Prelaticall Clergy, let God, their own consciences
and the world judge, when they consider their seldom preaching, their
ambitious aspiring, their coveteous desiring, their proud boasting, their great
despising of those that were good. In a word, their negligent caring for the
conversion, and feeding of souls, and their fervent desire and zealous
endeavor for the getting these earthly things: Viz. the pleasures, profits,
honors, of this world, all of them, for the most part, seek themselves, and
not the things that be Jesus Christ's. But as St. Paul told the Phillipians,
Phil. 3. 19. with tears, so do I (surely with grief) say, they have been
enemies to the Cross of Jesus Christ, and are at this day the greatest enemies
the Church of God has, whose end is destruction, [In nostris propriis bonis
forte ferri poterat aliqua negligentia, sed quid in Dei ecclesia excusabit
oscitantiam. Aretius in Acts 20. 28.] whose God is their belly, and whose glory
is their shame, who mind earthly things, for such seducing spirits has
bewitched them, that they speak lies in hypocrisy, and their conscience being
seared, they have not considered of those grievous miseries, they, by their
[Nusquam crudeliores piorum hosts, quam qui versantur intra ipsum ecclesiae
sacrarium, sed Deus vidit, and suo tempore requiret: Camer. Nulli asperiores,
vel diligentiores, vel audaciores sunt ecclesiae hosts, quam qui se vocant
ejus Architectos. Beza in Act.] means have brought on these Kingdoms, nor yet
fear the woes, and judgments that are now falling on their own heads. For
they join Revel. 16. 14. with those unclean spirits that came out of the
mouth of the Dragon for gathering the world together to fight against the
Almighty.

Seventhly, God says, every creature of God is good, 1 Timothy 4. 4. and nothing
to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving: and that Heb. 13. 4.
Marriage is honorable amongst all, yet these to witness, they are the men
before spoken of by the Apostle, they forbid to marry at 4 seasons in the year
without a license, from them at a dear rate, sixteen shillings at the least,
that so they may fill their coffers, and they forbid eating of meat, without
like toleration, bought of them, at a dearer rate, as in Sts. Eves, Emberweeks
Lent, Fridays, and Saturdays, herein verifying St. Paul's prophecy of them,
which were to come in the latter days: thus in direct terms they oppose Gods
word, Judayzing again, which sins S. Paul foresaw, and reprooved, Col. 2.
16. 20. usque ad finem. when he commands the Colossians; Let no man judge you
in meat, or in drink, or in respect of an holy day: for if ye be dead with
Christ, why are ye subject to the rudiments of the world? why as though living
in the world, are ye subject unto ordinances? touch not, taste not, handle not,
which all are to perish with the using, after the commands and doctrines of
men, which things have indeed a show of wisdom, and in will worship and
humility, and neglecting of the body, not in any honor, to the satisfying of
the flesh.

Eighthly, God commands us to labor six days, Com. 4. Genesis 2. 3. [Singularem
ipsi prae aliis diebus sanctimoniam indidit facto institutione and virtute sua,
ac proinde eum haberi sanctum and in sanctis solum rebus consumi voluit. Trem.
and Jun. notae in loc.] and to rest the seventh, and to sanctify it,
contrary, they forbid work on many of the six, for the honor and reverent
memory they have of the Virgin Mary, of the Apostles, Evangelists, and Martyrs,
when as neither God, nor they, never required any such thing, but rather forbad
the same, as St. Paul did before, and they tolerat the works of the flesh on
the seventh by plays, masses, dancing etc. Christ bids his Disciples Luke 11.
34. to beware they be not over charged, with the cares of this life, and St.
Paul wills Timothy not to 2 Timothy 2. 4. entangle himself with the affairs of
this life, yet these heap cares to themselves, thinking themselves to be such,
as the Poets fained Atlas to be, that could bear up the poles of both States
and therefore intrude themselves into all sorts of Courts, and state affairs,
from the pettie-sessions, to the high and Hon. Court of Parliament.

Lastly, that they may parallel the Mat. 23. 4. 23. Pharisees in all things they
bind heavy burdens and greiveous to be borne, on men's shoulders exacting the
lesser things as Tithes, keeping clean Churches, observing holy days, and
sundry ceremonies, with force, and rigor, but as for judgment, mercy, says,
preaching sincerely, living uprightly, praying in spirit, and in truth,
reverent and frequent receiving the Sacrament, for sanctifying Gods holy name,
and day, both in private, as well as in public, seperating the wicked, and
vile, from the good, and other weightier matters, both of the Law, and Gospel,
of these they have bin careless and quite omitted, such blind guides are they,
to strain, Mat. 23. 24. 25. 27. at a gnat and swallow a camel; to make a
fair show outward, and within to be like graves, most corrupted and stinking;
for by reason of the Pride, Covetousness, Luxury, Ambition, Bribery, Extortion
and Symony, in the Prophets, in the Courts, and actions of the Prelates, from
their ill example in the Church, has proceeded Bribery, Extortion, [Dum pastor
per abrupta vitiorum graditur, necesse est, ut inpracipitium grex sequatur.
Gregor. Pastor.] Perjury, and Injustice, in other secular Courts, even in the
Judges, Lawyers, Solliciters, and so when the eyes of the Land are darkened, and
the fountains which should send forth wholesome waters poysen'd, then, the
blind leading Mat. 15. 14. the blind, they must needs both fall into the ditch,
and the people that drink those banefull waters, must be infected: For from
these, have issued lying, Flattry, Deceit, Covetousness, Pride, etc. in Court
and City; and through their negligence and slavish fear, pride, Profaneness,
Idleness, Riotousnesse, Gluttony, Drunknesse, Swearing, Whoring, Gaining,
Oppression, is upheld and countenanced, in the Nobility and Gentry: Or else it is
flattered; connived and spared: Atleast, it is seldom censured, sharply, and
gravely reproved, and punished; nay all sorts of sins, Heresies, Hypocrisy,
proceeding of Ignorance, Self-love, and security, and ill example, is
maintained, and connived in the vulgar, [Cacus pastor ruina est plebis, sed
hen, quia sicut claudi volunt praeir^: Ita fa^^i praeesse. Gorran. in Evang.]
and Country people, as was the estate of Isreal's Common wealth in Jeremiahs
days, both the Prophets and Priests are profane, in my house have I found
their wickedness says the Lord etc. Jer. 23. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. Yea a
wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the Land, Jer. 5. 30. 31. the
Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests viz. the Bishops and Prelates, for
so they call themselves, bear [Dominos agunt in hareditatem Domini idque
ministerio pseudoprophetarum quos sacerdotes ad conciliandum sibi auctoritatem
submittebant. Trem. and Jun. not. in loc.] rule by their means, and my people
love to have it so, and what will ye do in the end thereof; surely by reason
hereof the Land mournes, our sines have cried so loud for vengance, that the
voice of them is come up into Gods cares, and he has powered out the fury of
his wrath, even the cup of trembling, and astonishment.

Since therefore Episcopacy and our Church Discipline is so cruel and
Antichristian, the cause of so much sin and profaneness, thus says the Lord of
Hosts, Jer. 23. 16. 17. 19. 20. hearken ye not unto the words of the Prophe^^
that prophecy unto you, they make you vain, they speak a vision of their
own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord, they say still to them that
despise the Lord, the Lord has said, ye shall have peace, and they say to
every one that walks after the imagination of his own heart, no evil shall
come unto you, when as a whirlewinde, of the Lord is gone forth in fury, even
a greevous whirlewinde; it shall fall grievously on the head of the wicked, the
anger of the Lord shall not return, until he have executed, and till he have
performed the thoughts of his heart. Hearken not my Lord O King any longer to
these false Teachers, but let my council be acceptable unto thee, and break
off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities, by showing mercy unto the
poor, if it may be a lengthning of thy tranquillity. O hearken not to these who
seek their own ease, honor, profit, (though with Jezabels Prophets, they are
many) but hearken to those holy, humble, zealous, and painful Ministers in
your Kingdom, those few Micaiahs, and Elians who seek not themselves Phil. 2.
21. but the things that be Jesus Christ's, for the settling of the discipline,
and reforming those things that be amiss in our Church, that so Baall and his
Prophets being removed, and that Antichristian Hierarchy quite abolished, those
few Eliahs hearkened unto, and obeyed, the true worship of God may perfectly,
and purely be restored, as in the Apostolical times, and according to the
unerring rule of Gods word, and most pious example, and holy practice of the
best reformed protestant Churches, by means whereof alone, (men being brought
to a true sight and sorrow for their sins, and for these especially which have
been the cause of these judgments,) Gods plagues may be removed, and your
Majesty's honor, and greatness, be far more resplendent then heretofore, and
better settled by divine grace; for hereby you shall obtain the mercy and favor
of God, the hearts of all your godly subjects, the prayers of all the Saints
alive, the love and approbation of all true Protestant Princes: hereon alone,
can a firm peace be built, your subjects be quieted, your throne established,
and from none can you expect hatred, or envy, but from the Papists, the
Devil, and his children, against whom in your baptism you promised to fight,
in which war* Christ will assure you of victory and glory.

Neither marvel, that I counsel your sacred Majesty to harken to few, and
despise the multitude, because what our book of Homilies, [Book of Homilies,
part 3. of the Sermon against peril of Idolatry, page 56. printed, London,
1623.] said long since, is true in our days, the faithful workmen are but
few, and if they were divided, every Shiere would scarce have one good
Minister; for sincere preachers were, and ever shall be, but a few in respect
of the multitude to be taught. Our Savior Christ says, the harvest is
plentiful, but the workmen be but few, which h^th been hitherto continually
true, and will be to the worlds end; *it is but one of a thousand, Job 33. 23.
Cujusmodi nuntius, and interpres fidus voluntatis Deiest rarissimus: for the
most part of our Ministers, and people, think with the Church of Laodicea, Rev.
3. 17. and boast themselves, that they have need of nothing, neither in
doctrine nor discipline, but are rich, increased with goods, viz. they seem to
themselves just, and sufficiently taught, and furnished with godly rites, and
services that please God, and leave no place for further instruction, but
contemn the Word of God, and Christ's institution, preferring their own
mixtures before all the justifications of God, (as [Bulling. in Apoc. Sermon.
20.] Bullinger well observes, commenting on that place,) for they are neither
hot, nor cold, in their service to God; of such sort are the Masses that are
used at this day of many, neither altogether Papisticall, not yet wholly
Gospel-like, for the Lords Supper appears not in them: The Popish Mass also
is cut off, and altered in the same, (for which he goes on, reproving still)
if we believe that Christ set forth the best rule of Religion, and living, why
follow we not him for our only Master? but we set more by the favor of men
(which in no wise we will lose, then by the favor of Christ,) for we set not
so much by the favor of Christ, as to call that saying of the Apostles into
memory, If I should please men, I should not be Christ's, Gal. 1. 10. servant
[Pseudo Apostolos perstringit, qui homines, semper in ore habent, ille, etsi
nihil derogare velit Apostolis, se tamen Deum suadere non homines dicit.
Camer.] so far that holy and reverend Divine; and indeed, the greatest part of
our Protestants are ignorant of the knowledge of salvation, and of the
mysteries of godliness; yea, those who have knowledge, have been misled by the
greatest sort of Ministers, who are not only ambitious, covetous and prop^ane
in their lives, but are corrupt, erroneous, and heretical in their teachings
of Ar^inian and popish doctrines; and little hope can there be expected from an
ordinary, or national Synod, when the members thereof almost all; which should
be reformers of the Churches errors, are chiefest informers therein; not only
assisters and helpers of these false teachers, but the first broachers, and
ringleaders thereof, who have countenanced and allowed of few for Ministers*
nor scarce promoted any, to any chief dignity, but those who before had given
approbation to their opinions, or were well levened with their corrupt
doctrine; for they endeavored to silence all Calvinists, stigmatized them for
Puritanes, and cast them forth for Non-conformists, when indeed it was for
condemning their superstitious ceremonies, and heretical opinions; yea, your
Royal father, in his latter time, (notwithstanding that most Christian
confession, promise, oath, and subscription, made in the fourteenth year of his
reign, in Scotland,) was also carried away with their dissimulation; and though
his Declaration is excellent against Vorstius, yet as soon as that
Archprelate, (by the Duke of Buckinghams means) got into favor, [Vide Antidote
against Arminian. page 16. printed 1641.] he procured of him an Edict, to
silence all Antiarminians, as his brother Courtney, in [Fox Acts and Mon. page
472. vol. 1. printed 1610.] Richard the seconds time, procured an Edict Royal,
[Fox, ut supra, page 464.] for the punishing of the Lollards, so did he for the
silencing and punishing of those whom he called Calvinists, Puritans,
Non-conformists, (but indeed, were zealous Protestants, Antianninians, and
Antipapists) but as godly Mr. Fox well notes, putting down the reasons, or [Fox
ut supra, page 472.] causes, which purchased the King much evil amongst his
subjects; this was the special reason, that he starting out of the steps of
his progenitors, ceased to take part with them, who took part with the Gospel;
whereupon it so fell out, by the secret hand of God, which directs all
estates, (and not by the blind wheel of fortune) that as he first began to
forsake the maintaining of the Gospel of God: So the Lord began to forsake him,
(and where the protection of God begins to fail, there, can lack no causes to
be charged on him whom God once gives over to man's punishment;) so that no
cause seems so much weighed of us, or hurtful to him, as his forsaking the
Lord, 1 Samuel 2. 30. [God will be especially sanctified in his Vicegerents, eos
qui public peccav^rint, statuam in publicum exemplum, atque documentum
severiss^ma and (...), justitia mea, ut timeant caeteri. Trem. and Jun. notae
in (...). 10. 3.] and his Word, and choosing rather to serve the humor of the
Pope and Archbishop, and other bloody Prelates, then to further the Lords
proceedings, in preaching of his Word; yea, in persecuting the faithful
Ministers and Preachers thereof, as appears by his letters and commissions,
against William Swinderbie, Stephen Bell, and Walter Brute, John Wickliffe and
his favorers; but especially by that ungodly statute, and unjust law made (by
the Clergy, with the consent of the King, [Fox Acts and Mon. ut supra, page
406.] but without consent or knowledge of the commons, in the fifth year of his
reign) against the godly Preachers in that age, which bastard statute, though
in the next Parliament it was disanulled, and repealed, with the consent of the
King; yet, by the persuasion of the Prelates, and the connivance of the said
King, this act of repeal was never published, nor ever since imprinted, with
the rest of the Statutes of that Parliament. And what our English Pope, and
other Arminian Prelates (disaffected to the sincere doctrine of our Church, and
to the faithful and zealous Ministers therein) have prevailed with your Royal
father, and your most excellent Majesty, is too notoriously known: (and let me
humbly, in Christ's stead, beseech your Majesty, with patience, charity, and
godly sorrow, to hear the reiteration) As first, [Vide Antidote against Armin.
page 16.] to inhibit preaching against Arminianisme: secondly, to [Vox populi,
Mr. Prynnes Royal Favorite.] persuade your Majesty to marry with a Papist, and
that upon ungodly terms, as to allow her Religion without control; to permit
Idolatry, and the Mass to be openly exercised in your royal City: thirdly, to
[Your Majesty's Declarati^^ to your subjects, concerning lawful sports to be
used, printed at London, 1633.] grant a toleration for sports and pastimes on
the Lords day, to the great dishonor of Almighty God, and profanation of his
Sabbath: fourthly, to grant [The new Cannons made, 1640. at the latter end of
that book.] Letters Patent for the licensing those new Constitutions and
Cannons, which were contrary to the Law of God and the Kingdom; and therefore
justly condemned this Parliament: fifthly, [Pryns Royal Favorite at large
herein.] to procure your Majesty to release many known Priests and Jesuits, by
your special Warrants out of prison, contrary to the known Laws of the Land,
to the great danger of many souls, and great increase of those Locusts and
their Idolatry, and not the least cause of the rebellion in Ireland, (see
Doctor Jones Relation to the House of Commons) and of all our troubles here in
England, they had so strong an influence on her Majesty's designs, and she on
yours: sixthly, to destroy [Thus did diverse Bishops, ^^. Wren, and Bath and
Wells, etc. Vide Newcomens Sermon. on the 5* of November, before the House of
Commons.] or at least hinder preaching, under pre^^nce of piety; for so it was
scattered, as coming from your Majesty, that there should be but one Sermon a
day, which being well heard, was enough; the afternoons must be only destinated
to Catechizing, and ordinary Prayers, all Ma^^^ns, all Lecturers must be put
down, as if they had been vagrants, not to be tolerated in the Church,
conscientious Ministers must be silenced, suspended, which would not constantly
practice the ceremonies, all catechizing must be in the words of the Primmer
Catechism; yea, prayer it self must be in the words of the Cannon, and that
new fardell of Idolatrous ceremonies are commanded to be practiced, by your
Majesty's letters [your Maj. letters patents printed with the C^^nons 1640.
page 3.] patens. under pretense that most of them were used, by those learned
and godly Divines, who were martyred, in Queen Mary's days, and under pretense
of uniformity and peace in the Church, when indeed, those religious Divines
used no such superstitious Rites, but battred dow^^ all stone and enclosed
Altars [as Latimer, Hooper, Babington, Jewel, practiced in their Churches.]
Images, and painted glass, and forbad all worshipping to the Host, or toward
the Altar etc. many of which perhaps before their conversion were practiced,
but after, hated, and fled from, for well they knew, that the maintenance of
these, would breed contention, and distraction both in Church, and State, as
ever since, but now especially, by woeful experience appears: Seventhly, they
[Pryus Royal favorite] persuaded your Majesty to receive a Nuntio. from the
Pope, and to allow of a popish Bishop, and a Covent of Friars for the Queens
Chapel which are all contrary to the Laws of God, and this [The Statutes
made in the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth, and King James.] Kingdom, which
punishes with death all such persons.

Eighthly, [Pryns royal favorite in the account on the Papists composition.] to
realease the penalty of the Laws against Recusants, to the great encouragement
of them in their Idolatry, and to the impoverishing the estate of your
Majesty's revenue, and to the great scandal of all your Majesty's good
Subjects, and zealous Protestants; and lastly to the great enriching of our
enemies, and enabling the Papists with the sinnowes of War, against a fit
time. Ninthly, by prevailing with your Majesty to depart from your Parliament,
when the Bills against Episcopacy, and double beneficed men were preferred, or
at least in agitation, (which never any King did above forty days, save
Richard the second, who was deposed, since the conquest) which has been, the
great spring in our past miseries, and present troubles, at least a cause of
most differences, and of this present unnatural War, which has already made
the whole Kingdom swim in blood, and if not speedily prevented will bring
utter desolation. Lastly, they persuaded your Majesty not only to entertain,
but to arms the Papists, as your most loyal Subjects, and to entrust them, not
only with your Castles, and Towns, and chief command in diverse parts of your
Armies; but to commit the custody, both of your Royal [As Aston and Gage a^
Oxford the place of your Court, being Governors.] person, and our Illustrious
Prince, (the Heyr apparent to the Crown) together with most of the Royal
Progeny, and diverse of the Nobility of the Kingdom, into their hands, when
they ought not by the Law of the Kingdom to approachnigh the Court: And are
known (the whole r^bble of) them to be sworn enemies to our Religion, [Fr^^^.
d^ver^^. ^^^stant in Apol. par. 1. Chap. 7.] and State, for they count us all
Heretics, and to murder such, it is a most meritorious work, yea Subjects are
obliged hereunto, [Neu^om. sermon. November. 5. preached before the House of
Commons.] by divine precept, on peril of losing their souls yet these must be
armed to high against your Parliament, for the defense of the protestant
Religion, under pretense, that your grand Council (who can in Law, no more do
ill then your Majesty,) are Rebels, and enemies to your Crown, and dignity,
where as, it is only to the Prelates Ambition, and Covetousness, together with
both their Superstition, and Idolatry, and their outrages and villainies,
formerly practiced, by your abused power, and their divellish policy, and still
fomented, and continued by the same breath, against the most protestant, and
loyalest of your Majesty's Subjects; for whosoever he be, that makes conscience
of his ways, and fears an oath, and wishes well to a Reformation of those
things that be amiss, in Church, or State, presently he is branded for a
Puritan [So Mercurius A^licus styles them in his mildest language. Vid. the
vindica. of Episcapacy page 64. and the blasphemies and horrid crimes laid to
their charge.] a Roundhead, and accounted no less then a Rebel, or a Traitor,
and ^o is imprisoned, plundered, if not wounded, or murthred; but which is worst
of all, and my heart trembles to think of it, they have seduced so far your
Majesty, as to make peace with those most inhumane cut throats, and malicious
fighters against God, (who beyond the fury of Antwerp, or the Massacre in
France, have most bloudily butche^ed the innocent sheep of Christ, who made no
resistance in Ireland, to the number of above a hundred and twenty thousand
[Vid. the Remonstrance in Ireland, and the horrible blasphemi^s and c^uel^ies
against God, his word and people in the petition to the House of Commons and
the Remonstrance of the general Assembly of the Church of Scotland, to your
Majesty printed July 5. 1645.] Protestants, whose blood cries to God for
vengance, and to your Majesty, who has his sword in your hand, to exec^e
wrath upon them) nay, and which is worst of all, these are sent for, to do the
like upon the poor Protestants here, whereby they would engage, your Majesty
(who is, and so ever should be the Defender of the faith, which is truly
Christian, and Apostolical*) to be a Patron of them, in their horrid c^u^l^y,
a destroyer of Christ's flock, an upholder of that man of sin. From the least
thought of either of which, the Lord of his mercy preserve your Majesty, and
open your eyes to behold their divillish stratagems, and grant you an upright
heart, zealously to love, and to maintain his truth, delivered in his word,
and to honor, and defend the true professors; and godly Preachers thereof, and
the good God of his infinite mercy, pardon your failings for the time past, and
avert his Judgments from your Sacred Majesty, and Royal Progeny, and from
the whole Kingdom, (by reason of these things* which these seducing spirits
have drawn your Majesty unto) and he direct your Counsels for the future, who
is the fountain, and God of wisdom, James 1. 17. the Father of lights, from
whom every good and perfect gift and work does proceed, even for his Son and
our Saviors sake, who is the way; Joh. 14. 6. the truth, and the life, that
you may know 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. the God of your fathers, and serve him with a
perfect heart, and with a willing mind, for he searches all the hearts, and
understands all the imaginations of the heart, that so you may be more
careful for the s^^rituall worship of God, (according a^ he has in his Word
prescribed) then for the gaudy external part thereof, that you may with all
possible zeal, and care, fly from, and abhor all Idolatry, 1 John 5. 21.
superstition, and will worship, and may strive to have God served, (in your
kingdom, and especially in your Court) acceptably Hebr. 12. 28. with
reverence, and godly fear, knowing him to be a jealous God, Hebr. 12. 29. a
consuming fire, who regards not persons Deuteronomy. 10. 16, 17, 18. [Jehovah Deus
vester est, Deus deorum, and Dominus dominantium, Deus fortissimus, maximus
potentissimus, summeque formidabilis, qui non accipit personam, neque recipit
munus. Trem. and Jun.] nor takes reward, but will render to every one
according to his works, Romans 2. 6. 11. to them (who by patient continuance in
well-doing, seek for glory and honor and immortality) eternal life; but unto
them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey
unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, tribulation, and anguish upon every
soul of man that does evil, Amen.

O! then to that end, let Gods Word alone be the rule, (as it ought, of all our
actions, that they may all tend to his 1 Cor. 10. 32. glory, without giving
offense, either to the Jew or Gentile, or to the Church of God) both in the
ceremony, and in the substance, both in our discipline, as well as in our
doctrine, and whatsoever is found amiss, which has no sure ground out of the
Word of God, and tends rather to contention, then edification, let it be no
longer retained, either for antiquity, or custom sake, which are both the old
pleas of Popery, [Quanta sit vis i^^eterata consuetudinis, hand indiligentur
^^imadvertit, qui ill^^ ^uique ^tati tyra^nidem esse dixit, cujus rei, nostris
temporibus in religionis nostra corruptione, etc. Muscul. in loc. com. de Missa
Papistica.] and Idolatry, Acts 19. 27. [Vide Mr. Dike on the Heart, page 174.
c. 14.] but with Asa and Hezekiah, godly Kings of Judah, let all Idolary and
superstition be destroyed, together with all causes, provocations, and
appearances of will worship, or of evil, without respect of persons, for fear,
or favor, profit, or pleasure, O let your Majesty trust in the Lord God of
Israel, and cleave to him, and depart not from following him, but keep his
co^mandments, which the Lord commanded by Moses, and then the Lord will be with
you, and prosper you, whithersoever you go, a^ he was with upright Hezekiah. 2
King. 8. 5, 6, 7. and to that end; let all good means be taken for removing the
Hos. 4. 6. gross ignorance which has besotted the great^^^ part of the
husbandmen in your dominions, and special care and diligence (above all other
Prove. 3. 13. and 4. 7. and 8. 15, 16, 17. things be used;) for the instilling
of the saving knowledge of the Gospel into their hearts, as well as into their
ears, or mouths; that so they may be enabled to worship God in spirit, and in
John 6. 24. truth, which can never be accomplished, till Popery, Arminianisme,
with their relics, and adherents, and all theirs, 2 Cor. 6. 17, 18. be
banished and punished, till a painful, learned, zealous, and Orthodox Ministry
be placed Joh. 5. 39. in every parish, (which will be the better ac^^mplisht,
if two or three parishes be joined together in one, having two or three
Ministers belonging to it) till all Impropriations, and sacrilegious customs
and privileges be quite taken away; and the full tithes, or what money does
equal, if not the fifth Lev. 27. 31. part superabound the value of them, be
paid, which is Gods own Ordinance; 1 Cor. 9. 14. till Antichristian Prelacy,
Phil. 3. 19. and Rev. 13. 16, 17. and that ambitious Hierarchy, Nonresidency,
Pluralities of livings, be exploded out of our Church, till the semipopish book
of common Isai. 2. 12. and 66. 2. prayer, together with all the superstitious
rites, and Mat. 15. ^. 6. ceremonies therein enjoined; as also all outward
pomp and glory of the 1 Cor. 27. 28, 29. Church be abolished, and we be
content with the elegant plainness, and simple purity of the Scriptures, 1
Cor. 1. 20. without the gloss of man's wisdom, (which is foolishness with
God) for as the Church of Bohemiah confesses, [H^^on. of Confess. Confess. of
Bohem. de Scrip. page 7. sect. 1.] In the Scriptures, such things that are
necessary to doctrine, or discipline and government of the Church, for all, and
singular persons, in the ordinary Ministry of salvation, (whence springs true
faith;) in this, I say, are all such things, fully, absolutely, and so farforth
as is necessary, (as in a most excellent and exquisite work of the Holy Ghost)
comprehended and included, then which no Angel from heaven can bring any thing
more certain, and if he should bring any other thing, he ought not to be
believed. For, as IRAENEVS [Apostoli perfectam veritatem posteris tradiderunt,
quam viam salutis, non alibi quaeramus quam in Apostolicis scriptis, and
literis Evangelicis. Iraeneus, sic etiam Aret. in Evang.] says, the Apostles
delivered to the Church the perfect truth; and therefore elsewhere, we are not
to look for any other rule, or way to walk by; and this is St. Austens opinion,
[Aug. in proe^. in 3. de sanct. Trinit.] and of other godly ancient Fathers,
who commands us, not to be servants to their writings, or doings, but to search
into the Canonical Scriptures, and to believe, and do what there is enjoined,
and to be followers of them, as they were of the truth, and of Christ, and what
in their writings, could not be proved by the Scriptures, that we should not
hold resolutely. We ought therefore, in all matters of difference, either in
doctrine, or in discipline, to go to the Isai. 8. 20. Law, and to the
Testimony, and if it agree not therewith, it is because there is no light in
them, and not to require what was done in this, or that century of the Church,
(as if antiquity could make an error, or superstition lawful:) But to reform
our selves according to the Word, and according to the first Primitive and
Apostolical times, as others our neighbor [(...), it was the first Cannon in
the Council of Nice.] Protestant Churches have already done, to which in things
lawful, we ought as near as may be, (for the honor of God, for avoiding Romans
14. 15, 16. and Matthew. 18. 6, 7. [Fratem quantumvis abjectorum, summa nobis
habenda rario, qui secus fecerit, graves paenas dabit. Beza in loc.] scandal,
for the peace and welfare of your Majesty, and these kingdoms) become
conformable, for want whereof, the Kingdom at this day groans under an
unnatural division, and intestine war, as a just judgment of God sent on
us, for our superstition and profaneness, our Idolatry and will worship, for
the greatest part of our discipline and worship we have borrowed from
spiritual Egypt, Babylon contrary to Gods command, Levit. 18. 3, 4. and also
Rev. 11. 8. we imitate them too much in their worship, orders, ceremonies,
which is contrary to that God requires, Deuteronomy. 5. 32, 33. and 6. 14, 15. and 7.
25, 26. and 12. 2. 30, 31. Isai. 29. 13, 14. Jerem. 1. 15, 16. Rev. 17. 2. and
18. 4. 3. 11. 12. by reason whereof, his judgments are heavy on us, and
unless we by repentance speedily prevent, it, will destroy us without remedy.

FINIS.

