ORATION DOMINICA: OR, THE LORDS PRAYER, Pleading for Better ENTERTAINMENT IN
THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND.

A Sermon Preached at Saint Mary Woolnoth, London, Jun 11. 1643.

By Peter Bales, Mr. in Arts, and Minister of the Gospel.

NVM. 23.12. Must I not take heed to speak that which the Lord has put in my
mouth?

ECCLES. 5.2. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to
utter any thing before God: for God is in heaven, and thou upon earth,
therefore let thy words be few.

Cypr. Ser. de Orat. Dom. Qui h^^itat intus in pectore, ips^ sit in voce; and
cium ipsum habeamus advocatum apud patrem pro peccat^s nostris, quando pro
delictis nostris peccatores nos petimus, advocati nostri verba promamus.

London, Printed for F. E. and are to be sold at the Marigold in Paul's
Churchyard, 1643.

TO THE TRVE CHRISTIAN WHICH Loves, Admireth, and constantly says THE LORDS
PRAYER.
P. B. wishes all spiritual Graces, with wordly prosperity in this life, and
eternal Felicity in the life to come.
Good Christian,
IF ever there were a time when, if ever a place where, Gods Ministers and
Watchmen, as Esaias calls them, Isa. 56.10.
his Stewards and Ambassadors; Tit. 1.7. 2 Cot. 5.10.
as Paul names them, his Angels and Messengers; Mal. 2.7.
as Malachy terms them, had need to cry aloud, and pour out their Prayers
before the Lord, and to exhort the People to do the same: And (of all prayers)
especially the sacred Prayer of our most gracious Savior; then now is the time
here is the place: The time is now, in this our age; the place is here, in this
our Land, In England (by the Separatists (the Lords Prayer is so used.
when and where it is either blasphemously contemned, wilfully rejected, or
impudently neglected.

I therefore (though the unworthiest of the Sons of Levi) have adventured
(from a clear Text) both to express and press the frequent use of it; Agn
(...) ^ater (...) ba, (...). (...) Cyp
that so we may have hope of obtaining our Requests. But (I confess) I should
not have (in print) exposed my self to the snarling of biting Censures, had
not the constant importunity of mary worthy Friends persuaded, and the rarity,
yet great necessity of the Subject enforced me thereunto. It is my comfort, and
encouragement, N^^ ad d^s^^d ni^m^un^statetut^^ nisul add^e^nd^^m veritate fae
l^us. Greg. Mag. in Ezekiel.
that there is nothing more safe to be defended then honesty: nothing more
easy to be spoken then truth: And (God is my witness, I lie not) I know
nothing but honesty, and truth in this Sermon; confirming the Innocent, and
detecting the Nocent. If any one be offended at it, let him know that he has a
guilty conscience: And as for thee, (good Christian) if there be any thing
amiss, thy friendly information shall be thrice acceptable. In the mean time,
I entreat thee to read with understanding, to remember what thou do read;
and the Lord give thee grace to practice what thou do remember.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, Peter Bales.

THE LORDS PRAYER Pleading for better entertainment in the Church of England.
LUKE 11. part of Ver. 2. Say, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.


THE first verse of this Chapter contains the best suit that ever was made to
Christ by his Disciples. We read in the holy Scripture of other suits made to
him.

The first, Mat.
for understanding of Parables.

The second, for increase of Faith. Luke


The third, for superiority in his Kingdom. Mat.


But this suit or request, is more eminent, and far above the rest, for it is
the means to procure illumination for understanding of Parables, to obtain
increase of Faith in laying hold of Christ; superiority in an heavenly, not in
a temporal Kingdom o^ which they dreamed. And as they showed more piety in
this suit, then in any other; so Christ shows more grace in this grant then
in any other. The first suit he granted; but with exprobration of their
ignorance; Mat. 15.16.
Are ye also without understanding?

The second he granted; but with exprobration of their unbelief; Mat. 16.8.
Mat. 10.40.
O ye of little says. The third he granted not at all, because it was a thing
not to be sued for; but he granted a form of Prayer, immediately upon their
petition: They saying, Lord teach us to pray, as John also taught his
Disciples; Christ answered, When ye pray, say, Our Father which art in Heaven,
etc.

My Text then plainly appears to be our Saviors gracious answer to his
Disciples humble motion; wherein you may be pleased to observe two things, viz.
Quod respondet, and quid respondet.

First, Secondly,
Begin we with the first, That he answers.

The great Doctor of his Church never denies, Quod respo.
deferreth, or expostulateth the case with his Disciples; but presently
returns a gracious answer; When ye pray, say, Our Father which art in
Heaven, etc.

First, John an example to him, of teaching his Disciples to pray: He might
have said, Why do you tell me of John? all the grace that John has, is from
me. Mat 3.11.
Yea, John confessed himself unworthy to unloose my shoe, and may not I now
take it in scorn, that the Disciples of John should teach me my duty after the
example of John? Notwithstanding all this, Christ to commend his humility, is
content both in his preaching and praying to follow John. Mat. 3.10.
John said, Every Tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and
cast into the fire. And Christ though he were the wisdom of God, and
furnished with all manner of Doctrine, was content to borrow that very sentence
from John-Baptist, as it is apparent in his Sermon on the Mountain, Matthew.
7.19. Nay further, he was content also to follow him in praying; so that the
example of John's diligence in teaching his Disciples that duty, was a motive to
him to do the like unto them.

Secondly, Disciples of Christ tell him, that John was wont to teach his
Disciples to pray, they spoke by experience; for diverse of them were before
time Disciples unto John, as appears in Joh. 1.37. And being they were
brought up at John's feet to learn to pray, our Savior might have been justly
offended at them, that they would be such Non-prosicients, under such a Tutor.
He might have said, what, do you come to me to teach you to pray? were you
Scholars so long in John's School, hearing prayer daily, and yet not able to
pray? It seems John has bestowed great pains to no purpose, he has (in
teaching you) only plowed the rocks, and harrowed the sands: Why should I take
the Childrens bread and give it unto you, who have so often trampled it under
your feet?

Lastly, our Savior might have given them justly the repulse, because they no
better regarded his own prayer then to forget it: For (you may know) He gave
this Prayer twice; once voluntarily, when he was preaching on the Mountain,
which was by them soon forgotten, having heard it but once; therefore one of
the Disciples (probably supposed John) in the name of all the rest, Mat. 6.1.
Voluntarily. 2. By entreaty Luke 11.1.
goes to Christ when he was praying, and when he ceased, beggeth a form of
prayer; which (notwithstanding their forgetfulness) he grants speedily,
fully, cheerfully.

Our comfortable Lesson from hence is, Christ with our petitions, if they be
lawful and good, for Christ is easy to be entreated: Jam. 3.17.
A present help in trouble. When you call (says he) I will answer: Psalm. 46.1.
Call upon me in the time of trouble; Psalm. 50.15.
so will I hear thee. And the Prophet David to encourage all men to pray, does
set forth the readiness of God to hear prayer: Psalm. 65.2.
O thou that hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come. And Christ
himself tells us what we in our prayer must perform to God, and then (for
our comfort) what God for our prayer will perform to us, Matthew. 7.7. Ask, and
it shall be given you; seek, and you shall find; knock, and it shall be
opened unto you. Ask, with the mouth, seek with the heart, knock with the
hand, and it shall be given you, and you shall find, and it shall be opened
unto you: And it shall be given you, that is for temporal things: And you
shall sind, that is for spiritual things: And it shall be opened unto you,
that is for eternal things. And Saint James tells us, Jam. 1.5.
if any man lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives to all men, (...),
liberally, and reproacheth no man, and it shall be given him. The Disciples
petition was therefore acceptable to Christ, because profitable for themselves;
for thus he professes of himself, ego Dominus Deus tuus, docens te utilia,
Esaias 48.17. utilia non subtilia. Aug.
I am the Lord thy God, which teaches thee to profit, which leads thee by
the way that thou should go. Saint Austin observes that Christ puts no
medium betwixt the Disciples motion, and his grant; they no sooner had said,
Lord, teach us to pray, but Christ answered, When ye pray, say, Our Father,
etc. Thr. mak^ emir^


There are three things which do make a giver eminent.

First, to give presently, for that is to give twice; Qui cito dat, bis dat.

The second is beyond that, to prevent the asker.

The third is beyond that, to put him in mind of asking.

And we have Christ an amiable President for all these.

The first he performs to the Leper; Chr^^ted.
when the Leper came to him and made no petition, only a supposition, Domine
sivis, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean: the Text says, that
Jesus imimediately put forth his hand, and touched him, saying, I will, be thou
clean; Mat. 8.2, 3.
and immediately his leprosy was cleansed.

The second he puts in practice toward the Paralyticke, which was let down
in the bed to him, Cl ve asl
for he said unto him, son, thy sins are forgiven thee: here he preventeth
his asking the forgiveness of his sins. Mar. 3.5.


The third he expresses to the Impotent-man; Christ did put in mind of
asking. Ioh. 5.6. Mar. 10.51.
for when Jesu, saw him lie, and knew that he long time had been diseased, he
said unto him, will thou be made whole? The like he expresses to the Blindman,
for he said unto him, what will thou that I do unto thee?

Let us put all these together, Applic.
and make a cord of them, to bind us to the comfortable duty of prayer; for
by all these we have encouragement to go to Christ; for if he was so ready to
supply our wants when he was here on earth, much more ready is he to supply our
wants now he is in heaven, sitting at the right hand of his Father, and making
intercession for us. In the midst therefore of our distractions and distresses,
troubles and extremities, let us pour out our prayers before him. If the
bruised reed, truly humbled, shall send up short ejaculations, and say, Luke
18.13. Mat. 9.2. Luke 7.48. Luke 17.5.
God be merciful to me a sinner, he shall find presently an answer returned,
Thy sins are forgiven thee. If the smoking flax, conscious of its own
weakness, shall send up this petition, Lord increase my faith, it shall have
that comfortable answer which Christ gave Peter: Luke 22.32.
I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not. If obedient Subjects (when
their religious, upright and gracious King, and their sinful, yet quondam
flourishing Kingdoms are angustiated on every side) shallwith true penitent
hearts cry to God in faith and fervency of spirit, Psa. 132.1.
saying, remember David (we have just cause to say Charles) with all his
affliction; Ps. 25. ver. ult.
and deliver Israel (our England and Ireland) out of al their troubles, O God;
they shall individually receive this comfortable answer; I have heard that which
thou have prayed me; I have spoiled you, but I will heal you; I have wounded
you, but I will bind you up; 2 King. 19.2^.
after two days will I revive you, and in the third day I will raise you up,
and you shall live in my sight. If a man, Hos. ^.1, 2.
seeling himself so defective in prayer, as that he cannot pray so fluently
and fervently as others, shall move this petition, Lord teach me to pray; Luke
11.1.
he shall have this gracious answer, when thou prayest, say, Our Father which
art in Heaven, etc.

So that they which pretend they cannot pray, have no excuse, for they know
where they may be taught, even in this; it is but ask, and it shall be given
you. If John taught his Disciples to pray, how much more, and sooner will
Christ teach those that come to him?

Thus much for the Quod respondet, That Christ answers.

Come we now to the Quid respondet, Quid resp.
What Christ answers.

His answer does contain a most sacred prayer to be used when we pray; and
therefore published by two Evangelists, Matthew and Luke, that so there might
be no ground or color left for Heretics or Schismatickes to reject it, for
by the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be confirmed (says our
Savior) and if every word, Mat. 18.16.
by the restimony of two or three, then undoubtedly the Word of God, by the
testimony of one; for if Pythagoras his ipse dixit was such a stickler amongst
his Scholars, how much more should the Lord's be amongst his followers? If we
receive the testimony of men (says Saint John) the testimony of God is
greater. 1 John 5.9.
Lo, here is the testimony of him who is both God and man, and therefore the
greatest that may be, and consequently to be carefully regarded. Mat. 6.9. The
Text.
Saint Matthew, does set down this Prayer as a rule, copy, or pattern for
prayer; After this manner pray ye; Saint Luke does set it down as a form,
When ye pray, say, Our Father, etc. Pray thus, says Saint Matthew; pray this
says Saint Luke. It has pleased Almighty God to put this as a tongue in the
head, which is both an instrument of speaking and asking it is not only a rule
or copy to make other prayers by, but a form to pray, in totidem verbis. Even
as he that writes a copy writes the same letters, and after the same manner;
and as a picture to the beholder represents a man, and to the Painter is a
pattern to make others by; so these words are a perfect pattern which we must
pray by, and a perfect form which we must pray in. So then this prayer (as
reverend Calvin well observes) is taken two ways, Master Calvin
as regula, as forma.

First, as a rule of prayer.

Secondly, as a form of Prayer. For indeed it is both. A rule of prayer. Exodus
25.9.
First, consider we it as a rule of Prayer. Moses in the building of the
Tabernacle was commanded to make all things according to the pattern showed
him in the Mount; so we are commanded to make all our prayers according to
Christ's pattern, showed in the Mount. The absolute consideration of it does
not take away the relative: A boundstone so marketh out the ground, as that it
is still a stone: Paternity makes not a father cease to be a man: So though
Our Father which art in heaven, etc. be a prayer in it self, yet it is a most
perfect Pattern, to make other prayers by. A skillful builder makes a goodly
house, according to the moddell in a piece of paper: So though the Lords prayer
may be written in a small compass, yet it is so large in extent, that all
prayers made before, may have reference unto it, and those made after, some
dependence on it. Pray otherwise we must not: not as though it were unlawful
for us to use another form; for Christ gave it twice, and there is some little
difference between that of St. Matthew and that of St. Luke; St. Luke has it,
Say these very words: Saint Matthew has it, (...), Pray on this manner, or to
this purpose, according to the instructions in this form contained: forgive us
our debts, says St. Matthew: forgive us our trespasses, says St. Luke: as we
sorgive, says one; for we forgive, says another: for thine is the kingdom,
etc. Beza.
says the one; the other says it not at all. But Master Beza, who took great
pains to search all the old Coppies of the new Testament, to perfect his
edition thereof, by comparing them together, does confess, that in many
coppies he found these words wanting in Saint Matthew, as well as in Saint
Luke; and that many Interpreters have thought that they were put into the Text,
as being the common conclusion used by the Christians in their prayers As that
holy Acclam. added at the end of the I^s. Gloria potrie, but neither without
divine Authority. 1 Chro. 22.11, 12. 2 Cor. 1.3. Reve. 5.13. Psalm. 48.1.
Cyprian, Aug. Hierom.
. Moreover (he says) three of the ancient Fathers in their expositions on the
Lords Prayer, have omitted this conclusion, and have not so much as mentioned
it. Arias Montanus gives this note upon Matthew. 6.9. Animadverte lector, hanc
classulam non esse de textu; he adds also, in the Greek Church the
Congregation does never repeat this clause, but when they have with the
Minister said, deliver us from evil. The Priest only pronounces these words,
(...)
for thine is the Kingdom. However it be, (as Tertullian observes) it is
lawful to use other words; but we must still keep the sense, therefore he
calls it legemorationis, the Law of prayer, as being the rule by which we
must square, or the mould wherein we must cast all our prayers. And of this
judgment was Saint Austin, Ar^. Epist. 12^ cap. 12.
whose words are these, Quamlihet alia verba dicamus, nihil aliud dicimus, quam
quod in ista Dominica oratione positum est, si recte, and congruenter oramus:
although (when we pray) we may say other words if we pray rightly and
congruously, we say no other thing then that which is contained in the Lords
Prayer. Of the same opinion likewise was reverend Master Calvin, Calvin, in
Matthew. 6.9.
who writes thus; Noluit praescribere filius Dei quibus verhis utendum sit, ut
ab ea quam dictavit formula deflectere non liceat, sed tamen vota nostra sic
dirigere fraenareque voluit, ne extra metas istas oberrent: that it might never
be lawful for us to turn aside from that form of prayer, which the son of
God has taught us, the son of God would not so strictly prescribe what words
we must use in our prayers, as if all our prayers must be totidem verbis; yet
for all this, he would so direct and bridle our desites, that they should not
wander beyond their bounds, but be confined within the contents of this Prayer,
which (indeed) is a pattern that has not a parallel.

It is an observation worthy of your consideration, that when Christ's
Disciples came for an increase of their faith, he gave them no form for their
faith, Luke 17.
but left that for them to give to the Church: But he frames himself to give
them a Map of prayer, that all the Christian world might speak the same
language; because he knew we knew not what we should ask, we ask oftentimes
unlawful things, or lawful things unlawfully: nay, we are prone to ask
hurtful things. Alexander when the Cynicke asked a groat, said, it was too
little for a King to give; when he asked a talent, Alexander told him, it was
too much for a Cynicke to ask; so when we ask, we either ask things unfit
for us to ask, or for God to give. Therefore our blessed Lord and Savior, who
was (as Saint Ambrose says) Confiliarius Patris, and best knew his Fathers
secrets (being God, he knew what petitions were best pleasing to God; being
man, he knew what petitions were best suitable for man) makes an incomparable
rule of prayer for us, that so we might have hope of obtaining our requests.
Applic.
But has Christ given us a prayer written as a mould wherein to cast, a touch
stone whereby to try, the beam of the Sanctuary whereupon to weigh, the
certain rule whereby to square all our prayers? why then do so many (in these
days especially) both Ministers and people, impudently forsake this Fountain
of living waters, to dig them pits, even broken pits that can hold no water?
Jer. 2.13.
Why do they say desperately, by their daily practice, we will have none of
this prayer for a pattern for all our prayers, for we have loved strange
prayers, Jer. 2.25. A blind (...) l^ade^h them out of the way.
and them will we follow? Do not these men follow an ignis fatuus, whiles
they embrace their own Chymeraes, and fanaticke conciets? And least that any
should say, or think I have wronged them by this discourse, let us bring to
the touchstone their ordinary prayers made and uttered in our public
Congregations. None can, or (I hope) will deny (the current stamp only
excepted) that they present to God rude, and undigegested extemporall
evaporations of their desires; yea, Immethodicall prayers.
such tautologies, battologies and reiterations, as no hearer can truly join
with them in these their prayers; for (though they often lick them over in one
sermocination) they are no fitter to be compared then to Bears whelps, without
form, without fashion.

And (I pray you tell me) is this the way to pray according to the Lords
prayer? Matthew. 6.7.
has not our Savior forbidden vain repetitions? is there in his prayer one
word placed amiss? is there an iota in it that has not its full weight?
things necessary asked out of place, Bona oration quae ordinem ser vat, Aug.
are not so convenient; Christ teaches not only what, but how to ask; He
keeps a good order.

Again, oblong and tedious; for they are an hour, 2 Oblong prayers.
sometimes two hours, yea, three hours long; as if words could prevail with
God, Matthew. 6.7.
and they should be heard for their much babbling; notwithstanding the Wiseman
tells us that our words must be sew; Eccles. 5.2.
and our Savior gives the reason thereof, Matthew. 6.8. Non vocem audi^ Deus,
sed affectum, Aug.
for your Father knows whereof ye have need before ye ask of him.

Is this the way therefore to pray according to the Lords Prayer, Ludolphus
div^ta Christi, part 1. cap. 89.
which is so short that it may be written in the compass of a penny? does it
not contain an ocean of matter in a little current of speech? Brevis sermon
capi^sa virtute, Cypr. ser. de orat. dom.
It is short in words, long in virtue; so (if we will make it our pattern) our
prayers must be fuller of devotion then words.

Thirdly, immodest, irreverent prayers; Immodest prayers.
for they do solicit God in such homely, rude, and sawey language as they
dare not tender to men; they are so familiar with him as (in their prayers) to
tell him news out of their weekly Intelligencer; so that their Diurnals, Qui
orat, ut qaasi Deo ignoranti suam necessitatem exponat.
and Corantoes stand them in great stead: In this their immodest carriage and
behavior, they imitate that saucy fellow whom Saint Chrysostom reprehendeth,
who when he prayed, expressed his necessity in such a manner as if God had
been ignorant of it.

And do these men (likewise) pray according to the Lords Prayer? Behold its
language is sad and serious, grave and gracious, declaring an holy reverent
zeal, with true and sanctified judgment. In that we say, Our Father, we call
upon the bowels of Gods mercy, which begets an holy holdnesse: In that we say,
Which art in Heaven, we invocate the arm of his power, which begets an holy
fear, and therefore (says the wiseman) Be not rash with thy mouth, and let
not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before God; Eccles. 5.2. Reg. Bible.
for God is in Heaven and thou upon Earth.

Lastly, heat of fury, Immane prayers. Luke 9.54.
as the two sons of thunder; let fire come from Heaven, and consume the
Samaritans; And vent the bitterness of their intemperate spleen in curses, and
imprecations, to Gods dishonor, and the breach of Charity; even against those
whose faces they never saw, and from whom they never received any wrong.

Do these men pray according to the Lords Prayer? which (as one said) is
(...), the engaging of our charity and love; for we desire to have remission of
sin no otherwise then as we forgive our brethren, whereby the love of our
brethren is continually increased. It runs altogether in the plural number
in a common strane; not My Father, but Our Father; give us; forgive us; lead us
not into temptation; deliver us from evil: which kind of expression does
include all men; for all men are by creation, and by conservation, and
protection, the sons of God, and of these God only knows who are his: It
is not in our power to discern who are reprobated, and who are elected; they
be all our fellow creatures, and the law of Charity does bind us to the love of
their persons. We must therefore pray for all sorts of men, not only for our
friends, but for our enemies. Matthew. 5.44.
First, for our personal enemies. Secondly, Luke 23.34.
for the enemies of our Country and Kingdom. Thirdly, we must pray for the
enemies of Religion; nisi Stephanius orasset, Jer. 29.7. Fulgentius.
Ecclesia Paulum non haluisset; unless Saint Steven had prayed for Saul the
Church had never had Paul. Acts 7. ve. ult.
And it is Saint Paul's exhortation that supplications, prayers, intercessions,
and giving of thanks be made for all men, for Kings, 1 Timothy 2.2.
and all that are in authority: Hominem s^c^t Deus, pecratorem bama non est
homo qu^est adversator, sed peccator; ora p^o homine ut Deus occidat
peccatorem, Aug.
And in his time all Kings were persecuters of the truth. Consider what God
made, and what man made; God made man, man made the sinner; it is not the man
which is thy adversary, but the sinner: Pray therefore for the man, that God
may slay the sinner; it is a way to destroy our enemy, and to save the man.
Saint Paul did not kill Steven, but Saint Steven killed Saul. David did not
pray against the person of Achitophel, but malignity. O Lord I pray thee turn
the Council of Achitophel into foolishness. 2 Samuel 16.31.
We may (I hope then by this time) plainly perceive that instead of sweet
savor, Isa. 3.24.
we have stink, and instead of a girdle, a rent, and burning instead of
beauty: Our Novelists have made them crooked paths; Isa. 59.8.
Whosoever goes therein shall not know peace. Are they not bereft of
understanding, and true Christianity? they are, says Hugo Cardinalis, Hugo
Cardin. in Matthew. 6.
Stulti qui non orant sicut docuit Christus nec sunt Christi, they are fools
(says he) which do not pray as Christ has taught, neither are they of
Christ. Quisquis id dicit (says Saint Austin) quod ad istam Evangelicam precem
pertinere non possit, Aug. Ep. 121. cap. 12.
carnaliter orat, whosoever praveth that which cannot appertain to this
Evangelicall prayer, prays carnally. Therefore let every good Christian
individually say, O my soul come not thou into their secret, Genesis 49.6.
unto their assembly mine honor, be not thou united. Let us not (like the
Cock in the Fable) prefer the barley corn before the precious gemme; or (like
Chius) sell the good Wine, and drink the dregs our selves; or (like Glaucus)
change our gold for copper. Let us not take darkness for light, Isa. 5.20.
and light for darkness; bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter: shall we make
this blessed Prayer of none effect, to promote our own? Romans 3.4.
God forbid: yea, let God be true, and every man a liar; let the whole treasure
of our prayers be contained in this treasury; let us offer the gold,
frankincense, and myrrh of prayers, and thanksgiveings, always on this holy
Altar; for, whosoever walks according to this rule, Gal. 6.16.
peace shall be upon him, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God.

So much for the first consideration of this prayer, viz. as it is Regula, or,
a rule of prayer: Come we ^ow to the second consideration of it, viz. as it is
Forma, A prayer of it self.
or, a prayer of it self.

All the Petitions contained in this prayer, were used by our Savior Christ in
the days of his flesh, as he took our nature; for sometimes he prayed for the
honoring his Fathers name; sometimes, for the enlarging of his Kingdom;
sometimes, for fulfilling of his will; sometimes, for multiplication of bread;
sometimes, for deliverance from temptation. But one petition seems repugnant;
forgive us our trespasses; he pray so, who never knew sin?

He might pray this, fellow-feeling of the Churches miseries; he was the head
of a body, 2 Cor. 5.21.
and was made sin for us, and so did not only confess himself a sinner,
but suffered the wrath of God for it; which made him cry, Deus mi, Mat. 27.46.
Romans 15.3. Psalm. 69.9.
Deus mi, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? The rebukes of them that
rebuked thee, fell on me.

Again, Savior did not recite it, as his prayer unto God; but left it as a
prayer unto his Church. There is a distinction made of the whole prayer in the
Lesson, and in the Liturgy: In the Lesson it is commended by God to us; in the
Liturgy, we commend our selves to God by it. And although Christ did not use
it as a prayer (though it might be so) yet certainly he commended it as a form
unto the Church. And albeit we read not in any place of holy Scripture, that
the Apostles used this form of prayer; in reason we are to suppose, that as
they were Disciples, and were ignorant, they used it as a prayer; as they were
Apostles and had the gift of prayer, they used it as a pattern to others.

That it was given as a prayer we need not, we ought not to doubt; therefore
we see it used in all the Liturgies of the Primitive Church (as in the
Liturgies of Saint James, of Saint Basil, of the Syrians, of the Ethiopians,
Marg. Bibliothe^. pat.
and in the Liturgy of Saint James there are these words prefixed; Vouchsafe
us O Lord, this confidence, that we may dare to pray unto thee and say, Our
Father which art in Heaven, etc. And that it was thus intended, it is plain by
the words. Our Savior does not say, pray that Gods name may be hallowed, his
Kingdom come, etc. in any other form, but he binds them to the same words
(as upon a just occasion he says) pray non in hunc modum, sed haec verba; When
ye pray, say, Our Father, etc. And this is the reason why it is so often used
in the Liturgy, Communion, Baptism and every particular Rite in our Church:
It is so, that if any thing be defective in our prayers, or forgotten, which
were fit to be asked, we may quicken our senses and recollect our selves by the
sweet recital of this prayer, which if a man could speak with the largeness
of affection, that the words will bear, he needs no other prayer. And
therefore we make it (at the least we ought) the clause and end of all our
prayers. Cyprian, de orat. Dom.


It is good (says Saint Cyprian) to ask God in his own words; for what is
more likly to prevail with God, Quae potest esse magis spiritualis oration quam
quae a Christo nobis data est, a quo nobis and spiritus sane^tus m^ssus est,
etc.
then that which was made by God himself? It begins with Kingdom, and
ends with Glory: It is the best form that ever was made (says that holy,
and blessed Martyr) for what more excellent, and true prayer can there be, then
that which was made by excellency and truth it self? It is the most spiritual
form; for it was given by the holy spirit. Saint Austin preaching upon this
prayer, Aug. de temp. sermon. 126.
does fall into admiration of it saying, O vere coelestis oration, quae tota est
oration; O truly celestial prayer, which is all prayer: Mr. Calvin
And reverend Calvin likewise learnedly and judiciously falls into
admiration, of the loving kindness of Christ toward us: Dum unigenitus Dei
filius nobis verba in os suggerit, quae mentem nostram omni haesitation^
expediant: In that he puts words into our mouth, which may free our mind of
all doubting.

For five things is this Prayer to be commended.
First, it is to be commended, public form; it was so intended by our Savior
Christ, A public form.
as it plainly appears by its running in the plural number: Not my Father,
but Our Father, etc. Hence it was well noted by Saint Greg. that although in
the latin Church it was said by the Priest only; yet in the Greek Church it
was said by all the people, as being intended public form; not but that we
should use it in private, as a clause of our prayer; for it is a prayer as well
for the closet, Matthew. 6.6.
as for the Church: When thou entrest into thy closet, pray after this manner:
for though then a man prays alone, yet must he not pray for himself alone;
qui sibi soli orat, solus orat, says Saint Austin, whosoever prays for
himself alone, prays alone and has not God hearing him; therefore in the
public Congregations, and in our closets, let us say, Our Father which art in
Heaven, etc.

Secondly, this prayer is to be commended, A set form.
because it is a set form; it is plain and evident by the giveing of it:
Christ gave it twife in the same words, and same form; nay, if he had been
desired a form of prayer a thousand times, he would have given the same form.
Therefore justy may we dislike Conceptuaries, which conceive of other forms,
and say it is a stinting of the Spirit, to pray in a set form: for rather we
may say, to pray in another form without premeditation is to abandon the
Spirit. This monstrous conceit of conceived prayers, without any premeditation,
Pur. and Br. page 9.
spoyleth both the Father and the Son (as King James says in his learned and
godly exposition of the Lords prayer) I justly call it monstrous (says he)
since they will have a thing both conceived and borne at once, contrary to
nature, which will have every thing to lie in the belly of the mother a certain
time after the conception, there to grow and ripen before it be produced; and
this is the universal course of nature, as well in animal, as vegetable
things, yea, even in minerals within the bowels of the earth. And in this Grace
imitates Nature, not producing any perfect work at the first, but by degrees.
Yet (I confess) when a man can swim well, he may cast away his bladders;
when the Cripple can walk well, he may throw away his staff; yet there is a
decorum to be kept, even by him that has the best gift that way. If a man has
the gift of prayer, it is not unlawful to use a set form, especially in
public; for when we know before what to pray, it is a means to stir up our
affections, and to keep them in good tune; but by accident it is a means to
cool our zeal, when we have a prayer by roat, when we mind the words only:
Yet certainly it is a good help to those, which are not come to a degree of
excellency in this gift; therefore (as one says) so keep a set form, as that
ye vary, and so vary, as that it be grounded upon this form, and then
conclude saying, Our Father, etc.

Thirdly, this prayer is to be commended, A plain form.
because it is a most plain and perspicuous form, being easy to such as
desire to inform themselves, what, and how to pray. Obscurity is in nothing so
odious as prayer; they which pray in an unknown tongue, pray not by the spirit,
because to pray without understanding is to offer strange incense; so that I
may use the words of Malachy, Mal. 1.8.
to such as put up prayers to God which they understand not; Go now and offer
this to thy Prince, and see if he will accept thy person: will not he think
himself abused, and dismiss thee with some sharp punishment? the bruit
Beasts may pray better, for they have natural and inarticulate voices; Psalm
147.9.
the Ravens are fed of God when they call upon him, their croaking is a kind of
invocation; the Lions roaring after their prey is a prayer. When men know not
what they pray, Praedatio eorum precatio, Aug.
how can God or themselves say Amen to their prayers; their praying is neither
a spiritual, nor a reasonable service: Therefore the Fathers do parallel this
praying in an unknown tongue, to Caligula's banquet, who did set before his
friends golden dishes, and bad them eat; but they found them hard meat, and
rose up more hungry then before. The Romish Priests do set before the people
rather brazen dishes, their souls are starved because they cannot eat: But if
they were golden, Quid prodest clauis aurea si non aperiat? quid obest lignea
si aperiat? Aug.
what good could they get by them? What does a golden key profit us, if it
cannot open our door? what does a wooden one hinder us, if it can open our
door? Caelius Rhodoginus writes, that Cardinal Ascanius had a Popinjay, Lib
3 32.
that could pronounce distinctly all the articles of the Creed; such
Popinjayes, or Dau^s are the Papists, who can say, Pater noster; yet not Our
Eather: If the Priest juggle as well in this, as in other things, he may teach
the common people as well to curse as bless God, for ought they know, Let us
therefore pray with the spirit; 1 Cor. 14.15.
but let us pray with understanding also: Lingua sonet, men^autem sc^utetur
sensum ^orum quae dicuntur. Basil in Ps. 28.
Let us take Saint Basils rule, Let thy voice be heard; but let thine
understanding find out the sense of those things which are spoken, and so let
us say, Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

Fourthly, this prayer is to be commended, because it is a brief form; A
brief form.
Lycurgus enjoined the people to offer little sacrifices unto their Gods; (for
says he) they respect more the inward affection then the outward action:
Matthew. 6.8. Matthew. 23.14.
A rule which our Master Christ has given us: When ye pray use not much
babbling: And he condemned the Pharisees for their long prayers. And behold this
prayer (which he has given us to say) is a short one, and that for these
Reasons, which Ludolphus recites: First, to be easier learned. Secondly, to be
better remembered. Thirdly, to be oftener repeated. Fourthly, Non tumultuosa
loquacitas; sed affectio cordis apud Deum praevalet, Aug.
to assure us that God hears us the sooner. Fifthly, that we may not so much
respect words, as devotion. It shows us that it is not tumultuous babbling,
but fervency of affection, that prevails with God. The form of the Decalogue
is reduced unto ten words; nay, by Christ unto two; nay, to one word; love:
mica salis, it is the grain of salt which seasoneth every part of our
obedience. Likewise the Creed is reduced unto twelve Articles, those twelve to
six, those six to two; what we believe in, and what we beleve of. This Prayer,
for brevity sake, is reduced to six petitions; for those prayers are best which
are shortest, and most full of affection: Sir Rich. Bak.
With the length or elegancy of our prayers, as God is not wearied, so he is
not delighted; but Devotion is the length, and Faith is the Eloquence, which
while with persuasions they importune him, with importunity they persuade him.
And therefore the Church has prescribed Collects, prayers answerable to this
short prayer of our Savior Christ. Let it not then be irksome unto us when we
pray, to say, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Lastly, this prayer is to be commended, A perfect form. Quantum restringitur
in verbis, tantum dissunditur, Tertul. lib. d^ orat.
because it is a perfect form. By how much it is straightened in words; by so
much it is defused in signification: It may well be called a world of prayer;
for this is the little world which Christ made upon earth: As the world
consists of Heaven and earth, so this prayer consists of heavenly and
earthly petitions: As the whole frame of Nature was made in six days, so
Christ gives us a form of prayer in six petitions, answerable to the six
days. Protegenes the Painter being from home, Apollo (in the mean time) came
to his shop and drow a line; by the evenesse and straightness thereof,
Protogenes knew that Apollo had been there: so by the evenesse and
straightness of this prayer, and excellent ontracting of the Petitions, though
the Gospel had not mentioned the Author of it, we might have easily gessed
that Christ's spirit had been there.

This Prayer is perfect, in respect of the Author, Order, Matter.

First, Author. 1 Cor. 13.
it is perfect, in respect of the Author of it. The Apostle says, If J had the
tongue of men and Angels. His meaning is, that the tongues of Angels were more
glorious then the tongues of men; and therefore that song of the Angels, Isa.
6.3.
Holy, Holy, Holy, is magnified in the Church: But this prayer was formed by
the tongue of Christ, who is the Lord of Angels. It was compiled by him who is
the wisdom of God, and therefore cannot be but perfect, Deuteronomy. 32.4.
quia perfecta sunt opera Jehovae; because all the works of the Lord are
perfect.

Secondly, Method.
it is perfect, in respect of the Method, or Order of it. If man did make a
prayer, he would begin at daily bread; Matthew. 6.33.
but Christ in this prayer teaches us, first to seek the Kingdom of God. The
Lacedaemonians used to ask of their Gods (...), (...), Things useful. Things
excellent.


So in this prayer we beg things excellent, in the three first petitions, and
in the two last; and things useful or necessary, in the fourth. It is a most
excellent order; for therein we first seek Gods glory, afterward our own
good: The three first petitions concern God, and do begin with his glory: The
first brings it in; the second amplifieth it: The third consummates it. The
three last do concern our selves; the fourth is for temporals; the fifth and
sixth are for spirituals: For temporals, in removing things occasionally evil,
as afflictions; for spirituals, in removing things simply evil, as sin.

Others do thus distinguish them.
The first petition respects God: Glory: Thy Kingdom come. Secondly, of
Grace: Thy will be done even in earth as it is in Heaven, Forgive us our
trespasses, etc. Lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil.
Thirdly, of Nature: Give us this day our daily bread. As it is thus perfect, in
respect of the Method: So, in respect of the Matter. Matter.


It is so large a Theme that we may lose our selves in it: The consideration
whereof made Saint Cyprian cry out, Qualia, and quam malta Sacramenta! How many
excellent mysteries in this prayer!

It is a prayer of it self, and every word in it is a prayer: There is not one
word wanting, that should be put in, nor any word more then ought to be.
Articles of the Creed; The Creed
they are twelve: here are six petitions: Those twelve may be reduced to six,
answerable to these six petitions. First, as we believe in God; so we pray that
God would show himself Omnipotent, in preserving us in the way to Heaven, by
giving us things necessary for this life: The fourth petition answerable to the
first article. As (in the other articles which concern Christ) we believe that
Christ's merits are sufficient; so we pray here that whatsoever Christ did
suffer, might be efficacions to bring us to his Kingdom, to do his will, to
assure us of remission of sins, and preservation from all evil. As (in the
Creed) we believe that the Holy Ghost is a sanctifier; so here we pray that he
would be so to us. In the Creed, we believe the Communion of Stints: here we
pray for it.

Again, it contains all the ten Commandments; for as in them are contained
all good things to be done; The ten Com.
so here we beg grace to do them. As all the Commandments of the Decalogue
are reduced to two heads; so all the Petitions of the Lords Prayer are reduced
to two heads: we beg things for Gods glory, and our own good. The sum of
the first Table is answerable to the three first Petitions, and the sum of
the second Table is answerable to the three last. Totius Evangelu breve compend
^m, Tertul. lib. de orat. cap. 1.
As the old Testament is a Comment upon the Decalogue, so is the New upon this
Prayer, which is (says Tertullian) the Gospels Epitome.

Thirdly, Compendium of all wants: Upon aloccasons, All wants.
we may have recourse unto this prayer. When Gods Name is blasphemed, we may
fly to the first Petition, and say, Lord, sanctify thy holy name. When Piety
is trodden under foot, we may run to the second, and say, Thy Kingdom come.
When we find in us an inability to do Gods will, we may have recourse unto the
third; beseeching God so to enable us to do his will here on earth, as it is
done in Heaven by the blessed Angels. When we stand in need of tempor all
things, we may express the fourth; saying, give us this day our daily bread.
When we find our selves burdened with sin, we thirst after the fifth, and say,
Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us. When we
are assulted by temptations, we may with comfort embrace the sixth, and say,
lead us not into temptation but diliver us from evil.

Fourthly and lastly, All kinds of prayer.
it is a Compendium of all kinds of prayer. It contains all that were made by
the Prophets of old; the prayers of Moses, David, Samuel, Daniel, etc. And all
the prayers of the Apostles in the new Testament. The Apostle Paul does set
down four kinds of prayer, in 1 Timothy 2.1.

The first is, (...), Deprecation of evil. 1 Timothy 2.1.


The second is, (...), Comprecation of good.

The third is, (...), Interpellation, or Intercession for others.

The fourth is, (...), Thanksgiving, or Blessing God for our selves and others.

All these are contained in this Prayer.
First, Deprecation is contained in the two last petitions: Forgive us our
trespasses, etc. lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.

Secondly, Comprecation is comprehended in all the other petitions.

Thirdly, Intercession shines in every word: Our Father; give us: forgive us,
etc.

Fourthly, giving of thanks appears in the Doxologie: For thine is the
Kingdom, the power, and the glory for ever, Amen.

Nay, there are all these in every Petition: For as in the Commandment, it is
a general rule, that where the affirmative part is commanded, there the
negative is forbidden, and on the contrary: So in these Petitions, where we
pray for any good, there we pray against the contrary evil. And in every
petition there is intercession, because we pray for others. And when we pray
for the obtaining of any good, or removing of any evil, there must of
necessity be giving of thanks, for any degree of having the one or removing the
other

Thus find we, to our great comfort, that never man spoke as Christ, when he
spoke to man: never Angel spoke as he, when he spoke to God. He has left us a
Prayer, which is as perfect, for a prayer, as Christ for a Savior, in its
sphere and proportion.

Good God! Ap. Romans 1.25. Heb. 10.29.
what frenzy then has possessed the practicke and pragmaticke spirits, to
turn the truth of God into a lie? to trample under foot this sacred and
unparelled prayer? Do not they count it an unholly thing? do not they cry out
against it, as the Edomites against Jerusalem, Psalm. 137.7.
saying, down with it, down with it, even to the ground? Or else, do not they
cry out against it, as the two possessed with devils, cried out against our
Savior saying, Matthew. 8.29.
what have we to do with thee? art thou come to torment us before the time? If
not, why do not they say it? shall I say in their private houses? T^r. 1.12.
Always liars.
nay, in our public Congregations? three sorts of Christians there are (I
should say Cretians) which do stand out, as professed enemies unto it.

First, Sarah did Hagar; but they must send a scourge of small cords after it,
with a pasport of ignomine and disgrace. Test.
Some have not bin ashamed to say, that if Christ were upon earth again, he
would not give his Church a set form of prayer, because it stinteth the
spirit. An idle and impudent minion said (not long since) that she did thank
God, A sern. in Br. Str. Test.
she had forgotten the Lords prayer. A woman walking up Col. hill, within these
few weeks, said, J am very glad that J have not said the Lords prayer for above
a twelve-moneth. Another far worse then these (if worse can be) said, A seru.
in T.P. Test.
J think in my conscience J shall offend God more, if J should say the Lords
prayer, then if J should lie with a man. O intolerable impiety! O impudent
atheism! O horrid blasphemy! Do not these strip off the white, and keep the
black? are not these profane and without show of the contrary? Romans 2.5.
Do not they virtually betray the Lord of life? Do they not treasure up unto
themselves wrath, against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous
judgment of God? Certainly they are such as Saint Paul speaks of, in 2 Timothy
4.3.4 2 Timothy 4.3.4.
The time will come (says he) when they will not endure sound doctrine, but
after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching
ears: And they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be given
unto fables.

Again, this prayer (I fear, The Brownists and Anabap. Barrow and Green wood,
etc. in the reign of Q. Eliza.
not cordially) for an excellent copy to write after, a mould to make prayers
by; but (they say) it is not a prayer it self, and therefore they will never
conclude their Prayers with it. They have put this abominable error in Print,
and have likewise published the same lately, in our London Pulpits, taking upon
them to show reason why it should not be used for a prayer.

First, let us weigh their reasons that are in Print;

First, Lords Prayer as a prayer, because we have no warrant, or example for it.

I Answer, Christians have a sufficient warrant: Luke 11.2.
and taught by the Lord Jesus to pray so: When ye pray, say this, not thus,
say, Our Father, etc. These words are a contradiction to their ne dicite.
Disciplina discipuli, doctrina Magistri; The Masters doctrine is the Scholars
discipline.

Again, The Lords Prayer is the pattern, or grandworke of prayer; therefore it
is not lawful for a Christian to use it, as a prayer.

The Antecedent is true, Matthew. 6.9.
but I deny the Argument: Is it no prayer, because it is the groundworke of
prayer? The argument is like unto these two arguments. First, the Articles of
our Creed, are the sum and groundworke of our Faith; therefore it is not
lawful to repeat them, as the confession of our says. Secondly, Concupiscence
is the groundworke and original of sin; Romans 7. Jam. 1.14.15.
therefore concupiscence is not sin: which Popish argument is very false, and
follows not; for, concupiscence is both sin, and the cause of sin.

Thirdly, Prayer must express our wants to God in particular, but the Lords
Prayer is general.

Our Answer is, general, and in particular we must pray to God; and therefore
our larger prayers do refer themselves to the general heads of this prayer,
and this concludes them all: Moreover, this prayer is full, even in particular
Petitions.

Fourthly, Lords Prayer; 1 Cor. 13.
therefore it is unlawful to use it publicly or privately, as a prayer.

The argument is very silly, knowledge is imperfect, and cannot reach unto very
many things contained in the Canonical Scriptures; therefore a godly Christian
may not travail in the body of the Canonical Scriptures. That man that should
dispute thus, deserves to be called an Ignaro.

Fifthly, Lords Prayer is Scripture; therefore it is not lawful to use it, as a
prayer.

A very good argument it is to justify the use of it. David's Psalms, and the
holy hymues of Scripture, but to apply them to our occasion; Lord, into thy
hands I commend my spirit: Psalm. 31.6. Luke 23.46.
Is not this Scripture? yet our Savior used it for a prayer on the Cross. But
we will pass from the Reasons in the Press, to the Reasons in the Pulpit;

First, Master T.
venerable Sir) Antichristian to say the Lords Prayer, as a Prayer, because it
is imposed upon men's consciences.

Seems it a small thing unto him to have eaten up the good pasture, Ezekiel.
34.18.
but he must tread down with his feet the residue of his pastures? and to have
drunk of the deep waters, Reve. 13.1.
but he must trouble the residue with his feet? Is not the name of blasphemy
upon his head? I am sure it is upon his tongue. Is Christ Antichrist? light
darkness? heaven hell? Is it Antichristian to say that prayer which Christ
has commanded us? will, dare any man question his authority? Consider this ye
that thus forget God; lest he tear you in pieces, Psalm. 50.22.
and there be none to deliver you.

But does not the Author mean (forgetting Christ) that this prayer the Church
has imposed upon men's consciences, to be said as a prayer? therefore it is
Antichristian. It seems then that the Author will not allow the Church so
much power, as to impose a prescript form of prayer upon men's consciences,
although Scripture it self. But cannot we prove that a prescript form of
prayer may be imposed upon the Church? let the Author and his followers take
notice of 1 Chro. chapter 16. v. 7, 8.35.36. Again, of Joel chap. 2. ve. Apparet
hunc P^^^mum, etc. Musc. in Psalm. 95.
15, 16, 17. The 95. Psalm, in the judgment of some learned men, was used in
the public assemblies of the Jews, even upon the Sabbath day.

Master Calvia w^^ting to the Lord Protector in the time of King Edward the
sixth, has these words; Quod ad formulam precum, Mr. Calvin. Epist. ad Prote^
Angl. 87. page 69.
and rituum Ecclesiasticorum, valde probo, etc. Concerning the form of prayer
(says he) and Ecclesiastical rites, I do very well like that they should be
certain in a prescript order, and that the Pastors be not suffered to swarve
from it; as well for the help of the simple, is also that a consent of all
Churches may he held; and lastly, to prevent the rashness of those that affect
novelties.

But again, Admirer of the Lords Prayer, said; We ought not (my Beloved) to
say the Lords Prayer, as a prayer; especially the Minister, in a public
Congregation; because there be many ignorant persons which understand it not.

To which I answer, Lords Prayer unless we understand it, it is unlawful to
teach our children to say it, Master Br. of Saint D. E.
who as yet are not come to the years of discretion. But consider these places,
Deuteronomy. 6.7. and 11.19. Pro. 22.6. Lastly, if it be so that none must say or hear
the Lords Prayer, but those that thoroughly understand it; then it is unlawful
to command our children to read the Scriptures, or to hear them read,
especially the 6. chap. of Saint Matthew, and the 11. of Saint Luke.

But this learned Doctor falls from objecting against the Prayer in general,
and betaketh himself to particulars.

First, ye ought not to say the Lords prayer, state of nature, you abuse God,
in that you say, Our Father.

Is God a Father of regenerate persons only? Father generally of all
creatures? All men may say, Our Father, by a fourfold right. Of Creation, the
Father of our being: Of providence, the Father of our continuance: Of infusion
of the spirit: Of regeneration.

In the two first senses not men only, but all other creatures may call God
theirs; because he created them and provideth for them.

In the third, not only Saints, but all men may generally call God theirs.

In the fourth, the Elect only: The first is the voice of nature, the second
of sense, the third of reason, the fourth of grace.

But unregenerate persons ought not to say the Lords prayer as a prayer; for if
they do, Thy Kingdom come.

I perceive that this famous Teacher never read of the Kingdom of power,
Kingdom of the Gospel: nor of the Kingdom of the Gospel, which makes way to
the Kingdom of grace: nor of the Kingdom of grace, which prepares for the
Kingdom of glory; yet this petition comprehends all these. Not any longer will I
trouble my self, to sweep away these slender cobwebs, or to press these rotten
grapes; only let me tell you, that the chiefest reason (as I guess) why the
Novelists do relinquish the sacred prayer of our Savior is, because it
contains this petition, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that
trespass against us.

And behold now I meet with the third, adversaries unto this prayer, which I
may call lukewarm Laodiceans: they are the more moderate Brownists and
Separatists: King James conter a Ham. Coa^t.
they will not quite forsake this prayer, but they will have as little of it as
they can, peradventure none o^ it, if they durst appear to their secret
dislike; for do not their famous Lecturers refuse to say it, except once in a
quarter of a year? and then, must it not be said upon the last lecture-day of
the quarter, because some worthy Citizens else willdeny their liberal
Contribution? shall I compare these men to those Spanish Friars (of whom I read)
who would say their Pater noster but once a week, and that was upon the Lords
day? Nay, may I not compare them rather to an honest brother of theirs, who
being lately asked by a worthy Citizen, what he thought of the Lords prayer; At
Master M. house in G.H.
answered, I think it is a prayer of all prayers: being asked again why then
he did not say it oftener at the end of his own prayers; answered, I will give
my Audience content. Is not that saying of the Apostle verefied of these men,
Phil. 2.21.
all seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's.

It is a prayer that cannot be said too often; and I dare press the frequent
use thereof upon warrant of this plain and clear Text: Luke 11.2.
Quando oratis dicite, etc. quando, is as much as quandocunque; quandocunque,
is as much as quotiescunque: whenever ye pray, or as often as ye pray. If we
repeat the same words to iterate the same petitions to God, is it any more
blameable in us then in Christ himself, Mat. 26.44. ^ Cor. 1^.8.
who in the Garden is said to have used three times severally the same words,
not the same petition only? Or, then in Saint Paul, who when Satan buffered
him, did three times pray the same prayer, as he confesses.

Away then with these proud, ignorant, wilful, dissembling Novelists: for
those which are ashamed of the Lords prayer here on earth, of those shall the
son of man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his Father with the
holy Angels.

But these are Brethren, and I heartily wish therefore, that by some good means
they were reformed; if not, it is the Apostles precept that they be avoided:
Mark those (says he) that make contentions, Romans 16.17.
and avoid them. Mark them, as you would the Basilisk, avoid them, as you
would a Pesthouse. And if ever (my beloved) you desire to find true comfort by
your prayers here on earth, or to see the face of Christ in Heaven, let me
persuade you to honor the Author for the prayers sake, and the prayer for the
Authors sake.

First, let us honor the Author for the Prayers sake. memorandum, which Mark
the Heremite gave to one of his Scholars, for his direction in his duty of
thanksgiving unto God, which was, that he was not only to bless God for the
good works which he did; but also for the good words which he spoke. A man
must as well bless God for his good words, as for his good actions: if we come
by the good word of grace, to have the grace of words in our speech, we are as
well to bless God for it, as for good works: because as we are not able to
do any good work, no more to speak any good word of our selves, for it is not
in him that wills, nor in him that speaks, but in God that gives the
power. If we must bless God for our words, much more for our prayers, and if
for our prayers, much more for this prayer, and the gift of the spirit in it,
and for his assistance in it.

And as we must honor the Author for the Prayers sake; Prayer for the Authors
sake. How readily will God hear the Prayer of his son! and how readily will
the son acknowledge his own Prayer made in his own name! when we offer up
this prayer we may say, as Saint Bernard of himself, Nunquam abs te, absque te
recedo, J never go from thee without thee. Cypr. de Orat. Dome
Oremus itaque, fratres dilectissimi, sicut magister Deus docuit. Let us
therefore (my beloved brethren) pray, as God our master has taught us. Since
he has framed us a prayer; of which we are assured, that he is pleased with
the hearing it; let us be delighted with the saying it; and let our zeal
toward it, like true love, which grows by the enjoying, increase by the
practicing; that the oftener we say it, the more we may love it; and the more
we love it, the oftener we may say it. Amen, Amen.

FJNJS.

