NEW PAPERS FROM THE ARMY, CONCERNING The Kings Majesty's Letter sent to His
Highness the DUKE of YORK, written by His Majesty's own Hand.

ALSO, The Resolution and proceedings of their Commissioners at the Treaty at
Wickham; concerning the Peace and safety of the Kingdom of ENGLAND.

With a Remarkable Passage concerning the Kingdom of Scotland.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Reynolds, Ju^^ 13. 1647.

The last NEVVES From the TREATY.
SIR,

YOur last I have received, dated July 5. wherein I find many earnest
expressions, touching the proceedings of this present Treaty. And whereas you
desire to be a partaker of our intelligence in these parts, I shall here
faithfully impart unto you, that which is of greatest concernmene, and most
desired by the whole Kingdom, viz.

Upon Friday being the 2. of this (...) ^^t July, the Commissioners authorized
by both Houses of Parliament, and the Commissioners appointed by his Excellency
Sir Thomas Fairfa^, began the treaty at Wickh^ne, who at their first meeting,
declared themselves to each other with most gallant expressions of love and
amity; which caused much triumph and joy throughout the whole army; and after
some few hours in debate touching their instructions, they came to this
result, VIZ.

1. That foam scruple was made about the passage in the instructions, viz to
treat with Sir Thomas Fairfax, and such as he shall appoint, whether that gave
power to treat with those he appoints, himself not being there. 2 Whrther they
should treat upon the Votes already made by the houses, or upon what shall be
debated. 3. Whether the Commissioners should give account to the houses before
the conclusion of the several things treated on, or after the result of every
particular Head.

After some time spent in debace thereof the Commissioners for the army, viz.
Lieutenant Genesis Cromwell. Commis. Genesis Ireton. Colonel Fleetwood. Colonel
Rainsborow. Colonel Harrison. Col. Waller. Col. ^ien. Col. Lambert. Col.
Hamond. Major Daisborough.
Proposed some things which they affirmed to be wanting in the late Votes of
the houses, in relation to the desires of the army, sent from Uxbridge June 27.
The result of which debate, I shall here intimate unto you, consisting of 6
Heads.

1. For the publishing a Declaration against the votes for inviting Soldiers
from the Army, etc.

2. For making the former Votes for provisions for the Army more effectual.

3. For speedy sending those that have left them into Ireland, etc.

4. For the speedy passing the Ordinance for Ireland.

5. For the speedy perfecting the establishment for the Army. 6. That they have
many things to present to the Houses of very great concernment, much conducing
to the peace and safety of this Kingdom.

We have also received a Letter from the North, intimating the proceedings of
the Council of Scotland, touching the present affairs in England, especially
concerning the present Designs and Engagements of our noble General and the
Army; in which Letter, was discovered some notable projects for the raising a
new Army to come into England, which for your further satisfaction, I shall
here recite, verbatim.

The Copy of a Letter sent from a Gentleman in the North, to his friend in the
Army.
SIR,

ACcording so my promise in my last Letter, I shall in this give you a brief
relation of some passages here which are most Remarkable. On Thursday last
being the 1. of this instant July, there was a Convention of the Council of
the Kingdom of Scotland, at which there was a very great appearance of the
Estates of that kingdom, according to the weight of the business, which was
now to be debated; which was concerning the raising, or not raising of Forces
to come into England; about which there was a long and deliberate debate. I
shall not need to mention the various opinions on this Subject, nor give you
the Propositions at large then insisted on; but the general were these.

First, whether it were necessary to send Forces into England, to assist the
Parl. in settling the Kingdom, and whether the major part of the City of London
did not hold with the Army.

Secondly, what number should be thought fit for this service,

Thirdly, under what conduct those Forces should be.

Fourthly, how they should be paid. And 6. That it should be in pursuance of
the League and Covenant, and continuing of the Brotherly amity between the two
Kingdoms, upon all which particulars, much time was spent; And waving the 1. it
was thought fit that if any Forces were sent, the number could not be under
20000. To the 3. it was thought fit, that if any such Forces were sent into
England, Lieut. Ger. David Lesly should be Commander in chief. Something was
then proposed, whether they should come in before they had a special
invitation; to which was also laid in the balance, the present condition of
that Kingdom, in which, that which was of greatest weight was, That that
Kingdom was still infested with an Enemy in the field, to whom, some Irish
were expected to come over and join with them, That some new Divisions were
risen in the heart of that Kingdom, and their Soldiers much in arrear already
for want of pay: All which (together with other things) being duly considered,
the Council came to their result, and declared, that for the present, no
forces of theirs should come into England, and that all preparations in that
kind should be laid aside, which is all at the present from

Sir, Your affectionate friend to serve you, W. GILL.
Barwick July 2. 1647.
Yet although diverse storms and oppositions may arise, I do verily believe,
those silver thrids of amity and love throughout the whole army, can never be
separated, or divided; for their hearts are firmly knit and united together,
fearing not the strength of Man, but generally offering themselves to the
protection of the great Jehovah. There is great hopes of a gallant composure,
for the treaty goes on fairly. We hear that the Kings Majesty has sent a
Letter to his Royal Son the Duke of York, it being his own handwriting as
does appear by the superscription. Major General Brown is in great favor
with the Kings Majesty, etc. Thus for the present, I remain

Your most affectionate friend and Kinsman, T. BURFOIT.
Wickham July 9. 1647.
FINIS.

