THE REFORMATION OF THE CHURCH To be endeavored more then that of the
COMMONWEALTH,

Declared, In a Sermon preached before the Right Honorable House of LORDS at
the public Fast, August 27. 1645.

By ANTHONY BURGES, Pastor of Sutton Coldfield, and now Preacher at
Laurence-Jury, London.

LONDON, Printed by G.M. for T. Underhill at the Bible in Woodstreet, 1645.

Die Iovis 28. August. 1645.
IT is this day ordered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That M. Anthony
Burgess, who preached yesterday before their Lordships in the Abbey Church,
Westminster, it being the day of the public Fast, is hereby thanked for his
great pains he took in his said Sermon, and desired to print and publish the
same, which is only to be done by authority under his hand.

John Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum.

I Appoint Thomas Underhill to print this Sermon.

Anthony Burgess.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE House of PEERS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
THe Scripture takes notice of those, Act. 17.11.
as more noble then others, that enquire and search diligently into the
Scripture, concerning the truth of things tendered to be believed. And well
does it honor such, because men are apt in matters of Religion (as Seneca
speaks about the opinions of an happy life) Credere magis quam judicare,
believe implicitly rather then judge exactly, whereby they walk, Non qua
eundum est, sed qua itur, not whither we should go, but whither the tract of
the path leads us. It was my endeavor in this Sermon to excite your
Lordships to a speedy and exact Reformation of the Church from all the
corruptions that have defiled her, and herein to attend unto Gods Word, as the
only star that will conduct unto Christ. None are too great to undertake so
good a work. Gregory said of David dancing before the Ark, Magis miror Davidem
saltantem, quam pugnantem, David is more to be admired in his religious worship
of God, then in his courageous conquests and slaughters of the Philistims, or
other enemies. Hence, Jer. 9.23, 24. where glory in wisdom, riches and might
is forbidden, there is a kind of an holy pride allowed in the knowledge of the
Lord. Let Heathens glory that they are saluted by the Commonwealth, patres
patriae; but let those Christians, whom God honors with dignity and place,
delight to be nursing Fathers unto the Church, by speaking comfortably unto
those who teach the good knowledge of God; and by commanding the Levites to
carry all the filthiness out of the Temple. Which that your Lordships may
faithfully and zealously do, is the prayer of

Your Lordships humble Servant Anthony Burgess.

Errata.
PAge 4. line 21. for counseled read compelled. against l. 29. add Calv. in
Amos, chapter 7 v. 13. p. 15. l 9. for subtitis r. subditis. p. 26. l. 8. for (...)
r. (...) p. ult. l. 28. read, but left the saithfull Ministers and godly
people of the land, under as many groans and troubles as before.

A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable the House of LORDS, August 28,
1645.
JUDGE. 6.27, 28, 29. Then Gideon took ten men of his servants, and did as the
Lord had said unto him: And so it was, because he feared his fathers household,
and the men of the City, that he would not do it by day, that he did it by
night.

And wen the men of the City rose early in the morning, behold, the altar of
Baal was cast down, and the grove was cut down that was by it, and the second
bullock was offered upon the altar that was built.

And they said one to another, Who has done this thing? And when they enquired
and asked, they said, Gideon the son of Joash has done this thing, etc.


THis book contains a wonderful alternation and vicissitude of the
Israelites troubles, and their deliverances, as also of their sins, and
prayers unto God; which old inconstancy of theirs, made Gregory compare them
to the grasshoppers, that do on a sudden leap high, and then fall down again
to the ground: Thus did the Israelites: and this Chapter contains the fourth
change, wherein we have first described their sin, and then their punishment;
Their sin, ver. 1. (The children of Israel did evil in the sight of the
Lord:) This evil was especially Idolatry; hence that is called in Scripture
(...), the abominable thing; and this Idolatry is either when the true God is
not worshipped, or when he is not worshipped in a true manner. It is not long
since in England were found such abominable things, which made the faithful
Ministers of God, so zealous for a Reformation; Omnis sermo adaptandus est
contra Idolatriam. In the next place, you have their punishment, they were
oppressed by the Midianites: and this was so great, that the Israelites, who
had been beasts in their sins, were now made like them in their punishments;
for they were forced to hide themselves in dens and caves; and this was not
all, they were in danger of scarcity and famine; for they found it very
difficult to get corn; now the words that do express the misery of war, as
clades, strages and calamitas, are such as are taken from the hurt done to the
husbandman, in his corn and grass, as if that were the great evil of war.

In the next place we have Isreal's prayer unto God, ver. 6. They cried unto the
Lord. At ver. 7. God sends a Prophet to them, to inform them of their sin,
that the weight thereof might lie heavier upon them, then all outward misery;
which also is aggravated by the manifold favors God has bestowed on them: now
it is indged by some, that here is an (...) in the history, and that this
expostulation, which the Prophet made with them, did precede and cause the
prayers and supplications of the Israelites. What the Prophet was, and whether
it was the same with the Angel mentioned, ver. 12. I will not discuss. Upon
the Israelites humiliation, God sends them a deliverer, who is described by his
name, family, and his present action (he was threshing wheat:) A fit
representation of him who was afterward in the worship of God, to separate the
wheat and the chafe. In the Chapter we have, 1. His call and commission; 2.
His humble and modest excuse, 3. His obedience notwithstanding: Now his
commission was in two things principally; First, The destruction of all false
worship, with erecting and establishing of the pure: And secondly, The
vindicating and asserting of the Common wealth from its oppressors: And my text
contains Gideons faithful discharge of the former part of his commission,
though he met with much opposition. Now in this whole fact of Gideons, some
things are extraordinary, and do not belong as examples to us; but other things
are ordinary, and from those I shall gather my present observations: As first,
whereas Gideon does not only free the Common wealth from outward violence and
oppression, but the Church also from corrupt worship and Idolatry; we may
conclude;

That it is an happy thing, when those Magistrates, whom God raises up to
assert the freedoms of a Common wealth, do also endeavor a reformation of the
Church.

In the second place; whereas you see Gideon much opposed, and that by the
multitude of people, and the dearest of his friends, in so much that had he not
been endowed with extraordinary piety and magnanimity from above, he could
never have performed this great service to God; we may observe;

That there is a necessity of the concurrence of many special abilities and
graces in those who undertake a Reformation. I will begin with the first
Doctrine.

Before we lay down the grounds of this, take notice, that it lies as a duty
upon Magistrates, to attend to the reformation of all corruptions that creep
into the Church, as well as to redress the abuses in a state: Only concerning
his power herein, there is a twofold extremity by way of error; first, of
Popery, who do not well approve, that the Magistrate should meddle in matters
of Religion; but would have him altogether bound up in the determinations of
the Pope and his Bishops; and especially they abhor this doctrine, when it
extends to the reformation of the Ecclesiastical persons; But we see in the
Scripture, the godly Magistrates, Hezekiah, Josiah and others, demolishing the
Altars, encouraging the Priests that taught the good knowledge of God, and
punishing Baals Priests; and where these things have not been done, there we
find the Magistrates reproved: on the other side, the error may be extreme,
when we give them an unlimited power in establishing matters of Religion; as if
they were not to be regulated by Scripture, or to take the advice and counsel
of those that are Spiritual governors in the Church: Thus Constantius is
branded, who when he would have counseled the Orthodox to Arianisme, he
uttered that speech full of pride, quod ego volo, pro canone sit; what I will,
shall stand for a rule: Thus also we go too far, when we confound Civil
power and Ecclesiastique, making the former wholly to devour the latter: Hence
Calvin speaking of the duty of Kings and all in authority, to use the sword for
the defense of Religion and the worship of God; yet adds, that there are
inconsiderati homines, etc. some rash and indiscreet men, who go beyond their
bounds in setting up the Magistrates power, so that they do abolere omne
spirituale regimen, abolish all spiritual government. By this briefly it may
be seen, that it is the Migistrates duty, to establish the worship of God, to
reform corruptions in the Church; yet with some rules and grounds. I come
therefore to the reasons, why Governors ought to lay to heart, and to be
affected with Church matters, as well as those of the state.

As 1. Because Gods blessing does most remarkably follow their other
enterprises; Hence Hag. 1. God bids them consider, whether they did not thrive
accordingly as they promoted the building of the Temple; and thus Jehoshaphat,
when he bestirred himself in a reformation, fear fell upon all the nations
round about, that they dared not to war with him; and on the contrary, how
was Solomon's and Rehoboams kingdom shaken, when they corrupted the worship of
God? If we would judge by Scripture, we should see horrible wickedness and
impiety in those speeches of men, which say; It is this strictness, this
reformation that brings all our calamities upon us: men that will not be
persuaded, their own oaths, drunkenness and ungodly practices do make the land
miserable, will yet think the prayers and active endeavors of the godly to
bring all our ruin upon us. 1. This is no Scripture judgment. If therefore we
would have God subdue our enemies, and those that hate us, let Magistrates
subdue that which is an enemy to God, corrupt worship, defiled administrations
of ordinances, these are enemies to God. It is true, sometimes God, to try the
constancy of reformers and their faithfulness, has brought much war and
calamity upon them, presently upon finishing the reformation, as 2 Chronicles. 32.1.

2. Herein are concerned the souls of men: certainly this ought much to
inflame, and kindle your affections in a Church-reformation, that hereby you
may preserve the souls of thousands from everlasting perdition. Monopolies and
illegal taxes, these only waste the outward estates of men; but corrupt
worship, does the souls of men. You do bemoan those thousands that have lost
their blood in the field, since the wars began; but (had not God stirred up
Governors to reform) how many thousands of souls would have perished through
ignorance and superstition? So that Joseph was never in more mercy raised up by
God to preserve his Father and Brethren from famine in time of dearth, then
when God moved the hearts of diverse in eminent places, to cause the plenty of
Gods Word. Know therefore (Right Honorable) that by your places and power,
which God has committed to you, you may save the souls of many. Look upon it,
as the least thing, that the people of England may by your means have their
bodies and estates securely provided for; but account it the greatest
obligation, and tie upon you, to provide for their souls and spiritual
happiness. There are spiritual plunderings as well as corporal; and there is
the siring of souls as well as houses and towns: therefore let your thoughts
and consultations be to prevent these.

3. The devil uses all his malice and power for the subverting of this rather
then the other. Wherein does the devils great enmity and rage appear against
men? It is not against their purses, their bodies, their outward comforts, so
much as against their souls.

The devil and his instruments they chiefly labor, that there may be no pure
doctrine, no holy discipline, no godliness promoted; to stop this, all the
power of hell combine: so that the greatest, and the most dangerous part of our
war at this time is with the powers of darkness, which stir up instruments
to promote that kingdom of darkness.

As they report of the Basilisk, it hates man so much, that wheresoever it
sees the image or picture of him, it endeavors to tear it in pieces; such is
the hatred of Satan and his instruments to any thing of God, appearing in
doctrine, worship, or discipline, that he would pull all into pieces; and
certainly the confusions that the devil has brought upon Churches by heresies
and impieties, are more dreadful and terrible then all the devastations and
desolations he has brought upon States and Commonwealths, by the sword or
other calamities. Let this therefore awaken men in place and authority; and let
them think, what is that which hell, which the devils, which wicked men would
so gladly have, and they shall see it is nothing, but a dissolute, careless,
and impenitent life, without any check from the Word of God.

4. Gods care about his Church is far above that to the Commonwealth.
Therefore learn from God, let your affections and thoughts be most about that,
which God has the greatest care about from all eternity.

He looks to the Commonwealth in the way of providence, as a God absolutely
considered; but to his Church, in the decree of Election, and acts of
Justification and Salvation, as a gracious Father; therefore God, he does
either bless, or afflict Commonwealths, and the Governors thereof, as they
are either froward and churlish, or kind and merciful to his people, Psalm.
87.2. Jehovah loves the gates of Sion more then the dwelling places of Jacob;
the place of his worship and ordinances, more then all other places. Think
therefore, that if Gods love, and works in a remarkable manner be for his
people, worship and ordinances, how effectual and strong ought the resolutions
and endeavors of those be, who by reason of their place and office are called
gods? and if it was accounted such an honor among the Heathens unto Hercules,
that he cleansed their Augean stable, and conquered their many-headed Hydra;
how much more will it be matter of honor and glory, to cleanse the temple of
God from all defilements, and to subdue all heresies, that rise up against the
truths of Christ? let us therefore all imitate God, in our places and
relations, by our love and thoughts of good to the Church and ordinances of God.

5. The Commonwealth is in reference and subordination to that: the Church is
not for the Commonwealth, but the Commonwealth for the Church. Hence a
Commonwealth is made glorious, when it becomes holy and Christian, as jewels,
which they say have their being at first in the sea, yet have more affinity
with the heavens, whose color they represent; so a State when once become the
Church of God, does more depend on heaven, from whence it has it is original,
then on the earth, in which it lives. And then do all Governors contradict
this principle, when they make the Scripture subordinate to State-ends or
policies: Thus Jeroboam makes the worship of God subordinate to the outward
peace of the Kingdom; and this has been the fatal miscarriage of many
Governors; they have not consulted what God and his Word speaks, but what
are the maxims and principles of State. If therefore your hearts and
affections be for the Commonwealth, how much more ought it be for the Church,
seeing God made the world at first, and does still preserve it, because of his
Church that is in it? and if Christ thought not his own blood too much to give
for the ransom of it, how much less should we judge our pains and thoughts
too much for it? Psalm 2. There is a forcible exhortation to all the governors
of the earth, to receive Christ, and to submit to his government, let none
think himself too great to be in Christ's yoke; nay, this is the end why God
has given greatness and power to men, that they might serve his Church; and
therefore he suffers her to be in a weak and indigent estate: when the Lord
promises, that Kings and Queens shall be nursing fathers, and nursing mothers,
it supposes the Church to be like a poor helpless orphan: now when we speak
thus of helping the Church of God, we mean not in such a manner, as they in
Popery plead for the outward dignity and carnal privileges, as also unlawful
authority, which are not of Christ's kingdom; but we speak of the people of God,
the Ordinances, the true Doctrine, and the wholesome discipline thereof; we
desire this to be established and promoted by you. Who sees not a vast
difference between the spirit of a proud Thomas Becket, obstinately dying for
the outward pomp and usurped power of the Church (as they call it) and the
zeal of a Calvin, choosing punishment, yea (a hundred deaths) as he says,
rather then to suffer the public profanation of the Lords Supper. Plato said,
magis amandam esse patriam quam matrem, quia patria quiddam divinum est: how
much rather then are we to love the Church of God, above the Common wealth,
because that is indeed divine, being the immediate plant of Christ himself?

6. God in laying down a law, does command those things first, that concern
him and his worship; so his promises to his Church, are chiefly about the
spiritual means of salvation; this consideration may also be a great motive in
the work of reformation. God in his commands, first does establish the duties
of worship and service to him, and then the offices and duties toward man; how
happy then is it, when men make laws proportionably to God?

Thus Moses, Varro. l. 14 c. 17. Romae quotiescunque senatus cogeratur nulla de
re prius, quam de religione agebatur.
as soon as he had delivered the people of Israel out of Egypt, before they
were a settled Common wealth, he prescribes them all the form and manner of
Gods worship; and here Gideon in the text, before he subdueth the Midianites,
he destroys their Idols. And as you have Gods commands, so also his promises
to his Church are chiefly in respect of spiritual things, Hag. 2.6, 7. One
would not have thought that the glory there prophesied of for the Temple,
should have been the reformation that Christ did bring into it, but rather
would have expected some outward material magnificence: Even as in Popery,
adorned Temples, goodly Images, and costly vestments, are accounted the glory
of a Church: but we see the promise is otherwise: So Zach. 12. and Mal. 1. the
promises of God to his people under the Gospel, are not that they shall live
free from taxes and pillaging, but that they shall have a refining Ministry,
pure Ordinances, and gracious affections in the use of them.

7. The oppressions in worship and Religion are far more grievous then those
of the outward man; therefore ought Magistrates to ease the godly in these
respects, rather then in any other. No doubt to the godly Israelites, Gideon
was more welcome, in that he destroyed Altars, then in that he vanquished the
Midianites. Conscience is the eye of a man, and any little crumme of dust blown
into that is very grievous; This made our godly ancestors, lying under the
burdens of Popery, to cry out, like David, for the water of Bethlehem; Who will
give us to drink of the pure waters of Gods ordinances? How many have found an
hell in their hearts, for communicating with false worship? Our worthy
reformers at first, if it had been matter of purse or state, they could have
born it; but when oppressions were in doctrine and worship, this made them
choose reproaches with Christ, rather then the treasures of Rome. It is true,
there are men whose consciences are like the Leviathans skin, no spear can
enter into them; let there be an Image set in the room of David, any Idols in
the place of Christ, they are not much troubled. That is observeable in the
Jews, though senseless enough under their Idolatry, while they were in outward
prosperity, yet being in captivity, how tender are they? Psalm. 137.3, 4. In
that Psalm many things are observable to our purpose; as first, though they
were by the pleasant rivers side, yet they could not but mourn for Ierusalems
sake. Again, its observed by Calvin, as a great testimony of their faith and
godly zeal, that they carried their harpes with them into so strange a land
from their own country, as their dearest housholdstuffe, which they would
keep, till God restored them to their worship in Jerusalem again. Further, you
may take notice of their refusal to sing in a strange land; the public
worship of God, and the legal Sacrisices, might not be celebrated in a
polluted land. Hereupon, see into what an holy passion the Church breaks out,
ver. 6. If I forget the, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning; If
I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; If I
prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy: Here are spiritual and heavenly
hearts, that can rejoice more in the restitution of the worship and ordinances
of God, then in all their own private advantages: By this Psalm you see, what
an oppression and misery is upon those, who groan under Church-pollutions. Now
one of the main burdens that has borne down the backs of the godly Ministers
in this kingdom, has been the want of holy and powerful discipline; England
was a good school, wherein truths were taught, but there wanted a rod to
correct vice; the want of this is a grievous burden. Its a passage of Calvin's
to Farell, speaking of the Sacrament to be with them the next Lords day, Cogita
(says he) quantis angustijs constringer, utinam me absente posset celebrari,
hac condition, ut ad vos usque vel manibus reptarem. What is the cause then,
that men may be earnest for the one, and not for the other?

1. The state reformation agrees most with our sensible good; hence we shall
see the Romans and other Heathens, have adventured themselves for the Common
wealth, and have gloried in being the assertors of its liberties; but to
promote Christ's ways, that is contrary to our corrupt hearts: therefore men
may be forward to have monopolies and taxes removed, that yet cannot endure to
have the sanctification of the Sabbath, the powerful and soul saving preaching
of Gods Word established. How few are like Theodosius, of whom Ambrose says,
Dilexi virum, qui cum corpore solveretur, magis de statu Ecclesiarum, quam de
proprijs periculis angebatur; he was more careful about the Church then his
own affairs.

2. Multi ^^nt qui d^sciplinam imperium esse judica^t ac rationa^^m
ca^^^gationem superbiae assignant; quum non fit imperium, aisi ubi aliqui^
juberur i^^u^^um; ne^ superbia, nisi u^i regligitur disciplina Aug.
Christ has yokes, and Common wealths are unwilling to receive these; In Psalm.
2. ver. 3. see the resolution of the governors of the earth; Let us break
their bonds, and cast their cords from us: The orders of Christ are so holy, so
heavenly, so self-denying, that few states will arise to the obedience of them:
And this made the Heathens object, though very falsely; that Common wealths and
the Christian religion cannot stand together: And this made some profane men
profess, when the reformation began in Lathers time; that they had rather live
under the government of the Turk, then where all things should be ordered
according to Gods Word; but this is to be ignorant of the great happiness,
both spiritual and temporal, which the ways of Christ bring to a people.

Besides the former, there are also extrinsecall causes.

1. God leaves them to their own carnal wisdom; this is a great judgment
of God, when they are left, in matters of Religion, to their own hearts, as in
Jeroboam and others: some have said, the head of every sacrifice was to be
thrown away, and not offered, to signify, that our own carnal apprehensions
must be laid aside in the worship of God: Now the Church of God scarce ever had
a reformation, wherein men have not been in part left to this, as appears by
that frequent passage; Nevertheless the high places were not taken away:
therefore to reform, is Gods great work upon the hearts of men, as he poured
his Spirit upon Zerubbabel; and take the best reformers, while they have no
more then man in them, they are like Sampson without his hair, fearful,
worldly, self-seeking as others.

2. The people are unwilling and unprepared: thus it was in Josiahs time,
insomuch that one would wonder to read the story in Josiahs time, to see what a
general compliance there was in the whole kingdom with his reformation, yea,
an universal submission thereunto; and to observe the prophecy of Zachary,
which is said to be at the same time; for in this latter, God by the Prophet.
complains of them as a very wicked people, yet they gave way to the
reformation by Josiah; only this did not last, for Josiah is immediately
killed, and all the people fall back to their false worship again, so that the
inward rottenness and hypocrisy of their hearts, do either stop a
reformation, intended by governors; or else throws down immediately
whatsoever is built up.

3. A corrupt Ministry does always oppose this; Magistrates have not been
always able to reform as they would, because of the wickedness of the
Ministry, who should indeed have laid the first stones of every spiritual
building; Thus Christ, whom the zeal of Gods house did consume, by whom was he
contradicted in a most violent manner, but by the Priests and Pharisees? Thus
Luther professed he found more enemies in the Cloisters and Monasteries, then
out of wicked and profane places; And is not this to be found in England? had
not corrupt Ministers, brokers for Popery, like the Philistims, thrown earth
into all our springs that we were to drink of? yet do they repent and humble
themselves for all their superstitious pollutions to this very day? or are they
not rather obstinate and hardened in the maintaining of them? So then its no
wonder, if the governors of a Common wealth do not so willingly and fully
reform, when great learned scholars, and men much admired for their knowledge
shall oppose it.

It was a witty speech of Luthers, Monachica theologia nihil videt in Scriptur
is nisi cucullos; and its true still, great scholars corrupted in their
judgments, see nothing in the Scripture, but what they think makes for
Altars, and Ceremonies, and such vanity.

would have it better with the state, and are not affected with a reformation
in the Church; and this carnal disposition was of old; Austin speaks much to
this purpose about the Heathens, who cried out of the Christian religion, as
the cause of all their troubles and miseries; They would have peace again,
though they had thereby, mala saevis pejora hostibus; and he brings in an
Heathen, saying, Let us have our feasts again, our merry meetings, reges non
curent quam bonis, sed quam subtitis regnant; non jubeantur dura, non
prohibeantur impura; Let no hard duties be commanded, no impure ways
forbidden; Ille sit publicus inimicus cui haec felicitaes displicet. Lib. 1. de
civit. cap. 30. I fear these things lie in the bottom of many men's hearts, who
yet are very willing to have all state grievances taken away.

The means to be such Magistrates and people, are these.

1. Be affected with Gods Word, take that for a rule; adore the majesty and
fulness of the Scripture; consider not, what this, or that carnal principle
suggesteth to you, but say, how is it written? and how do we read in the
Scripture? The Church of God is tied to the Scripture, to fetch all nourishment
and support from it, as the child is fastened by the navell to the mother, for
the relief and maintenance of it: What has made men heretics in the
mysteries of the Trinity and Deity of Christ, but only attending to reason, and
not Scripture? they will have us show the like in the creatures; but the Father
said well to the Arian that demanded so, Da mihi alium Deum, and aliam
Trinitatem tibi ostendam.

2. Get an heavenly heart and mind, which will prize the ordinances of God;
till this be in men, they will not move, or stir in any Temple-worke. Its no
marvel if David have such a desire to build an house to God, when he cries
out, How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord? Psalm. 84.1. Blessed are they that
dwell in thy house, etc. So when he is in banishment, what is that which he so
longs for? is it to have his peace and outward tranquillity again, or not
rather to see the power and glory of God, as he had seen it in the sanctuary?
Psalm. 6.31, 2.

3. Humble your selves for former known pollutions, or for negligence and
remissness in reformation, when opportunities have been offered. Who knows
whether much of this work that is now to do, might not have been dispatched
heretofore, if the hearts of men in place had been for it? Can we say, that it
is not the sin of Parliaments and governors heretofore, that the Ark is not
already settled? and how necessary our humiliations are for former known
defilements and superstitions, appears, Ezekiel. 43.10, 11.

4. Remember these considerations.

1. What the thoughts are which God has about a worship that is none of his,
Joh. 4. You worship you know not what; men do they know not what, howsoever
they dote most upon their own invented worship. There is a Papist Raymundus
says, There are as many mysteries in the Mass, as drops in the sea, Angels in
Heaven, Stars in the firmament, atoms in the Sunne-beames, or sand in the
sea shore; but that which is highly esteemed among men, is abominable before
God.

2. The danger of our own hearts in such things; God does frequently forbid our
own wisdom and discretion, in matters concerning him; and the wiser men are,
the more absurd they have been in their worship, when they have not been guided
by the light of the Scripture, as in the Egyptians, who were noted to be a
fountain of the arts, and much knowledge; they were of all the Heathens most
ridiculous about their gods. And all Popery may sufficiently advertise us, how
dangerous it is to leave Gods word, and to follow our own imaginations: In
things of this life, a Magistrate de jure suo tantum remittere potest, quantum
pacis studium requiret: sed alia est ratio spiritualis regiminis.

3. The unprofitablenesse of any such way for a spiritual benefit; whatsoever
doctrine, worship or ordinance is not of the Lords institution, can never be
blessed to any spiritual effect upon the soul: The word of promise does always
suppose a word of institution.

4. Godly men cannot rejoice in outward blessings; if this be wanting, as you
heard before of David, though he might have his country, his liberty again,
yet that was not so great a good, as to enjoy God again; it is riches and the
Gospel, peace and the Gospel that makes a people happy.

5. This is a great argument to prevail with God; what an argument is this in
prayer; Lord bless these Magistrates, this Parliament, for they set up thy
Kingdom? and consider that every time you pray that petition in the Lords
prayer, that the Kingdom of God would come; the meaning is, that the powerful
preaching of Gods word, and the wholesome dispensation of the ordinances may
every where be settled.

But against all these Arguments for a Reformation, there are many objections
brought; I will instance in three only.

First, Some say, this is to make all Religion ridiculous; what a vanity, and
inconstancy does this seem to be, to have one year, one kind of service and
worship of God, and another the next year? Now to this I answer these things.

1. It is indeed a very hard thing to take men off from their religious usages,
though they have no solid ground to retain them. Thus Austin he complained,
Genus est morbi gravissimi, eorum qui dicunt nobis, vere quidem dicitur non est
quod respondeatur, sed durum est nobis traditione^ parentu^ relinquere; This
does much trouble men to leave customs, which by long tract of time have made
an awful impression upon their conscience. And thus Austin at another time,
Sensi saepe dolens and gemens, etc. he often perceived with much grief, that
many perturbations and contentions were raised in many things, one reason
whereof was, because it was not their custom in their country to do so.
Therefore this must be acknowledged, that people will generally startle and be
astonished, if an old custom be denied them, though they have no Scripture for
it.

2. It may fall out, that it is so far from being mutability, that it is a duty
to leave off such things as have been practiced: Thus when the kingdom of
Israel had set up many idolatricall practices, was it their sin, because they
made their change, or not rather their duty? and thus in Popery, when God
caused the light of Reformation to shine out of that thick darkness; was this
levity and mutability, because there were no Altars, no Images, no Mass, where
they were used to be for many hundred years? No, God commanded them to leave
Babylon.

3. There is an alteration essential and destructive, and an alteration
accidental and perfective. Where the Churches of God retain the true Doctrine,
there is not an essential alteration, nor can Religion properly be said to be
changed. And thus when calumniatours say, that we are setting up a new
Religion; it is but a slander, for the doctrine that has heretofore been
retained in England (I speak not of Papizing and Arminianizing persons) is not
changed; we still retain the Doctrine of the Scriptures, of the Trinity, of
Christ, of justifying faith: therefore all the alteration is accidental,
concerning rituals and discipline, which alteration makes to the perfection and
wellbeing of the Doctrine, for the Doctrine that is anima, and Discipline that
is the nerves whereby the body is compact together.

4. No Reformers that ever God raised up in the Church would own themselves so
far perfect, as that there needed no addition; we should do wrong to the
blessed Reformers, if so be that we should think they themselves thought they
had attained to such a Reformation, as needed no further a Reformation. It Is
expressed in the Common Prayer book, That till the primitive Discipline may be
restored again, they ordered for the present thus, and thus. Nay certainly were
the godly Martyrs commanded to come out of their graves, and to see what is now
doing in England, they would exceedingly rejoice to see the fruit of their
prayers.

5. It lies as a duty upon Churches to improve their talents, as well as
particular persons.

If persons are to grow in knowledge and Reformation, then why not Churches?
not as if that Academicall principle of the Socinians were to be received, that
it is lawful every month to alter our opinions in the Doctrine of Religion;
that is to bring in Atheism at last: yet notwithstanding there is to be a
growth in the clearer knowledge even of essentials; as when a child grows,
he does not get new members or parts: only they grow in their kind: It is
profectus, not alteratio, as Lyrinensis called it; and as for those things that
are not absolutely essential; we see by experience what need there is, that
Churches should daily increase in their knowledge. And so much for this
Objection.

The next Objection is of those, who say, It Is no such dangerous thing to live
and die in errors, therefore there needs not so much strictness and
accuratenesse herein, and the handling of this is necessary in these times,
when it is thought that heresy is but a theological fiction, and that it is
great innocence. Now though great care ought to be used, for the declining of
all tyranny in Discipline against errors; and in opinions of less
concernment, a Magistrate is not to make the major proposition; a jailor, the
minor, and a prison the conclusion; yet that people may be more afraid and
tremble about error then they do. It is good to confider, first, a man may
pervert Scripture to his own damnation by error, 2 Pet. 3.16. Which the
unlearned and unstable wrest to their own damnation: So that a man may damn
himself by errors, as well as by a wicked life. Yea Oecumenius makes it as
great a sin to wrest and mangle the Scripture, as to take the bodies of the
holy Penmen, and to murder them; consider that place, Prove. 30.6. Add thou
not to his words, lest he reprove thee. By reproving, is meant a real
chastisement and affliction; now when thou lie under heavy troubles, thou
inquire, what sin have I done? What iniquity is it that I have committed, for
which God does thus heavily afflict me? never considering that it may be for a
sinful and carnal opinion. If therefore error may be the poison, and
damnation of a man's soul, it is not to be judged, as a thing of pardon, rather
then of blame, as some would have it.

2. Heresies and errors come from damnable causes; therefore they are not to
be slighted: the general cause of them is made to be the flesh, Gal. 5.20.
and reckoned in the nature of them with gross sins, murders, whoredoms, etc.
and joined in the damnable effect of them, They that do these things shall
never inherit the Kingdom of heaven; neither is there any necessity of that
forced interpretation, to take heresies (there spoken of) for contentions and
strifes, seeing though the word may denote some wilful pertinacie, yet it
frequently signifies some pertinacy about religious matters; by this therefore
it appears, that a man may be carnal by his head-sins, as well as by his
hand-sinnes; then there are more particular causes mentioned by Scripture of
error, which are damnable, as obstinacy, covetousness, pride, and vainglory,
as in Marcion, when he said, (...), he would throw the fire-bals of contention,
which should be unquenchable like those of hell: especially these errors are
of a damnable cause, when they come from a looseness of heart, as those that
dispute against the morality of the Sabbath, and the strict keeping of it, and
against the obligation of the moral law, and the divinity of the Scriptures;
therefore go to the fountain of every error, and see how dangerous that is.

3. The several acts, or nature, wherein it consists, is damnable. There is
a learned man, that confidently maintains the word Heresy is never used in
the Scripture in a middle or indifferent sense, but always in an ill notion: I
shall not call that into question now; only we say, as it is taken
ecclesiastically, the acts of it are very heinous, as that it is putting a lie
upon the holy Ghost: if the salfe prophets were so threatened for saying, Thus
says the Lord, when the Lord did not say so; then must the like condemnation
fall upon them, who say, Thus says the Scripture, when it says it not. Again,
Gods Word is the public Standard; it is the testament of Christ: now how
harnous a thing is it judged to falsify the last will of a man? Again, Gods
Word is precious and dear to him, and he will hear the words and the groans, as
it were, which this corrupt heart makes in it.

4. The consequents of it are damnable, for error is like the plague and
infection, which destroys many others. Arius una scintilla fuit; and yet how
did it fire the whole world? and how well were it, if Luthers temptation were
upon many men, Tune solus sapis? art thou only wise? what if thou be damned,
and drawest many thousands to hell with thee? therefore it is a true saying,
Quicquid in religionem divinam committitur, in omnium fit injuriam. Again,
these sins of errors pollute the mind and understanding, which are the
choicest parts of man: always the sins that are majoris infamiae, greater
reproach among men, are not presently majoris reatus, of the greater guilt
before God. Is not the devil called an unclean spirit? yet he has no bodily
wickedness, therefore doctrine being the foundation of practice it is
dangerous to err there. And then lastly, such sins we are hardly convinced of.
An outward gross sin natural conscience may condemn, but it cannot do so in
matters of faith, because they are supernaturally revealed. These things duly
considered, may make men pray, and again, pray that God would not leave them to
their own understandings.

Lastly, There is no solid excuse, or plea can be made for it. Not that it is a
man's ignorance, and therefore we are to do with them as blind men, whom we
pity, and not beat, for by this means the Jews who opposed Christ should have
been excused; and those who thought they did God good service in killing of the
Prophets: insomuch that a man may be under much guilt by error; and yet be
persuaded he is in the right way; neither does this excuse him, that he cannot
help it, or remove his error no more then he can remove a mountain into the
sea, for then this would excuse those also who are captivated to any sinful
way; and certainly the commands of God are as much to understand the truth, and
to believe what God has revealed, as to embrace in our will and affections
what is good; neither does this excuse them, that they have good intentions and
ends, for the Socinians profess they dare not hold Christ to be the true God,
equal with the Father, out of reverence and respect to the Father, lest they
should dishonor him. Nor lastly, that every man is fallible, and therefore no
man may judge another to err, for if because all may err, it would follow
that they do err, then all truths in Religion would be quite overthrown.

The last Objection is, wherein should England be reformed? Has not the Church
thereof been famous for her orthodoxy? what can be done more to her? I answer,
to settle wholesome orders, and spiritual discipline against sin. It Is not
enough for a Church to be orthodox, but she ought to be holy also, and the
Scripture is not only a rule for faith, but for our life also: now take those
places of Scripture, 1 Cor. 5.11. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. what little influence had they
upon our Kingdom? O, but this will bring men into bondage and slavery! no more
then to have Physicians in the Commonwealth, then to have Pilates in a ship:
these orders of Christ are merely medicinal, utiliter vincitur, cui licentia
iniquitatis eripitur.

Again, these orders of Christ are not terrible, for he has commanded them to
be administered, with all love, tenderness and compassion. Luther said, while
he was still leavened with Popish principles of contrition, and their penance,
there was no more bitter word in all the Scripture then resipisce, repent: but
when he understood the Gospel, then it was precious and welcome. Thus it may be
with the orders of Christ, while they are looked upon as made odious by the
calumnies of men, they are ready to reject them; but if once understood
according to the institution, use and end of them, then with Moses, you may
take this Serpent that you were afraid of, and it will become a rod.

Further consider, that it is no bondage to take Christ's yoke: but to be under
the command of sin, that is a slavery. To be servum tot Dominorum, quot
vitiorum; this is indeed a great vassalage.

Again, For want of spiritual order and government in a Church, many sins go
unreformed, which yet do much dishonor God; for commonly States, in making of
laws, consider a sin, as it is destructive to the Commonwealth, and as
injurious to others, and do not for the most part attend to a sin, as it is
offensive to God: now what a sad thing is it to consider that the sea is not
fuller of water, or the air of flies, then towns and cities are full of
wretched oaths, and blasphemous curfings, which certainly do much provoke God
against us, whereas spiritual order would be a special means to remove these.

And lastly, lay to heart seriously how far Popery has prevailed with Kingdoms
and States, to debase and wrong themselves indeed, in their outward liberties,
to set up that; and shall not Christ prevail to have his doctrine and orders
settled, which will indeed be no detriment, but a preservation of all honor and
dignity?

And thus have I answered the three main Objections.

I come to the second Doctrine, which is,

That the work of Reformation, requires the concurrence and conflux of many
noble and excellent graces. It Is like the choice compound of ointment, which
Aaron was to make. As

First, A clear understanding of Gods will out of his Word. Thus the King he
was to write Gods Word, and to be acquainted familiarly with it, that so he
might be the more able to reform all abuses that may creep into the worship of
God: it is a great fault, when men in place and power think that matters of
Religion do not at all belong to them; whereas they cannot discharge their
duties, if they know not by the Word what to do.

2. Zeal for Gods glory, and his pure worship. Such as was in David, and
Hezekiah, and most remarkably in Christ himself. It Is an excellent thing, when
Magistrates lay to heart Gods dishonor more then their own, and are more
sollicitous that the laws of Christ may be best, then their own laws. It was an
ingenuous way of reproving, which one orthodox Bishop used to an Arian
Emperor, who being called into the Emperors presence, where his son also was,
the Bishop made his low obeisance to the Emperor, but took no notice at all of
the Emperors son; at which there was great offense taken; but the Bishop
replied, that if he would not honor the Son of God, why should he regard his
son: So why should we look upon it as an heinous thing, when men will not keep
our Laws, if we do not Gods?

3. Public affections, and love to the soul of others. Unless a man beclothed
with a public spirit, he cannot labor for a Reformation. Nehemiah, though it
was well with him, yet how deeply and sadly is he affected, because the Temple
lies desolate? and thus Christ himself at that very time, when he was received
with the greatest acclamations, he does not mind them, but weeps for
Jerusalem. Then has God dealt graciously with your hearts, when neither
riches, honors, or any personal dignity can do you any good, till Jerusalem
be settled a praise in the earth, as it was with David.

4. Sincerity and pure aims. For though Governors may be carried far in a
Reformation, yet if pure love to God and his Ordinances be not the Star which
leads them, the issue will be very uncomfortable; you have a sad instance in
Iehu, who though he did all according to Gods heart (as the Scripture says)
yet Hos. 1. God threatens to be avenged on him. Take heed therefore of corrupt,
political designs in promoting Gods work. Nazianzen complained of some that
were (...) and (...): This has made God many times let his own Ark fall into
the hands of the Philistims, not but that his cause was dear to him, only those
who managed it, had selfish and particular interests.

5. Humility under all the honors God puts upon them. This was wonderful in
Gideon and David, whereas men, who are lifted up by any success that God
bestows on them, are like a blazing star, that make a great luster at first,
but at last end in slime. John the Baptist that wrought a great Reformation,
and the eyes of the world was upon him, yet he rejoices, because he must
decrease, and Christ increase.

6. Exemplary holiness of life. This obligation comes upon all Reformers, by
that general rule, He which reproves others, ought himself to be free from
those sins. The examples of Reformers, they are to others, as the parti-colored
sticks to Jacobs sheep: and indeed how uncomely is it, when Governors make
laws against impiety, profanation of the Sabbath, contempt of holiness; and
such sins be found in their lives, or in their families? Now this is a great
part of Reformation, when the lives and families of men are changed, as well as
when Reformation is in the public worship and Ordinances.

7. Fortitude and courage, accompanied with faith. For all Reformations meet
with much opposition and contempt. When Hezekiah sent messengers up and down
for the pure keeping of the Passover, they were mocked and scorned. Now to go
through all the accusations and calumnies of men, yea and many exercises from
God himself, this requires, as humility and patience to be under them, so
faith and courage, to be above them.

8. Prudence and singular wisdom. This fact of Gideon, going with some few men
in the night, is questioned by some as a weakness in him, whereas indeed it
was his great prudence. Any that has read ecclesiastical Histories may
observe that the imprudence of men, has much hindered the propagation of truth;
only there must be care that prudence do not degenerate into carnal and mere
State-wisdom; God has made such wisdom in the end great folly, especially when
it is accompanied with the corruption of his worship.

The Use is for Exhortation, to be filled with all these excellent
qualifications, God has put an opportunity into our hands, and we have all
covenanted according to our places and callings to set upon this work. Let us
therefore be humbled and ashamed this day, that we have with no more zeal
promoted it. How have Governors, and others, who have not had such advantages,
such interests in the Kingdom, done much for Christ and his Ordinances? and do
these things speedily, lest hereaster you may in the anguish and grief of your
spirits call for the time and opportunities again, but cannot obtain them; let
not the generation to come say, our Governors indeed delivered a Common wealth
from thraldom, but beset the faithful Ministers, and the godly people of the
land, under as many groans and troubles as ever before.

FINIS.

