A Wonder of Wonders. BEING A faithful Narrative and true Relation, of one Anne
Green, Servant to Sir Tho. Reed in Oxfordshire, who being got with Child by a
Gentleman, her Child falling from her in the house or Office, being but a span
long, and dead born, was condemned on the 14. of December last, and hanged in
the Castle-yard in Oxford, for the space of half an hour, receiving many great
and heavy blows on the breasts, by the but end of the Soldiers Muskets, and
being pulled down by the legs, and was afterward begged for an Anatomy, by the
Physicians, and carried to Mr. Clerks house, an Apothecary, where in the
presence of many learned Chyrurgions, she breathed, and began to stir;
insomuch, that Dr. Petty caused a warm bed to be prepared for her, let her
blood, and applied Oils to her, so that in 14 hours she recovered, and the
first words she spoke were these; Behold Gods Providence! Behold his miraculous
and loving kindness! With the manner of her Trial, her Speech and Confession
at the Gallows; and a Declaration of the Soldiery touching her recovery*
Witnessed by Dr. Petty, and Licensed according to Order.

depiction of a man and a woman in a bed; a coffin; a woman with a covered face
hanging from a gallows with a man pulling down her feet, another man striking
her with the butt of his rifle, and a woman kneeling at the base of the ladder
Behold Gods providence.



A Wonder of Wonders, etc.
SIR,
ON the 14. of December last, there happened a very strange passage concerning
a Maid, Anne Green by name, which was got with Child, by an Oxfordshire
Gentleman, the particulars whereof follow.

This Anne Green, Servant to Sir Thomas Read, being very busy at turning of
Malt, overreaching her self, found her self to be very ill; whereupon she
immediately went into the house of Office, remaining about a quarter of an hour,
full of pain; at last, a Child, about a span long sprung from her, but
abortive, which much impaired her health and strength; but being exceeding
fearful, that a discovery should be made thereof, she laid it in a Corner of
the aforesaid house, and covered it with dust and rubbish.

During which time, one of her Fellow Servants, admiring that she staid so
long, and hearing many heavy groans, went to see what was become of her, who
found her in a very sad and deplorable condition, and asking her what the
matter was? she replied, she was utterly undone, undone, undone; Why Anne, I
hope thou art not with Child? Alas, alas! Mary, that ever I was born, to live
and die in shame and scorn: I was, but now I am clear of it; Why? what is
become of it? she answered, look yonder, where it lies, and going to the place,
casting off the dust, ran shricking out into the house, acquainting her Master
and Mistress, with this sad accident; in so much, that they presently sent for
her in, and demanded who it was, that had committed that foul act, and
contemptible crime with her? who answered, a Gentleman of good birth, and
kinsman to a justice of Peace.

But after half an hours discourse, she was carried before a Justice, who upon
examination, confessed, that she was guilty of the Act, in committing of the
sin, but clear and innocent of the crime for murdering of it, for that it was
dead born; yet notwithstanding, after further examination, the Justice caused
her Mittimus to be made, inditing her to answer it at the next Assizes, and
forthwith sent her to the Castle Goal at Oxford, where she remained till the
Sessions; at which time, she was arraigned for her life, who being brought to
the Bar, pleaded, not guilty; but after a short trial, she was convicted for
her life, and received sentence to be hanged on Oxford Gallows, which was
accordingly performed; and being brought to the place of execution, she fell
down on her knees at the ladder foot, humbly desiring of God, that his Divine
Majesty would be pleased, to show some remarkable judgment on her, for a
signal and testification to the world of her innocence, which most miraculously
was evidenced to her, to the great and wonderful admiration to all that shall
either hear of, or read these ensuing lines.

But before I insist upon this miraculous deliverance, it is requisite that I
should communicate her speech and deportment upon the Ladder, which was with
great comfort, and undauntedness of spirit by this poor soul performed, to the
great admiration of the spectators.

At the going up the Ladder, she fixed her eyes on the Executioner, saying, God
forgive my false accusers, as I freely forgive thee, and then turning her self
on the Ladder uttered these words.

Dear Friends,
YOur business hither to day, is to see a sad spectacle, an innocent woman to
be in a moment cut off, in the prime of her years, which sudden change does not
in the least strike dread or terror to my heart, but rather incites me to a
motion of eternal joy and happiness; for I conceive, there is no more but this
Rope and Ladder between me and Heaven, and I doubt not but that I am now going
to receive that blessed Portion, which my blessed Savior and Redeemer Jesus
Christ has purchased for me, by ransoming my soul with his precious blood, and
bitter passion.

And as for this untimely end, I do unfaignedly acknowledge and confess, that
it is Gods just judgment and wrath upon me, for sins long unrepented, of many
judgments withstood, and mercies slighted: therefore God has whipped me by
his severe rod of correction, that he might not lose me.

I pray join with me in prayer, that it may not be a fruitless rod, that when
by this rod I have laid down my life, by this staff I may be comforted, and
received into glory.

One thing more I desire, and to you dear Cosen, being a young man, standing
at the foot of the ladder) I represent my suit, That when the doomful turn from
off the ladder comes, that you would use all possible means to dispatch me of
my pain; and then casting up her eyes to Heaven, being prepared for a new
change of life, breathed forth her last words, saying, sweet Jesus receive my
soul; upon the uttering of which words, the Executioner did his Office; and
being turned off the ladder, her kinsman took hold of her feet, and hung with
all the weight and force of his body on them, that so he might the sooner rid
her of her pain.

A Soldier standing by, gave her 4. or 5. blows on the breast, with the but
end of his Musket, and having hung half an hour, she was cut down, (being quite
dead) and put into the Chyrurgions Chest, (who had begged her for an Anatomy)
and carried to Mr. Clerks house, an Apothecary, where the Physicians met to
try their skill; and having prefixed a time for the reading a Lecture over her,
(being usual upon the anatomizing of either man or woman.)

When they were all met, her body was taken out of the Coffin, and laid upon a
large Table, where in the presence of them all, she began to breath, which was
no small terror nor admiration, to all that were then present; whereupon a
large dispute arose about her, and one amongst the rest, Dr. Petty by name,
went to her, took her by the hand, and laid his ear to her temples, and
perceiving life, declared that there was a great hand of God in the business,
and imediately let her blood in 3 places. After which he caused a warm bed to
be prepared for her, and a woman to lie with her, and applied several Oils unto
her, using many other circumstances of art, until she recovered, which was
within 14 hours: And even in the last minute of the 14 hour, she opened her
eyes, uttering these words. Behold Gods providence, and his wonder of wonders,
which indeed, is a deliverance so remarkable, since the ceasing of Miracles,
that it cannot be paralleled in all Ages, for the space of 300 years, And
withal, it may remain upon record, for a president to all Magistrates, and
Courts of Judicature, to take a special care in denounsing of sentence, without
a due and legal process, according to the known Laws of the Land, by an
impartial and uncorrupted Jury, either of men or women, etc. This poor
Creature, which God of his infinite mercy has evidently manifested his love
unto, is now indifferent well recovered, and can walk up and down her Chamber,
but her neck is very sore, and black withal, her breast and stomach much
bruised, yet her pain disswages daily, and diverse both in City and Country
frequent hourly to behold her. At her first recovery she seemed to be much
aghast, and looked strangly, her eyes being ready to start out of her head; but
by the great pains of honest and faithful Dr. Petty, she is m^raculously
recovered which moved some of her enemies to wrath and indignation, insomuch
that a great man amongst the rest, moved to have her again carried to the place
of execution, to be hanged up by the neck, contrary to all Law, reason and
justice; but some honest Soldiers then present, seemed to be very much
discontented thereat, and declared, That there was a great hand of God in it,
and having suffered the Law, it was contrary to all right and reason, that any
further punishment should be inflicted upon her, which words brought a final
end and period to their dispute and controversy; where I shall (at present)
desist from reciting any further circumstances, and remain,

Your obliged Servitor, W. BURDET.
Oxford Jan 13. 1651.
FINIS.

