ROMES Cruelty and Apostacy: DECLARED IN A SERMON Preached on the fifth of
November, 1644. Before the Honorable House of COMMONS. BY Anthony Burgess,
Pastor of Sutton Coldfield; A Member of the Assembly.

LONDON, Printed by George Miller for Tho. Underhill at the Sign of the Bible
in Woodstreet. 1645.

TO THE HONORABLE House of COMMONS Assembled in Parliament.
Worthy Patriots,
THe Church of God under her troubles is neither to become (with the Poets
Niobe) a senseless stone, despising the affliction of God; nor yet with (their
Hecuba) a mad dog, raging through impatiencie at Gods Providence toward her;
For whether God exercises her with outward persecutions, it is (as Austin
said) to try her patience; or with heresies and errors, it is to prove her
sapience and wisdom. And this may satisfy us, that Gods love and care for his
Church, and truth, is greater then ours can be; and the loss of his glory is
dearer to him, then the loss of our temporal comforts can be to us. It is
true, as God to demonstrate the divine authority of the Scriptures, uses not
such arguments, that agree with a proud and carnal wit, but such as are
agreeable to the holiness and majesty of the things contained therein; so also
God in his Providence toward his Church goes not in such a way which our
hearts would expect, but in that which is most beseeming his love, wisdom, and
power; and this has made those, who have much appeared for God, to say (as
Tully, when Pompey had the worse by Caesar, whose cause he judged the better)
In divinis magna est caligo, Gods Presence is sometimes in a great cloud. Be
not therefore dismayed (honorable Senators) notwithstanding the many
oppositions in the way of this your begun Reformation, and think not to be
quiet, as long as the popish adversary can work; For as Austin observed of the
Romans (while Pagans) among the many Temples they built to several Goddesses,
there was one also built to Quies, to whom notwithstanding they never
sacrificed, because of their delight in war. The same may be applied to Rome,
now Antichristian, who delights to make her self drunk in the blood of the
Saints. But God has frustrated her many plots, and expectations, of which this
Fifth day of November is a famous memorial. The Lord so prosper you in your
work, that neither fraud, or force may destroy it.

Your humble Servant in Christ Jesus, Anthony Burgess.

A SERMON preached before the Honorable House of Commons, the 5. of November,
1644.
REVEL. 19.2. For true and righteous are his judgments, for he has judged the
great whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and has avenged
the blood of his servants at her hand.


I Am not ignorant how much revelation is necessary to understand this Book of
Revelation, and that Interpreters themselves need interpretation, insomuch that
the learned Arias Montanus relates, that though he had thirty years studied
the Scripture, with the help of Expositors, he understood only one or two
Chapters, and therefore was wont to say, That the Expositors were as hard to be
understood as the Text. There are some Comments that may be called (...),
obscurities upon the Revelation: yet for all this, none may bring an ill report
upon this Book that flows with Milk and Honey, though there may be Anakims,
great objections in the way, for the Scripture calls them blessed, and wise
that understand these mysteries; and the difficulties are, to shake of our
negligence, and to quicken our desire to know, as Basil said, Nature had
guarded the Rose with pricks, that so the danger to get it, might the more
irritate to have it. Besides, the book being full of Prophecies, it is
congruous, they should be clothed with some obscurities: Therefore we wonder
at the boldness of the ancient Monks, who were neither skillful in the
tongues, or Scripture, that yet would adventure to open this sealed Book, which
how happily they have done appears in their expounding the very first word
Apocalypsis, which (they say) comes of (...) and clipsor clipsaris, i.e. velo
velas.

The subject that I have pitched upon, is not clogged with any of these
Objections, for they are part of that song, which a Company in Heaven praised
God with, for his judgments upon Rome, and the sum of their thanksgiving is
general, All his judgments are right. 2. Particularly, upon the Church of
Rome, who is called Babylon, because of her oppression and captivating the
people of God; and whore, because of her corrupt falsehoods and idolatries; and
great whore, because of her universal corrupting the whole earth; she is also
described by her cruelty, she had shed the blood of Gods Servants; yea, Chap.
18. the blood of all the Saints, (those that were murdered elsewhere, are yet
said to be found in her.)

Before I come to the Doctrines, I must clear one doubt, and that is, Whether
this City be Rome, or no? For as the Jews looked for another kind of Christ
then the true Messiah, so the Papists for another kind of Antichrist then the
Scripture holds forth: And as Christ is proved to be the Messiah not by one
property only (for that may agree to another) but all the Characters together:
so is Antichrist to be found out by the accumulation of all marks together.
Now that Rome is this City appears; Rev. 17.18. The woman (which is the same
with Babylon and the whore in my Text) is said to have power over all the kings
of the earth; and this was only the Roman Monarchy at that time.

2. She is called emphatically (...), now Rome was only the famous City, being
called urbs (...).

3. This City is said to be set on seven hills: Chap. 17.9. which does only
agree to Rome, called (...), and howsoever Mountacutius would prove this true
of Constantinople; yet if it were so, it is so obscure in story that it is not
to be regarded; and this is so clear that Bellarmine confesses it, but then
he adds, this was true of Rome, while it was Ethnicall, and not now Papal:
That this is false appears in that Antichrist is to be in the Temple of God,
which was not true of the Heathen Emperors.

2. It Is such a Babylon that for a while they were lawfully in her, but when
her corruptions did increase, then they were commanded to depart, which could
not be affirmed of Rome paganish.

This being premised, I observe two Doctrines.

1. That the Church of Rome is greatly apostatized from her former true faith.

She that was a Matron is become an whore: She succeedes her predecessors, as
Vespae succedant apibus, as waspes come into the nests of Bees; Nor is it any
matter that they have the Creed and many externals of Religion, habent enim and
vespae suos favos, the Waspes have their combs also, though no honey in them,
as Tertullian said, The time was when such a point as this might not be
pressed, There was a law that no body should eat of this honey, but since God
raised up you, Honorable Patriots, Truth, like Sampson, has broke all the
cords she was tied in.

Obs. 2. That Romes corrupt ways are accompanied with bloody cruelties.

I will begin with the last first, and show, they are bloody, partly
doctrinally, and partly practically.

Doctrinally, in these Positions:

1. In maintaining the Popes power over all temporal Kingdoms, for the Pope,
like the devil, will show all the glory of a kingdom, and give it to some
creature of his, if he will continue to worship him, and how bloody this
principle has been, all that read histories know. It is true, Bellarmine
uses many distinctions in the asserting of this power, for the Jesuits in all
their controversies strive who shall show the most subtilty, as Apelles and an
other Painter contended, who should draw the smallest line. But as for other
Authors they maintained this power of the Popes more boldly and more
ignorantly. How learned was that argument, because it is said, In principio, not
principiis, in the beginning, not the beginnings, therefore there was but one
supreme power, and that was the Popes.

2. That an heretic, for heresy sake, and in point of Conscience, though he
do not trouble the state, ought to be put to death; this also makes to the
effusion of much blood. There are in this controversy two extremes, the
Papists on one side, who are for corporal death, and the cruel burning of
those who dissent from their Church. Qui haereticos occidendos negant, de
seipsis solliciti sunt, says Maldonat. And the other of the Socinians, who
would have no outward forcible restraining of any error, though never so gross
and pernicious; certainly the Magistrate is so to walk that he be neither
guilty of remissness and want of zeal, nor yet of unwarrantable severity.
Meisnor does well distinguish between haereticus simplex, and haereticus
seditiosus ac blasphemus, these last he says may be punished with capital
punishments; but the Pope and his accomplices hold otherwise. For when they have
anathematized a nation or people, ne bruta essent fulmina, they inflame kings,
and provoke them to destroy all with sword and fire; Thus cum solitudinem
fecerunt, pacem appellant; they call an utter desolation, peace. And this
further makes their opinion bloody, that they will judge what heresy is. How
much blood in France, Germany, and other parts has this doctrine shed?

3. That no public faith or promise is to be kept with such heretics. As if
Christiana fides and punica were all one. Who has not read of the sad
Covenant-breach with John Huss, by the Emperor Sigismund, being provoked
thereunto by the Papists, and Ioannes de Roma, a Priest, said, that in the
destruction of the Lutherans, Judges were not bound to follow law, or reason.
But how contrary is this to Scripture, we have a fearful instance in the
Prophet Ezekiel, of Zedekiah the King, who brake his faith with the king of
Babylon: how does God take notice of this sin especially, and punish him for
it? Yea, did not the Heathens by the Moonlight of nature see this, and
therefore how much admired is that Roman, who kept his faith with Carthage,
though he knew it would be his desperate ruin? And did not God punish Saul's
posterity, for the breach of his Covenant with the Gibeonites, though it was
deceitfully obtained? How true do they make that old proverb, Men play with
oaths, as children with shells?

4. That mental Reservations and Equivocations are lawful; This also must
needs overthrow state constitutions, though adamantine, for seeing that truth
and words they are the sinews and ligaments of the body politic, if these be
cut and dissolved, how can the body stand? What delusions of Magistrates? What
evasions of righteous judgments? What insnaring of innocent men? what doubling
in oaths will there be by this means? How can an oath be an end of a
controversy if this be allowed? O ye holy Martyrs lay aside your glorious
Robes of immortality, you died like fools, and were guilty of your own blood,
when as you might have denied, and forsworn all by mental Reservations.
Aquinas says well, That an oath is for practicals, what first Principles are
for speculatives; and as any conclusion will easily be granted, which shines
by the light of the first principles; so that fact must be submitted to, which
is confirmed by an oath. But by this doctrine, first Principles in societies
are quite extinguished. It is true, there are some Papists, that do write
against these Jesuiticall assertions; but they are not considerable, nor does
the Pope of Rome look upon such as his abettors. How does the moral honesty
of Heathens exceed their piety, for Tully does relate among the examples malae
fidei, that fact of a soldier, prisoner, who by Hannibals permission had leave
to go out upon his oath, that he would return again, and he returns
presently, pretending he had forgot something, and so by this, thought himself
freed from his oath.

5. That there is an absolute necessity of concealing all things revealed in
auricular Confession; and this doctrine has been a private backway to let in
horrible conspiracies and murders, Nullum tantum malum esse potest cujus
vitandi causa confessionem prodere liceat, and Bellarmine praises Garnet, that
would not reveal this Gunpowder treason; because (forsooth) confession (as
they say) is De jure Divino, and temporal authority de jure humano, leviori
damno reges omnes quotquot sunt occiderentur quam vel una confessio
revelaretur, Casaubon says, this was a Jesuits speech to him; I wonder
whether they would hide it, if there were a conspiracy to kill the Pope? Thus
you see how all their opinions are with Dracoes written in blood. But there was
one Jesuit escaped well in this matter of Confession, his name was father
Aubigney, who in the bloody fact of Ravilliack, being called in question, and
demanded, what was revealed to him? He replied this answer, that God had given
him this grace, that whatsoever was told him in Confession, he presently by a
miracle forgot it, and for all the world could not remember it again. I think
if this answer saved him, it was the best grace ever God bestowed on him.

6. That the Clergy are exempted from subjection, and so cannot be guilty of
treasonable practices: Clerici rebellio in regem, non est crimen laesae
Majestatis, quia non est subditus regi, and if so, what wickedness may be
committed by them without any control. That same distinction of Clergy and
Laity, though it has been used well enough in an Ecclesiastique sense for
distinction sake, yet in the popish way is very detestable, for hereby they
hold themselves so the inheritance and portion of God, that they are exempt
from all jurisdiction; and I know not how many temporal governors have given
way too much hereunto; now does not this assertion directly oppose Ro^. 12.1.
Let every soul, etc? and what is more known then that Explication of
Chrysostom, Every soul, though he be a monk, a priest, though he be never so
spiritual, as they call it, is understood here by the Apostle.

7. That blind Obedience unto Governors is necessary, and you may easily see
what knives and swords this opinion has in it: Let in this upon a people, that
whatsoever the Pope and his Officers shall command to be done, though it be to
destroy an whole kingdom; yet it must without any disputation be obeyed: Let
in this doctrine, and you let in the Trojan horse; It Is no wonder, if they hold
this in matter of fact, when they also maintain it in matter of faith. That it
is better defined by ignorance then knowledge. Thus what Seneca complained of,
as a great weakness among people, That homines malunt credere quam judicare,
and they do receive all worship of God, tanquam legibus jussum, rather then
diis gratum, will be made a virtue in these men; yea, that they do mereri
credendo, even by believing so stupidly they merit. Thus when these Philistines
have put out men's eyes, they will make them drudge in what Mils they please.

8. That the Pope may dispense in all vows and promises, and obligations, and
who knows not how England has been like Egypt, all the waters of it turned
into blood by this doctrine? How have Popes absolved people from their oaths
and all civil obligations whatsoever? and that the Jesuits they are like
those heathen priests that had snakes in one hand and firebrands in the other,
and by this means the Papists have wrought themselves out of all credit, that
let what protestations, imprecations, and obtestations be made by them; yet
because the Pope can so easily untie such knots, what trust can be given to
them? Well therefore is that Antichrist set forth by the Dragon in the Rev. who
is both subtle and bloody, and as Bernard said of the Devil in tempting of
men's souls, vereor magis serpentem gliscentem, quam leonem rugientem: the same
we may apply to them.

9. That to slay their enemies, it is lawful to kill their friends, if as much
good will come by the one, as hurt by the other; and this is true in our case
this day, for when Catesby asked Garnet, Whether it was lawful to blow up in
the Parliament the innocent with the nocent, he answered, it was lawful to
kill friends in the destruction of enemies, if so much good would arise as
might recompense the slaughter of the innocent. How contrary are those to God,
God would save Sodom, if there were ten Righteous, and these would destroy
Jerusalem for ten wicked men's sakes; and I remember a story of a popish Duke,
who when he was asked by his soldiers, Whether they should kill friends or no
in killing their enemies? he returned this answer, Yes, Deus enim novit, qui
ejus sunt, God will know well enough at the day of judgment, which are his.
How bloody and cruel then, must they needs be, who will kill their own to
kill others.

10. To praise and defend those that have dyed their hands in blood. Learned
men relate many things out of the Papists to this purpose; That which
concerns our case this day, This inhumane bloody Conspiracy, wherein they had
Nero's wish of Rome, that England had but one neck, and they cut it off, yet
this is mitigated by them, Magna mihi opinio est faelicis eorum exitus and
salutis, qui etsi in consilio opereque peccassent, constantes tamen in fide
Romanae Ecclesiae ex hac luce discesserunt. You see here is an etsi peccassent,
and in these bloody acts they confirmed themselves by the Sacrament, as if that
were the seal of other men's blood, and not Christ's.

And as for their cruel practices take these instances:

1. Concerning the Waldenses and poor Albigenses, although we have little
certainty of their opinions, they being for the most part reported by popish
Authors, yet of the cruelty used against them, how many sad witnesses have we?
It would make your hair to stand upright with horror. How many thousands of
them have been murdered in a day? and not content with their innocent blood,
they did waste all the forest and trees, as if with the Manichees, they had
thought the trees had a rational life, and that to cut down a tree had been
homicidium, as the Manichees fancied.

2. In France, what an ocean of blood has been shed there, sometimes by
conspiracies and massacres; sometimes by open hostile ways, and howsoever it
be true, that the Protestants there in defense of their toleration, which was
confirmed to them by law, did also shed much blood, yet that was only
defensive, and blood must be charged upon that side which did unjustly, and
unrighteously begin the war. And do but observe wheresoever the Pope and his
Agents have had to do, that at last all has ended in blood.

3. That in Queen Mary's days, and this blood is not yet dried up: How fresh
are all the Stories of those spiritual Nero's in our minds? what was Bonner
or Gardner, but as they said of Nero, (...): Howsoever they labor to
calumniate that book of Martyrs (as we have had some a late could not abide it)
calling it a lying legend, yet it lays such a blemish upon them, that the
holy water of Rome cannot cleanse them from it.

4. In Ireland, alas! whose hearts have not been affected with those doleful
Tragedies there? How have they cruelly devoured, and spared no more then Tigers
or Wolves? But this may support us, that the blood of Gods people has a
twofold notable effect:

1. It speaks and cries: Oh what a loud cry is there in Ireland, which God
will not always refuse: Abel though dead speaks.

2. It makes fruitful, and it is the semen Ecclesiae, even as when you shake
one ripe flower, for one seed there comes up many.

5. In their attempt upon England this day: The particulars of this Tragedy
are so known, that to relate them would be to weary you: consider the
horridness of the plot, at one blow to destroy an whole nation. Think O
Lucifer, and imagine, O prince of darkness, a more bloody attempt if thou
can. What darkness would have covered the land? How would the Sun and
Moon, (the great ones of the state) been turned into blood? How had the
Philistines taken the Arc, our Ministers been turned into Friars, our Bibles
into images, our Tables into altars; yea, our Heaven turned immediately into an
hell? All this was a plotting and sol non sudas? and terra non contremiscis?
How would the Kingdom have been like an Egypt, when every house had one dead
in it? We cry out of Herod's cruelty, that would have killed all the children of
two years old: Here is greater bloudinesse, even to destroy all in a Nation, O
innocent Catiline and Verres to these men: and are these the men that cry up
Charity, that hold it justifies? Are these the men that admire St Francis his
pity, because he would not kill a Flea, when they can destroy an whole
Kingdom? What and to be Saints for all this? Shall we, with Paul and Peter and
the other Saints, see Catesby and Faux, and that company also?

Use of Exhortation, to loath that Religion, take heed of connivence at those
snakes, which when they are warm will sting and poison. Oh this connivence at
Popery, how has God avenged himself upon Ireland and England for it, we have
complied with their ways, and now God has made them woeful scourges to us,
may we not say, that the Lord has made them, as the Iebusites and Canaanites
to us. In quo quis peccat, in eo punitur: Think not that your estates, and
goods will content them, it must be your God, and your lives; when ye are
willing your souls should be damned, and your bodies killed, then think of
reconciliation with the Church of Rome. Puniantur a te, ne tu pro illis
puniaris: let them be punished by you, lest you be punished for them; Execute
you the judgment of the Lord upon them, as it is in your power, and never be
quiet, till this and the other Kingdoms be free from it; Make no friendship
with angry men, much less with bloody men; rather dye by them, then ever be
reconciled with them, and know God has promised to be avenged on that Church
of Rome, and that they shall not always boast in that mark of temporal
felicity. It is the greatest honor that ever can be put upon you, to be
instruments in destroying of her.

Use 2. of Instruction concerning the great difference between the popish, and
Protestant Religion, in this matter of blood, for howsoever some Papists
heretofore have endeavored to show the bloudinesse of Calvinisticall Doctrine,
making it the cause of all the wars in France, Germany, and Scotland, yet
Bilson does fully and clearly vindicate them in their defensive wars; And it
is nothing but calumny in some, who have labored to make odious your present
war, as arising from the principles of Popery, whereas there is indeed a
vast difference both in the authority, in the end, in the nature, in the
manner, and in the extent, as might at large be showed, if it were pertinent.

For true and righteous are his judgments, etc.

The second Doctrine is,

That the Church of Rome has greatly apostatized from all her former faith.

The Apostle Paul says of the Romans, their faith was known to all the
world, but now their Apostasy is as famous: Even as the Angels by their fall
are become devils. It is true, to give the exact punctual time, when this
great change was, as Bellarmine demands, is impossible, for it was a change by
degrees, as consumptions are in a body, and therefore it was the more dangerous
and certainly mortal, Ille morbus vix est sanabilis, qui sanitatem imitatur,
and besides, as Cameron does well observe, changes to the worse do for the
most part please all, and therefore little opposition being made, the Apostasy
in the beginning of it can hardly be discovered. And the handling of this point
will justify that Reformation, which is now on the wheel.

The Causes of this Apostasy were,

1. Pride and ambition. Chrysostom well called pride the mother of hell, for
that made the devil, a devil, and so hell an hell; It is known to all, what
arrogance that Church did take unto her self, and how Tertullian in his time
complained of the insolentiam cleri Romani, now how ill would the poor
contemptible way of Christ, and his truth agree with their spirits; therefore
all the glory of the Church they interpreted it of outward and carnal glory;
In that assertion how do they extol the Priesthood? Creatura paruit Iosuae,
at Presbyteris Creator; fol illi, at his Deus quotiescunque verba sacra
pronuntiant: The Creature obeyed Joshua, but the Creator does the Priests; The
Sun yielded to him, but to these God does as often as they pronunce their
words of Consecration.

2. Fraud and perfidiousnesse:

They had fully learned, that Regnandi causa, all oaths were to be violated;
How grossly were the Pope and his adherents taken in forging some Canons of
the Council of Nice, for their preeminent dignity; therefore their way is
called a lie, and deceiveablenesse.

3. Covetousness; and if you look on all their opinions about indulgences,
private Masses, auricular confession, etc. you will find love to money the cause
of them; so well was it said in the Canon Law, Roma fundata a praedonibus,
adhuc habet de primordiis.

4. Nourishing of sin:

This was usual with the Church of Rome, when any had been censured in the
Eastern Churches for foul miscarriages, then would she encourage them to
appeal to her, whereupon she would release them, by which means she exalted
her self into this great dominion she has; And then when she would inflict
Ecclesiastical censures, they were in a great part pecuniary, and merely to
the macerating of the body, no ways to the saving of the soul, so that though
the sins of men by their penance, were like Sampsons hair cut off, yet
because the root was there, they did grow into their full strength again.

5. Neglect of Scripture:

And this set open the flood-gate, whereby all the world was immediately
drowned in errors; for take the eyes out of the body, the Sun out of the
firmament, the Compass from the Ship, what can follow but confusion? Therefore
they have wished that there had never been Scripture; That the Church could
have done well enough with traditions only; They have called the Bible the
Book that has made all the contentions in the world, and all the faith a man
can have by it, to be only humane, O the great patience of God, that bears
these blasphemies; and therefore (worthy Patriots) in your way of Reformation
do you walk contrary, as they pulled it down, do you set it up, regard the
Scripture more then all State respects; This is the fountain, and so the
streams that run hence will be pure; It is impossible (says Chrysostom)
that ever any good should come from that man, who is not diligent in Scripture.

6. The suteablenesse of it to flesh and blood; and therefore it is called the
wine of fornications. Even as they say, Leopards are taken not by arrows and
bows, or open fire, but by leaving wine for them to drink, whereby they are
so intoxicated, that they are easily surprised; of this kind are all popish
errors; He brings you milk as Iael did to Sisera, and afterward strikes a
nail into your temples. As Satan beguiled Eve, so are we coozened into
errors; the devil did not appear himself, but used a subtle instrument,
nor did he directly deny Gods Word, but made Quaeries and Vtrums upon it, and
then he presented that which was pleasing to sense; striking out the fear of
death, by all which means he at last deceived her.

1. Their Doctrine is pleasing to flesh; It is good for the world to know, why
all sorts of men are so apt for Popery? Not long since, when there were altars
and images brought into our Churches, what a general willingness was there in
people, but now to have such things removed, what madness does it work in
men? and how do they cry, as children for their babies again? Do but consider
their doctrines extenuating Original sin, making motions to sin
unconsented to, no sin; That a man has power to keep the Commandments; That
the Commandment to love God binds only at sometimes, Scotus (as I take it)
only on holy days; That actual inadvenrtency in holy duties does not hinder
the fruit of them; That if a man drink till he be giddy, and the room run
round, it is no drunkenness; That Prayers said in Latin, though we do not
understand them, are accepted; That the devout man, who in his prayer said,
Miserere tui Domine for mei, yet had good devotion and was acceptable to God.

2. Their worship is outwardly sensible. Thus when they had taken away the
Scripture, they set pictures up in their room, now this pleases the common
people, Homo est magis sensus, quam intellectus, it was Aristotle's speech.
Herein the popish religion does much gratify the ignorant people; The people
of Israel cried out for gods that might go before them: To worship in spirit
and truth can be no more understood by them, then the eye can see a spirit.

3. Their piety extends to external acts, for if we observe all their
Theology, its like that of the Pharisees, to look to the external acts, not
regarding the inward grace, but as he that would have set up his picture, and
it would not stand, cried, (...), There wants something within; the same may be
said of all their prayers and religious performances, There wants something
within.

4. They make the Ordinances of God to confer grace ex opere operato, whereby
they take men off from being heart and soul-Christians. Hence they speak of
Sacraments, as we would of some Physic or potion, that has an inward natural
force and efficacy to produce such an effect.

5. They have custom and antiquity for them, many of their foolish and
superstitious customs are some hundred years old, and what fathers and
grandfathers have done, it is hard not to admire, and certainly had not the
Scripture foretold what an Eclipse would be upon the whole Church, we would
think it impossible that such ridiculous things should be taken up. Because
Christ is the Light, therefore they have light at noone-dayes; Because Christ
said we must be like children, therefore the Monks wear Cowles, like
childrens swadling-clouts, and one Pope (as Bishop Abbot relates it) made a
serious motion in the Conclave that he and the Cardinals might ride on a
solemn day on Asses to imitate Christ's humility; but the Conclave thought the
Ass rode the Pope too much already.

6. They have the greater part of the world; And he must needs have a
peremptory spirit, that does not follow a multitude to do evil; It is a sign
he has life in him that will swim against the stream. A man is a sociable
creature even in errors, as well as any thing else.

7. They commend ignorance; By this means whereas God can make stones the
children of Abraham, these make the children of Abraham stones, and the people
they love to have it so; for this freeth them from Catechismes and Bibles.

Therefore the way to keep out Popery is to encourage Learning; The heathens
in their sacrifice to Apollo offered Ivy to him, to show, that Learning could
not grow unless the Magistrates would bear it up: God forbid therefore that
ever you should discourage it; for at the same time when God brought truth into
the world, humane literature flourished, and was a great help thereunto.

8. They pretend to Miracles; and by this means they have deluded a world of
people; It is said, he should bring down fire from Heaven, though that which
he would have done to day, was a contrary wonder, Ignis de terra, fire from
under the earth; And although Austin said, that he who would look now for
Miracles, he himself was a great Miracle; yet they make them as the essential
notes of the Church.

Use of Instruction, how necessary it is to reform from Popery, leave off your
contentions one with another, and set upon this common adversary. Learn of the
very Romans, who though sometimes at deadly enmity one with another, yet would
deponere inimicitias, till they had done the public service; How can you ever
endure that these trumperies and idolatries should be brought in again; Humble
your selves that Parliaments heretofore have not done them; Let not Parliament
sins in ages heretofore come upon your score; How often do the people of
Israel bewail their own sins and the sins of their fathers? do you
confess your own sins of unwillingnesse, of coldness in this work, and the
sins of your Ancestors. It is to be feared, that many of you have not got
that zeal for the purity of Gods Ordinances, and Worship, as ought to be: And
in the carrying on of this, take heed of two fatal rocks: 1. A sinful
moderation. 2. A popish Tyranny.

A popish Tyranny is when any do appropriate and enclose to themselves such a
power, which Christ has not at all given, or if he have given it, he has
communicated it to more then one; This has been the cause of much schism and
contention in the Church of God; Christ has invested the Officers of his
Church with sufficient spiritual power for the attaining of that spiritual
benefit, which they are to look for, and therefore do you, being Magistrates
confirm them in it.

The second is moderation, and there are these sorts:

1. A Cassandrean moderation, and that is, when men make an hodge-potch in
Religion, and plow with an Ox and Ass: Howsoever Grotius does much extol
Cassander and Erasmus (whom Bellarmine called semichristianum) yet we ought not
to loose a letter or syllable of truth to gain all the world, and so Wicelius
did tertiam religionem, and mediam meditari, and therefore did bitterly at the
same time write against Papists and Luther too, and howsoever Melancthon was
thought to be rather medius, then moderate, yet he is wronged, for he
vehemently opposed the Emperors Interim: It is better to have dissension for
truths sake, then a sinful accord: Agreement can never be made of the mixture
of error and Truth; we have a famous instance for this of the Orthodox and the
Arrians, Syrmiensis Synodus in humane wisdom to quench the fire raised by the
Arrians, did conclude an ambiguous form, that so both parties might have their
senses, and therefore whereas it was used to be read in the Creed (...), they
would have it (...), that so both parties might agree. But what became of this?
a great fire was raised hereupon, which made Hosius a grave man, that yielded
in that Synod, to grieve because he had betrayed the truth.

2. A Socinian moderation; And this is indeed rather a cursed Academicall and
scepticall unbelief in fundamental things then moderation; That what the
Schoolmen do in many School and abstruse questions, the same they do in
substantials and essentials, videtur quod sic, and videtur quod non, and prout
nobis nunc videtur; these will put a fortasse, and salvo meliorum judicio, upon
received Principles of Faith; and its observed, that they would make a
Declaration sententiae eorum, of their judgment and opinion, not fidei in
maine things of Religion.

3. A state politic Moderation. That is also, when we bring down Scripture
and the Commands of Christ to state considerations; This has been fatal to
Reformers, and all this arises because they do not think by faith, that
Christ is able to save the ship they are in, when the waves and tempests do
arise, was not this the destruction of Jeroboam? and has not the Lord been
severe in punishing even little neglects in his worship?

4. A Christian Moderation, which is to be seen in a toleration, and forbearing
of the weak, in some opinions, and in an accommodation of diffenting brethren,
so far as truth, and the peace of a Kingdom will bear. Let there be a
considering of one another, so far, that the prevailing party may not
violently urge an uniforme obedience, nor the oppressed party, an unlawful
liberty. It is but a trifle comparatively that I shall instance in, yet Tully
was applauded in it, when two great Orators quarrelled about tertio Consul,
and tertium Consul, which was best Latin, and calling upon Tully to judge, he
decideth it thus, by wishing them to write the half word only, tert. Consul,
and so both parties might quickly agree. In wounds its better to close and
heal, rather then widen, especially when there is a common enemy to destroy
both. And this made the Orthodox when they were afraid the true faith would be
subverted by the Arrians, who were potent and numerous, to join with the
Novatians, who agreed with them in the Deity of Christ, (although dissenting
from them in matters about Baptism) and this concord proved successful.

I know the question of tolerating men dissenting in Religion is a vast ocean,
and many learned men have writ of it, both Papists and Protestants, yet I
observe those that are sound and judicious, especially when they come to speak
of punishments for their errors, to incline in mitiorem partem: Although
indeed the Magistrate is herein to deport himself so, that he be neither
guilty of sinful remissness on one side, or unlawful severity on the other.

Use of Thankfulness, that we are as this day delivered from Popery, and all
their cruel attempts. I will conclude all, that if Popery be thus cruel, thus
Idolalitricall; let us with hearts and tongues give God the Glory, That you are
a Parliament, that we have our houses, our states, our Religion; Let us bless
God for this days mercies. Abraham received Isaac from the grave as dead; so
do you all your mercies temporal and spiritual, especially having so many
deliverances and victories vouchsafed by God to your Armies. You have many
fifths of November in this one day; and every time you have a victory it is a
deliverance from a Gunpowder plot; before it was secret, and now it is open.

FINIS.
Die Martis, 6. November. 1644.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Mr Nicoll, and Mr
Ashhurst do from this House give thanks to Mr Burgess, for the great pains he
took in his Sermon on the Fifth of November, at the entreaty of the said
Commons at Margarets Westminster; and to desire him to print his Sermon: and it
is ordered, That none shall presume to print his Sermon, but whom the said Mr
Burgess shall authorize under his handwriting.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I appoint Tho. Underhill to print my Sermon,


ANTHONY BURGESS.


