A TREATISE OF SELF-JUDGING, In order to the Worthy Receiving OF THE Lords
Supper.

Together with a SERMON OF THE General DAY OF JUDGMENT.

By Anthony Burgess Pastor of Sutton-Coldfield in Warwickshire.

LONDON, Printed by J.H. for T. Underhill at the Anchor, and M. Keinton at the
Fountain, in Paul's Churchyard. 1658.

TO THE READER.
READER,
THe subject of this short Trea ise, (which for the comprehensiveness and
fruitfulness of it, might have swelled into a bigger Volumn) is Self-judging:
The frequent commands for which in Scripture, as also the excellency,
usefulness, difficulty and contrariety of it to flesh and blood, which loves
to say, Soul take thy ease, do all proclaim the great moment and importance
thereof; yea it may be justly affirmed, that the neglect of this duty is the
cause of miscarriage and apostasy in many professors. Certainly Calvin, when he
had enlarged himself about that curious and exact point, wherein the temporary
believer, and the truly godly differ, granting that simili fere sensu
afficiuntur, they feel almost the same things with one another, yet adds,
that in the hypocrite this sense of divine things is not so radicated, it is
also more confused, then what is in the godly, but hereby they are deceived in
their experiences, and one reason is, because slothfulness does so far possess
them, ne cor suum probe ut par erat examinent, lib. 3. Instit. cap. 2. par. 12.
that they do not so thoroughly examine their heart, as is fit they should. Some
Heathens, as Pythagoras and Seneca, have made Essaies upon this duty: The
Jesuits also in their Tractates of devotion do much commend it; but the pillar
and cloud that we have in the ^cripture, is only able to guide us in this
wilderness: They only can manage this work with spiritual proficiency, who
through an holy habit, have their senses exercised to discern between good and
evil. For seeing there are three different principles may be working in our
hearts, Nature in its improvement, The Devil with his delusions, The Spirit of
God, and that either in a common way, such as hypocrites and reprobates may
attain unto, or in a peculiar, discriminating way, which the sincere do only
partake of; what heavenly skill, what godly prudence is required to make a
distinction herein, to difference what is of nature or the devil, from the
Spirit of God; yea to go further, and to discern what is of the Spirit of God
in a common way, and what in a special way: Such that can do this, must be like
thos^ Benjamites, Judge. 20.16. that could sling stones at an hairs breadth, and
not miss. In the protract of this discourse I consider this duty more
particularly, as it is a necessary preparative to the Ordinance of the Lords
Supper, for this was the occasion of fastening upon this subject at first. My
Method in handling of this Point, is for the most part, positive; waving
controversies, even when the matter did seem to call for it. As page 126, 127.
I affirm, That such who are spiritually dead, cannot put forth gracious actings
at the Lords Supper, or spiritually eat and drink, so that they receive no
heavenly nourishment thereby; not entering upon the Controversy, Whether the
Lords Supper be a converting Ordinance, or not, being satisfied in this, That
that Ordinance was not instituted, either for the exhibition, or obsignation of
the first, and radical, or fundamental grace, but does wholly presuppose it:
Therefore I think Aquinas speaks Orthodoxally in this, Comment. In cap. 11.
ad Corinth. Epist. 1a Lecti 7a, who making this objection to himself, That
Christ is received in this Sacrament, now he is a spiritual Physician, and that
not the whole, but the sick need such an one: He answers, That this Sacrament
declares nourishment, and therefore none do receive the benefit thereof, but
such who live the life of grace, yet we must add that sinners, if humbled, and
of broken hearts, ought to address themselves to that Ordinance for the
sealing of the pardon of their sins, to obviate that error in Popery, which
denies remission of sins to be vouchsafed in the right use thereof. Again,
page 128, 129. I declare That such who have competent knowledge, and are
unblameable in their lives, are by Church Officers to be admitted to this
Ordinance, though happly not internally sanctified. Neither is the
Church Officer to attend to that, but the command and order of Christ, not
launching into the Controversy of the extensivenesse of the administration of
Ordinances, or the qualifications of Church Members, a^quiescing in that which
Ames answers to Bellarmine, Bellar. Enerv. tom. 3. cap. 1. de Sacram. qu 3.
(who objected, That if Sacraments were the seals of grace, a Minister could not
baptize any, unless he knew he were elected, lest he should apply the seal to a
falsehood,) That Ministers are not to administer Sacraments according to their
private knowledge or opinion, but according to the command of God. Let me also
advertise thee, that because of the consanguinity of the matter, there is
annexed a Sermon of the day of Judgment, self-judging being a special means
to prevent that dreadful judgemen^ of condemnation in that great day. The
great Prophet of his people teach thee to profit and make these necessary
instructions effectual to thy souls good.

Anthony Burgess.

ERRATA.
Page 12. lin. 7. r. Cyprian, Inde surgat actus nostri ratio, unde ordo and
origo surrexit. p. 19. l. 18. r. Ancient did. p. 43. l. 5. r. desultorious. l.
3. r. true gold. l. 14. dele metal. p. 49. l. 20. r. (...). p. 64. l. 19. r.
renew. p. 82. l. 17. dele voluntary.

In the Sermon of Judgment.

Page 9. l. 11. r. (...). p. 36. l. 11. dele virtuous. p. 59. l. 20. r. is u.
p. 64. l. 17. r. tu rides.

A TREATISE of Self-judging, In order to the Worthy receiving the LORDS SUPPER.
1 COR. 11.31. For if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged.


FRom the 17th verse to the end of the Chapter, Some general observations from
St Paul's Discourse about the Lords Supper.
we may see Paul like a shining and burning light, with that Urim and Thummim
upon him, as some expound it; light by his doctrinall information; burning, by
his severe and sharp reprehension. (...), in a very terrible manner, as
Chrysostom; and all this, wholly about the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Now
although it would be too much, to analize and take notice of all the
particulars, in this his Discourse about the Lords Supper, yet I shall touch
upon some general observations, and so bring you to the text. First therefore
take notice of the sudden and speedy degeneracy of this Church of Corinth,
from Christ's first institution about the Sacrament: who would think that this
Church being a garden of Paul's own planting, and he yet alive, that it should
be thus overgrown with weeds? As Paul of Doctrinalls, to the Church of
Galatia, so here of practicalls, I wonder you are so soon removed from him that
called you, Gal. 1.6. You see a false Apostle, an heretical teacher could do
more on a sudden to pervert souls, then the Apostle in many years to establish
them. That which other painful Ministers have with much difficulty bin a
building many years, they can suddenly destroy. We may say of many Churches
since Christ's time, how is it that they have fallen off from that primitive
purity and godly order, which was observed by the Apostles.

2. Observe the devil and his instruments busied in the corrupting of this
ordinance of the Lords Supper, above any else. Peter Martyr observes well,
that there was not such corruption about Baptism, as about this ordinance. Its
true in after ages the corruptions both doctrinal and practical, were very
great about both the Sacraments, but he began first with the Lords Supper, as
being that which is the highest Church-grace and favor.

3. The corruption about this ordinance was occasioned by an humane
institution, their (...), Their love feasts, which Jude mentions, saying,
some were spots in their feasts of charity, Jude 12. whither they were at first
instituted in imitation of the Jews, or as some, of the Gentiles, who used to
have their feasts after their s^crifices, is doubted. The intent was to nourish
and keep up love amongst one another. Its judged by most, and Paul seems to
make it probable, that they were before the Lords Supper, though Chrysostom,
and others, make them after: Maldonate and other Jesuits, will by no means
understand the Eucharist by the Lords Supper, but are peremptory, that neither
Scripture, or the Fathers ever gave it such a name. But Causabon does well
chastise this impudency of theirs. For why should the Apostle bring in the
solemn institution of the Lords Supper at first, if their divisions and
prophanes did not relate to that, though occasioned by their love feasts,
whether the Apostle does absolutely condemn the very use of the love feasts,
as being an humane institution added to the Sacrament, or the abuse only is
likewise doubted. It is enough for us, to see how unhappy these prooved in the
issue, for they fell into divisions and factions, hereby making as it were so
many parties: and withal, the poor were despised, and the rich they grew
intemperate; and in these distempers they dared to proceed to this ordinance;
for this it is, the Apostle though he had praised them in the beginning of the
Chapter for keeping his order, yet here he could not do it, some holy order
they kept, but not all.

4 Obs: That that Sacrament which was appointed by Christ, not only as a seal
of communion with him, but of believers amongst themselves, was now abused,
through the many schisms and divisions that were amongst them, and made an
occasion of discord and strife; and is not this sadly to be laid to our hearts,
that there are more breaches and rents about this ordinance, which yet is for
communion, then any po nt in religion; how many doctrinall controversies, how
many disciplinary controversies, all tending to break love and union, by the
symboles and seals of union, what dispute about the order, about the
communicants, about the benefits, the Sacraments being by some made Idols, as
in Popery, which caused a learned man to wish the word Sacrament had bin laid
aside, people co^ceiving some hidden virtue in the bread and wine by that name;
and by othe^s despised, as by those who s^y they are above ordinances, when yet
we are to do this in remembrance of Christ, till his coming, if we were sure
Christ were to come the next day, yet we might receive this ordinance
immediately before. The Socinians and Remonstran^s do debase them; The latter
say, the whole doctrine of the reformed Church about the Sacraments, is nobis
valde suspecta, is greatly suspect^d of falsehood by us; and the former say, its
only a commemoration of Christ's death, so that there is no grace or benefit
anew received; ev^^ say they, as in the com^^^oration of the Angels Passover in
the Pa^chall Lamb, there was no new deliverance vouchsafed: but the very
institution of such Elements, bread and wine, argue they a^e spiritual Alimony
to the true receiver, only these sad divisions hinder the blessed fruit
thereof.

Obs: 5. That the Apostle in reformation of this abuse, go h to the o^igin^ll
institution, he declares what he had received of Christ, viz. immediately, for
Paul was not a^ the institution of it, and indeed to reform, is properly to
bring a thing to its first form or original; we account what the Church did
about the Sacraments when it came out of Popery, was reformation, though the
Papists call it deformation; That which is reformat^on to one, is confusion to
another. Therefore the only way to decide this is not custom, multitude, or
as Stapleton, Ecclesiastical tradition, for that is as corrupt as any thing
else, but divine institution, as Cyprian, Vide, surgat altum nostrum recte,
unde ordo and origo surrexit, let our actions arise from the same fountain
that institutions themselves d d, Elisha powered salt in the spring, when the
streams were bitter; and about the Sacrament it is to be obse^ved, that
whereas many persons are so importunate for antiquity and old customs in other
things, when we can from Scripture and the Ancients for two or three hundred
years after Christ, show plainly how careful they were that no ignorant and
profane person should be admitted to this ordinance, then they w^ll not
hearken or yield obedience: bring Antiquity for any superstition, or needless
custom, they are glad of it, but when for purity and godly order, they cannot
digest it.

Obs: 6. That God did very severely punish these Corinthians for their disorder
about the Lords Supper; For this cause (says Paul, ver. 30.) many are sick,
weak, and dye. There was a common mortali ie, (if not the plague) amongst
them. Paul indeed could by the guidance of Gods Spirit know that was the
particular cause, and although we have not such certain knowledge, yet we may
with Peter Martyr reckon public calamities upon a Land, as war, famine, and
plague, with other pestilential diseases to this sin, as part. Certainly, we do
not consider, that this Sacrament-sin is so highly provoking of God, when we
do not attribute our miseries to this, at least, as one cause among the rest;
and Gods judgments for this are the more to be observed, because in the New
Testament this is the only instance we have of a public general judgment.
Indeed Ananias and Saphira were stricken dead for lying against the holy Ghost,
and Elymas blind, but here many, some whereof were godly and holy, were sick,
and others cut off with untimely deaths. ^ seems to be an allusion concerning
Gods order about the paschal Lamb, which whosoever did transgress, was to be
cut off.

7. The Apostle therefore to prevent all such abuses for the future, does so
forcibly inform about the unworthy receiving of this ordinance, That it has
left some impression upon all Churches, to keep off those that are dogs and
swine, not to give this bread and pearl to such, let them be Episcopal, (some
of them at least) Presbyteriall, or Congregationall. Hooker in his Posthumus
books of Ecclesiastical Poli^, sixth Book, page 57. does affirm, that by
the Church of England, Every noto^ious offender was to be kept from that
ordinance, and (which is remarkable) that all Ministers had equally power to do
it.

The Socinians do highly press the casting out of all evil persons, and
condemn the Evangelicall Churches for remissness therein: yea, Erastus one of
the first that troubled the Church about the admission of persons to the
Sacrament, does yet often profess that he only understands such sinners to be
admitted, as publicly repent of their sins, and promise amendment. He makes
it a great injury done to him, as if his opinion were that all who name
themselves Christians, yea though neither willing, nor thinking to depart from
their evil ways, were to be admitmitted, therefore professes he so disputes
of these points, as that he would have the custom of their Church observed,
Erast. Contr: These. lib. 6. cap. 2. And he speaks expressly against the
promiscuous admission of all, without any examination. It is an injury and a
calumny, he says, to charge that opinion on him, lib. 6. page 34. Certainly,
these thunderbolts of Paul have made deep impressions upon men's hearts, though
otherwise not willing to be affected with much strictness herein.

8. We may observe, it is a blessed and happy thing that Paul did thus by the
Spirit of God enlarge himself about the institution of this ordinance; for
although three Evangelists relate the institution of it, ( John only omitting
it) yet Paul instead of a fourth Evangelist, does with much enlargement make
mention of it; for who could have gathered such conclusions as Paul did from
the mere institution, had not the Spirit of God immediately guided him, so that
these very sins of the Corinthians, we may as the ancient Adams sin, call them
felices culpae; for their corruptions gave occasion to Paul for such a large
and pithy amplification about it.

And therefore as it was a mercy to the Church, that many heresies arose, even
in the Apostles days, which made them speak so distinctly and clearly
against them, as about Justification by the works of the Law, etc. Yea the
doubtings of the Apostles in many particulars, is the cause why we do not
doubt now about the same things. Which made one say, Plus debeo Thomae
dubitanti, quam Petro credenti, I owe more to Thomas doubting, then Peter
believing. As (I say) the event of such heresies or doubts was in mercy to the
Church, so disorders and corruption in the Discipline of the Church, did
provoke the Apostle to speak so much about this ordinance as he does. And it
was Casaubons good wish, that men had been more industrious to bring in the
Primitive good order in Church Discipline, then subtly to dispute without
Scripture Light in many controversal points, this would have bin more
acceptable to God, Exer. 16. page 396.

Lastly; Observe amongst the many arguments for our right approaching, this in
my text is none of the meanest, wherein we may consider.

First, the duty supposed, with the object of it, if we would judge our selves,
what the word (...), does imply, will appear in the doctrine Grotius thinks
this place may not unfitly be expounded of their public Church Censures, as if
the Apostles meaning were, if you had godly discipline, and this were
faithfully put in order, this would prevent Gods judgments; for he thinks by
the several factions that were, the discipline of the Church lay prostrate;
but I will go in the most general interpretation of it, and so the words may
be considered, either in the Thesi, as a Theological Aphorism, That
self-judging, will prevent Gods judging of us in all cases; or else in
Hypothesi, in the particular, as it does relate to the Sacrament. Hence Erasmus
renders it in the past sense, If we had judged our selves, we had not been
judged of the Lord. I shall take in both these considerations.

Secondly, There is the benefit proposed, or discovered upon our self-judging,
we should not be judged. The Apostle speaks here of believers as well as
wicked men, yea chiefly of believers, because he adds, verse. 32. When we are
judged, we are chasten^d of the Lord, that we may not be condemned with the
world. The world and the godly are directly opposite; here are then three
doctrines in this text, as the natural offspring of it.

First, That self-judging, preventeth Gods judging.

Secondly, God does judge even his own people for their sins.

Thirdly, The sins which God judges them for, are not only moral, gross
sins, but their ordinance-sins, their Sacrament-sins, committed against
positive institutions. For the first; He that judges himself, takes the way
to prevent Gods judging of him. What our Savior says of judging of others,
Mat. 7.1. Judge not lest ye be judged, is clean contrary here: Judge your
selves, and that severely, impartially, else God will judge you: You see there
must be judging, if you do not judge your selves here, God will judge
hereafter; if here be not a judgment of discussion, in hell there will be a
judgment of condemnation. This self-judging it is the marrow, and soul of all
Christianity; for want of this it is that there are so many hypocrites and
Apostates in Religion; for want of this, that there are so many Pharisaicall,
and self-righteous men; If this duty were more practiced, there would be more
truth and sincerity in the ways of godliness: so that in this very thing the
profane and the godly man part; the Pharisee and the true believer are
divided; the hypo^rite and the true Saint differ: they may both pray, they may
both abound in gifts and inlargements, they may both be frequent in the
Ordinances, but the one judges himself, and the other does not, or cannot, or
dare not, he is afraid to search into himself; so that this is a duty required
of us in our whole life, but especially upon some extraordinary occasions, as
here in this Sacramental Administration. Had Jehu judged himself, had Judas
judged himself, they had not been such scandals in Religion.

But let us rip up, as it were, and discover this great and weighty duty of
self-judging; and herein we are to know, that many things are antecedent to it,
some things constituent of it, some things concomitant of it, and some things
consequent from it; and all these manifested, will make us able to judge of
this self-judging.

What things are antecedent to self-judging.
To the Antecedent or introductory things we refer these particulars.

1. A man must erect a tribunal and bar, as it were, in his own heart, and
assume to himself a superiority and dominion as it were, over himself, for thus
all judgment is exercised; he that is a Judge in that act is a superior: Now
in man, we may consider him as enlightened in his conscience by the word, and
herein supplying Gods place: So that conscience is not only a witness, but a
Judge, and that is the reason why a man may not do any thing against
conscience, though otherwise, he is indeed bound to lay aside his error, but
he must not contradict it, because it is a Judge in Gods room; he may and must
many times go against his affections, his will, his inclinations, but never
against his conscience. The very Heathen could say, (...), Conscience is a God
to every man: it is in Gods room; yet because it is an inferior judge, subject
to error, when it appears God the superior Judge does countermand the
contrary, then that cease and has no further authority. Romans 2. The Apostle
speaking of the Heathens, said, their consciences did accuse, or excuse; here
was judging then, and that by some superiority. Now this is much to be
observed, because naturally we are unwilling to set up such a Court in our
breast, we think we shall bring our selves under too much slavery; we cannot
then, though but a little while, turn aside into any vain thoughts, or any
loose practices, but we must be summoned to this court presently; men would be
uncontrolled in their lusts, and therefore to assume a superiority over a man's
self, to make a man's self the delinquent, the offender, to show no pity, no
compassion to his sins, this is very difficult. No wonder men do not love
Church Discipline, for they cannot abide heart-discipline, soul order; they do
not love to set up a spiritual court the^e to arraign themselves, their
convinced selves, against their delinquent selves, their enlightened selves,
against their corrupt selves; yet this must be, where se^f-judging is: As long
as thou art afraid to leave thy lusts, or sin keeps thee in slavery, thou will
never erect a court in thy own heart to condemn them.

2. The second thing antecedent is knowledge and understanding, for if thou set
up such a court in thy breast, and there be no Scripture wisdom to guide thee,
here will be much false judgment: how many times does the true believer bear
false witness against himself, condemn himself falsely for an hypocrite, for a
castaway, for one left by God: and on the other side, does not the pharisaical
man clear himself, say all is well, acquit himself because his ways are clean
in his own eyes; and all this is, because there is not that heavenly light to
guide us in this self-judging. Now there is a twofold knowledge must go before
we can pass any true sentence about our selves. First, A knowledge of our
selves; that which the very Heathens have admitted as a fundamental truth, and
a divine Oracle, E coelo descendit; but we see neither Heathens, no nor such as
read and know the Scripture, can perform this, while unregenerated Romans 7.
Paul did wholly mistake himself; Nicodemus did not know himself; for this
knowledge must be of our state by nature, in the first place, that is a
mystery: How many heretics deny any such natural pollution, whereas the
greatest part of our evil lies in this. Job and David did go from actual sins
to this of their nature, as the spring of all their evil, and for which they
ought most to humble themselves; and when we thoroughly know this wretched and
damnable estate of our nature, then able we are to know our sins past and
present, especially our dearest sins, our own iniquities: So that by this it
appears, that much spiritual skill, and heavenly wisdom is required to this
self-judging, because there must be so much self-knowing. Alas will thou go to
judge thy heart, that know not the depths, or the deceitfulness of it! Did
not David, though a godly man, Psalm. 19. who had much illumination and
sanctification, cry out, Who can understand his errors? cleanse me from secret
sins; that corruption I do not know, I cannot discover. If therefore thou will
set upon this duty, get more knowledge of thy self, let in more light into thy
breast, else there will many serpentine lusts lie crawling in thy heart, that
thou will never discover: If a godly man hardly know himself, how can a wicked
man, who is wholly blinded with self-love. Secondly, There must be a knowl^^ge
of the rule, the law, by which we are to judge our selves; as there must be
light within, so without; as we must try spirits and doctrines by the word, so
our hearts and actions by it, otherwise we shall foully mistake: it is of great
consequence what rule you judge your selves by. The Scripture it may be
condemns that as loathsome, as abominable, which is glorious in thy eyes: The
Scripture will tell thee that is no grace, no godliness, which thou think
will carry thee to heaven. Most men judge of themselves by false rules; why is
morality, why are duties, gifts, opinions, made grace to some men, resting upon
them? but because they judge not by the rule; you must then be acquainted with
Gods Word, apply that to thy heart, to thy life, to thy words: you must not
bring the rule to you, making the Scripture for thy life, as heretics do for
their opinions, wrest it, possessing thy self first with such thoughts, and
apprehending the Scripture ^very where speaking to that purpose: So neither
multitude, or the custom of others is a rule to judge our selves by, yea on the
contrary we are to say, Argumentum pessimi turba, the multitude is an argument
of evil; and nunquid mali feci, what evil have I done, when all commend me.
What do you more than others, said our Savior, Matthew. 5.47. but above all
things we must not be a rule and a law to our selves, to make our own wills the
Bible to walk by, and our own hearts the Scripture. The Scriptu^e speaks
notably, 2 Cor. 10.12. They measured themselves by themselves, they never
looked upon better then themselves. Amongst blind men and deaf men, they that
have any use of those senses, though much imperfect, are admired; so that in
this self-judging it is dangerous to make our own hearts the accuser and the
judge, for then all will be well. This makes the Church of Rome incurable, that
she will acknowledge no other judge but her self. Thus when we judge of our
selves by our own inlargements, impulses, revelations, as the Illuminists and
others do, these can never judge righteous judgment. Tradition on the Popish
side, and Revelations on the other side, have made the Scriptures authority
void: but if thou would judge right, keep to this rule.

3. There is required antecedently to this self-judging, composedness and
quietness of spirit: The heart must cast out all distracting turbulent
workings of soul, else it is no ways able to judge it self: A man cannot see
his face in the water that is stirred and moved up and down. Therefore the
Psalmist says, Psalm 4.4. Commune with your heart upon your bed and be still.
How can that man, who is always in a throng of business, in a crowd of
distracting thoughts, ever be able to pass sentence upon himself. Therefore
remove all disquietness, all disturbances of soul; be as if there were nothing
in the world, but God and thy own soul together, as Abraham left his beast and
other things at the bottom of the hill, and went up to God alone. It Is
Aristotle's rule, Anima sedendo and quiescendo fit sapiens, A quiet sedate frame
of soul, is like wiping the dust off the glass to see our faces more clearly.
In the Canon Law the very sitting is made requisite to the validity of the
sentence; that if the Judge do not sedendo pronounce judgment, it is void,
because it implies he is in some passion and commotion when he rises up, or
stirs himself many ways.

4. There must not only be a quiet seda^e frame of soul, but there must be an
a^tentive, fixed, and settled meditation of the heart in this work; so that
self-judging can never be performed without meditation. This duty of
meditation, as it is commended in the Scripture, so it is very seldom practiced
by believers; there is not the least sin lurking in the soul, but meditation
would find and search it out. Alas thy light, inconstant desulphurous
thoughts, which are like a flesh of lightning, these will never go to the
bottom of thy soul. Hence this self-judging is in equivalent expressions,
called searching and trying, as the Artificer does cou^terfeit from gold
metal; or as the woman took a candle, and swept the house to find her lost
groat. Meditation is the soul in paraphrase, whereas short ejaculations, are
but the soul in an epitome, or in characters. It is a shame for us Protestants
to see how much Jesuitical devotion both commends and practices this work of
meditation; insomuch that Suarez said, he prized that part of the day, which
was for the examination and scrutiny of his conscience, above all the time of
his study, wherein he prepared so many voluminous books; and we are seldom or
never in this duty.

Lastly, The work of God, even his efficacious grace is above all required
antecedently, to enable us to this self-judging; if we cannot do the least
good, or think the least good thought without his grace, how much less this
which is one of the greatest and weightiest, Romans 8. We know not what to pray,
or how to pray without Gods Spirit, so neither what to judge, or how to judge,
unless God assist us in it. This made Paul say contrary to my text, 1 Cor. 4.3
I judge not my self; What, did not Paul examine himself, and watch over
himself? yes he did, lest he should become a castaway, but he dared not to
judge himself with a sententiall absolution of himself, as from and of himself;
Why? because it is God that judges. So then, unless God who knows our
hearts better then we do, who sees more pride, vanity, rottenness in thy
soul, then thou can, unless he enable thee; thou may be an Hazaell, when
thou think thy self a Saint. Would Peter have spoken so presumptuously, if
God had made his own heart known to him at that time?

In the next place let us consider, what is formally constituent of this
self-judging, What is formally constituent of this self-judging.
and that lie^h in these things:

1. Examination, exploration, and diligent diving into our hearts. The Greek
word is used sometimes for disputation and doubting, which is a kind of further
searching into a thing; then at first appears, (...), and truly this is
necessary for our hearts, because they are so deceitful above all things. Thy
principles, thy aims, thy ends, thy motives, and all the secret workings of thy
soul, who can find out, but by diligent searching. The heart is like the sea,
though the waters are calm above sometimes, yet there are many rocks, and
several monsters under the waters. Therefore thou must search and again search,
it may be thou art not yet come to the bottom of thy heart for all thy duties.

2. There is required not only examination, but discerning, and separation of
the vile from the precious, of making a difference, between what is of God in
thee, and what of the devil in thee; what is of the flesh, and what is of the
Spirit; for the meaning is not, as if a Christian should be always searching,
and examining, and prying upon his soul, wearying himself in labyrinths of
doubts and perplexities, but he must be able to make a separation. Thus the
Apostle, Phil. 1.9, 10. prays they might abound in all judgment, which was
seen by approving the things that are excellent: and Heb. 5.14. some are said
to have their senses exercised between good and evil: we see the hypocrite, the
reprobate may go far: we see there are many that do doctrinally dispute, that
the work of grace is of the same species in a temporary believer and one
regenerated; yea many dispute, it is impossible to know whether we be in the
state of grace or no: therefore there is required this eagle-eye, for from that
bird do some derive the word (...). Oh then be thus wisely qualified, as to be
able upon thy inquiry, to take the dross from the gold, to winnow the chaff
from the wheat, and so to separate thy ways from the most refined paths of any
hypocrite.

3. It Is required, that upon sin discovered, we should pass sentence of
condemnation upon our selves; that as God will have at the day of judgment, a
judgment of discussion, and then of condemnation to the wicked, so should we:
And this is the greatest thing in this duty; if we would condemn our selves,
saying, Lord we are worthy of all thy curses, of all thy wrath, of all thy
anger; this would prevent Gods judging of us. David thus judged himself often;
but our self-love, our self-flattery is such, that we are unwilling to sentence
our selves as lost and damned wretches. As Paul had the sentence of death, so
we should have of condemnation upon our selves; and this is the way to have it
repealed, to come to God, as they did to the King of Israel, with a rope about
their necks.

Lastly, This judging is in a voluntary taking of all shame upon our selves; we
judge our selves to mourn, to weep, we judge our selves to shame, and to an
holy revenge upon our selves, 2 Cor. 7.11. What indignation, what revenge: This
was that penance the Church of God did exercise it self with in antiquity; for
in gross scandalous sins, such as did offend the Congregation, he that did
truly judge himself for his sins, could have no rest, till he did publicly
confess his sin, and shame himself with tears, in the face of the Church.
Indeed afterward this way was abused, and Officers of the Church took upon
them to enjoin penance, and to make new Sacraments about it, but at first there
was only this way of their repentance and self-judging, a voluntary giving of
God glory, and shaming themselves; and this is the duty still of all such
public gross sinners, that do offend the Church. Thus they came to John
Baptist, publicly confessing their sins, Matthew. 3.6. And those who used
unlawful arts, came and burnt their books, though of a great value, before
Paul, Act. 19.19. It is not shame, or peoples talk, or any such carnal
consideration, could hold them in, when their hearts were truly broken, and if
such Church Discipline were in use, would there be so much bold, and impudent
prophannesse as is every where? If they were called upon, as Joshua to Achan,
to give glory to God, Josh. 7.19. they would not then press to Sacraments
without a wedding garment, yea with goar blood of their sins upon them; but
would rather with the leper stand aloof off, crying out, I am unclean, unclean:
and with another, Calcate me insipidum salem, trample on me as unsavory salt:
They would not then rage at the Minister, and say, the Sacraments are their
dues, but would acknowledge public shame and sorrow was due to them: They
would not press to make us guilty of unworthy giving, while they are of
unworthy receiving: Et dum se solvere cupiunt ligare Sacerdotem, as Ambrose
speaks excellently, while they seek to lose themselves, to bind the
Minister. But it is not all the books, all the arguments in the world that will
do this, it must be an humble heart, truly contrite before God. To hear men
cavilling whether Godly order be Jure Divino, when the world knows their
prophannesse, their impiety is not Jure Divino, may make us conclude, that it
is not arguments, or books, but an humble, self judging heart, that must decide
this controversy.

The concomitants of this self-judging.
The next thing is the Concomitants: And first, self-judging is accompanied with
exalting and setting up of God, as David, Psalm. 5.4. Thou may overcome when
thou art judged. So much as the soul judges it self, so much it clears God.
O God my perdition is of my self, if temporal, if spiritual judgments fall
upon me, I must clear thee, I cannot charge the holy God foolishly. Thus man is
low, and God is set up.

2. This is accompanied with sincerity, and ingenuity. Examine me and try me,
said David, Psalm. 26.2. The sincere heart is willing every secret corner of his
soul should be searched into, but the hypocrite of all duties, cannot abide
this self-judging, he will never say, Even my son Jonathan shall die.

3. It is accompanied with much shame and relenting of soul: He is judged, even
as a poor malefactor is judged, that bitterly laments his misery, and therefore
the whole work of conversion is in this self-judging.

The last thing, are the Consequents of self-judging; The consequences of this
self-judging.
which are,

1. A readiness to every duty, to every holy performance. He that has judged
himself faithfully, he cries out with Paul, What will thou Lord have me to do
Thou have never thoroughly and deeply judged thy self, if thou can not pull
out thy right eye.

2. He does renounce all his own righteousness, flying alone to Christ, and
seeking for justification by him alone. The Pharisee did not judge himself, and
so he saw not the need of Christ. We thus judge, says Paul, 2 Cor. 5.14. if
Christ died for all, then all were dead, descende^do ad coelum ascenditur; by
descending we ascend to heaven.

3. They are patient and humble under all those chastisements God lays upon
them for their sins; they judge themselves worthy of them, and hell it self.
Why should a man complain of the punishment of his sins, Lam. 3.39. Thus they
accept of their punishment.

4. They have a deaf ear against all the censures and calumnies wicked men cast
upon them. They judge themselves more then all the world does, and for that
heart corruption which the world cannot know.

5. This will make him a savoury, experimental Christian, he can tell how to
speak to the temptations, to the doubts of other men's hearts, and to the cases
of conscience in godly men; by this duty constantly performed, he comes to
have wonderful skill in heart-work, he knows more then books can teach him,
he closes with a heart searching Ministry, he speaks from the heart, to the
heart of another.

Lastly, He does not sinfully censure others, he has enough to do to judge
himself; neither can he give way to useless disputes, and opinions in
Religion: Oh this self judging will make a man avoid all these endless
questions that beget nothing but strifes; therefore its excellent counsel to
those who spend their whole life in disputes and opinions, to be more
acquainted with self judging, and thou will find thy own heart will help thee
to work enough: thou will find errors, lusts, such combats and rebellions in
the practical way of powerful godliness, that thou will be amazed to see how
men can take up so much time abroad, and keep so little at home.

Some practical Corallaries or Conclusions from the truth premised.
Let us add some Corallaries, or Conclusions from the truth premised.

1. That a natural unregenerate man, cannot judge himself, he wants all the
forementioned Antecedents; so that in this sense it is true, The spiritual man
judges all things, 1 Cor. 2.15. Can a beast judge, what the reason of a man is?

2. This self-judging is not opposite to an Evangelical, Gospel frame, nor to
the Spirit of Adoption; you may think this is too legal, this will encourage
doubtings, and banish fears; certainly the Apostle did not intend to prejudice
grace, or to take the Corinthians off from Christ, while he presses this duty.

3. This self-judging though a duty, yet is wisely to be managed; we must not
judge in our temptations, in our sad thoughts, or when the Devil distempers thy
eyesight.

4. This self-judging is not to keep us in uncertainties; but as we are to
prove all things in doctrine, yet not be Scepticks; we must hold fast that
which is good: so about our hearts we must judge, yet so as to make our Calling
and Election sure. This self-judging must not oppose assurance.

5. No man can so judge himself, as to find out all the naughtiness of his
heart; he cannot empty this Sea; if our hearts condemn us, God is greater then
our hearts, 1 John 3.20. God sees more vileness and corruption in us, then we
are able to find out.

6. Under Gods judgments, or upon special approaches to him, we are to receive
this duty. Therefore we are more solemnly to perform it at this time in
approaching to the Sacrament; for hereby we shall prevent Gods Judging of us.

1. Every Sacrament we have received God took notice of: God has not forgot
all thy former unworthy receivings. Thy old sins, thy old formality, may be
matter of trembling to thee: as Melancthon said Totus cohorresco, etc. I am all
in a trembling to think, how once in Popery I went boldly, and fell down before
Images, worshipping of them: so say, horror takes hold of me, to think how
profanely and irreverently I once approached to this Table.

2. Judge thy self, because of the special grace and favor vouchsafed to the
fit guest: the more thou judge thy self, Gods love will be the mo^e welcome to
thee: As the Centurion judged himself unworthy that Christ should come within
his roof.

3. Judge thy self, it may be this may recover the benefit of former Sacraments
which was lost: Godly men may receive unworthily, though in the state of Grace,
because not in a Proxime preparation; and therefore receive the Judgment of
Chastisement, though not eternal Condemnation: Thus Self-judging then may
recover the benefit of all bypast Sacraments.

CHAP. II. Of Gods Judging and punishing his own Children for their sins, with
the Aggravation and mitigation of them compared with the sins of others.
1 COR. 11.31. For if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged.


WE proceed to the second Doctrine, which is very useful to awaken the Godly,
and to make them walk with an holy fear, not abusing the grace of God, and
making his love an occasion of sin; which is, That God does Judge even his own
people for their sins: Justification and Gospel Grace does not set Believers in
such a secure condition, that let them live how they will, Gods love will
indulge all, God will take no notice of their sins to chastise them for them.
In the Text we have Gods judging of such; for although it cannot be thought,
that all who came irreverently to this Ordinance were truly Godly; so on the
other side we cannot conclude none were; yea it is plain, that some of those
were truly holy, though offending God in their Sacrament-Sins, because the
Apostle adds, verse 32. When we are judged we are chastened of the Lord, that
we may not be condemned with the world. This then being laid for a foundation,
it is plain, that God judges his own people for their sins. Now this word
Judgment does imply, that God is not only a Father to his People, but a Judge
also, a Fatherly Judge: so that although as a Father he be merciful and
pitiful, yet as a Judge he is severe, and will chastise for sin: this is
notably expressed, 1 John 2.12. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father: Though he be a Father, yet we need an Advocate upon our sinning, even
the Lord Christ. Though he is a tender Father, yet an Holy Judge also; and
therefore does God assume to himself such tempered Relations, that his People
might have such a tempered and qualified frame of heart, that they might
rejoice with trembling, that they might love with reverence, that though they
call on him as a Father, yet because he is such a father, they are to pass the
time of their sojourning here in fear, 1 Pet. 1.17. Therefore observe what the
Apostle adds, if ye call him Father, who without respect of persons judges
every man: if David though a man after his own heart? If Solomon though beloved
of the Lord do sin against him, he will chasten them, and make them feel the
bitterness of their fins as well as others; although always their is a great
difference between the afflictions that are upon the Godly for their sins, and
those which are upon the wicked. The wo^d then in the Text does suppose a real
anger, and just displeasure in God against his own people when they offend; for
to judge is more then to chasten: to chasten is commonly made the action of a
Father; but to judge and to punish, the act of a judge; yet this latter God
does to his offending people; whether it be punishment, properly so taken, is
afterward to be sp^ken unto; we have the like passage, 1 Pet. 4.17. The time is
come that judgment must begin at the house of God; here is judgment, and that
to Gods house. It is true, the word judgment, even as to judge is used in
several senses in the Scripture, sometimes for that strict justice of God,
whereby he will take notice of sin to punish it, according to the utmost desert
of it. Against this David, though a godly and justified man, does earnestly
deprecate, Psalm. 143.2. Enter not into judgment with thy servant, and the
reason is full of weight; for in thy sight no flesh shall be justified: There
is no holy man can stand in this judgment, if God be only as a Judge, and not
a Father likewise, we are all damned men; but at other times judgment is used
for mercy, and moderation opposite to anger, as, Jer. 10.24. O Lord correct me,
but with judgment, not in thine anger; that is in moderation, let my
afflictions be medicinal, not destructive, Aliter secat Chirurgus, aliter
Lanius; he prays that God would let no more blood from him then may abate his
disease, and weaken corruption within him, suitable to this, is that
expression, Ier. 30.11. Where God, though he threatens the Nations to make a
full end of them by his anger, yet to Israel he says, I will correct thee in
measure or in judgment, he would not pour out all his wrath: Thus the godly
have submitted to Gods rebukes; Jeremiah does not pray to be corrected, but it
is his concession and resignation, If Lord I have provoked thee, and thou
correct me, let it not be in thy anger and hot displeasure; for who can endure
under that.

But in my Text, to judge, and judgment is not taken for moderation, or mercy,
but f r severity and afflictions, arising from Gods anger to his people, when
they have sinned aga nst him.

Let us lay open the Doctrine; and first consider, that there are two extreme
and dangerous errors Two errors to be avoided.
about this truth, and you must carefully avoid both these rocks: for first
there is the Antinomian erring on the right hand, and they do so magnify the
grace of God in justification, they do so exalt the love of God in Christ to
believers, that they say God never sees any sin in them, he is never angry
with them; he is as well pleased with David in his Adultery, as when making his
Penitential Psalm: as well with Peter, denying Christ, as when weeping
bitterly; but certainly this opinion may quickly fall from the head to kill the
vitals of all holiness; for if God does not see sin in me, why should I see sin
in my self? And if God be not angry with me for my offenses, why should I be
angry and grieved at my self, when I have fallen into any sin; so that this
opinion does overthrow all those commands which are made to the godly upon
their falls, to repent, and to recover from their backslidings, with brokenness
and bitterness of heart. As also it charge David and Peter, with others, who
have so bitterly bewailed their revolt from God with weakness, yea sinfulness,
troubling and grieving themselves where they ought not. According to this
Doctrine, God never chastises for sin (as they express it) but from sin, that
is, the afflictions which come upon the godly, do not arise from Gods anger for
sin past, only they are afflicted to prevent future. But the instance in my
Text does confute this; for these Corinthians being guilty of sinful
approaches to the Lords Table; it was because of this sin that God brought such
a general mortality amongst them; for this cause, says the Apostle, ver. 30.
Many are sick and weak not some, but many, and it was for this cause: It is
true indeed the afflictions Gods people have, are for the preventing of future
corruptions, and to teach them not to sin any more; yet withal they are sharp
stings for sins past. Let not then the gracious heart delude himself, that
because he is in a state of grace, he may therefore sin and do what he list:
let him remember what the Apostle says, even in the person of the godly, Heb.
12.29. For our God is a consuming fire. David complains of his broken bones,
and wi^h many tears and agonies of soul prays that God would restore his
loving kindness to him, for he had lost the sense and feeling of it. It is true
the people of God are to grow up into the Spirit of Adoption, and to cast out
all tormenting fears; but they must distinguish between Liberty and
Licentiousness, they must not under that pretense cast out an holy trembling
and a reverential fear lest they offend God at any time. In the second place,
the Devil promoteth his Kingdom of darkness on the left hand, if he cannot on
the right; therefore in Popery their is also corrupt Doctrine about this point,
and instead of milk they wring till blood comes; for they say, God does not
only judge his people for their sins, though he has pardoned the fault, but
that he does afterward in a proper way punish them, and avenge himself in a
way of Justice, which they are to satifie in respect of temporal punishments by
some voluntary penalties either inflicted upon them, or voluntarily assumed.
Thus when David has his sin pardoned, yet they say, the death of his child
was inflicted as a proper punishment to satisfy the justice of God: Christ's
blood takes away the guilt of sin, but man's poenal exercises, must take away
the temporal punishment. Thus by their distinctions they do greatly obscure the
Doctrine of Justification, which does take off all the guilt of sin, so that
there remains properly no more punishment for sin thus pardoned; I would not
contend about the word punishment, I s^e Divines do use the word concerning
those afflictions which God lays upon his people, only we cannot say they are
ultiones, they are not acts of vengeance to the godly, as they are to the
wicked, being of the same nature, though different in degree with the torments
of hell to the damned. Calvin therefore does distinguish between Judicium
ultionis and Judicium castigationis, a judgment of revenge, and a judgment of
Chastisement; the latter only befall the godly, and if you say, why then does
the Scripture require humiliation and repentance? Yea, Bellarmine urges my
Text, to judge our selves, which he would have, to imply such voluntary
punishing of our selves, through Fasting, and other duties, that thereby we may
satisfy Gods justice, so as to remove the temporal punishment.

I answer, the Apostle does not use the word (...), when he speaks of our duty,
but (...), which is to examine and search our selves, to separate the evil from
the good, upon discussion of our selves to be greatly humbled, and loathing of
our selves for our sins Not that these duties are to satisfy Gods Justice, but
only they are the way, wherein God alone will communicate mercy. Thus you see
how the truth is stated between two extremes, and it is good for Christians to
be thoroughly informed herein, that in the afflictions which befall them they
may know how to judge of God, and also to deport themselves accordingly. To
judge of God, as one indeed angry and displeased, and whose anger is terrible,
so that to a godly man, it is more dreadful then all troubles, to apprehend
Gods displeasure to him. It is not, says David, the loss of my child, the
troubles in my Kingdom, that affects me so much, as because God does hide his
face from me, Psalm. 51. and it must needs be so, because the heart of a
believer awakened for sin, is made very tender, and so the frowns of God do
more pierce his heart, then almost Hell flames do terrify the wicked: as a
little offense to the eye, because a tender part, is more grievous then great
blows to other parts of the body. The godly therefore are not to despise the
rod of God, yea, none are more to lay it to heart then they. But further, as
they are to be sensible of his anger, so withal to assure themselves that he is
angry, because he loves them: that this bitter fruit does come from a sweet
root: that all his exercises have their rise from a Fatherly care toward them,
and therefore they are to receive them as medicinal, not as poenal and
destructive.

But I shall not enlarge further herein: let us for the more particular
affecting of our selves, who pretend to have an interest in the Lord more then
others, consider the grounds why God will not let his own people, Reasons why
God will punish his own people for their sins.
when sinning, to go unpunished; they must be called to a severe account, yea
when God lets the wicked ones of the world live in their ease, go on
securely in their impieties, and blessing themselves therein; at the same time
the godly for lesser sins shall have the bitter cup of affliction to drink of,
so that by outward events you would think the godly only were hated by God, and
the wicked loved: And the first ground of Gods judging his own people, if not
judging and humbling themselves, may be from the order, and way which God has
appointed for the communicating of Christ's benefits to us, for this is the
foundation of that Antinomian error mentioned, when they read such places, as
that Christ's blood is made an atonement for our sins: that the father laid our
iniquities upon him: that he is made righteousness to us, and that we are
accepted of in Christ: They think this is all, and because this is accomplished
by Christ, though we be wallowing in our lusts, they think these great merci^s
are to be applied to us, but they are to remember the other places as well of
believing, of repentance, not that they are causes, or merits, or to be opposed
to Christ, but they are the qualifications of such subjects to whom Christ will
thus reveal himself; and the Pool, as it were in moving whereof the Angel
comes down, and heals us, so that its a blessed thing to avoid extremities
in this point in our afflictions, not to be securely presuming, nor yet
slavishly dejected; not to look upon a Christ without duties, nor yet oppose
duties to Christ.

2. Another ground why God may even break the bones, yea the heart as it were
of his own children when offending him, is from the many aggravations that are
to be found in the sins of the godly, so that the like cannot be found in the
transgressions of the wicked man, insomuch that the offenses of the godly do in
some respects more displease God, then all the sins of wicked men: As first,
when the people of God sin, it is against more experience of the sweetness and
comfort by grace, and also of the bitterness of sin, which they have felt in
their own souls; and certainly this must highly aggravate thy sin, thou know
what the songs and joys are, of an heart reconciled to the Father through
Christ. Thou know how bitter a thing it is for God, to shut thee out of his
doors for thy transgressions, to give thee childrens bread no longer, but to
suffer thee to live upon husks: Oh what an aggravation is this to every sin
thou fallest in, to remember these experiences: Alas, the wicked when they sin,
they never tasted of a better life; they never found any thing sweeter then the
creature; therefore they think they do not sin to their loss, and so they have
not experimentally felt the terrors of the Lord it may be upon their souls:
hence it is no wonder if they eat poison for honey; but for thee who have been
taught all these things upon thy soul, to meddle with sin that cost thee so
dear; to deprive thy self of that joy and heaven thou have had: Oh tremble
under the approaches of any sin to the^^ Christ used this as a motive in his
prayer for those who crucified him, Father forgive them, for they know not what
they do; but how shall Christ say, forgive thee, who know what thou do:
All the experience God has wrought in thee about holy things, does sadly
aggravate thy evil ways.

2. As the godly sin against more experience, so they also rebel against more
light and knowledge, which is always highly aggravating a sin: What made the
Angels sins to be so greatly displeasing to God? What made Adams sin so highly
offensive? amongst other reasons this was one. They sinned against a great deal
of light and knowledge which God had endued them with: Now the godly man has
not only natural light, but revealed light; he is supernaturally illuminated,
and that not only in a common way, as many Hypocrites are, but in a special and
peculiar manner, such as no reprobate can attain unto; oh then how greatly must
God be offended, when thou shall sin against that quick, penetrating, and
tender light, which shines in thy breast; and therefore God will judge thee
for thy he^rt-sins, thy soul-sins; the pride there, the unbelief there, because
thou have light to discover all these. Any false motions, any sinful
inten^ions, any corrupt minglings of thy self with the things of God, these God
will judge, because thou have spiritual light within thee, which like the
Sunbeams make thee discover those atoms, those secret little sins, that other
vi^^^ u would never take any notice of; remember then what light thou have
put under a bushel, as it were, and then no wonder if God judge thee for this.

3. The godly man's sin is more heinous then the wicked man's, because of that
love, that Free Grace, those bowels of mercy showed to him, which never were to
ungodly men. No wonder then, if of all sins God will not bear the abuse of his
love and his grace, especially that discriminating grace; he gave his Son to
thee, not to another, who if converted, might have done him more service: his
Grace did convert thee, change thee when thou wast as froward as others,
wallowing in thy lusts as others, and so how can God take thy rebellion against
so much Free Grace; what patience is it, that Hell does not swallow thee quick
up: As the Apostle argues comparatively the excellency of Christ, To which of
the Angels said he, Thou art my Son: so to what wicked man, to what unconverted
man, abiding in his sins, has God drawn nigh with that grace and favor, as he
has to thee? how unreasonable is it to turn grace then into wantonness: Argue
as Ezra did, cap, 9.13. Thou have given us such a deliverance as this, and
should we again break thy Commandments, O Lord, thou have done for me more then
for many thousands, who sit under the power of their lusts, and shall I despise
this love of God?

4. The godly man's sin is to be aggravated, because of the special privileges
which God does bestow upon him; for he makes him his Son, his Friend, admits
him into his presence and favor. Now thou who art at such a Feast always,
should never be without thy Wedding Garment: Seems it light to you, said
David, to be Son in Law to a King: and thus, is it a small matter to be taken
into Gods favor, to be his adopted children; to be in communion with him; to
stand, as it were, before him: surely this must greatly aggravate thy sin: The
more favor and honor from God, the more abominable is thy sinfulness. Michal
told David falsely, Thou have made thy self like one of the vile persons: but it
is true of thee, Is it for one accustomed to the Kings presence to be tumbling
in mire and dirt. Oh shame thy self in thy humiliation for this; how uncomely
is this to a justified person? how unsuitable to the spirit of Adoption;
observe that passage, 1 Kin. 11.9. God was angry with Solomon, because his
heart was turned from God, which had appeared to him twice: How many times in a
gracious manner has God appeared to thy soul, and will thou provoke him?

5. The godly man's sins are the more heinous because committed against greater
obligations, and bonds to the contrary; for every duty, every ordinance is a
greater obligation against sin. The more thou have prayed against passions, and
yet passionate: the more thou have prayed against pride, and yet proud; and so
of every sin, the greater is thy sin. God will bring thy prayers, thy duties to
witness against thee, happily the wicked man never, or very seldom has prayed
against his evil ways; but in every confession, in every prayer thou have
bewailed, and resolved against such evils, and therefore in this respect, the
greater aggravation of sin, when committed. Again the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper that is a strong and mighty obligation against sin. Now the godly they
are admitted to this Ordinance, they are not commanded to stand in the Court,
but they may enter into the Holy of Holies; they are children, and this bread
is to be given to them. Now if they walk in proud sinful ways, what a witness
will this ordinance be against thee; did ye receive Christ to serve the Devil?
Did ye receive Christ to vain and unbelieving thoughts. Oh know that all sins
after obliging Ordinances have a kind of perfidiousness and Covenant Breaking
in them, and this must needs aggravate.

6. The sins of Gods people are to be heightened in this consideration, that
they are not only transgressions, but unkindnesses, and therefore they are said
not only to anger God, but to grieve him, as Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve not the holy
Spirit of God: God complains of Israel who were his people in a peculiar
manner, though all not upright in heart, that forty years long they had grieved
him: and truly what grieveth the spirit of God, must exceedingly grieve us.
Hence though the sins of the godly cannot be that sin against the Holy Ghost,
which the Scripture makes unparpardonable, yet because the Spirit of God, is in
the godly a Sanctifier, a Sealer, a Comforter, and works choice and glorious
effects in them; therefore they do in a more special manner grieve the Spirit
of God. The Spirit of God dwells in the godly as in his Temple, and not so in a
wicked man; now to defile this Temple, to profane this Temple by applying thy
self to any evil way, how distasteful must it be to the Spirit of God: Oh
remember, wicked men's sins anger God, but thine do grieve him also; as a
stubborn child does not only offend his parents, but make them inwardly grieve
also.

7 The people of God in their sins have this aggravating particular why God
should judge them rather then others, because they have greater power to
withstand it, there is not that necessity upon them in sinning, as is in
unregenerate men: It is true, an unregenerate man cannot but sin in all that he
does, yet this necessity does not excuse but aggravate, both because it is
voluntarily contracted upon himself, and because this necessity is voluntary,
and with delight, Eo magis libera quo magis Ancilla, as Bernard: But now in a
godly man, there is a spiritual life and power within him to avoid sin; he is
not in the progress of holiness, as in the first conversion, merely passive,
but now acti agimus, and moti movemus; the grace of God exciting, we have life
within us to cooperate. Now then, if God has infused such a life within us,
it is thy greater sin, if thou do not act accordingly: God has brought thee
out of thy first bondage, and if thou do yet live a slave, the greater is thy
condemnation. It Is made a dispute, whether a godly man can avoid any more sins
then he does, or do any more good then he does: Some Orthodox men are reported
by the Arminians to affirm they cannot; but no doubt converting grace takes
away that spiritual death in sin, and gives principles of life, and all habits
of grace infused, have a sufficiency in their way to produce their acts, yet so
as they need actual grace to excite and apply these to operation. A man that
has his eye healed, has a power to see, yet if there be not light to actuate
the medium, he cannot see. We need grace even after conversion, to excite and
quicken those principles: But this shows that a godly man's sin is therefore
to be aggravated, because he has a principle within to refuse it.

8. Hence it is, because of this supernatural life within him, that all the
sins of a godly man have a kind of unnaturalness in them; when a wicked man
sins, he sins of his own, it is natural, as it is for a serpent to be
poisonous, for a wolf to be ravening; but if a godly man sin, it is wholly
contra-natural: How comes this figtree to bear thorns, this Vine to bear
thistles? Hence, 1 John 3.9. he that is born of God, is said, not to sin, yea
he cannot sin, because the seed abides in him, for sins are against his
divine principle; it is as if iron should swim, as if fire should descend: How
can I do this and sin against God, said Joseph, Genesis 39.9.

9. Therefore God does judge his people when offending, because their sins do
dishonor God more; what disorders are in an house redound to the Masters
reproach; from wicked men no other thing is expected, every one looks that
swine will wallow in the mire; but when sheep do so, this is intolerable. This
aggravation God puts upon David's sin, 2 Samuel 12.14. Because by this deed,
thou have given great occasion for the enemies of God to blaspheme. Now
remember that the honor and glory of God is worth ten thousand such as thou
art.

10. And lastly, The sins of the godly are a stumbling block and
encouragement to the wicked; if they see thee proud, earthly, passionate, they
think they may do so likewise. Besides, thou do hereby discover some
weariness of God, as if to turn from him to sin were better, as if thou
did not find that contentment and fullness in the ways of God, as thou
did hope for; so that seeing all these things are in the sins of the godly,
no wonder if the Lord do in a special manner, call them to account, and make
them taste of the bitter cup he gives them to drink.

Use of Exhortation, let the People of God then speedily set upon this duty of
self-judging. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of God provoked; if
thy heart be dull, hard, senseless, lay all these quickening aggravations of thy
sins to thy soul, and they must needs humble thee. The Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, as from one consideration, it requires joy, and gladness of heart; so
from another, godly sorrow and brokenness of soul, to see Christ crucified, as
it were, for thy sins before thy eyes, and thou have been many times ready to
crucify him again and again: Cry out, O Lord, my heart is overwhelmed, what
can I say, This sin with these aggravations make me fear and tremble. Oh it is
not in my own worthiness, in my own fitness, I presume to draw to this
Ordinance, for with the Centurion, I am not worthy Christ should come within my
roof; and thus the less thou sparest and excusest thy self, the more welcome
will thou be to this Table.

CHAP. III. Of Gods punishing his people for sins against a Positive
Institution, such as Sacrament-sins.
1 COR. 11.31. For if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged of the
Lord.


THE last Observation is, That God does judge his people, not only for moral
gross sins, but Sacrament-sins, sins that are against a positive
institution. The Corinthians were guilty of many other sins, some whereof were
contrary to the moral Law, yea to the very light of nature; but the Apostle
does not instance in them as a cause of that public judgment which was upon
them, but he pitcheth on their profane approachings to the Lords Supper, which
is of a positive Institution. The original of all that calamity which is come
upon mankind, and that sin for which God was so provoked, that all the
posterity of Adam is obnoxious to eternal wrath, God punishing no sin in the
like manner, as he did this; What was it? but a transgression of a positive
law. Uzzah was stricken dead, Nadab and Abihu consumed with fire from heaven,
and all because they did not keep to such order, in Gods worship, as he had
instituted: 1 Chronicles. 15.13. Yea Moses but for deferring Circumcision, which was
an Ordinance likewise of mere institution, so that it had been no duty to
circumcise, if God had not commanded it, yet he was threatened to be killed for
his delay therein. The Paschal lamb also, Exodus 4.24. to which the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper does answer, whosoever did neglect, was to be cut off from
among his people, Numb. 9.13. By these instances it does appear how severe the
wrath of God is against all such as do not keep to the Ordinances of God, and
that in such order as he has required, as we read David acknowledging, 1 Chronicles. 15.13.

I shall not treat in the general about all the positive institutions of
Christ, but limit my self to this of the Lords Supper, and to show you, that
seeing God will so justly judge men for their unworthy approaches to it, it is
good for us to judge our selves for such sins first, and this may prevent Gods
judging of us; only to understand the Doctrine, you must know that that
speaks of sins of two sorts, moral sins, and positive sins; to understand
which distinction, you must know, that this division is according to the two
kinds of Commands which God imposes upon his Church; there are moral commands,
which command or forbid that which is either intrinsecally good, or evil; so
that because they are goo^ God commands them they are not commanded and
therefore good: suc^ is to love God, to fear hi^ and such are the duties of the
second Table: for we regard not those Schoolmen, who say nothing is
intrinsecally good or evil, but merely so from the outward Command of God, or
his prohibition. Again, there are positive commands, and these have their
goodness only, because God commands them, in themselves they have no
intrinsecal goodness, only Gods institution makes them good; thus the
sanctification of the Lords Day is a duty by positive institution: so the
observation of the Sacraments, it is a duty by Gods mere will and institution,
so that the not being baptized, the not receiving of the Lords Supper had not
been any sins, if God had not required them: only these positive Commands are
again distinguished into positive temporary, such things as God has required
of h^s Church for a time only, as to be Circumcised, to observe the Judaical
Rites and Sacrifices: it was great sin to keep them up when the time of their
obligation was expired. 2. There is positive perpetual, and that is when God
has appointed such Ordinances to be observed till the coming of Christ, as the
Lords day, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, we are to show forth his death till
he come, 1 Cor 11. This is called by some Divines Moral Positive, and the other
Moral commands, are called Moral Natural. Now as there are two kinds of Laws,
so there are such kinds of sins which are the transgression of those Laws; when
a man is unjust, unclean, intemperate, then he breaks the natural Law of God;
when he prophanes the Sabbath, when he comes unprepared to a Sacrament, he
breaks the Positive Law; and whereas it might be thought these latter sins
are not very heinous, because they are only mala quia prohibita evils, because
prohibited, Gods prohibition makes them to be sins. The Doctrine tells us,
that for such sins God will judge us: yea it is worth the while to take notice
of that place, Levit. 17. ver. 3, 4, 5. where God speaking not of a profane
killing of beasts for common food, but religious, by way of Sacrifice, he
enjoyneth this order, that whosoever kills a beast, thus for a Sacrifice, and
brings it not unto the door of the Tabernacle, blood shall be imputed to that
man, he has shed blood. A notable place, to show how heinous a sin it is not
to keep to Gods order in his worship. The very not bringing of it to the door
of the Tabernacle makes it as heinous a sin as to kill a man; and indeed in
some respects these sins are worse then the other, whereof this is the chief,
because the Lord does by these Positive precepts demonstrate his sovereignty
over us, and try our obedience; so that if we be negligent or omissive therein,
we do expressly and formally manifest our disobedience to God, and do refuse to
own him as our Lord: Not to add that in these positive institutions, God
regards our good; he has appointed Sabbaths and Sacraments, not for his good
but for ours, not that he needs us, but because we need him; and therefore we
must highly sin against our souls, What particulars are to be examined, and
inquired after with special respect to the Ordinance of the Lords Supper.
when God shall in such a merciful manner tender our good, and we refuse it.

This foundation laid, let us inquire into the duty of Self-judging in this
particular Ordinance of the Lords Supper, and because this judging as you heard
does imply a judgment of discussion, and upon sin discovered, a judgment of
condemnation. Let us speak to both, and for the judgment of Discussion: these
things are to be done, first the worthy Receiver, who may receive comfortably,
is to judge himself about the state of grace, to examine himself, whether he be
a new creature, whether God has ever put a supernatural and heavenly principle
in him, or no? for if he be a man in the state of nature still? If he have no
more in him then what he came with into the world, he cannot put forth those
actual graces of Faith, and spiritual hunger after Christ, and his benefits,
which make the Lords Supper to be spiritual meat and nourishment indeed. There
was once a profane custom crept into the Church, which was removed by a
Council, That the Lords Supper should no^ be given to dead men, and the
elem^nts being symbols of nourishment, in the use whereof we a^e commanded to
eat and drink, all this supposes that while men are dead in sins, void of
spiritual life, they cannot spiritually eat and drink, nor put forth gracious
actings in the Ordinances; for there must be a good root, before the branches
be good; there must be a good Fountain, ere the streams be; and so a good
foundation of grace and spiritual life within, before thou art able to put
forth Sacramental act ngs; only you must remember that the Church admits such
to this Table that have competent knowledge, and are free from gross sins,
because she cannot judge of the hearts of men: neither is the Sanctification,
or Regeneration of a person, either in Baptism, or the Lords Supper a
foundation of the administration of the Sacrament; for then the Minister would
be in perpetual doubtings to whom to give it to, or ra her conclude to give it
to none, because he cannot certainly judge of grace in another man's heart, but
the ground of our administration is Christ's command, with the order and way he
has prescribed. Now the Word does only bar ignorant and profane, the other
are admitted to come; yet they must know that without a principle of
regeneration, they cannot spiritually eat and drink at this Feast. Therefore
rest not in man's approbation, that is but a poor reed to lean upon: you see the
Officers let in that man to the Feast, and did not keep him out, who came
without a wedding garment; but the Master of the Feast, when he comes and
vieweth them, he finds him out, saying, Friend, how came thou hither, without
a wedding garment? Mat. 22.12. which made him speechless immediately; he did not
plead, thy servants admitted me, they bid me come; so neither will thou be able
to plead, who being not born again, or in a state of grace, approachest to this
Ordinance: Lord I was admitted by the Ministers, I gave them satisfaction. This
is not enough, but search into the bottom of thy soul, inquire what are the
great things God has done to thy inward man: remember it is mensa Aquilarum,
not Graculorum, a Table for Eagles, not Jayes, as Chrysostom said. If a
gracious heart doubt about this work of grace in himself; such an one is to
know that his duty is to come; for where there is a sense of sin, an hungering
after Christ, a bewailing of our infirmities, these are encouragements for thee
to come, though it may be thou art not assured of thy being in the state of
Grace: many of Gods children would be denied this bread, if none might come,
but those that had assurance of their being in Christ. I have not time to
enlarge on this

2. We are to judge our selves about our present fitness, and capacity for the
Lords Supper: Not only whether grace be in us for the main, but whether it be
actuated, and preparing the soul, that it is like a room ready swept and dressed
to receive Christ: Every godly man is not in an immediate fitness to receive
the Lords Supper. Some of these Corinthians were truly godly, as was proved,
yet they became guilty of unworthy receiving, by their actual indisposition.
The instrument may want tuning for present melody; the k^y may be rusty; the
heart may be so dull, unbelieving, c^rnal, and unsavory, that there is not a
present temper of heart to close with those Ordinances as he ought to do. If
thy heart be a Fountain, but sealed up; if a Box of ointment, but not opened;
there is a gulf be^w^en Sacramental benefits and thy heart. If you ask, what
does actual fitness consist in: I answer it is in the actual exercise of those
graces, the principles whereof are in thy soul: It is like the wind breathing
upon the flowers of a garden, which make them send forth a sweet smell; its
like a tool whetted, like a Spring running, like a fire kindled, many times
thou have wood laid together, the principles of grace within thee, but there is
not fire that does kindle it; the graces to be actually put forth, are a
renewed sorrow and tender meltings of thy heart for thy former impieties;
serious meditation about Christ his Person, his Offices, his unspeakable love
in dying for thee, not to give over thinking about this, till thou find it
prove like coals of fire in thy bosom; Heavenly mindedness likewise lifts up
thy heart, and makes thee suitable to heavenly gifts; spiritual hungrings and
longings of soul after the benefits received, holy joy and gladness of heart,
with great thankfulness unto God: Oh when a soul is dressed in all these
ornaments, the Lillies of the field, nor Solomon in all his glory, is not like
it: As therefore the master invited his guests, saying, Come for all things are
ready, is it likewise true of thee concerning thy fitness, I come Lord, for all
is ready, my soul is put in order, the heart is furnished to receive Christ.
And if the godly soul say, oh this is that which troubles me; I am so
disordered, my heart is untuned, this disquiets me, that distracts me, my heart
is in an uproar, no fitness is there to entertain Christ. To such an humbled
soul I say, Because these things are a burden to thee, thou desire these
mountains might be levelled, and these valleys raised; therefore thy soul is in
some preparedness and fitness, though not so much as thou would be: the more
empty and lowly in thy own eyes, the more welcome to Christ: Besides as these
make thee in some sort fit to come, so they put thee in a necessity of coming.
Eat of this honey, that thy eyes may be enlightened; draw nigh to this Ordinance
that thou may have more of Christ, and his graces: the more thou keepst from
this pool, as it were, the less healing thou can expect. Among many things
that may be said to convince and encourage such a tempted person, I would
chiefly propound this, Thou art afraid to come to the Sacrament; Art thou also
afraid to come to Christ? Dare thou not lay hold on a promise, what! all the
while thou k^epest from a Sacrament, would thou also keep from Christ, and
the Promise? Surely thou will return a negative to this; but consider, those
that may come to Christ, may come to Sacraments; those that may by Faith lay
hold on him, may also draw nigh to this Feast: As Christ says, Come unto me,
all ye that are heavy laden, and I will ease you: Thus does the Sacrament, as
it were speak, Come unto me ye burdened sinners, and Christ in the use of his
means will give rest to you; thou art greatly deceived, if thou think thou
may lay hold on a promise, and not come to the Sacrament at that time; for a
Promise and a Sacrament are the same things; the Sacrament is nothing but a
visible promise, appointed by God to assure thee of his love, and to be an help
against thy infirmities: It is true in some cases of relapses and repentings of
them, there the party though believing in Christ is yet to abstain that he may
give satisfaction to the Church, because it is not only a Sacrament of
Communion with Christ, but also with one another; here he may believe, and lay
hold on the Promise, when yet in respect of Christ's order, he is to forbear the
Sacrament; but this public satisfaction, is not to be delayed, he is to take
his first opportunity, and then the Church is bound (...), 2 Cor. 2.8.
to confirm her love to him. Therefore Calvin does well reprove some ancient
Canons about Church Discipline of too much severity, when persons offending
were to be kept, some two, some three years, from the Lords Supper, though they
did publikly humble themselves.

In the next place from a Judgment of discussion, we are to go to a Judgment
of condemnation; for upon winnowing of thy self, thou can not but find much
chaff: by searching into thy self, much corruption will appear, and when this
is found out, thou art to pass a sentence upon it: O Lord, I judge my self for
this folly, this lust, I am ashamed of my self, I dare not in my own name draw
nigh unto thee: especially let the Communicant condemn himself in these things:
first, all his former profane, ignorant, and irreverent approaches to this
Table. Oh let thy heart tremble, to think with what security, and joll^ty thou
did draw nigh to this Ordinance, being full of ignorance, not able to discern
of the duty in hand; full of profaneness, coming in thy sins, and going away
in thy sins. It is a speech of Chrysostom, That a man had better never have
received the Sacrament in all his life, then to have taken it once unworthily:
Therefore bewail thy self, think how many times thou have made thy self guilty
of the body and blood of Christ: Such sins God has not forgotten, tho thou
may have forgotten them. Happily the Corinthians did not think that it was
for this sin God did so greatly afflict them: and how little do people lay to
heart their former Sacrament-sinnes, whereas horror should take hold on thee,
as often as thou do remember, with what boldness and profaneness thou did
come to these dreadful mysteries. 2. Judge and condemn thy self for thy
failing in all those duties thou wast obliged too by this Ordinance. If thou
receivest these Ordinances, and art as proud, as carnal, as sensual, there is
no more quickened obedience in thee, thou do not live a more heavenly and
spiritual life after this heavenly food: Know here is also matter of
condemnation: The life of Christ should appear in him, who has received
Christ; As a man coming from an Apothecaries shop, carries about him some of
the sweet smell there. The Jews would not taste any thing after the Paschal
Lamb, that the taste might be long in their mouths. If you see one live upon
excellent fare, yet as faint, and as diseased as before; this argues some
vitiated principle within; were there a true principle, thou would find this
Ordinance to be such strength to thy soul, as Elias food was to his body. But
thou will say, because I am conscious to my self of my sinful ways, and I
cannot get out of these snares, therefore I will never come to this Ordinance.
To this I answer, this will not serve thy turn, for then thou bring thy self
into a perplexed necessity of sinning, if thou come to a Sacrament with these
lusts upon thee, thou eatest thy damnation, and because thou do^st wilfully
live in a state unfit for a Sacrament, thou indangerest thy damnation also;
therefore thou have no way to take but to reform, to repent and to be made
partaker of it. This I speak to warn all such as live in a wilful incapacity
and unfitness for a Sacrament, they will not receive, because daily fall ing
into such sins; but woe unto thee that thou do thus wilfully indispose thy
self; how do thou obey that command, Do this in remembrance of me? How
greatly do thou contemn Christ and his benefits, with the seal thereof;
therefore lay this to heart and tremble. Thou that live in a wilful
unfitness to come to a Sacrament, thou art no ways fit to die, no ways fit
for heaven, and dare thou continue in such a life, when if death comes, thou
art sure to fall into hell: Meditate on this, Am I not fit for a Sacrament, how
then am I fit to die! Cannot I meet Christ in an Ordinance, and can I meet him
as a Judge? and so if no fitness for a Sacrament, no fitness for heaven:
Without are dogs; this is true, both concerning heaven, and the Church.

Dethick Mayor.
Tuesday 20th of May, 1656.
IT is Ordered, that Mr Anthony Burgess be desired from this Court to Print
his late Sermon at Paul's.

Sadler.

A DEMONSTRATION OF THE Day of Judgment, against ATHEISTS and HERETICS.

For the awakening of the Ungodly, and the Comfort of Saints, especially those
of them that are afflicted and oppressed.

Preached at St Paul's, May 11. 1656.

By Anthony Burgess Pastor of the Church of Sutton-Coldfield in Warwickshire.

LONDON, Printed for T. Underhill at the Anchor and Bible in Paul's Churchyard,
1657.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir John Dethick Lord Mayor of the City of London, AND
The rest of the Aldermen.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
THis Sermon formerly preached before you and entertained with your good
approbation, is now in Obedience to your Order made more public; whereunto I
was more willingly induced, because of the special usefulness of the Subject.
The Doctrine of the Day of Judgment, with the practical improvement thereof,
being much insisted upon both by our Savior and the Apostles, yea the Duties
in reference to this Day, are so importunately urged, as that, Whether we eat
or drink, whether we walk or sit still, our thoughts and meditations should be
fervent and affectionate about it; and which is the more to be observed, this
Truth is a fountain from which comes bitter and sweet; In it is both a sting
and honey; from the same root springs the Rose and the prickles; Would we raise
up our dejected and disconsolate hearts? the thoughts of this Day, like David's
Harp, would expel all such evil apprehensions; Would we awaken our dead and
dull spirits? Would we curb and bridle our immoderate affections? the
meditations upon this Day would be like a fiery Sword to keep from them. Hence
it is that the Scripture makes this two-fola Use thereof, for Comfort (to the
Godly, I mean) Therefore (Luke 21.28.) they are commanded upon the approach of
that Day, To lift up their heads, for their Redemption draws near. It is a
Day of Redemption to th^e who art kept a prisoner in this Egypt of the world;
A mighty Deliverance will then be wrought for thee from sin and misery; How
blessed then and comfortable must the thoughts of this time be to thee? Luthers
expression was (Sermon. de Signis prae. extr. Jud.) That he had rather never
have been born, than not to be in hope of this Day. Hence it is that God
exercises his children in this Wilderness, that Canaan their rest in Heaven
may be more desired. Luther (ibidem) says of himself, That once he was very
angry, and could not endure the matter of the Lords Prayer, wherein Christ's
Kingdom is prayed for, but after that God had tossed him up and down with the
waves and tempests that he met with in this world, then no Petition could be
more welcome to him. He that does not look for, and hasten Christ's coming, is
not yet weaned enough from the world, his corrupt heart is not burden enough to
him. The things of this world have too much interest in his soul, and therefore
with the children of Reuben they had rather take up their habitation on this
side Canaan, because the Land was fruitful and advantageous: But where the
heart is raised up to a spiritual frame, there their hopes, desires, and ardent
affections are breaking and longing for his coming, even as Sisera his mother,
Judge. 5.28. looked out at the window, expecting his triumphing return, and
crying, Why is his Chariot so long in coming? Why tarry the wheels of his
Chariot?

The second Use, which is of Terror, and thereby to keep back from sin, to
preserve in a constant watching and praying, which the Scripture likewise
frequently commends, is diligently to be heeded by every one, especially
(Right Honorable and Right Worshipful) by you who are called to the Public
Government of that famous City, the meditation on that Day should be as
powerful to awaken your souls for Zeal to the glory of God, and righteousness
in all your administrations; As the sound of the Trumpet, and the voice of the
Archangel will be effectual to raise your bodies. And the rather attend
hereunto, because that Day among other ends is especially Judicare non
judicata, and male judicata, The sins not judged and not punished, and the
things falsely and unrighteously judged; God will at that Day have a review of
them, so that the crooked things which are in this world will then be made
straight. At that Day, riches, honors, and the pomp of the world will be in no
request, but an interest in Christ, to have him our Mediator and Friend, who
is the Judge, will be the only happiness, of which the Lord grant you to be
partakers, so as to find mercy in that Day, is the prayer of

Your humble Servant in the work of the Ministry ANTHONY BURGESS.

A DEMONSTRATION of the Day of Judgment.
ACTS 17.31. Because he has appointed a day in which he will judge the world
in righteousness by that man whom he has ordained.


WHat has Athens and Jerusalem to do with each other? What the Gentiles
Academy, and the Christian Church? said Tertullian, speaking of Gods providence
concerning this passage of Paul's being at Athens; yet here we see him like a
little David going in the name of the Lord with a few Stones from the brook,
some Arguments from the Scripture, against the great Goliahs of the world: And
in this Historical Narration we may see Paul performing a double service for
God, as a Disputant, and as an Orator; As a Disputant with the many Sects of
Philosophers then reigning in Athens, especially the Epicureans, (whose
opinions were called (...), being suitable baits to draw out the flesh of man)
and the Stoics. Now though both these were extremely contrary, yet they agreed
in opposing of Paul, and therefore called him for his Doctrine (...), a
trifling babbler, a word much vexed by Critics; and Austin says, though of
deriders Paul was called, S^minator verborum, yet of believers he may in a good
sense be acknowledged to be so, because of the good seed of the Word he did
abundantly sow, from which came a great crop.

But Paul does not only encounter with Philosophers, he is brought to
Areopagus, that famous place with Heathen Writers, where he makes a grave and
admirable Oration, of which my Text is part. In which we may consider the place
where, the general is Athens, the bright luminary of the world for Learning,
Linguata Civitas, as Tertullian calls it, a City of the tongue, whose manners
are said to be exercised in enquiring after, (...), a dise3se many times in the
Christian Church, many being weary of solid and known Doctrines, desiring of
that which is unheard and unknown, and loving to be in the Terra incognita, or
uninhabitable part of Divinity: The proper place is Areopagus, Mars-hill,
called so, either because Mars was here accused for his impiety, or else
because it was a severe Court of Justice against all unjust, violent, murderous
actions. This Areopagite Judicature is famous, they did excel so much in
Authority, that Kings laid down their Crowns when they came to sit with them;
they were of such integrity that they kept their Court, and gave Judgment in
the night, and in the dark, that they might not behold the persons who did
speak, lest they should be moved thereby, they only did hear what was said;
here it was that the pleader must not use any Proemium, nor make any rhetorical
expression to move the affections; Hence it was that they did bear as much
reverence to the Sentences and Decrees promulged there, as they did to their
sacred Oracles, and here Paul is placed. Grotius thinks not, as to the Court
there, in a juridical manner, but others judge contrary; however Paul is
undaunted, and being an earthly Angel, as Chrysostom calls him, fears not
the power of man.

In his Oration we may consider the crime he charge upon them, and that is
Superstition in the universal extent of it in all things (...), where (...) does
(...), is redundant, as some think, or else it is emphatical, for there is
(...) veritatis, and (...) similitudinis, which may explain that place against
the Socinians, Joh. 1.14.

Some learned men think the word Superstition is used in an indifferent and
middle sense, as the word Heresy is sometimes, yea some say Paul speaks here
in their commendation, and therefore uses the comparative more superstitious
or religious, and indeed they were excessively devout in their Religion, as
among other things is plain concerning Anaxagoras, whom they adjudged to death,
because he held the Sun, which they worshipped as god, to be but Saxum
ignitum a white fiery stone; but this is not probable, because afterward he
calls it an ignorant Worship, therefore the word is not here used in an
indifferent sense, much less a laudable one. The instance by which he proves
their superstition, is an Altar with this Inscription (...), as the Romans had
their Incerti Dij, and therefore sacrificed sine Deo, fine Dea; so the Grecians
not knowing which was according to their blind Idolatry (...), the proper god,
to repel such an evil, made these Inscription, To the Unknown God; The Apostle
to inform them herein instructs them both about the true God, who he is, and
the true manner of Worship; After which he comes to the Exhortatory part of his
Oration, which is grounded upon Gods dispensation to those times of Ignorance
he winked at (...); here may be much dispute about the salvation of Heathens,
because it is said, God winked at it, and so indeed generally it is
interpreted, but the Septuagint use the word for to despise and be angry, Deuteronomy.
3.26. Psalm. 78. and so to punish, and in this sense it seems to be used here.
Those times of ignorance in Idolatry God was angry with, punishing of them with
temporal and spiritual judgments, but now the grace of the Gospel, and the
love of God has appeared in commanding every one to repent: And my Text is the
reason and forcible ground of repentance, Because he has appointed a day. And

In the words, Consider, The Author or Effici^nt Cause, God has appointed a
day; God that is Just, Omniscient, Omnipotent, He has appointed a day, (...),
he has settled it so that there is no repealing of it, there cannot be any
reversing of it, though ungodly men would give worlds to have it cancelled.

2. There is the Matter it self [A Day] Here is much dispute about the length;
Some say this Day is a thousand years, wherein God will be judging of the
world; It is certain, that there will be no proper Natural, or Artificial Day,
as we account; but seeing the Scripture has not determined the duration, who
can define it?

3. The End why such a Day is appointed, and that is to judge; Now God seems
to take no notice of the impieties and ungodliness of wicked men, for they at
present eat, drink, and rejoice in their iniquities, but there is a Day wherein
God will judge the world.

4. The Object, The World; None is exempted, great as well as small, rich as
well as poor, the mighty as well as the weak, whosoever is of the world shall
be judged, the godly as well as the wicked; But differently, The godly with a
judgment of Discussion and Approbation, the wicked with a judgment of
Discussion and Condemnation.

5. The Manner how, in righteousness; Righteousness is here put partly for
Truth, and partly for Justice, whereby he hates sin, and will punish it: so
that the opinion of the Socinians, which says, there is no such thing as
vindicative Justice, essentially appertaining unto God, as it makes Christ
Satisfaction needless, so it opens a wide door to all impieties.

Lastly, There is the Judge, By whom, (...), an Hebraism for (...) and (...)
for (...) a Grecism; Now in that Christ is called here a man and a Judge only
appointed, a constituted Judge, Hence those blasphemous Socinians deny the
Essential Deity of Christ, and make him only a constituted God, but therefore
is he called a man here, not exclusively to God, but because he shall judge the
world in an external and visible manner, which cannot be done by him, as God,
for so he is invisible; and whereas he is said to be appointed a Judge, and
this Judiciary Power is given him, you must know that many things are said to
be given unto Christ as Mediator, which does not diminish his Deity, but
necessarily presuppose it, as to be made a Judge of the whole world; None can
be so but he who is God as well as man, for he must be Omniscient and
Omnipotent, who is this Judge, whether indeed he be a Judge in both Natures, as
well in the Divine as Humane; As also how the Humane Nature of Christ comes to
know all the secret things of man's heart, is disputed between us and the
Lutherans, but I wave it; only you must know, Christ is not an inferior or
delegate Judge, but supreme and chief, being God as well as man.

The Text being thus divided and opened, this Doctrine or Corollary naturally
flows from it, viZ.

That God has appointed a Day to judge all mankind by Christ.

This truth is an Article of Faith, and having such powerful influence upon
our lives, it is good to possess our minds with the truth of it, and our
hearts with the terror of it, for both corrupt minds and profane hearts have
withstood this main Fundamental point: As the fool has said in his heart (by
wish and affection) that there is no God: So they say in their hearts, there is
no Day of Judgment; And as that King of France strictly forbad any so much as
to mention death in his hearing, he did so abhor the thoughts of it; so do
many about the name of this Day. The Devil cannot hurry men into hell, as he
did the Swine into the Sea, until the thoughts of this Day are wholly
obliturated; Therefore before Christ's time, and since, there have been
Doctrinal and Practical opposers of it; Doctrinal, so the Sadduces, who denied
the Resurrection and Immortality of the soul, were necessitated also to deny
the Day of Judgment: And as Josephus observes, The Sadduces, though they were
not so many as the Pharisees, nor so reputed of for Religion, yet they were the
most potent, the greatest in wealth and honor; So that the denial of a
Resurrection, and the Day of Judgment was very suitable to their interest.
After Christ's time, though this Article be so plainly affirmed in the New
Testament, that no words can speak it more clearly, yet there is a large
Catalogue given by learned men of blasphemous and damnable Heretics, who do
deny it; and the Socinians in that they hold eternal torment to be the
annihilation of the whole man, do in effect also renounce this necessary Truth.
And as for Practical Opposers of it, the Apostle Peter does signally decipher
some even in his days, that were but scoffers and deriders at that truth which
should have struck them into fear and tremblihg, 2 Pet. 3.3, 4. There shall in
the last days come scoffers, saying, Where is the promise of his coming? No
doubt all profane, secure and atheistical sinners, who say, Let us eat and
drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, though they do not expressly, yet do
really deny this Day, or put it far from them. It is therefore Gods great
mercy, that whereas some main points in Divinity are not directly in Scripture,
but by consequence, though the sense and matter be in Scripture, yet not the
words; But for this Article, we have in Scripture both the truth and the words;
For if there had been any evasion, the corrupt heart of man would have sought
out plausible inventions to have denied it.

This truth is clearly asserted both in the Old and New Testament, so that the
Scribe of the Kingdom of Heaven, may bring out of his Treasure old and new; and
this is the more remarkable to have it in the Old, where the truths of Heaven
and Hell are more obscurely delivered; Yea the Socinians look upon the Jews
under that Legal Administration, but as so many Swine, desiring husks only, and
not knowing of the Manna of the Gospel.

That this Doctrine was believed of old, yea presently after the fall,
appears by what Jude relates in his Epistle, verse. 14. Enoch the seventh
from Adam prophesied, saying, Behold the Lord comes with ten thousands of his
Saints to render vengeance; And whether this was a real or verbal Prophecy is
disputed; if verbal, where is that Prophecy? if it be lost, May any part of the
Canonical Scripture be lost? And how did Jude come to know this was in Enoch's
Prophecy? These are Disputes which the practical matter I intend will not
suffer me to treat of: Here we have a plain Prophecy, and that almost from the
beginning, That the Lord will come with ten thousand of his Saints to execute
Judgment.

That it is a Doctrine of great Antiquity, Solomon likewise the wisest of men,
even in that Book, where to outward appearance, we would think too much liberty
given to carnal opinions, therefore some Expositors make him often speak in the
person of a profane Epicure, and sensual man, he gives a twofold testimony
to this truth.

Eccles. 11.9, 12, 14. God will bring every work into Judgment; And this is
brought as a bridle to impiety, and a spur to all godliness.

The last Text I shall pitch on, is that famous Text, Dan. 7.9, 10, 13-26. so
much agitated in the Chiliastical Controversy; From hence, says Mr Mede, the
Jews took the name of the Day of Judgment, and Christ used the expression as a
known thing, even as the title of the Kingdom of Heaven was a Jewish phrase. It
is true, some learned and pious men comparing this with Revel. 20. do improve
it not only for a Day of Judgment, but that it shall continue a thousand
years, wherein the Martyrs, as some; or all the godly, as others, shall be
raised and reign in glory in the Earth a thousand years, after which time the
wicked also shall rise to be judged, and this they call the first Resurrection.

But as in the Doctrine of the Trinity, and Christ's Incarnation, we must
distinguish between Fundamental Truths, and Problematical; so in this Article
the Fundamental is, That there shall be a Day of Judgment; The Problematical
are such which Learned and pious men may dispute and differ in, without breach
of Charity, Although for this opinion of a thousand years, I can sooner admire
it for the wonderful things asserted by it, than approve of it.

I come to the New Testament. And here it would be useless to accumulate many
places, only two or three Texts shall be mentioned, that so our hearts may be
as sensibly awed with it, as if with Hierom we did always hear that noise in
our ears, Arise ye dead and come to Judgment, Matthew. 25.31. We have there a
lively Description of the Day of Judgment, with the form of Christ's judicial
process, as also the event of it, which is to divide between Goats and Sheep,
the one adjudged to eternal punishment, the other received into eternal life;
Let Faith realize this Text upon thy soul, set thy self at Gods Bar, think as
God called to Adam, Adam, Where art thou? and he was filled with so much fear
that he hid himself; Thus God is calling, thou such a sinner, such an unjust
profane wretch, where art thou? To what mountains and hills will thou call to
be covered from the sight of this Judge?

A second Text is, 2 Pet. 3.7, 8, 9. there is the antecedent to this Day, All
the world shall be on fire like a Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Heavens and the
Earth shall pass away like a noise: As before an house falls this beam
crackleth, and that pillar makes a noise: Thus it will be in the end of the
world; I do not dispute, Whether it will be an essential abolition, or a
qualitative one, but this will be such a terrible change and alteration, that
the Apostle makes this use, verse. 11. Seeing all these things shall be
dissolved, What manner of persons ought we to be, (...) not (...) to
admiration: How is it possible to believe such a day as this, and live in
ungodliness? Thou profane and unrighteous man, either thou art an Atheist, and
do not believe any such thing, and if so, What do thou in the Church of
God? Or if thou believe this day, thou art a fool and mad man, that fittest
thy self for destruction against that Day: Have men faith, reason, conscience,
whose thoughts are not more constant about it? 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. There is Christ's
coming also described with a shout, the voice of the Archangel, and a trump of
God; We will not dispute the Explication of those things, this is to show that
Christ will come with all the Majesty, terror and glory that possibly can be
imagined; and that this is certainly so, consider Heb. 9.27. It is appointed
for man once to die, and after death comes Judgment; It is appointed, (...),
treasured up in Gods Decrees, and therefore it is as sure as death; so that
thou may no more question such a day then that thou shall die. Besides
Scripture, let us consider from rational demonstrations of it. And

First, It must be so from the verity and Truth of God. God you see has
foretold in so many places of such a day, so that although it may seem
impossible and incredible to men, yet Gods word will stand when Heaven and
Earth shall pass away. Now consider with thy self, whatsoever the Scripture
has foretold we see it comes to pass in it is time; Christ did come in the
flesh according to the Prophecies, which went before; The world was drowned, as
Noah prophesied, while they were eating and drinking; Now shall all things come
to pass but this? Set Scripture, the Word of God against thy carnal reasonings,
and say, Every thing will prove a lie, but Gods word, thou will find thy
lusts, thy sins, the Devil to be a liar to thee, only Gods Word will be
faithful and true.

Secondly, The righteousness of God his punishing Justice does require it,
therefore it is called (...), the day of Gods righteous Judgment, and in the
Text, He shall judge the world in righteousness. The Socinians (as you heard)
who deny any essential Justice in God, whereby he is inclined to punish sin,
as they take away the Satisfaction of Christ thereby, so also they weaken the
necessity of such a Day of Judgment, wherein the holy Majesty of God will be
avenged upon all the ungodly. Should sin ever go unpunished, this would seem
as if God were not a God hating iniquity; the Justice of God calls for such a
day.

Thirdly, The goodness and mercy of God likewise requires such a Day; For if
the godly had only hope in this life they were more foolish and miserable than
any; They only were wise, who say, Let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall
die. A man would keep a good conscience in vain, and foolishly abstain from the
excessive riot of the world, especially the Martyrs would be the greatest fools
of all; let them put off the crown of Glory, if this day be not; If there be no
D^y of Judgment, they were imprisoned in vain, and died in vain; but it is
called a Day of Redemption, and the godly are commanded to lift up their heads
with joy; then their Summer comes, they are to look for and hasten it, for
here they are sighing, groaning, here also they are conflicting with proud,
earthly, vain hearts, but this day wilt put a period to all, there will be no
fin or sorrow any more.

Fourthly, The providence of God, as it disposes things in this life, does
plainly declare a Day of Judgment; For here in this world Solomon observes,
All things fall alike to all, to him who fears God, and him who fears him
not; The prosperity of the wicked, and the adversity of the godly has been
such a perplexing subject to the wisest of the godly Heathens, Seneca and
Plutarch, that they have spent many thoughts about it, yea this Providence of
God was such a riddle to David and Jeremiah, that without much prayer and
recourse to God, they were not able to answer it. Now to this Objection, which
has staggered so many, there is no such satisfying and complete answer, as
that there is a Day of Judgment, when God will set every thing in its proper
place, when all the world shall discern between him who is righteous, and him
that is not; therefore silence all such murmurings and disputes with
expectation of that Day, you should not judge too soon before the last act be
past; and as in the Word of God a man would make blasphemy, if he should make a
period at a comma or a colon, as in this place, Thou art not a God that love
iniquity, if he should stop at that, Thou art not a God, and go no farther,
this would be blasphemy: So it would be highly derogatory to the Justice,
Wisdom and honor of God, if thou should conclude what is just, and what is
unjust, completely and finally by passages in this world, seeing the day of
consummation of all things is not yet come.

Lastly, That there is such a Day, appears by the very implanted principles
in a natural conscience; For why is it that a man dying, whose conscience is
not benumbed in that hour, terrors and agonies should surprise him? And why
then, and it may be never before should horror and trouble take hold of him?
Animula vagula quae nunc abibis in loca, Oh wretched soul, Whither art thou now
going? What will become of thee? Live I cannot, Die I dare not; Why, I say,
should such anguish of spirit fall upon a man going out of the world, if not
for some implanted sense about a future judgment? For we might think a man
though never so vile, might then be least troubled about his sins, he then
fears no Law to convince him, no Judge to condemn him, no Neighbors to shame
him, and yet for all this he trembles and quaketh in his soul, not knowing
what to do. To bring this coal yet nearer into your bosoms to inflame there, I
shall lay down some Propositions about the day of Judgment. As

First, It will be the last day of Gods great working, as to the world, God
will then make to cease all that kind of government in Church and State, as is
now upon the earth administered; So that it being the last Day of Gods Power,
Majesty, Glory, in reference to mankind, we must think that that day will be
answerable to the greatness of the Judge, hence he is to come in the Clouds, as
so many bright Thrones of Glory, with an innumerable company of Angels: So that
God, though he has in many particular and public judgments showed forth his
glorious power, yet never like what will be at that Day; it is the last day,
and all days empty into it; All our words, works and thoughts have an
influence into that Day, so that in this sense we may say, Every thought is
Eternal, every word is Eternal, every action is Eternal, these die not, but all
live till the Day of Judgment; What holy care and diligence should this put us
upon in all things? It is said of Apelles, that being demanded, why he was so
deliberate and curious in drawing his pictures? answered, he did pingere
aeternitati, he painted for Eternity, not the present Age only, but many
successive Ages were to judge of his work: Thus all we do, we do to Eternity,
at the Day of Judgment it will be all revived: thy sins die not, thy good
works die not, all these will then be mentioned, as if done but to day; So that
this is the last Day, wherein all days with the works therein are involved,
after this there is no more day of grace, no more Manna will fall, no Angel
will descend into the pool; the world is then as to this kind of administration
put to an end.

Secondly, As it is the last Day, so it is a terrible and dreadful Day, the
very name a day of Judgment, Dooms day is enough to strike terror into us.
Romans 2. It is called the day of wrath, and the revelation of the righteous
Judgment of God; it is terrible in the antecedent signs as Matthew. 24. in the
concomitant, in the nature of it, all the secret and evil ways of mankind
being to be judged, in the consequent of it, as appears in that sentence,
Depart ye cursed; and it must needs be terrible, because the Judge will then
set himself to appear terribly, so that all the terror and dread God can put
forth, will then be manifested; and this makes the Scripture represent it by
all those expressions, which may make it formidable; And certainly, if the
report of it be so dreadful, what will the Day it self be? Then every wicked
man will say, as the Queen of Sheba, concerning Solomon, That she had heard was
nothing to what she did see; Hence also the wicked are brought in, gnashing of
their teeth, and crying to mountains and to hills for to cover them; This will
be the more terrible, not only because all external objects will be horrid and
doleful sights, viZ. The world on fire, the wicked roaring and yelling, but
because God will then fill the hearts of men with terror and trembling, their
spirits will be prepared for it; What is the reason that now the thought of
this Day does not astonish thee, does not make thee a Magor-missabib, fear and
terror round about? but because thy heart is a stone, God does not make it
sensible and apprehensive; but at that Day, as the spirits of the just shall be
perfected and raised up to love God, and to delight in him more then ever: So
the spirits of wicked men will be more enlarged to receive horror, they will
be made more capacious of terror than now they are; though now under these
truths, thou art like Jobs Leviathan, that do laugh at the spear, and we seem
but as bablers, telling you the Poets f^bles of the Stygian lake, and the
hellish furies, yet when this Day comes indeed, madness and horror will fill
thy heart whether it will or no; Above is horror, if thou look to Christ
the Judge; About thee is terror, the Devils ready to take thee to an eternal
prison; Below is horror, hell opening its mouth to swallow thee up in those
flames; and within thee is the greatest horror, there is the gnawing worm
which never dies; Think then of sin, look upon thy lusts, as thou would
then at that Day; Would I do as I do, if I were at Gods Tribunal, if I were
arraigned at that dreadful Day?

Thirdly, It is a wonderful Day, a Day wherein there are nothing but miracles
upon miracles, and wonders upon wonders: Insomuch that we need a divine faith
in this Article, as well as in any other, Prorsus incredibile quia impossible,
as Tertullian of Christ's Incarnation; The Scripture tells us, such a Day will
be, and we must not be curious Quomodists, saying, Quomodo, How can it be?
There is a Quomodo essentiale, and a Quomodo accidentale in every main point of
Divinity; The essential Quomodo we are to enquire after, that is, Whether the
thing be or no? But for the accidental it is good to satisfy our selves with
that of Gregory, He that in Gods doings does not invenire rationem facti, may
easily in seipso invenire rationem cur non inveniat; yet let us instance in
some of those miracles at that wonderful Day; What a wonder is it that all the
persons, who ever were in the world, though their bodies have consumed so many
ways, yea eaten it may be by other creatures, yea it may be by some Cannibals
or savage men, yet all those very bodies rise again, and the same individual
persons appear before God? This corruptible, (says Paul) cutem tangens, as
Tertullian. This is so great a miracle, that the Philosophers derided it.
Another wonder is, that all the millions and infinite millions of persons
should be gathered into one place; As for those who say, it will be the valley
of Jehosaphat, with their conceits thereupon, we leave it as a curiosity. This
is wonderful, that all the persons which ever lived in all Ages (Infants not
excepted, for they must rise up to be judged) should all be convened together.
A third wonder is, Christ's audible voice to speak in the ears of all the world,
and in such a bodily manner to pronounce his Sentence of condemnation: Some
indeed have thought there will be no audible pronunciation by Christ, but that
shall only be mental in every man's conscience; but we must not depart from the
Letter of the Scripture, unless necessity compel; As for the Dispute about the
Trump, whether it be a material one, as also the fire, yea and hell it self be
a place and material, these are here impertinent. Lastly, what a wonder is
this, that upon the pronunciation of departing to hell, every one shall obey,
the conscience of every one shall yield to it, that they cannot withstand the
sentence of God? you would think they would rather be torn in pieces, then
depart into fire, but they must do it.

Fourthly, It is an uncertain Day in respect of our knowledge, though certain
that it shall be; that this Day and hour cannot be known by any man, is plain
from what our Savior speaks, who says, Neither men, nor Angels, nor the Son
of man, as man, knows it: Therefore the opinion of some is very absurd, who
have concluded the time of this Day may be known, but the event has to some
proved their opinion a lie. In the Apostles days, some pretended Revelations
from the Spirit about the Day, and in these later days, some deluded persons
have in some places run up and down, making an horrid and doleful noise,
crying out, Repent, Repent, because the Day of Judgment is come; Yea, some
vain and ridiculous Astrologers, who use to foretell other men's conditions, and
yet never know what shall befall themselves, as they have thoughts that Noah's
flood, and Christ's birth might have been foretold by the Stars, Nay some have
blasphemously said, That Christ wrought such miracles, because he was born
under such a Constellation: So these do conclude, that by the Stars we may know
the time of the Day of Judgment; but the Scripture compares it to a Thief
coming in the night, and to a snare for the bird, it will come upon all
unexpected and unlooked for. It is true, many sober Divines, though they say
the time cannot exactly be determined, yet think it is not far off, yea from
this year and forwards, they look for mighty alterations in the world; so that
they think it not improbable, that some now living may not die till these
things be. But these seem only conjectures, Let us content our selves with
this, that it is certain, and the time uncertain, that we should not have oil
to provide for, when the Bridegroom is come, that we should not cry out with
him, Inducias usque ad mane, Let me alone longer, I am not yet ready for that
Day.

The Doctrinals thus dispatched, let us proceed to the practicals; for if any
Article in Religion has that blessing upon it, Increase and multiply, I know
none more useful and profitable then this. And

The first Use shall be of Exhortation in general to all. God commands every
one to Repent, in that he has appointed a Day wherein he will judge the world.
I shall not encounter with those Heterodox opinionists, who think it is too
legal, and not becoming a Gospel Ministry to preach of this dreadful subject,
as if these Arguments did not belong to an Evangelical spirit, for Christ was
then a Legal preacher, and Paul, who does so often treat on this subject.
Indeed we may see the goodness and love of God in this, that he does threaten
with Hell, with the Day of Judgment; For why does he thus foretell about it,
but to have thee provide for it? Once he set a flaming Sword in anger to keep
Adam out of Paradise, but now he lifts up this fiery Sword in mercy to keep
thee out of hell, he threatens thee with the Day of Judgment, that it may be a
Day of Redemption to thee; How inexcusable then art thou (oh sinful man) who
believe such a Day, and yet do not repent before it be too late? What
pleasure or sweetness will thou then find in thy lusts, when thou shall say
with Jonathan, I have tasted a little honey, and I must die, I have had a
little pleasure of sin, and now I must for ever be damned? NebuchadneZZar
erected a golden Image with this terrible Commination, That whosoever would not
fall down and worship it, should be cast into the fiery furnace. Now this was
so terrible to every one, that unless it were three or four, there were none
that did resist, the fear of a fiery furnace made them do any thing: Shall not
then the fear of those eternal flames, the fear of this Day, wherein God will
reveal all wrath without any mercy to the wicked man, Shall not this turn thee
out of thy ways? Shall not this make thee with bitterness bewail thy former
lusts? Descendamus in infernum viventes, ne descendamus morientes, Be not so
enslaved to the Devil, as to say, Give me my pleasures, my profits to day,
though to morrow I be in the grave, I be in hell. (...), was a wicked speech in
Chrysostom's time, which he zealously inveighed against; yet is it not still
the voice of every profane man, Give me that which is sweet or pleasant,
though it choke me? But more (particularly) because of this Day of Judgment,
take heed in these respects:

1. Beware of living in secret sins, secret uncleanness, secret lying, bribing,
or unjust ways, for this will be the eminent work of the Day of Judgment, to
bring all secret things to light; The Day of Judgment is Judicare male
judicata, and non judicata, those sins which for the secretness the Magistrate
cannot judge, at the Day of Judgment will then be most eminently and signally
judged by God: That will be the Day when those sins, which no neighbor, no
wife, no friend in the world knows, shall be discovered and judged; Whatsoever
is said, or done, in secret, shall be preached upon the housetop. Whoremongers
and adulterers God will judge. Why will God judge them? Because such sins are
so secretly committed, that the Magistrate cannot punish them. Flatter not thy
self with secretness, seeing there will be a Day of Judgment, but live so
uprightly and sincerely, that if thou had Gyges ring, which they fable would
make a man invisible, yet thou would with Joseph say, How can I do this and
sin against God? The more craft, subtilty and secrecy there is in a sin,
the greater is thy wickedness, as appears Joshua 7.9. That wedge of gold was
a tongue indeed, as the word signifies. Sometimes even in this life, God
judges secret sins to make them confess them, and bring them to light, how
much rather at that great Day. Prove. 5.14.

2. Because of this Day of Judgment, take heed of accounting any sins little,
as if they were venial, for at this great Day, even those shall be judged, as
well as the greatest, Matthew. 12.36. We must give an account of every idle word
at the Day of Judgment. It is true, Some learned men, because of the Context,
do positively determine, That the idle word is no less than the sin against the
holy Ghost; but more probably our Savior argues from the less to the greater:
If of an idle word a man shall give account, how much more of that blasphemy
against the holy Ghost? Do not then charge men as too strict or precise, when
they endeavor to abstain from idle thoughts and idle words, that they dare not
give themselves that license which others take, for these are indictable as
well as great sins; an idle word will damn thee as well as sinful actions, if
not repented of; For what are the apostate Angels adjudged to eternal torments,
and reserved in those chains of darkness? Was it for any more than proud
thoughts, and the very first also? There cannot be any little sin, no more
than a little God, or a little hell, or a little damnation, in some sense;
Futurum Judicium est, and ^^ucides, said a devout Ancient, to one whom he saw
laughing; If a man should have no other sin, but an idle word, or an idle
thought, yet at the Day of Judgment this would eternally cast him, for this
needs the blood of Christ to wash it away, as well as other sins: But woe, and
a thousand times woe to us, because of this Day; For what are all our Feastings?
What are all our meals, but so many idle words? What are all our meetings, our
companyings together, but so many idle words?

3. Because of this Day of Judgment, therefore in a particular manner take
heed of sins of omission; Do not bless thy self with a privative Righteousness,
Lord, I bless thee I am no drunkard, no extortioner, nor like this Publican; It
is not a Negative, but a Positive Holiness which this Day will enquire after.
Thus you may read of that solemn process at the Day of Judgment, Ma^th.
25.42, 43. I was in prison, and ye visited me not, etc. all is for omission;
It Is not for sins committed, you robbed me, defrauded me, you persecuted me,
you put me into prison, but the omission of what they should have done, was
that which did condemn them. Now how dreadful will the Day of Judgment be,
even in this respect to most men? How little do they consider their Negative,
their Privative sins? thou comfortest thy self, because thou art none of the
gross positive sinners in the world; but what confusion will fall upon thee,
when God shall enquire about thy omissions? Thou do not curse or swear, but
thou prayest not, thou call not upon God privately, or in thy Family, thou
do not oppose all such who are maliciously set against those who fear God,
thou art but a mere Negative Christian, thou do not reprove sin, thou do
not punish sin, thou art not zealous for the holy ways of God: Oh consider,
this not doing will damn thee, as well as sinful doing, and in this God will
make special enquiry; How many Talents has God given thee, and thou have not
improved them? How many blessed advantages for good have been vouchsaft, and
thou have omitted them? as Divines say, Plures sunt gratiae privativae, quam
positivae, so Plura sunt peceata privativa quam positiva.

4. Because there is a Day of Judgment, take heed of Hypocrisy, of carnal and
corrupt Ends in the professing of Christ's way, for that Day will especially
bring the Jehues, and the Judasses to light, who though they may for a season
do the will of God, yet because not for Gods sake, not upon pure and righteous
motives, therefore the great work of that Day will be to unmask such, and make
them naked, 2 Cor. 5.9, 10. This made Paul walk with such integrity, not
seeking himself in the Ministry of the Word, because we must all appear before
the Judgment seat of Christ, (...), we must be thoroughly made manifest and
transparent; Now it is hardly known who is an hypocrite, and who is sincere,
who is truly for God, and who in pretense only, who is (...), and who is (...),
but then the counsels and thoughts of the heart will be disclosed. That is
remarkable, 1 Cor. 4.5. Paul did not matter other men's judgments, yea he did
not judge himself, because the Day of Judgment will find out more evil, more
hypocrisy, more sinfulness than ever we thought of. Isa. 3^.14. The hypocrites
are surprised with fearfulness, Who among us shall dwell with devouring fire? A
man that is carried by false motives in Religion, has hell heated seven times
hotter for him; Hence the expression for an heavy damnation, is to have a
portion with the hypocrites, Matthew. 24.51. It was the speech of that famous
Orator for the Heathens, Symachus, pleading for the Liberty of the Heathenish
Idolatry, when urged to become a Christian, in a scoffing manner, Fac me
Episcopum Romanum, and ero Christianus, Are not many too real, what this
Heathen was in pretense? Help me to profit, to preferment, and I will turn
religious; but pray thou for truth in the inward parts.

5. Lastly, Let the thoughts of this Day moderate thy appetite to the great
things of this world, to wealth, honors, places of trust and charge, for as
these things do increase, so their account will be greater at that Day: Oh that
I had never been a Magistrate, will one say! Oh that I had never been a
Minister, will another say! We shall be then as ready to shake off those
burdens, as now we are to put them on. Let this therefore satisfy thee, if I
have less, my account will be less at that great Day.

FINIS.

