A FEW Sighs from Hell, OR, The Groans of a damned Soul.

OR, An Exposition of those Words in the sixteenth of Luke, Concerning the Rich
Man and the Beggar: Wherein is discovered the Lamentable State of the damned:
their cries, their desires in their distresses, with the determination of God
upon them. A good warning Word to Sinners, both Old and Young, to take into
Consideration betimes, and to seek by Faith in Jesus Christ to avoid, lest they
come into the same place of torment.

ALSO A brief Discourse touching the profitableness of the Scriptures for our
Instruction in the way of Righteousness, according to the tendancy of the said
Parable.

By that Poor and Contemptible Servant of Jesus Christ, JOHN BUNYAN.

The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God,
Psalm. 9.17. And whosoever was not found written in the book of life, was cast
into the lake of fire, Revel. 20.15. London, Printed by Ralph Wood, for M.
Wright, at the Kings Head in the Old Bailey, 1658.

To the Reader.
IT is sad to see how the most of men neglect their precious souls, turning
their backs upon the glorious Gospel, and little minding a crucified Jesus,
when in the mean while their bodies are well provided for, their estates much
regarded, and the things of this present life are highly prized; as if the
darling was of less value then a clod of earth, an immortal soul then a
perishing body, a precious Savior then unsatisfying creatures: Yea, though they
have been often wooed with gracious entreaties, glorious promises, and fresh
bleeding wounds to make choice of the better part, that shall never be taken
from them, yet alas such influence has this world and the pleasures of it, and
such is the blindness of their understandings, that they continue still to hunt
after those things which cannot profit, nor be a help to them in the worst
hour; yea, that will prove no better then poison to their souls, and refuse
that would be (if embraced) their happiness here, and their glory hereafter:
such a strange stupidity has seized upon the hearts of men, that they will
venture the loss of their immortal souls for a few dying comforts; and will
expose themselves to endless misery, for a moments mirth, and short-lived
pleasures. But certainly a barn well fraught, a bag well filled, a back well
clothed, and a body well fed, will prove but poor comforts when men come to
dye, when death shall not only separate their souls from their bodies, but
both from their comforts. What will it then avail them that they have gained
much? Or what will they give in exchange for their souls? Be wise then (O
Reader, to whose sight this may come) before it be too late, and thou repent,
when repentance shall be hid from thine eyes; else it will be as a dagger to
thine heart one day, to remember what a Christ, what a soul, what a heaven thou
have lost, for a few pleasures, a little mirth, a short enjoyment of this
present world; yea, and that after many warnings, against many reproofs, and
notwithstanding the many tenders of a full Christ, instead of those empty
vanities, which thy soul closed with, hunted after, and would by no means be
persuaded to part withal. No, but thou would take thy time, and swim in
this worlds delights, though thy soul thereby was drowned in perdition and
destruction, 1 Timothy 6.9. True, few there are that will be persuaded, that this
course they take, though their daily conversations do bear witness to it: for
how much time is spent, and how much care is the hearts of men filled withal,
after attaining, keeping, and increasing these things? And how seldom do they
trouble their heads, to have their minds taken up with thoughts of the better?
Cumbring themselves with many things, but wholly neglecting the one thing
necessary; yea, whereby do they measure their own or other men's happiness, but
by the large incomes of this worlds good, accounting this the greatest, if not
the only blessedness, to have their corn, wine and oil increase in abundance,
and reckoning those that are most serious about, and earnest after the world to
come, men of foolish spirits, giddy brains, and worthy to be branded in the
forehead for simple deluded ones. But surely he is the most fool that will be
one at last, and he that God calls so ( Luke 12.20.) will pass for one in the
end: yea, within a short time they themselves shall change their notes. Ask the
rich man spoken of in the ensuing Treatise, who was the fool? he, or Lazarus?
and he will soon resolve the question, that he now sees, and by woeful
experience finds, (whatsoever his former thoughts were) that he, not Lazarus
was the silly deluded one, for he, fool like, preferred the worse things before
the better, and refused that which once might have been had, but now he has
slipped the time, it cannot be gained; when this poor man (knowing the day of his
visitation) was making sure of that glory which he now enjoyes, and shall enjoy
for evermore. So that in this Parable (if I may so call it) thou shall find
that Scripture confirmed, That the triumphing of the wicked is short, Job 20.5.
Together with that, That the temptations (or afflictions) of the righteous,
which cause heaviness, are but for a season, 1 Pet. 1.6. And in this treatise
both of those are largely opened and explained. Behold here a rich man clothed
in silks, fed with delicates, and faring deliciously every day: but look a
little further, and so, this man clothed with vengeance, roaring under
torments, and earnestly begging for a drop of water to cool his tongue, a sad
change. On the other hand here thou shall see a poor, but a gracious man, with
a pinched belly, naked back, and running soars, beging at the rich man's gate
for a morsel to feed his belly, a sad state, yet but short: for look again,
and behold this beggar gloriously carried (as in a Chariot of triumph by the
Angels into Abraham's bosom, shining in glory, clothed with beautiful
garments, and his soul sat down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the kingdom
of the Father; his rags are gone, his soars healed, and his soul filled with
joy unspeakable, and full of glory; the one carried not his costly fare, and
his gorgeous apparel with him into hell, nor the other his course diet, moldy
bread, filthy rags, and ulcerous body into heaven; but the happiness of the
one, and the misery of the other took their leaves at the grave; the worldly
man's portion was but for his life, and the godly man's afflictions lasted no
longer, For mark the perfect, and behold the upright, for the end of that man
is peace, but the end of the wicked shall be cut off, Psalm. 37.37, 38. His
present comforts, his future hopes, and his cursed soul together; yea, though
he lives many days, and rejoices in them all, yet the days of darkness will
overtake him, and his eye shall see no more good; in his life time he enjoyed
his good things, and at the hour of death legions of devils will beset him,
innumerable evils will befall him: and then shall he pay full dear for all the
pleasures of sin, that have carried away his heart from closing with, and
following the Lord in the day of his prosperity. Ungodly men, because they feel
no changes now, they fear none hereafter, but flatter themselves with dying as
the godly, though their life is consumed in wickedness, and their strength in
providing for, and satisfying the lusts of the flesh, but as it fared with
wicked Balaam, so shall it fare with these, and their vain hopes will prove a
feeding upon ashes through their deceived heart, that has turned them aside,
Isaiah 44.20. For they that sow to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap
corruption, Galat. 6.8. And they that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness, shall
reap the same, Job 4.8. Hosea 8.7. But they that sow to the Spirit, shall of
the Spirit reap life everlasting. Say ye then to the righteous, it shall go
well with him, however it goes with him now, a few days will produce a happy
change, It shall go well with him that fears the Lord, Eccles. 8.12. Go on
then (O soul) thou that have set thy face toward heaven though the east wind
beats upon thee, and thou find trouble and sorrow; these shall endure but for
a night, joy will undoubtedly come in the morning: besides those sweet visits
thou shall have from thy precious Savior in this thy day of darkness, wait but
a while, and thy darkness shall be turned into light. When the light of the
wicked shall be put out, and the spark of his fire (wherewith he warmed
himself) shall not shine, Job 18.5. Grudge not to see the wicked prosper, and
their steps washed with butter, but rather put on bowels of mercy, and pity,
as the elect of God, knowing that they are set in slippery places, Psalm. 73.18.
And their day is coming, when fearful horror shall suprize them, and hell be
opened to receive them: nor yet be disquieted in thy mind, that troubles and
afflictions do beset thee round: for as a worser thing is reserved for them, so
a better is prepared for thee. Do they drink wine in bowls? and do thou
mingle thy tears with thy drink? Do they live in pleasures, and spend their
days in wealth? and do thou sigh and mourn in secret? Well, there is a cup
for them in the hand of the Lord, the wine whereof is red, and full of mixture,
which they must drink up the dregs, Psalm. 75.8. And the Lord has a bottle for
thy tears; Psalm. 56.8. And a book for thy secret sighs, and ere long thy
brin^sh tears shall be turned into the sweetest wine, which thou shall drink new
in the kingdom of the Father, and thy secret sighs into glorious praises, when
thy mouth shall be filled with laughter, and thy eyes see the King in his glory.

Now considering that these lines may be brought to the sight, both of the one
sort and the other, I shall lay a few things before the thought of each, and
first to the worser sort.

First, consider what an ill bargain thou will make to sell thy precious soul
for a short continuance in thy sins and pleasures; if that man drives but an
ill trade, who to gain the world, should lose his soul, Matthew. 16.26. then
certainly thou a far worse, that sells thy soul for a very trifle. Oh, it is
pity that so precious a thing should be parted withal, to be made a prey for
the devouring lion, for that which is worse then nothing; if they were branded
for desperate wretches, that caused their children to pass through the fire to
Molech, surely thou much more that gives thy soul to devouring flames, to be
fuel for the everlasting fire, upon so easy terms; what meanest thou, O man,
to truck with the devils? Is there no better merchandise to trade in, then what
comes from hell, or out of the bowels of the earth? and to be had upon no lower
rates, then thy immortal soul? Yes, surely the merchandise of wisdom, which is
better then the merechandize of silver, and the gain thereof then fine gold,
Prove. 3.14. Prove. 8.19. is exposed to sale. Rev. 3.18. And to be had without
money or price; and if thou should part with any thing for it, it is such,
that it is better to part withal then to keep. The wise Merchant that sought a
goodly pearl, having found one, sold all that he had, not himself, not his
soul; and all that he sold was in it self not worth a farthing, and yet
obtained the Pearl, Mat. 13.45, 46. Paul made the like exchange when he threw
away his own righteousness, which was but rags, yea, filthy rags, Isaiah 64.6.
And put on the garment of salvation, and cast away to the dunghill that which
was once his gain, and won Christ, Phil. 3.8. Thou need not cast away thy
soul for puddle pleasures, behold the fountain of living water is set open, and
thou invited to it, to take and drink thy belly, thy soul full without price or
money, Isaiah 55.1.

2ly. Take a short (yet let it not be a slight) view of the best of the things
men prize so high, that for the love of, they lose their souls: what are they?
Even painted nothings, promising vanities, (like the apples of Sodom, fair to
the eye, but being touched, turn to dust: or like our Mother Eve's, that had a
beautiful look, but being tasted, brings forth death) which for the most part
have proved snares to the owners, and always miserable comforters at the
parting, they cannot satisfy in life; for the more of these things are had,
the more (with a disquieted spirit) are they reached after, and what comes in,
serves but to whet up the greedy unsatisfied appetite after more. The world
passes away, and the lust thereof, 1 John 2.17. Though most men content
themselves with these, yet it is not in these to satisfy them, and had they
but one glimpse of the world to come, one cranny of light to discern the riches
of Christ, and the least taste of the pleasures that are at the right hand of
God, Psalm. 16.11. They would be as little satisfied without a share in them, as
they are now with what of worldly things they enjoy: much less can they ease
from pain at death, clap a bag of gold (as one once did) to thy sinking spirit,
pained body, and tormented conscience, and it can neither cheer up the one, nor
appease the other, least of all can they deliver from, or yield comfort after
death; those cannot serve as a bribe to death, to pass thee by, nor yet bring
comfort to thy soul, when thou art gone: the rich fools large crop and great
increase, could not procure one nights respite, nor one moments comfort.
Besides, God regards them so little, that frequently he gives the largest share
of them, to whom he hates most, Psalm. 17.14. And the least to them who are the
excellent in the earth, in whom his soul delights, although he has made them
heirs of the Kingdom, Jam. 2.5. Yet does he bestow but a small portion of these
worldly things upon them, hereby declaring to all, how little he sets by those
things which most set so much by, and to draw up our hearts, minds and
affections to the things above: yea, His own Son that he appointed heir of all
things, Heb. 1.2. shall come forth neither of rich kindred, nor attended with
gallants, nor yet accoutred with the worlds glory, but in a low, mean, and
abject condition, at whose birth a manger received him, and through his life,
sorrows, wants, and sufferings did attend, and at the end a shameful death (in
the worlds esteem) befalls him, and by all this he shows his contempt of the
worldly man's darling. Cast not away thy soul then, O man, in seeking after,
solacing thy self in, and contenting thy self with this present world; for
though thou may make gold thy hope, and put thy confidence in thy wealth,
yet when this thy hope shall fail, and thy confidence slip from thee, (as sure
it will ere long) glad would thou be of the least drop of the water of life,
and the least filing of that precious gold, (that thou art now called upon to
drink of, and to buy for thy self) but alas they shall not be had, then: O then
what profit will thy treasures of wickedness yield thee! and whereto will thy
thick clay that thou have hoorded up, and thy carnal pleasures which thou have
drunk down, as the fish drinks down water: whereto I say will they serve,
unless to weigh thee the deeper into hell, and increase the fire, when it shall
be kindled upon thee.

Thirdly, look upon thy loss too, which is such, that ten thousand worlds
cannot repair thy soul, thy body, thy comforts, thy hopes, thy share in a
crucified Jesus, the crown of life, and everlasting Communion with the Father,
Son, and Spirit, blessed Angels, and glorified Saints, and a soul-satisfying,
soul-saving Christ, who came from the bosom of love, and gave himself to open
a way to everlasting glory, by the sacrifice of himself, to whom thou art
called, invited, and persuaded to come; whose heart is open, arms spread, and
who has room enough in his bosom to receive thee, grace enough to pardon
thee, blood enough to justify thee, treasures enough to enrich thee, pleasures
enough to delight thee, Psalm. 36.8. And glory enough to crown thee, In whom it
has pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell, Colos. 1.19. to
make them perfectly blessed that come to him; so that there is no need to seek
happiness among the creatures, which most do, and thereby lose true happiness,
and their souls too; turn in hither, and thou shall eat of his bread, and drink
of the wine which he has mingled, Prove. 9.4, 5. Would thou fare deliciously
every day, and have thy soul delight it self in fatness, Isa. 55.2. Hearken
diligently, and come to the wedding, the oxen and fatlings are killed, and all
things are ready, Mat. 22.5. I tell thee, whatsoever food thou feedest upon
else, will prove no better to thee, then the Prodigals husks, Luke 15.16. That
will starve thee whilst thou feedest on them; and if thou drinkest of other
wine, it will prove as a cup of wine mixed with poison, which though it be
pleasant to the taste, it will be the death of thy soul. Will thou then lose
this Christ, this food, this pleasure, this heaven, this happiness for a thing
of naught? Will thou drink out of a puddle, a broken Cistern, which leaks out
the water, and holds nothing but mud? and refuse the fountain of living water,
which whosoever tastes of, shall live for ever.

Fourthly, beware of persuading thy self into a conceit of the poor man's end,
if thou live the rich man's life, and dyest his death. It is strange to see
how many run swiftly the very way to hell, yet are full of confidence of going
to heaven, though Scripture every where shuts them out, and Christ at last will
certainly shut them out for ever hereafter, living and dying in their present
state; let none therefore deceive you, neither deceive your selves, for none
such can enter into the kingdom of heaven. But for these things sake comes the
wrath of God on the children of disobedience, 1 Cor. 6.9. Ephesians. 5.5, 6. And
how sad will thy disappointment be, that go on securely, fearing nothing,
being fully (yet falsely) persuaded of eternal life at last, and then drop down
into the bottomless pit? Like wicked Haman, that dreamed of greater honor, but
behold a gallows: or our mother Eve, who conceited to be as God, but became a
cursed creature. Though the devil may persuade thee thou may live as in hell
here, yet in heaven hereafter; believe him not, for he endeavors to keep thee
in his snares, that he may drag thee to hell with him; and the better to effect
his devilish design upon thee, he will present (and through his cursed subtlety
knows how to do it) thy sins and this world, in as lovely and taking a guise as
may be, but will hide the evil consequences from thine eyes, that thou might
be inveigled by gazing on the one, and not be afrighted by beholding the other;
his bait shall be pleasant, but his hook hid, like the strumpet in Proverbs 7.
That intices the simple with fair words, but conceals, that the way to her
house leads to the chambers of death; nothing appears but a bed richly
furnished, and a promise of solacing him with loves, but he that follows
after her, goes as an ox to the slaughter, and as a fool to the correction of
the stocks.

Fifthly, this is thy day to prevent the loss of the one, and to get an
interest in the other, this is the day of salvation, the accepted day of the
Lord, 2 Cor. 6.2. Let the sun of this day be set before this work be done, and
an everlasting night of darkness will close thee in, wherein thou thou shall
have time enough indeed to bemoan thy folly, but none to learn to grow wiser.
It is a sad thing (especially in soul concernments) to be wise too late, and to
cry out when time is past, Oh that I had improved it when it was present, then
will the Remembrance of thy former misspent time, and thy despair of ever
gaining more, be like poisoned arrows drinking up thy spirit. Amongst all the
talents God has entrusted man withal, this is not the least, because on it
depends eternity; and according to the use we make of this, will our eternal
condition be, though the most of men live at such a rate, as if it was given
them to no other end, then to waste in wickedness, and consume in pleasures,
what means else their spending days, weeks, months, years; yea, their whole
life in whoring, swearing, playing, coveting and fulfilling the lusts of the
flesh, so that when they come to die, the great work that they were sent to do,
is then to be done; their souls, Christ, eternity was scarce thought on before;
but now when merciless death begins to gripe them, then do they begin to
bethink themselves of those things which they should have got in readiness
before, and that is the reason why we so often hear many that lie upon their
death beds to cry out for a little longer time; and no wonder, for they have
the salvation of their souls to seek. Oh sad case! to have their work to do
when the night is come, and a Christ to seek when death has found them; take
therefore the counsel of the holy Ghost, Heb. 3.7. To day if you will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts. Mark, it is the Spirits counsel; true, the devil
and thine own heart will tell thee another tale, and be ready to whisper in
thine ears, thou may have time enough hereafter, what need of so much haste,
another day may serve as well; let thy soul be filled with pleasure a little
longer, and thy bags filled a little more; thou may have time for this and
that too. Oh but this is the suggestion of an enemy, that would cause thee to
defer so long, that thy heart may grow too hard, and thine ear too heavy to
hear at all, but certainly this being thy greatest business, challenges the
first and greatest care, Mat. 6.33. And let this be done, then if thou shall
either have so much time to spare, or a heart to do it, take thy time for the
other.

Sixthly, this day of thy mercy, and Christ's importunity will not last long, it
is but a day, and that a day of visitation: indeed it is rich grace that there
should be a day, but dally not, because it is but a day. Jerusalem had her day,
but because therein she did not know the things of her peace, a pitch night did
overtake, Luke 19.42.43. It is a day of patience, and if thou despisest the
riches of Gods goodness, patience and long-suffering toward thee, and art not
thereby lead to repentance, Romans 2.5. A short time will make it a day of
vengeance, though now Christ calls, because he is willing to save sinners, yet
he will not always call; see then that thou refuse not him that speaks from
heaven in this Gospel-day, Heb. 12.25. But seek him while he may be found, and
call upon him while he is near, Isa. 55.6. lest thou criest after him
hereafter, and he refuse thee. It is not crying Lord, Lord, when the day of
grace is past, that will procure the least crumb of mercy, Matthew. 7.21. No, if
thou come not when called, but stayest while supper is ended, thou shall not
taste thereof, Luke 14.24. though a bit would save thy life, thy soul; if thou
drinkest not of the fountain while it is opened, thou shall not when it is
shut, though thou beggest with tears of blood for one drop to cool thy
scoarching flaming heart; thou that might have had thy vessel full, and
welcome, shall not now have so much as will hang on the tip of a finger. Oh
remember the axe is laid to the root of the tree, Matthew. 3.10. And although
three years time may be granted, through the Vine-dressers importunity, that
will soon be expired, and then the axe that is now laid, shall cut up the tree
by its roots, if it bring not forth good fruit. See thou not? that many of
late have been snatched away, on each side of thee (by that hand that has been
stretched out, and is so still) and though thou may escape a while, yet have
thou no assurance that the destroying Angel will long pass by thy door: Oh
then, neglect thy soul no longer, but consider time is short, and uncertain,
eternity long, thy work great, thy soul immortal, this world vanishing, Christ
precious, hell hot, and heaven desirable.

And if thou be a Christian (to whom this may come) that have not only had
a price in thy hand, but wisdom given thee from above to make use of it, and
art one who (whilst others are seeking to make this world and hell together
sure to themselves) spendest thy time, and make it thy only business to make
sure of the one thing necessary, and heaven to thy soul, I shall lay two or
three things before thy thoughts.

First, walk with a fixed eye upon the world to come, Look not at the things
which are seen, that are temporal, but at the things which are not seen, that
are eternal, 2 Cor. 4.18. A Christians eye should be upon his journeys end, as
our Lord Jesus, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross,
Heb. 12.2. When the stones fled about Stephens ears, His eyes were lifted up to
heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God,
Acts 7.55, 56. What though thou at present may lie at the rich man's gates,
yet a few days will translate thee into Abraham's bosom. Though Israel had a
sharp voyage through the wilderness, yet Caleb and Joshua men of excellent
spirits, had their eye upon the good Land they were going to; though graceless
souls are too dull fighted to see a far off, 2 Pet. 1.9. yet thou that have
received the unction from above, do in some measure know what is the hope of
thy calling, and what is the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the
Saints.

Secondly, be satisfied with thy present condition, though it be afflictive,
for it shall not last always, thy sorrows shall be short, and thy joys long;
roll thy self upon the Lord, for there is a heaven will pay for all; Christ
first endured the cross, before he wore the crown. David before he was a King,
was a shepherd. The poor man spoken of in this ensuing Treatise, before he was
carried into heaven, had experiences of sorrow, and sufferings on earth, Let
the flesh be silent in passing judgment on the dispensations of God toward
thee, and the men of this world, in this present life. David by prying too far
herein, with his own wisdom, had almost caught a fall, Psalm. 73. Though Gods
judgments may be too deep for our reason to dive into, yet are they always
righteous, and his paths mercy and truth to those that keep his Covenants,
Psalm. 25.10. When Jeremiah would debate with the Lord concerning his judgments
in the wickeds prosperity, he would lay this down as an indubitable truth, that
his judgments were righteous, Jer. 12.1. And his end was not to charge God,
but to learn understanding of him in the way of his judgments; and although
the ways of his providence may be dark to his people, that they cannot discern
his footsteps, yet are they always consistent with his everlasting covenant,
and the results of the favor he bears to them, If the wicked flourish like the
grass, it is that they should be destroyed for ever, Psalm. 92.7. And if the
godly have many a wave beating upon them, yet will the Lord command his loving
kindness in the day time, Psalm. 42.7, 8. And after a little while being tossed
too and fro in these boisterous waves, they shall arrive at the heavenly haven,
this world being not their resting place, but there remains one for them, Heb.
4.9.

Thirdly, let the faith and hopes of a glorious deliverance, get thy heart up
above thy present sufferings, that thou may glory in tribulation, who have
ground of rejoicing in hope of the glory of God, Romans 5.2, 3. For whatsoever
thy present grievances are, whether outward afflictions, or inward temptations;
this may be thy consolation, that a few days will rid thee of them, when thou
shall sigh no more, complain no more, but these shall be turned into praises:
thou have (if I may so call it) all thy hell here, let thy life be expired, and
thy misery is ended; thy happiness begins, where wicked men's end; and when
thine is once begun, it shall have no more end.

Reader, I have an Advertisement to thee concerning the following Discourse,
and the Author of it. Thou have in the Discourse many things of choice
consideration presented to thee in much plainness, evidence, and authority, the
explications are full, the applications are natural; be not offended at his
plain and downright language, it is for the discharge of the Authors
conscience, and thy profit, besides the subject necessarily leads him to it. It
is a mercy to be dealt thoroughly and plainly with, in the matters of thy soul;
we have too many that sow pillows under men's elbows; and too few, who dealing
plainly, divide to every man his portion. Read it not to pick quarrels with it,
but to profit by it; and let not prejudice either against the Author, or
manner of delivery, cause thee to stumble and fall at the truth; prejudice will
both blind the eyes, that it shall not see the truth, and close it in with it,
and make them too quick sighted, either to make faults where there is none, or
to greaten them where they are; and so cause the Reader to turn the edge
against the Author, or his Work, that should be turned upon his own heart. It
is mavelous to see how the truth is quarrelled at, that comes from one, that
would be easily received if it did drop from another: and I doubt not, if this
Book had some other hand at it, there is scarce any expression that may be now
carpt at by some, but would have been swallowed without straining. We are now
fallen into such an age, (the good Lord help us) that truth upon its own
account, can challenge but little acceptance, except the Author be liked, or
his lines painted with his own wit. But certainly truth is of so excellent a
nature, of such singular advantage, and of so royal a descent, that it deserves
entertainment for it self, and that not in our houses, or heads only, but in
our hearts too, whatsoever the hand is that brings it, or the form that it
appears in; men account gold worth receiving, whatsoever the messenger is that
brings it, or the vessel that holds it.

If thou meetest (Reader) with any passage that seems doubtful unto thee, let
love that thinks no evil put the best construction upon it, and do not hastily
condemn, what thou can not presently yield to; or if any expression thou
meetest with, may (happily) offend thee, do not throw aside the whole, and
resolve to read of it no more; for though some one may offend thee, yet others
(I hope) may affect thee; or if there be that which some may call Tautology, be
not displeased at it; for that word that may not fasten upon thy heart in one
page, may in another; and although it may be grievous to thy eye, (if thou
be nice and curious) yet bear with it, if it may be profitable to thy soul.

Concerning the Author (whatsoever the censures and reports of many are) I
have this to say, That I verily believe God has counted him faithful, and put
him into the Ministry: and though his outward condition, and former employment
was m^an, and his hamane learning small, yet is he one that has acquaintance
with God, and taught by his Spirit, and has been used in his hand to do souls
good: for to my knowledge there are diverse, who have felt the power of the word
delivered by him; and I doubt not, but that many more may, if the Lord continue
him in his work; he is not like unto your drones, that will suck the sweet, but
do no work. For he has laid forth himself to the utmost of his strength,
taking all advantages to make known to others, what he himself has received of
God: and I fear this is one reason why the Archers have shot so soarly at him;
for by his, and others industry in their Masters work, their slothfulness has
been reproved, and the eyes of many have been opened to see a difference
between those that are sent of God, and those that run before they are sent.
And that he is none of those light fanatic spirits, that our age abounds
withal: this following discourse, together with his former, that have been
brought to public view will testify; for among other things that may bear
record to him herein, you shall find him magnifying and exalting the holy
Scriptures, and largely showing the worth, excelleny, and usefulness of them.

And surely if thou shall (notwithstanding this) stumble at his meanness and
want of humane learning, thou will declare thine unacquaintance with Gods
declared method, who to perfect his own praise, and to still the enemy and
avenger, Makes choice of Babes and Su^klings* and in their mouths ordains
strength, Psalm. 8.2. Though men that have a great design do, and must make use
of those that in reason are most likely to effect it, yet must the Lord do so
too? then instru^ents (not himself) would carry away the praise; but that no
flesh should glory in his presence, he has chosen the foolish things of the
world to confound the wife, and base things of the world, and things that are
despised has God chosen, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28, 29. Cast thine eye back to the
beginning of the Gospel dispensation, (which surely if at any time should have
come forth in the wisdom and glory of the world) and thou shall see what method
the Lord did take at the first to exalt his Son Jesus: he goes not amongst the
Jewish Rabbi's, nor to the schools of learning, to fetch out his Gospel
Preachers, but to the trades, and those most contemptible too; yet let not any
from hence conceive that I undervalue the gifts and graces of such who have
been, or now are endued with them, nor yet speak against Learnnig, being kept
in its place; but my meaning is, that those that are learned should not despise
those that are not; or those that are not, should not despise those that are,
who are faithful in the Lords work: and therefore being about to leave thee, I
shall leave with thee two Scriptures to be considered of. The one is, John
13.20. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that receives whomsoever I send,
(mark whomsoever) receives me; and he that receives me, receives him that
sent me. The other is, Luke 10.16. He that hears you, hears me; and he that
despisest you, despisest me; and he that despises me, despises him that sent
me.

I. G.

The Author to the READER.
FRiend, because it is a dangerous thing to be walking toward the place of
darkness and anguish: and again, because it is (notwithstanding) the journey
that most of the poor souls in the world are taking, and that with delight and
gladness, as if there was the only happiness to be found; I have therefore
thought it my duty (being made sensible of the danger that will befall those
that walk therein) for the preventing of thee, (O thou poor man or woman) to
tell thee, by opening this Parable, what sad success those souls have had, and
are also like to have, that have been or shall be found persevering therein.

We use to count him a friend that will forewarn his neighbor of the danger,
when he knows thereof, and does also see, that the way that his his neighbor
is walking in, does lead right thereto; especially when we think that our
neighbor may be either ignorant, or careless of his way. Why Friend it may
be, nay twenty to one but thou have been ever since thou did come into the
world, with thy back toward heaven, and thy face toward hell; and thou (it
may be) either through ignorance, or carelessness (which is as bad, if not
worse) have been running full hastily that way ever since. Why Friend? I
beseech thee put a little s^op to thy earnest race, and t^ke a view of what
entertainment thou art like to have, if thou do indeed and in truth persist in
this thy course. Friend, ^hy way leads down to death, and thy steps take hold
on hell. Prove 5.5.
It may be the path indeed is pleasant to the flesh, but the end thereof will
be bitter to thy soul. Hark, do thou hear the bitter cries of them that are
but newly gone before? saying, Let him dip the tip of his finger in water, and
cool my tongue, that is so tormented in this flame: Luke 16.
Do thou not hear them say, Send one from the dead to prevent my father, my
brother, and my fathers house from coming into this place of torment? Shall
not then these mournful groans pierce thy flinty heart? Will thou stop thine
ears, and shut thy eyes, and will thou not regard, take warning, and stop thy
journey before it be too late? Will thou be like the silly fly, that is not
quiet, unl^ss she be either entangled in the spiders web, or burned in the
candle? Will thou be like the bird that hastes to the s^are of the Fowler?
Will thou he like that simple one named in the 7. of Proverbs, That wilt be
drawn to the slaughter by the cord of a silly lust? O sinner, sinner, there is
better things then hell to be had, and at a cheaper rate by the thousand part
then that! (O there is no comparison) there is heaven, the^e is God, there is
Christ, there is communion with innumerable company of Saints and Angels: hear
the message then that God does send, that Christ does send, that Saints do
bring; nay, that the dead do send unto thee. How long ye simple ones, will you
love simplicity? and ye scorners delight in scorning, and ye fools hate
knowledge? Turn you at my reproof, and behold, I will pour out my Spirit unto
you, I will make known my words unto you. I say, hear this voice, O silly one,
and turn and live thou sinful soul, lest he make thee hear that other saying:
But, because I have called, and you have refused, I have stretched out my hand,
and no man regarded, I also will laugh at your calamity, and mock when your
fear comes.

O poor soul, if God and Christ did wish thee for thine harm, it would be
another matter: then if thou did refuse, thou might have some excuse to
make, some fault to find, and some ground to make delays. O but this is for
thy profit, for thy advantage, for the pardoning of thy sins, the salvation of
thy soul, the delivering of thee from hell fire, from the wrath to come, from
everlasting burnings, into favor with God, Christ, and communion with all
happiness, (that is so indeed.)

But it may be thou will say, all that has been spoken to in this discourse,
is but a Parable, and Parables are no realities.

I could put thee off with this answer, that though it be a Parable, yet it is
a truth, and not a lie, and thou shall find it so too, to thy cost, if thou
shall be found a slighter of God, Christ, and the salvation of thy own soul.

But secondly, know for certain, that the things signified by Parables, are
wonderful realities. O what a glorious reality was there signified by that
Parable! The kingdom of heaven is like to a net that is cast into the sea, etc.
Signifying, that sinners of all sorts, of all Nations, should be brought into
Gods kingdom, by the net of the Gospel. And O how real a thing shall the other
part thereof be, when its fulfilled, which says, And when it was full, they
drew it to shore, and put the good into vessels, but threw the bad away;
signifying the mansions of glory that the Saints should have, and also the
rejection that God will give to the ungodly, and to sinners. And also that
Parable, what a glorious reality is there in it, which says, Except a corn of
wheat fall to the ground and die, it abides alone; but if it die, it does
bring forth much fruit. To signify, that unless Jesus Christ did indeed spill
his blood, and die the cursed death, he should abide alone; that is, have never
a soul into glory with him; but if he died, he should bring forth much fruit,
that is, save many sinners. And also how real a truth there was in that
Parable, concerning the Jews putting of Christ to death, which the poor
dispersed Jews can best experience to their cost; for they have been almost
ever since a banished people, and such as have had Gods sore displeasure
wonderfully manifested against them, according to the truth of the Parable.
Mat. 21. v. 33. to 41
O therefore for Jesus Christ's sake, do not sl^ght the truth, because it is
discovered in a Parable; for by this argument thou may also, nay thou will
slight almost all the things that our Lord Jesus Christ did speak; for he spoke
them for the most part (if not all) in parable. Why should it be said of thee,
as it is said of some, These things are spoken to them that are without in
parables, that seeing they might not see, and that hearing they might not
understand Luke 8.10. I say, take heed of being a quarreller against Christ
parables, lest Christ also objecteth against the salvation of thy soul at the
judgment day.

Friend, I have no more to say to thee now, it may be shortly thou may hear
from me again, in a discourse touching the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant
of Grace; it had been with thee now, had opportunity been afforded me; but
being busy here and there among the saints and sinners (though I can do but
little good) I have not had that conveniencie nor leisure, that I could wish I
had, to present it in right form for truth and edification to thee. Now if thou
do love me, pray for me, that my God would not forsake me, nor take his holy
Spirit from me; and that God would fit me to do and suffer, what shall be from
the world or devil inflicted upon me. I must tell thee, the world rages, they
stamp and shake their heads, and fain they would be doing: the Lord help me to
take all they shall do with patience, and when they smite the one cheek, to
turn the other to them, that I may do as Christ has bidden me; for then the
Spirit of God, and of glory shall rest upon me. Farewell.

I am thine, if thou be not ashamed to own me, because of my low and
contemptible descent in the world. John Bunyan.

A FEW Sighs from Hell: OR, The Groans of a damned Soul: OR, An Exposition of
those words in the 19th. of Luke, ver. 19. etc.
19 THere was a certain rich man, which was clothed in purple, and fine
linen, and fared sumptuously every day. 20 And there was a certain beggar,
named Lazarus, which was laid at his gate full of fores; 21 And desiring to be
fed with the the crumbs, which f^ll from the rich man's tabl^: moreover the dogs
came and licked his sores. 22 And it came to pass, that the beggar died, and
was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom: the rich man also dyed, and was
buried. 23 And in hell he lift up his eyes, being in torments, and sees
Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom: 24 And he cried, and said, Father
Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his
finger in water, and cool my tongue; for I am tormented in this flame. 25 But
Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good
things, and likewise Lazarus evil things, but now he is comforted, and thou
art tormented. 26 And besides all this, between us and you there is a great
gulf fixed, so that they which would pass from hence to you, cannot: neither
can they pass to us, that would come from thence. 27 Then he said, I pray thee
therefore father, that thou would send him to my fathers house. 28 For I
have five Brethren, that he may testify unto them, lest they also come into
this place of torment. 29 Abraham says unto him, They have Moses and the
Prophets, let them hear them. 30 And he said, Nay, father Abraham: but if one
went unto them from the dead, they will repent. 31 And he said unto him, If
they hear not Moses and the Propets, neither will ^hey be persuaded, though one
rose from the dead.
THis Scripture was not spoken by our Lord Jesus Christ, Verse 19.
to show you the state of two single persons only, (as some through their
ignorance of the drift of Christ in his Parables do dream) but to show you the
state of the godly and ungodly to the worlds end; as is clear to him that is of
an understanding heart. For he spoke them to the end, that after generations
should take notice thereof, and fear, lest they also fell into the same
condition.

Now in my discourse upon these words, I shall not be tedious, but as briefly
as I may, I shall pass through the several Verses, and lay you down some of the
several truths contained therein: and the Lord grant that they may be
profitable, and of great advantage to those that read them, or hear them read.

The 19 and 20 verses also, I shall not spend much time upon, only give you
three or four short hints, and so pass to the next verses; for they are the
words I do intend most especially to insist upon.

The 19, 20, and 21, verses run thus, There was a certain rich man, which was
clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared deliciously or sumptuously every
day. And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus, which was laid at his gate
full of sores, etc.

1. If these verses had been spoken by Jesus Christ, and no more, all the world
would have gone near to have cast a wrong interpretation on them. I say, if
Jesus had said only thus much, There was a certain rich man that fared
sumptuously daily, and a certain beggar laid at his gate full of sores. The
world would have made this conclusion of them, the rich man was the happy man.
For at the first view it does represent such a thing. But take all together,
(that is) read the whole Parable, and you shall find, that there is no man in
a worse condition then he, as I shall clearly hold forth afterward.

2. Again, if a man would judge of men according to outward appearance, he
shall oft-times take his mark amiss. Here is a man to outward appearance,
appears the only blessed man; better by half then the beggar, in as much as he
is rich, the beggar poor; he is well clothed, but peradventure the beggar is
naked; he has good food, but the beggar would be glad of dogs meat; (And he
desired to be fed with the crumbs that fell from the rich man's table) the rich
man fares well every day, but the beggar must be glad of a bit when he can g^t
it. Oh! who would not be in the rich man's state? A wealthy man, sorts of new
suits, and dainty dishes every day: enough to make one, who minds nothing but
his belly, and his back, and his lusts, to say, Oh, that I were in that man's
condition! Oh that I had about me as that man had! Then I should live a life
indeed; then should I have hearts ease good store; then I should live
pleasantly, and might say to my soul, Soul, be of good cheer, eat, drink and be
merry, thou have every thing plenty, and art in most blessed condition.

I say this might be, I, and is the conclusion with them that judg^ according
to outward app^arance. But if the whole Parable be well considered, you will
see, that that which is had in high estimation with men, is an abomination in
the sight of God. And again, that condition that is the saddest condition,
according to outward appearance, is often times the most excellent; for the
beggar had t^n thousand degrees the best of it, though to outward appearance
his state was the saddest; from we shall observe thus much.

1 That those who judge according to outward appearance, do for the most part
judge amiss.

2. That they who look upon their outward enjoyments to be tokens of Gods
special grace unto them, are also deceived; for as it is here in the Parable, a
man of wealth, and a child of the devil may make but one person; or thus, a
man may have abundance of outward enjoyments, and yet be carried by the devils
into eternal burnings. But this is the trap, in which the devil has caught
many thousands of poor souls, namely, by getting them to judge according to
outward appearance.

Do but ask a poor carnal covetous wretch, how we should know a man to be in a
happy estate, and he will answer, Those that God blesses, and gives abundance
of this world unto; when for the most part they are they that are the the
cursed men. Alas poor men, they are so ignorant, as to think, that because a
man is increased in outward things, and that by a small stock, therefore God
does love that man with a special love, or else he would never do so much for
him, never bless him so, and prosper the work of his hands. Ah! poor soul, it
is the rich man that goes to hell. And the rich man died, and in hell, mark, in
hell he lift up his eyes, etc.

Methinks to see how the great ones of the world will go strutting up and down
the streets sometimes, it makes me wonder. Surely, they look upon themselves to
be the only happy men, but it is because they judge according to outward
appearance; they look upon themselves to be the only blessed men when the Lord
knows, the generality are left out of that blessed condition. Not many wise men
after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called, 1 Cor. 1.26. Ah!
did they that do now so brag, that no body dare scarce look on them, but
believe this, it would make them hang down their heads, and cry, O give me a
Lazarus portion.

I might here enlarge very much, but I shall not* only thus much I shall say
to you that have much of this world; Have a care that you have not your portion
in this world; take heed that it be not said to you hereafter, when you would
very willingly have heaven. Remember in your life time you had your good
things, in your life time you had your por^^on Psalm 17.14.

And Friend, thou that seek after this world, and desire riches, let me
ask this question, would thou be content that God should put thee off with a
portion in this life? Would thou be glad to be kept out of heaven with a
back well clothed, and a belly well filled with the dainties of this world?
Would thou be glad to have all thy good things in thy life time, to have thy
heaven to last no longer then while thou do live in this world? Would thou
be willing to be deprived of eternal happiness and felicity? If you say, no,
then have a care of the world and thy sins; have a care of desiring to be a
rich man, lest thy table be made a snare unto thee; lest the wealth in this
world do bar thee out of glory. For as the Apostle says, They that w^ll be
rich do fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful
lusts, which drown men in perdition and destruction, 1 Timothy 6.9. Thus much in
general, but now more particularly.

These two men here spoken of (as I said) do hold forth to us the state of the
godly and ungodly: the beggar holds forth the godly, and the rich man the
ungodly. There was a certain rich man. etc.

But ^hy are the ungodly held forth under the notion of a rich man?

1. Because Christ would no have them look too high, as I said before, but that
those who have riches should have a care, that they be not all their portion,

2. Because rich men are most liable to the devils temptations, are most ready
to be puffed up with pride, stoutness, cares of this world, in which things they
spend most of their time, in lusts, drunkenness, wantonness, idleness, together
with the other works of the flesh, For which things sake the wrath of God
comith upon the children of disobedience, Col. 3.6.

3. Because he would comfort the hearts of his own which are most commonly of
the poorer sort, But God has chosen the poor* despised and base things of this
world, 1 Cor. 1.26. Should God have set the ^ich man in the blessed state, his
children would have concluded being poor, that they had no share in the life to
come.

And again, had not God given such a discovery of the sad condition of those
that are for the most part rich men; we should have had men conclude
absolutely, that the rich are the blessed men. Nay, albeit the Lord himself
does so evidently declare, that the rich ones of the world are for the most
part in the saddest condition, yet they through unbelief, or else presumption,
do harden themselves, and seek for the glory of this world, as though the Lord
Jesus Christ did not mean as he said; or else that he will say more then shall
assuredly come to pass: but let them know, that the Lord has a time to fulfill
that he had a time to declare, for the Scripture cannot be b^oken.

But again, the Lord by this word does not mean those are ungodly, who a^e rich
in the world, and no other, for then must all those that are poor, yet
graceless and vain men be saved, and delivered from eternal vengeance; which w
uld be contrary to the word of God, which says, That together with the kings
of the earth, and the great men, and the chief captains, and the mighty men,
there are bondmen or servants, and slaves that cry out at the appearance of
the Almighty God, and his Son Jesus Christ to Judgment, Rev. 6.15.

So that though Christ does say, There was a certain rich man, yet you must
understand he means all the ungodly, ri^^ or poor. Nay, if you will not
understand it so now, you shall be made to understand it to be so meant, at the
day of Christ's second coming, when all that are ungodly shall stand at the
left hand of Christ with pale faces and guilty consciences, with the vials of
the Almighties wrath, ready to be powered out upon them. Thus much in brief,
touching the 19. verse. I might have observed other things from it, but now I
forbear, having other things to speak of at this time.

Verse 20. And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus which was laid at his
gate full of sores.
Verse 20.
THis verse does chiefly hold forth these things. 1. That the Saints of God are
a poor contemptible people. There was a certain beggar. If you understand the
word beggar, to hold forth outward poverty, or scarcity in outward things, the
Saints of the Lord, for they are for the most part a poor, despised,
contemptible people. But if you allegorize it, and interpret it ^^us, They are
such as beg earnestly for heavenly food; this is also the spirit of the
Children of God, and it may be, and is a truth in this sense, though not so
naturally gathered from this Scripture.

2. That he was laid at his gate full of sores.] These words hold forth the
distempers of believers, saying, He was full of sores; which may signify the
many troubles, temptations, persecutions, and afflictions in body and spirit,
which they meet withal while they are in the world; but also the entertainment
they find at the hands of those ungodly ones, who live upon the earth. Whereas
it is said, He was laid at his gate full of sores. Mark, He was laid at his
gate, not in his house, that was thought too good for him, But he was laid at
his gate full of sores. From whence observe, That the ungodly world do not
desire to entertain and receive the poor Saints of God into their houses. If
they must needs be somewhere near unto them, yet they shall not come into their
houses: shut them out of doors, if they will needs be near us, let them be at
the gate. And he was laid at the gate full of sores. 2. Observe, that the world
are not at all touched with the afflictions of Gods children, for all they are
full of sores; a despised, afflicted, tempted, persecuted people, the world
does not pity; no, but rather labor to aggravate their trouble, by shutting
them out of doors; sink, or swim, what cares the world, they are resolved to
disown them, they will give them no entertainment; if the lying in the streets
will do them any good; if hard usage will do them any good; if to be disowned,
rejected, and shut out of doors by the world will do them any good: they shall
have enough of that, but otherwise no refreshment, no comfort from the world.
And he was laid at his gate full of sores.

Verse 21. Verse 21.
And desiring to be fed with the crumbs which fell from the rich man's table:
the dogs came also, and licked his sores.
BY these words our Lord Jesus does show us the frame of a Christians heart,
and also the heart and carriage of worldly men toward the Saints of the Lord:
the Christians heart is held forth by this, that any thing will content him
while he is on this side glory. And he desired to be fed with the crumbs, the
dogs meat, any thing. I say a Christian will be content with any thing, if he
have but to keep life and soul together. (as we use to say.) He is content, he
is satisfied, he has learned, if he has learned to be a Christian, to be
content with any thing, as Paul says, Phil. 4.21.
I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content. He learns in
all conditions to study to love God, to walk with God, to give up himself to
God; and if the crumbs that fall from a rich man's table will but satisfy
nature, and give him bodily strength, that thereby he may be the more able to
walk in the way of God: he is contented. And he desired to be fed with the
crumbs that fell from the rich man's table. But mark, he had them not, you do
not find that he had so much as a crumb or a scrap allowed unto him. No, then
the dogs will be beguild, that must be preserved for the dogs. From whence
observe, that the ungodly world do love their dogs better then the children of
God. You will say that is strange. It is so indeed, yet it is true, as will be
clearly manifested, as for instance. How many pounds do some men spend in a
year on their dogs, when in the mean while the poor Saints of God may starve
for hunger. They will build houses for their dogs, when the Saints must be glad
to wander, and lodge in dens and caves of the earth: and if they be in any of
their houses for the hire there^f, they will warn them out, or eject them, or
pull down the house over their heads, rather then not rid themselves of such
Tenants. Again, some men cannot go half a mile from home, but they must have
their dogs at their heels; but they can very willingly go half a score miles
without the society of a Christian Nay, if when they are busy with their dogs
they should chance to meet a Christian, they would willingly shift him if they
could. They will go on the other side of the hedge or the way, rather then they
will have any society with him; and if at any time a child of God should come
into an house where there are but two or three ungodly wretches, they do
commonly wish either themselves, or the Saint out of doors; and why so? Because
they cannot down with the society of a Christian: though if there come in at
the same time a dog, or a drunken swearing wretch, which is worse then a dog,
they will make him welcome, he shall sit down with them, and partake of their
dainties. And now tell me, you that love your sins and your pleasures; had you
not rather keep company with a drunkard, a swearer, a strumpet, a thief; nay, a
dog (as I said before) then with an honest hearte^ Christian? If you say, no.
What mea^^ your sour carriage to the people of God? Why do you look on them,
as if you would eat them up? yet at the very same time if you can but meet your
dog, or a drunken companion, you can fawn upon them, take acquaintance with
them, to the Tavern or Alehouse with them, if it be two or three times in a
week; but if the Saints of God meet together, pray together, and labor to
edify one another, you will stay till doomes-day (as they call it) before you
will look into the house where they are. Ah friends, when all comes to all, you
will be found to love drunkards, strumpets, dogs, any thing; nay, to serve the
devil, rather then to have loving and friendly society with the Saints of God.

Moreover, The dogs came and licked his sores] Here again you may see, not
only the afflicted state of the Saints of God in this world, but also, that
even dogs themselves, according to their kind, are more favorable to the
Saints, then the sinful world; though the ungodly will have no mercy on the
Saints, yet it is ordered so, that these creatures, dogs, lions, etc. will.
Though the rich man would not entertain hi^ into his house, yet his dogs will
come, and do him the best good they can even to lick his running sores. It was
thus with Daniel, when the world was mad against him, and would have him thrown
to the lions to be devoured, the lions shut their mouths at him, (or rather
the Lord did shut them up) so that there was not that hurt befell to him, as
was desired by the adversaries. Dan. 6. And this I am persuaded of, that would
the creatures do as some men would have them, the Saints of God should not walk
so quietly up and down the streets, and other places, as they do. And as I said
before, so I say again, I am persuaded, that at the day of judgment many men's
conditions and carriages will be so laid open, that it will evidently appear,
they have been very merciless, and mad against the children of God; insomuch,
that when the providence of God did fall out so, as to cross their
expectations, Verse 22.
they have been very much offended thereat, as is very evidently seen in them
who set themselves to study how to bring the Saints into bondage, and to thrust
them into corners, as in these late years. And because God has in his goodness
ordered things ot^erwise, they have gnashed their teeth thereat. Hence then let
the Saints learn not to commit themselves to their enemies, they are very
merciless men, and will not so much favor you, (if they can help it) as you
may suppose they may. Nay, unless the overruling hand of God in goodness do
order things contrary to their natural inclination, they will not favor you
so much as a dog.

Verse 22. And it came to pass, that the beggar died, and was carried by the
Angels into Abraham's bosom: the rich man also died, and was buried.
THe former verses do briefly hold forth the carriage of of the ungodly in this
life toward the Saints. Now this Verse does hold forth the departure both of
the godly and the ungodly out of this life.

Where he says, And it came to pass, that the beggar died, and was carried
into Abraham's bosom: and the rich man died also.] The beggar died, that
represents the godly: and the rich man died, that represents the ungodly; from
whence observe. Neither godly ^or ungodly must live always without a change,
either by death or judgment; the good man died, and the bad man died; that
Scripture also does back this truth, that good and bad must die, mavelous
well, where it is said, And it is appointed to men once to die, and after that
the judgment. Heb. 9.27.

Mark, he does not say it is so, that men by chance may die, which might beget
in the hearts of the ungodly, especially some hope to escape the bitterness of
it; but he says, It is a thing most certain, it is appointed. Mark, it is
appointed for men once to die, and after that the judgment. God has decreed
it, that since men have fallen from that happy estate that God at the first did
set them in, they shall die: now when it is said the beggar died, and the rich
man died; part of the meaning is, they ceased to be any more in this world; I
say, partly the meaning, but not altogether. Though it be altogether the
meaning when some of the creatures die, yet it is but in part the meaning, when
it is said, that men, women, or children die; for there is to them something
else to be said more then barely a going out of the world: For if when
unregenera^e men and women die, there were an end of them, not only in this
world, but also in the world to come, they would, as I may say, be happy over
they will be now; for when ungodly men and women die, there is that to come
after death, if they die unregenerate, that will be very terrible to them;
namely, to be carried by the Angels of darkness from their deathbeds to hell,
there to be reserved to the judgment of the great day, when both body and soul
shall meet, and be united together again, and made capable to undergo the
uttermost vengeance of the Almighty to all eternity. This is that I say, which
does follow a man (that is not born again) after death; as is clear from that
in 1 Pet. 3.18, 19. Where before speaking of Christ being raised again by the
power of his eternal spirit, he says, by which, that is, by that spirit he
went and preached to the spirits in prison; but what is the meaning of this?
Why thus much; that those souls who were once alive in the world in the time,
or days in which Noah lived, being disobedient in their times to the calls of
God by his Spirit in Noah, for so I understand it, was according to that which
was foretold by that Preacher deprived of life, and overcome by the flood, and
are now in prison. Mark, he preached to the spirits in Prison; he does not say,
who were in Prison, but to them (in) that is, now in Prison, under chains of
da^kness, reserved, or kept there, in that prison, in which now they are (ready
like villains in the jayl to be brought before the judgment seat of Christ at
the great day: but of this I shall speak further by and by. Now if this one
truth* that men must die and depart this world, and either enter into joy, or
else into prison, to be reserved to the day of judgment, were believed, we
should not have so many wantons walk up and down the streeets as there do; at
least it would put a mighty check to their filthy carriages, so that they would
not, could not walk so basely and sinfully as they do. Belshazzer
notwithstanding he was so far from the fear of God, so long as he was senseless
of the Lords hand against him; yet when he did but see that God was offended,
and threatened him for his wickedness, it made him hang down his head, and knock
his knees together, Dan. 5.5, 6. If you read the verses before, you will find
he was careless, and satisfying his lusts in drinking, and playing the wanton
with his Concubines. But so soon as he did but perceive the finger of an hand,
writing, then (says the Scripture) the Kings countenance was changed, and his
thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his loins were loosed, and his
knees smote one against another. And when Paul told Felix of Righteousness,
Acts 24.25.
Temperance, and Judgment to come, it made him rremble. And let me tell thee
(Soul) whosoever thou art, that if thou did but verily believe that thou must
die, and come into the judgment, it would make thee turn over a new leaf, as
we say. But this is the misery, the devil does labor by all means, as to keep
out other things that are good, so to keep out of the heart as much as in him
lies, the thoughts of passing from this life into another world; for he knows,
if he can but keep them from the serious thoughts of death, he shall the more
easily keep them in their sins; and so from closing with Jesus Christ, as Job
says, Their houses are safe from fear, Job 21.9.
neither is the rod of God upon them. Which makes them say to God, Depart from
us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, verse 14. Because there is no
fear of death, and judgment to come, therefore they do put off God and his
ways, and spend their days in their sins; and in a moment, that is, before
they are aware, go down to the grave. ver. 17. And thus it sared also with the
man spoken of in Luke 12.20. the man instead of thinking of death, he thought
how he might make his barns bigger: but in the midst of his business in the
world, he lost his soul before he was aware: supposing that death had been many
years off. But God said unto him, Thou fool, thou troublest thy self abo^t
things of this life* thou put off the thoughts of departing this world,
when this night thy soul shall be taken from thee. Or, this night, they, that
is, the devil will fetch away thy soul from thee. And here it comes to pass,
men's not being exercised with the thoughts of departing this life, that they
are so unexpected to themselves and their neighbors, taken away from the
pleasures and profits; yea, all the enjoyments they busy themselves withal
while they live in this world. And hence it is again, that you have some in
your towns and cities that are so suddenly taken away, some from haunting the
Alehouse, others from haunting the Whore-houses, others from playing and
gaming, others from the cares and covetous desires after this world, unlooked
for as by themselves, or their companions. Hence it is also, that men do so
wonder at such tidings as this, there is such an one dead, such an one is
departed; it is because they do so little consider, both the transitoriness of
themselves and their neighbors: for had they but their thoughts well exercised
about the shortness of this life, and the danger that will befall such as do
miss of the Lord Jesus Christ, it would make them more wary and sober, and
spend more time in the service of God, and be more delighted and diligent in
enquiring after the Lord Jesus, who is the deliverer from wrath to come. For as
I said before, it is evident, that they who live after the flesh in the lusts
thereof, do not really and seriously think on death, and the judgment that
does follow after, neither do they indeed endeavor so to do; for did they, it
would make them say with holy Job. Job 14.14.
All the days of my appointed time will I wait till my change come. And as I
said before, that not only the wicked, but also the godly have their time to
depart this life. And the beggar died. The Saints of the Lord, they must be
deprived of this life also, they must yield up the Ghost into the hands of the
Lord their God; they must also be separated from their wives, children,
husbands, friends, goods, and all that they have in the world. For God has
decreed it: It is appointed namely, by the Lord for men once to die, and we
must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ. As it is 2 Corinthians. 5.10,
11.

But it may be objected, if the godly do die as well as the wicked, and if the
saints must appear before the judgment seat as well as the sinners; then what
advantage have the godly more then the ungodly, and how can the Saints be in a
better condition then the wicked?

Answ. Read the 22th. verse over again, and you shall find a mavelous
difference between them, as much as is between heaven and hell, everlasting
joy, and everlasting torment; for you find, that when the beggar died, which
represents the godly. He was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom, or
into everlasting joy; Psalm. 1.
but the ungodly are not so, but are hurried by the devils into the bottomless
pit: for he says, And in hell he lift up his eyes. When the ungodly do die,
their misery begins; for then appear the devils, like so many lions, waiting
every moment till the soul depart from the body. Sometimes they are very
visible to the dying party, but sometimes more invisible; but always this is
certain, they never miss of the soul, if it do die out of the Lord Jesus
Christ, but do hale it away to the prison, as I said before, there to be
tormented, and reserved until that great and general day of judgment, at which
day they must body and soul receive a final sentence from the righteous Judge,
and from that time be shut out from the presence of God into everlasting woe
and distress. But the godly, when the time of their departure is at hand, then
also are the Angels of the Lord at hand; yea, they are ready waiting upon the
soul to conduct it safely into Abraham's bosom. I do not say, but the devils are
often times very busy doubtless, and attending the Saints in their sickness; I,
and no question but they would willingly deprive the soul of glory. But here is
the comfort, as the devils come from hell to devour the soul, (if it be
possible, at its departure) so the Angels of the Lord come from heaven to watch
over and conduct the soul (in spite of the devil) safe into Abraham's bosom.

David had the comfort of this, and speaks it forth for the comfort of his
Brethren. Psalm 34.7. saying, The Angels of the Lord encampeth round about them
that fear him, and delivers them. Mark, the Angels of the Lord encampeth
round about his children, to deliver them. From what? From their enemies, of
which the devil is not the least. This is an excellent comfort at any time to
have the holy Angels of God to attend a poor man or woman; but especially it is
comfortable in the time of distress, at the time of death, when the devils
beset the soul with all the power that hell can afford them. But now it may be,
that the glorious Angels of God do not appear at the first, to the view of the
soul; nay, rather it may be, hell stands before it, and the devils ready, as if
they would carry it thither. But this is the comfort, the Angels do always
appear at the last, and will not fail the soul, but will carry it safe into
Abraham's bosom.

Ah Friends! consider, here is an ungodly man upon his death bed, and he has
none to speak for him, none to speak comfort unto him; but it is not so with
the children of God, for they have the Spirit to comfort them. Here is the
ungodly, and they have no Christ to pray for their safe conduct to glory, but
the Saints have an Intercessour. John 17.
Here is the world, when they die, they have none of the Angels of God to
attend upon them; but the Saints have their company. In a word, the unconverted
person when he dies, he sinks into the bottomless pit. But the Saints when
they die, do ascend with, and by the Angels, into Abraham's bosom, or into unto
unspeakable glory.

Again, it is said that the rich man when he died was buried, or put into the
earth, but when the beggar died, he was carried by the Angels into Abraham's
bosom. The one is a very excellent style, where he says, he was carried by the
Angels into Abraham's bosom; it denotes the excellent condition of the Saints
of God, as I said before; and not only so, but also the preciousness of the
death of the Saints in the eyes of the Lord, that after generations may see how
precious in the sight of the Lord the death of his Saints is, when he says,
they are carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom. Thus many times the Lord
adorneth the death and departure of his Saints, to hold forth unto after
generations, how excellent they are in his eyes. It is said of Enoch, that God
took him; of Abraham, that he died in a good old age of Moses, that the Lord
buried him; of Elijah, that he was taken up into heaven; that the Saints sleep
in Jesus; that they die in the Lord; that they rest from their labor; that
their works follow them; that they are under the Altar; that they are with
Christ; that they are in light; that they are to come with the Lord Jesus to
judge the world. All which sayings signify thus much, That to die ^ Saint is
very great honor and dignity. But the ungodly are not so. The rich or ungodly
die, and are buried, he is carried from his dwelling to the grave, and there he
is buried, hid in the dust; and his body does not so fast molder and come to
naught there, but his name does stink as fast in the world: as says the holy
Scripture, The name of the wicked shall rot. And indeed the names of the godly
are not in so much honor after their departure, but the wicked and their names
do as much rot. What a dishonor to posterity was the death of Balaam, Agag,
Achitophel, Haman, Judas Herod, with the rest of their companions. So that
though the wicked have their names written in the earth, and they do perish and
rot, yet the name of the Saints do cast forth a dainty savor to following
generations: and that the Lord Jesus does signify where he says, The godly
are carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom. And that the wicked are nothing
worth; where he says, The ungodly die and are buried.

Verse 23. And in hell he lift up his ^^es being in torment, and sees Abraham
afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom.
THe former verse speaks only of the departure of the ungodly out of this
life, together with the glorious conduct that the godly have into the kingdom
of their Father. Now our Lord does show in this verse, partly, what does, and
shall befall to the reprobate after this life is ended, where he says, And in
hell he lift up his eyes.] That is, the ungodly after they depart this life, do
lift up their eyes in hell. From these words may be observed these things.

1. That there is an hell for souls to be tormented in when this life is ended.
Mark, after he was dead and buried. In hell he lift up his eyes.

2. That all that are ungodly, and do live and die in their sins, so soon as
ever they die they go into hell: he died, and was buried. And in hell he lift
up his eyes.

3. That some are so fast asleep, and secure in their sins, that they scarce
know well where they are, till they come into hell, and that I gather from
these words, In hell he lift up his eyes. He was asleep before, but hell makes
him lift up his eyes.

As I said before, it is evident that there is an hell for souls; yea, and
bodies too, to be tormented in after they depart this life, as is clear. First,
because the Lord Jesus Christ that cannot lie, did say, that after the sinner
was dead and buried, In hell he lift up his eyes.

Now if it be objected, that hell is here meant the grave, that I plainly deny.
First, because there the body is not sensible of torment or ease; but in that
hell, into which the spirits of the damned depart, they are sensible of
torment, and would be very willingly freed from it, to enjoy ease, which they
are sensible of the want of; as is clearly discovered in this Parable. Send
Lazarus that he may dip, etc.

2. It is not meant the grave, but some other place, because the bodies so long
as they lie there, are not capable of lifting up their eyes, to set the
glorious condition of the children of God, as the souls of the damned do. In
hell he lift up his eyes.

3. It cannot be the grave, for then it must follow, that the soul was buried
there with the body, which cannot stand with such a dead state as is here
mentioned; for he says, The rich man died; that is, his soul was separated
from his body. And in Hell he lift up his eyes.

If it be again objected, that there is no hell but in this life, that I do
also deny, as I said before; after he was dead and buried, In hell he lift up
his eyes. And let me tell thee, O soul, whoever thou art, that if thou close
not in savingly with the Lord Jesus Christ, and lay hold on what he has done,
and is doing in his own person for sinners, thou will find such an hell after
this life is ended, that thou will not get out of again for ever and ever. And
thou that art wanton, and do make but a mock at the servants of the Lord,
when they tell thee of the torments of hell, thou will find, that when thou
departest out of this life, that hell, even the hell which is after this life,
will meet thee in thy journey thither, and will with its hellish crew give thee
such a sad salutation, that thou will not forget it to all eternity, when that
Scripture comes to be fulfilled on thy soul, in Isa. 14.9. where it is said,
Hell from beneath it moved for thee, to meet thee at thy coming: it stirs
up the dead for thee, even all the chief ones of the earth: it has raised from
their thrones all the kings of the nations. All they, that is, that are in hell
shall say, Art thou become weak as we? art thou become like unto us? O
sometimes when I have had but thoughts of going to hell, and considered the
everlastingness of their ruin that fall in thither; it has stirred me up
rather to seek to the Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver me from thence, then to
slight it, and make a mock at it.

And in hell he lift up his eyes.] The second thing I told you, was this, That
all the ungodly that live and die in their sins, so soon as ever they depart
this life, do descend into hell. This is also verified by the words in this
parable, where Christ says, He died and was buried, and in hell he lift up his
eyes. As the tree falls, so it shall lie, whether it be to heaven or hell. And
as Christ said to the thief on the Cross, This day shall thou be with me in
Paradise. Even so the devil in the like manner may say unto thy soul, To morrow
shall thou be with me in hell. See then what a miserable case he that dies in
an unregenerate state is in; he departs from a long sickness to a longer hell;
from the gripings of death to the everlasting torments of hell. And in hell he
lift up his eyes. Ah Friends! if you were but your selves, you would have a
care of your souls; if you did but regard you would see how mad they are that
slight the salvation of their souls. O what will it profit thy soul to have
pleasure in this life, and torments in hell; thou had better part with all
thy sins and pleasures, and companions, or whatsoever thou delightest in, then
to have soul and body to be cast into hell. O then, do not now neglect our Lord
Jesus Christ, lest thou drop down to hell. Consider, would it not wound thee to
thine heart, to come upon thy deathbed, and instead of having the comfort of a
well-spent life, and the merits of the Lord Jesus Christ, together with the
comforts of his glorious Spirit: to have, first, the sight of an ill-spent
life, thy sins flying in thy face, thy conscience uttering it self with
thunderclaps against thee, the thoughts of God terrifying of thee, death with
his merciless paw seizing upon thee, the devils standing ready to scramble for
thy soul, and hell enlarging her self, and ready to swallow thee up; and
eternity of misery and torment attending upon thee, from which there will be no
release. For mark, death does not come alone to an unconverted soul, but with
such company, as were thou but sensible of, it would make thee tremble. I pray
consider that Scripture. Rev. 6.8. And I looked, and beheld a pale horse, and
his name that sa^ on him was Death, and hell followed with him. Mark, death
does not come alone to the ungodly; no, but hell goes with ^im. O miserable
comforters! O miserable society! here comes death and hell unto thee. Death
goes into thy body, and separates body and soul asunder; hell stands without
(as I may say) to embrace, or rather to crush thy soul between its everlasting
grinders. Then thy mirth, thy joy, thy sinful delights will be ceased when this
comes to pass; lo, it will come. Blessed are all those, that through Christ
Jesus his merits, by faith, do escape these soul-murthering companions. And in
hell he lift up his eyes.

The third thing you know that we did observe from these words, was this, That
some are so fast asleep, and secure in their sins, that they scarce know where
they are, until they come into hell. And that you know I told you I gather by
these words. In hell he lift up his eyes. Mark, it was in hell that he lift up
his eyes. Now some do understand by these words, that he came to himself, or
began to consider with himself, or to think with himself in what an estate he
was, and what he was deprived of; which is still a confirmation of the thing
laid down by me. There it is that they come to themselves, that is, there they
are sensible where they are indeed; thus it fares with some men, that they
scarce know where they are, till they lift up their eyes in hell. It is with
these people, as with those that fall down in a swoun; you know if a man do
fall down in a swoun in one room, though you take him up, and carry him into
another, yet he is not sensible where he is, till he comes unto himself, and
lifts up his eyes.

Truly thus it is to be feared, it is with many poor souls, they are so
senseless, so hard, so seared in their conscience, that they are very ignorant
of their state; and when death comes, it strikes them, as it were, into a
swoun, (especially if they die suddenly) and so they are hurried away, and
scarce know where they are, till in hell they lift up their eyes.

Of this sort are they spoken of in Psalm 73. where he says, There are no
bonds in their death, but their strength is firm. They are not troubled as
other folk, neither are they plagued like other men. And again, they spend
their days in wealth, and in a moment, mark, in a moment, before they are
aware, they go down to the grave, Job 21.17.

Indeed this is too much known by woeful and daily experience, sometimes when we
go to visit them that are sick in the towns and places where we live, Oh how
senceless, how seared in their consciences are they? they are neither sensible
of heaven, nor of hell; of sin, nor a Savior: speak to them of their
condition, and the state of their souls, and you shall find them as ignorant,
as if they had no souls to regard. Others, though they lie ready to die, yet
they are busying themselves about their outward affairs, as though they should
certainly live here, even to live and enjoy the same for ever. Again, come to
others, speak to them about the state of their souls, though they have no more
experience of the new birth then a beast, yet will they speak as confidently of
their eternal state, and the welfare of their souls, as if they had the most
excellent experience of any man or woman in the world, When as I said even now,
the Lord knows they are as ignorant of the new birth, of the nature and
operation of faith, of the witness of the Spirit: as if there were no new
birth, no faith, no witness of the Spirit of Christ in any of the Saints in the
world. Nay, thus many of them are, even an hour or less before their departure.
Ah poor souls, though they may go away here like a lamb, as the world says,
yet if you could but follow them a little to stand and listen soon after their
departure; It is to be feared you should hear them roar like a lion at their
first entrance into hell.

Now by this one thing does the devil take great advantage on the hearts of the
ignorant, suggesting unto them, that because the party deceased, departed so
quietly, without all doubt they are gone to rest and joy: when alas, it is to
be feared, the reason why they went away so quietly, was rather because they
were senseless and hardened in their consciences; yea, dead before in sins and
trespasses. For had they had but some awakenings on their death beds, as some
have had, they would have made all the town to ring of their doleful condition,
But because they are seared and ignorant, and so depart quietly: therefore the
world takes heart at grass, (as we use to say) and make no great matter of
living and dying they cannot well tell how. But let them look to themselves;
for if they have not an interest in the Lord Jesus, now while they live in the
world, they will, whether they die raging or still, go unto the same place, and
lift up their eyes in hell.

O my friends, did you but know what a miserable condition they are in, that go
out of this world without an interest in the Son of God, it would make you
smite upon your thigh, and in the bitterness of your souls cry out, Men and
brethren, what shall we do to be saved? And not only so, but thou would not
be comforted, until thou did find a rest for thy soul in the Lord Jesus
Christ.

Verse 23. And in hell he lift up his eyes, being in torments, and sees
Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom.
Something in brief I have observed from the first part of this verse, namely
from these words, And in hell he lift up his eyes. And indeed I have observed
but something, for they are very full of matter, and many things possibly might
be taken notice of in them. There is one thing more that I might touch upon, as
touched in this saying, and that is this, Methink the Lord Jesus Christ does
hereby signify, that men are naturally unwilling to see or take notice of
their sad state, I say by nature; but though now they are willingly ignorant,
yet in hell they shall lift up their eyes. That is, in hell they shall see and
understand their miserable condition; and therefore to these words, In hell he
lift up his eyes, he added, being in torment. As if he had said, Though once
they shut their eyes, though once they were willingly ignorant, yet when they
depart into hell, they shall be so miserably handled and tormented, that they
shall be forced to lift up their eyes. For while men live in this world, and
are in a natural state, they will have a good conceit of themselves, and of
their condition; they will conclude that they are Christians, and their state
to be as good as the best; they will conclude they have faith, the Spirit, good
hope, and an interest in the Lord Jesus Christ: but then, when they drop into
hell, and lift up their eyes there, and behold, first their soul to be in
extreme torments; their dwelling to be the bottomless pit; their company
thousands of damned souls; also the innumerable company of devils; and the hot
scalding vengeance of God, not only to drop, but to fall very violently upon
them; then they will begin to be awakened, who all their life time were in a
dead sleep. I say, when this comes to pass, Lo it will, then in hell they shall
lift up their eyes, in the midst of torments they shall lift up their eyes.

Again, you may observe from these words. And in hell he lift up his eyes being
in torment. That the time of the ungodly men's smarting for their sins, will be
in the torments of hell. Now here I am put to a stand, when I consider the
torments of hell, into which the damned do fall. O unspeakable torments! O
endless torments! Now that thy soul might be made to flee from these
intolerable torments, into which the damned do go. I shall show you darkly and
briefly what are the torments of hell. First, by the means of it. Secondly, by
the sad state thou will be in, if thou come there. First the names. It is
called a never dying worm. Mark 9. It is called an oven, fire hot, Malachi 4.1.
It is called a furnace, a fiery furnace, Mat. 13. It is called the bottomless
pit, the unquenchable fire, fire and brimstone, hell fire, the lake of fire,
devouring fire, everlasting fire, eternal fire, a stream of fire. Rev. 21.

First, one part of thy torments will be this, thou shall have a full sight of
all thy ill-spent life from first to last, though here thou can sin to day,
and forget it by to morrow; yet there thou shall be made to remember how thou
did sin against God at such a time, Psalm 50.
and in such a place, for such a thing, and with such an one, which will be an
hell unto thee.

2. Thou shall have the guilt of them all lie heavy on thy soul, not only the
guilt of one or two, but the guilt of them all together, and there they shall
lie in thy soul, as if thy belly were full of pitch, and set on a light fire.
Now here men can sometimes think on their sins with delight, but there with
unspeakable torment; for that I understand to be the fire that Christ speaks
of, which shall never be quenched. Mark, while men live here, O how does the
guilt of one sin sometimes crush the soul, it makes a man in such plight, that
he is weary of his life, so that he can neither rest at home nor abroad,
neither up nor in bed. Nay, I do know, that they have been so tormented with
the guilt of one sinful thought, that they have been even at their wits end.
But now when thou come into hell, and have not only one or two, or an
hundred sins with the guilt of them all on thy soul and body; but all the sins
that ever thou did commit since thou came into the world, all together
clapped on thy conscience at one time, as one should clap a red hot iron to thy
breasts, and there to continue to all eternity, this is miserable.

3. Again, then thou shall have brought into thy remembrance the slighting of
the Gospel of Christ; here now thou shall consider how willing Christ was to
come into the world to save sinners, and for what a trifle thou did reject
him. This is plainly held forth in Esaias 28. where speaking of the Lord Jesus
Christ the foundation of salvation, ver. 16. he says of them that reject the
Gospel, that when the overflowing scourge does pass through the earth, (which I
understand to be at the end of the world) then says he, It shall take you
morning by morning, by day and by night shall it pass over you; that is,
continually without any intermission. Now these are the words I aim at, where
he says, And it shall be a vexation only to hear the report. A vexation, that
is, a torment, or a great part of hell only to understand the report, that is,
to understand the good tidings that came into the world by Christ's death for
poor sinners, and you will find this to be verily the mind of the Spirit, if
you compare it with Chap. 53. of Esaias verse 1. where he speaks of men's turning
their backs upon the tenders of Gods grace in the Gospel, he says, Who has
believed our report, or the Gospel declared by us? Now this will be a mighty
torment to the ungodly, when they shall understand the goodness of God was so
great, that he even sent his Son out of his bosom to die for sinners, and yet
that they should be so foolish, as to put him off from one time to another;
that they should be so foolish, as to lose heaven, and Christ, and eternal
life in glory, for the society of a company of drunkards; that they should lose
their souls for a little sport, for this world, for a strumpet, for that which
is lighter then vanity, and nothing. I say, this will be a very great torment
unto thee.

4. Another part of thy torment will be this, thou shall see thy friends, thy
acquaintance, thy neighbors; nay, it may be thy father, thy mother, thy wife,
thy husband, thy children, thy brother, thy sister with others in the kingdom
of heaven, and thy self thrust out. And this is that, that Christ told the Jews
would befall them in Luke 13.28. There shall be weeping, etc. when you shall
see Abraham (your father) and Isaac, and Jacob, (together with your brethren)
the Prophets in the kingdom of heaven, and your selves thrust out. Nay, says
he, There shall come from the East, and from the West, that is, those that thou
did never see in all thy life before, and they shall sit down with thy
friends, and thy neighbors, thy wife and thy children in the kingdom of
heaven, and thou for thy sins and disobediencc shall be shut, nay, thrust out.
O wonderful torment!

5. Again, thou shall have none but a company of damned souls, with an
innumerable company of huge devils to keep company with thee. While thou art in
this world, the very thoughts of the devils appearing to thee, makes thy flesh
to tremble, and thine hair ready to stand upright on thy head. But O what will thou do, when not only the supposition of the devils appearing, but the real
society of all the devils in hell to be with thee howling and roaring,
screeching and yelling in such a hideous manner, that thou will be even at thy
wits end, and be ready to run stark mad again for anguish and torment.

6. Again, that thou might be tormente^ to purpose, the mighty God of heaven
will lay as great wrath and vengeance upon thee, as ever he can, by the might
of his glorious power. As I said before; Thou shall have his wrath not by
drops, no, but by whole showers shall it come thunder, thunder upon thy body
and soul so fast, and so thick, that thou shall be tormented out of measure.
And so says the Scripture. 2. These. 1.9. speaking of the wicked, Who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power, when the Saints shall be admiring his gooodness and
glory.

Again, this thou shall have, as I said before, without any intermission, thou
shall not have any ease so long as while a man may turn himself round: thou
shall have it always every hour, day and night: for their worm never dies, but
always gnaws, and their fire is never quenched. As it is written in Mark 9.

7. Again, in this condition thou must be for ever, and that is as sad as all
the rest. For if a man were to have all his sins laid to his charge, and
communion with the devils, and as much wrath as the great God of heaven can
inflict upon them. I say, if it were but for a time, even ten thousand years,
if then it might have an end, there would be ground of comfort, and hopes of
deliverance; but here is thy misery, this is thy state for ever, here thou must
be for ever: when thou look about thee, and see what an innumerable
company of howling devils thou art amongst, thou shall think this again, this
is my portion for ever. When thou have been in hell so many thousand years as
there are stars in the firmament, or drops in the sea, or sands on the sea
shore, yet thou have to lie there for ever. O this one word, ever, how will it
torment thy soul. O friends, I have only given a very short touch of the
torments of hell. O! I am set, I am set, and am not able to utter what my mind
conceives of the torments of hell. Yet this let me say to thee, accept of Gods
mercy, through our Lord Jesus Christ, lest thou feel that with thy conscience,
which I cannot express with my tongue, and say, I am sorely tormented in this
flame.

And sees Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom.]

When the damned are in this pitiful state, surrounded with fears, with
terrors, with torment and vengeance; one thing they shall have, which is this,
they shall see the happy and blessed state of Gods children: he sees Abraham
afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom, which as I said before, is the happy state
of the Saints, when this life is ended. This now shall be so far from being an
ease unto them, that it shall most wonderfully aggravate or heighten their
torment, as I said before. There shall be weeping, or cause of lamentation,
when they shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven, and
themselves thrust out.

2. Observe, those that die in their sins are far from going to heaven. He
sees Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom. And indeed it is just with
God to deal with them that die in their sins, according to what they have done;
and to make them who are far from righteousness now, to stand far from heaven
to all eternity. Hearken to this ye stout hearted, that are far from
righteousness, and that are resolved to go on in your sins; when you die, you
will be far from heaven; you will see Lazarus, but it will be afar off. Again,
he sees Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom. These are some of the
things that the damned do behold, so soon as they come into torment. Mark, And
he sees Lazarus in Abraham's bosom. Lazarus, who was he? Why, even he that was
so flighted, so disregaded, so undervalued by this ungodly one while he was in
the world; he sees Lazarus in his bosom.

From whence observe, That those who live and the die enemies of the Saints of
God; let them be never so great or stout; let them bear never so much sway
while they are in the world; let them brag and boast never so much while they
are here, they shall in spite of their teeths see the Saints, yea, the poor
Saints, even the Lazarus's, or the ragged ones that belong to Jesus, to be in a
better condition then themselves. O who do you think was in the best condition,
or who do you think saw themselves in the best condition, he that was in hell,
or he that was in heaven? He that was in darkness, or he that was in light? He
that was in everlasting joy, or he that was in everlasting torments? The one
with God, Christ, Saints, Angels: the other in tormenting flames, under the
curse of Gods eternal hatred, with the devils and their angels, together with
an innumerable company of howling, roaring, cursing, ever burning reprobates.
Certainly this observation will be easily proved to be true here in this world,
by him that looks upon it with an understanding heart, and will clear it self
to be true in the world to come, by such as shall go either to heaven or to
hell.

2. The second observation from these words, And sees Abraham afar off, and
Lazarus in his bosom, is this, They that are the persecutours of the Saints of
the Lord now in this world, shall see the Lords persecuted ones, to be they
that are so highly esteemed by the Lord, as to sit, or to be in Abraham's bosom
(in everlasting glory) though they, the enemies to the children of God, and the
practice of the Saints did so lightly esteem them, that they scorn to let them
gather up the dogs meat that falls under their table; this is also verified and
held forth plainly by this Parable. And therefore be not grieved, O you that
are the tempted, persecuted, afflicted, sighing, praying Saints of the Lord,
though your adversaries look upon you now with a disdainful, surly, rugged,
proud and haughty countenance, yet the time shall come, when they shall spy
you in Abraham's bosom.

I might enlarge upon these things, but shall leave them to the Spirit of the
Lord, which can better by ten thousand degrees enlarge them on thy heart and
conscience; then I can upon a piece of paper. Therefore leaving these to the
blessing of the Lord, I shall come to the next verse, and shall be brief in
speaking to that also, and so pass to the rest.

Verse 24. Verse 24.
And he cried, and said, Father Abraham, have mercy upon me, and send Lazarus,
that he may dip the tip of his finger in water to cool my tongue, for I am
tormented in this flame.
YOu know I told you the 22. verse is a discovery of the departure of the godly
and the ungodly out of this life; where he says, The beggar died, and the rich
man also died. The 23. verse is a discovery of the proper places, both of the
godly, and the ungodly after death; one being in Abraham's bosom, or in glory,
the other in hell. Now this 24. verse is a discovery of part of the too late
repentance of the ungodly, when they are dropped down into hell. And he cried,
and said, Father Abraham, have mercy upon me.]

From these words, and he cried, we may observe, first, what a change the
ungodly will have, when they come into hell. Where he says, he cried; it is
like he was laughing, jesting, jearing, drinking, mocking, swearing, cursing,
prating, persecuting of the godly in his prosperity, among his filthy
companions; but now the case is otherwise; now he is inanother frame; now his
proud, stout, currish carriage is come down, as is clearly signified by these
words, And he cried. Therefore by these words you may secondy observe, that the
laughter of the ungodly will not last always, but will be sure to end in a
cry. O no my friends, consider, you must have a change either here or in hell.
If you be not new creatures, regenerate persons, new born babes in this world
before you go hence, your note will be changed, you. conditions will be
changed: for if you come into hell, you must cry. O did but the singing
drunkards, when they are making merry on the Alebench think on this, that if
they drop into hell they must cry, it would make them change their note, and
cry, What shall I do, whither shall I go when I die? But as I said before, the
devil, as he labors to get poor souls to follow their sins, so he labors also
to keep the thoughts of eternal damnation out of their minds; and indeed these
two things are so nearly linked together, that the devil cannot well get the
soul to go on in sin with delight, unless he can keep the thougths of that
terrible after-clap out of their minds. But let them know that it shall not
always be thus with them; for if when they depart, they drop down into eternal
destruction, they shall have such a sense of their sins, and the punishment due
to the same, that it shall make them to cry. And he cried. O what an alteration
will there be among the ungodly, when they go out of this world! it may be a
fortnight or a month before their departure, they were light, stout, surly,
drinking themselves drunk, slighting Gods people, mocking at goodness, and
delighting in sin; following the world, seeking after riches, faring
deliciously, keeping company with the bravest; but now they are dropped down into
hell, they cry. A little while ago they were painting their faces, feeding
their lusts, following their whores, robbing their neighbors, telling of lies,
following of plays, and sports to pass away the time; but now they are in hell
they do cry. It may be last year they heard some good sermons, was invited to
receive heaven, was told their sins should be pardoned, if they closed in with
Jesus; but refusing his profers, and slighting the grace that was once
tendered, they are now in hell, and do cry.

Before they had so much time (they thought) that they could not tell how to
spend it, unless it were in hunting, and whoring, in dancing and playing, and
spending whole hours; yea, days, nay weeks in the lusts of the flesh, but when
they depart into another place, and begin to lift up their eyes in hell, and
consider their miserable, and irrecoverable condition they will cry.

O what a condition will thou fall into, when thou do depart this world, if
thou depart unconverted, and not born again, thou had better have been
smothered the first hour thou wast born; thou had better have been plucked
one limb from another; thou had better have been made a dog, a toad, a
serpent; nay, any other creature in the visible world, then to die unconverted,
and this thou will find to be true, when in hell thou do lif^ up thine eyes,
and do cry.

Here then before we go any further you may see, that it is not without good
ground that these words are here spoken by our Lord, That when any of the
ungodly do depart into hell, they will will cry. Cry, why so?

1. They will cry to think, that they should be cut off from the Land of the
living, never more to have any footing therein.

2. They will cry to think, that the Gospel of Christ should be so often
proffered them, and yet they are not profited by it.

3. They will cry to think, that now though they would never so willingly
repent and be saved, yet they are past all recovery.

4. They will cry to think, that they should be so foolish as to follow their
pleasures, when others were following of Christ.

5. They will cry to think, that they must be separated from God, Christ, and
the kingdom of heaven, and that for ever.

6. To think, that their crying will now do them no good.

7. To think, that at the day of judgment they must stand at the left hand of
Christ, among an innumerable company of damned ones.

8. They will cry to think, that Lazarus, whom once they slighted, must be of
them that must sit with Christ to judge, or together with Christ, to pass a
sentence of condemnation on their souls for ever and ever, 1 Corinthians 6.2, 3.

9. Cry to think, that when the judgment is over, and others are taken into
the everlasting kingdom of glory, then thou must depart back again into that
dungeon of darkness, from whence thou came our, (to appear before that
terrible tribunal) where thou shall be tormented so long as eternity lasts,
without the least intermission or ease. How say thou, O thou wanton, proud,
swearing, lying ungodly wretch, whether this be to be slighted, and made a mock
at. And again, tell me now, if it be not better to leave sin, and to close in
with Christ Jesus, notwithstanding that reproach thou shall meet with for so
doing; then to live a little while in this world in pleasures, and feeding thy
lusts, in neglecting the welfare of thy soul, and refusing to be justified by
Jesus, and in a moment to drop down to hell, and to cry? O consider, I say
consider betimes, and put not off the the tenders of the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, lest you lift up your eyes in hell, and cry for anguish of spirit.

And he cried, and said, Father Abraham have mercy upon me, and send Lazarus,
etc.

These words do not only hold forth the lamentable condition of the damned,
and their lamentable howling and crying out under their anguish of spirit, but
also they do signify to us (as I said before) their too late repentance; and
also that they would very willingly if they might, be set at liberty from that
everlasting misery, that by their sins they have plunged themselves into. I
say, these words do hold forth a desire that the damned have to be delivered
from those torments that they now are in: O Father Abraham, says he, have
mercy upon me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in
water, and cool my tongue, for I am tormented in this flame. These words,
Father Abraham, may have some difficulty in them. It is possible, that some may
think them to be meant of Abraham, and those; or him that cries out here, to
be the Jews. Or it may be some may understand it to be God, or Jesus Christ his
Son, which I rather suppose it may be, that is here cried out unto, because you
find the same cry to him, as it were uttered by the ungodly in other places of
the Scripture, as in Luke 13. verse 25, 26. Then shall they say, Lord, Lord, we
have eat and drunk in thy presence, and thou have taught in our streets. Nay
more, In thy Name have we cast out devils, and in thy Name done many wonderful
works. This was just at their rejection. And again in Mat. 25.11. They cry
again to him, even to Jesus. Lord, Lord, open to us. And he there again gives
them a repulse, as also in this Parable. But however, or whosoever Abraham is,
yet these truths may be observed from the words.

1. That the damned, when in an irrecoverable estate, will seek for, or desire
deliverance from the wrath that they are, and shall be in for eternity.

2. That they will pray (if I may so call it) earnestly for deliverance from
their miserable estate. These two things are clear from the words. For mark, He
not only said, Father Abraham have mercy upon me. But he cried and said,
Father Abraham have mercy on me. From whence take a third observation, and that
is, There is a time coming, wherein though men shall both cry and pray, yet
they are like to have no mercy at the hands of God; for so was this man served,
as I shall further show by and by when I come to it.

Some people are so deluded by the devil, as to think that God is so merciful,
as to own or regard any thing for prayer; they think any thing will go for
current and good satisfaction, while they are here in this world, through
ignorance of the true nature of the mercy of God, and the knowledge in what way
God is satisfied for sinners. Now I say, through ignorance they think, that if
they do but mutter over some form of prayers, though they know not what they
say, nor what they request, yet God is satisfied, yea, very well satisfied with
their doings; when alas! there is nothing less. O friends, I beseech you to
look about you, and seek in good earnest for the Spirit of Christ, so to help
you now, to strive and pray, and to enable you to lay hold of Christ, that your
souls may be saved, lest the time come, that though you cry and pray, and wish
also that you had laid hold on the Lord Jesus, yet you must, and shall be
damned.

Then again, you may see that though God be willing to save sinners at some
time, yet this time does not always last: No, he that can find in his heart
to turn his back upon Jesus Christ now, shall have the back turned upon him
hereafter, when he may cry and pray for mercy, and yet go without it. God will
have a time to meet with them that now do seek after him: they shall have a
time, yea, time enough hereafter to repent their folly, and to befool
themselves for turning their backs upon the Lord Jesus Christ.

Again, this should admonish us to take time while it is proffered, lest we
repent us of our unbelief and rebellion, when we are deprived of it. Ah
friends! time is precious, an hours time to hear a sermon is precious; I have
sometimes thought thus with my self. Set the case the Lord should send two or
three of his servants the Ministers of the Gospel to hell among the damned with
this Commission; Go ye to Hell and preach my grace to those that are there: let
your Sermon be an hour long, and hold forth the merits of my Sons birth,
righteousness, death, resurrection, ascension, and intercession with all my
love in him, and proffer it to them, telling them that now once more, and but
once, do I profer the means of reconciliation to them. They who are now
roaring, being past hope would then leap at the least proffer of mercy: Oh they
that could spend whole days, weeks, nay years, in rejecting the Son of God,
would now be glad of one tender of that mercy. Father says he, have mercy on
me.

Again, from these words you may observe, that mercy will be welcome when souls
are under judgment; now his soul is in the fire, now he is under the wrath of
God, now he is in Hell, there to be tormented, now he is with the devils and
damned spirits, now he feels the vengeance of God: now, Oh, now have mercy on
me. Here you may see again that mercy is prized by them that are in Hell, they
would be glad if they could have it. Father, have mercy on me. For my poor
souls sake send me a little mercy.

And send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my
tongue.

These words do not only hold forth that the ungodly have a desire of mercy,
but what those mercies are that these poor creatures would be glad of.

As first, To have the company of a Lazarus, granted to them. Father Abraham
have mercy upon me, and send Lazarus. Now Lazarus was he that was beloved of
God and also he that was hated of him. Therefore,

2. Observe, that those Saints that the world in their lifetime could not
endure, now they are departed they would be glad to have society with them. O
now send Lazarus, though the time was when I cared not for him, yet now let me
have some society with him.

Though the world disregard the society of God children now, yet there is a
time coming in which they would be glad to have the least company with them.
Nay do but observe, those of the Saints that are now most rejected by them,
even from them shall they be glad of comfort, if it might be. Send Lazarus; he
that I slighted more then my dogs, he that I could not endure should come into
my house, but must lie at my gate, send him: Now Lazarus shall be welcome to
me, now do I desire some comfort from him; but he shall go without it.

From whence again observe, that there is a time coming, O ye surly dogged
persecutors of the Saints, that they shall slight you as much as ever you
slighted them. You have given them many an hard word, told many a lie of them,
given them many a blow: And now in your greatest need and extremity they shall
not pity you.

Again, send Lazarus. From whence observe, that any of the Saints shall then be
owned by you to be Saints. Now ye look upon them to be of the sect with
Hymeneus and Philetus, but then you shall see them to be the Lazarus's of God,
even Gods dear children. Though now the Saints of the Lord will not be owned by
you, because they are beggarly, poor, low, contemptible among you here, yet the
day is coming that you shall own them, desire their company, and wish for the
least courtesy from them.

Send Lazarus that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my
tongue, for I am tormented in this flame.

Thus shall the souls that abide in their sins cry out in the bitterness of
their spirits with wonderful anguish and torment of conscience, without
intermission; that he may dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my
tongue. That he, namely, the man who before I scorned should eat with the dogs
of my flock, that before I slighted and had no regard of, that I shut out of
door, send him, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my
tongue. Now these words, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, etc.
do hold forth the least friendship, or favor; as much as if he should have
said, Father now I would be glad of the least mercy, now I would be glad of
the l^^st comfort, though it be but one drop of cold water on the tip of his
finger. One would have thought that this had been a small request, a small
courtesy, one drop of water, what is that? Take a pail full of it, if that
will do the any good. But mark, he is not permitted to have so much as one
drop, not so much as a man may hold upon the tip of his finger. This signifies
thus much, that they that fall short of Christ, shall be night and day
tormented from years end, to years end, as I may say, even as long as eternity
lasts, and shall not have so much as the least ease, no not so long as while
a man may turn himself round, not so much leave as to swallow his spittle, not
a drop of cold water.

2. Again consider, that though the rebels while they are in this world can
turn their backs upon the greatest mercy, namely the Grace of God in Christ;
yet the time will come that they would be glad of the least mercy even a drop
of cold water.

3. Again observe, that those who in their life time do turn their back upon
the streams of Gods grace and love, when they depart this life, they shall not
have the privilege of the least mercy, though they would never so willingly. O
that these things did take place in your hearts, how would it make you to seek
after rest for your souls before it be too late, before the sun of the Gospel
be set upon you. Consider, I say, the misery of the ungodly that they shall be
in, and avoid their vices by closing in with the tenders of mercy; lest you
partake of the same portion with them, and cry out in the bitterness of your
souls, one drop of cold water and cool my tongue.

For I am tormented in this flame.

These words hold forth the reason why the damned do so much request there
might be some pity showed to them; namely because they are under sore and sad
affliction; for I am tormented in this flame. Indeed the reason why the poor
world do not so earnestly desire for mercy is, partly because they do not so
seriously consider the torment that they must certainly fall into if they die
out of Christ. For let me tell you, did but poor souls indeed consider that
wrath that does by right fall to their shares because of their sins against
God, they would make more haste to God through Christ for mercy then they do.
Then we should have them say, it is good closing with Christ to day before we
fall into such distress.

But why is it said, Let him dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my
tongue? Because that as the several members in the body have their share in
sin, and committing of that, so the several members and every member of the
body, shall at that time be punished for the same. Therefore when Christ is
admonishing his desciples, that they should not turn aside from him; and that
they should rather fear and dread the power of their God then any other power,
he says, Fear him therefore, that can cast both body and soul into hell. And
again; fear him that can destroy both soul and hody in hell. Here is not one
member only, but all the body, the whole body, of which the hands, feet, eyes,
ears, and tongue are members. And I am persuaded, that though this may be
judged carnal by some now, yet it will appear to be a truth then to the greater
misery of those who shall be forced to undergo, that which God in his just
judgment shall inflict upon them. O then they will cry, one dram of ease for
my cursing, swearing, lying, jearing tongue. Some ease for my bragging,
braving, flattering, threatening, dissembling tongue, now men can let their
tongues run at random, as we use to say, now they will be apt to say our
tongues are our own; who shall control them? But then they will be in another
mind. Then O that I might have a little ease for my deceitful tongue.

Methinks sometimes to consider how some men do let their tongues run at
random, they cannot tell well how, it makes me marvel. Surely, they do not
think they shall be made to give an account for their offending with their
tongue. Did they but think they shall be made to give an account to him who is
ready to judge the quick and the dead, surely they would be more wary of, and
have more regard unto their tongue.

The tongue says James is Jam. 2.
an unruly member full of deadly poison, it sets on fire the whole frame of
nature, and is set on fire of hell. The tongue, how much mischief will it stir
up in a very little time? How many blows and wounds does it cause? How many
times does it (as James says) curse man? How often is the tongue made the
conveyer of that hellish poison that is in the heart, both to the dishonor of
God, the hurt of its neighbors, and the utter ruin of its own soul? And do
you think that the Lord will sit still (as I may say) and let thy tongue run as
it lists, Verse 25.
and yet never bring you to an account for the same? No stay; the Lord will not
always keep silence, Psalm. 50.21.
but will reprove thee, and set thy sins in order before thine eyes, O
sinner. Yea and thy tongue, together with the rest of thy members, shall be
tormented for sinning. And I say, I am very confident, that though this be made
light of now, yet the time is coming when many poor souls will rue the day that
ever they did speak with a tongue, will one say that I should so disregard my
tongue. O that I when I said so and so had before bitten off my tongue! that I
had been born without a tongue! my tongue, my tongue, a little water to cool my
tongue for I am tormented in this flame; even that flame that my tongue,
together with the rest of my members, by sinning have brought me to. Poor souls
now will let their tongues say any thing for a little profit, for two pence or
threepence gain. But O what a grief will this be at that day when they
together with their tongue must smart for that which they by their tongues have
done while they were in this world. Then you that love your souls look to your
tongues, lest you bind your selves down so fast to hell with the sins of your
tongues, that you will never be able to get loose again to all eternity. Jam.
1.26.
For by thy words thou shall be condemned if thou have not a care of thy tongue.

Verse 25. But Abraham said, Son, remember, that thou in thy life time had
thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things, now he is comforted, and
thou art tormented.
THese words are a discovery of the answer to the request of the damned, such
as did or shall depart this life unconverted. The verse before (as I told you)
is a discovery of the desires they have after they depart this world. Here is
the answer, Son, Remember, etc.

The answer signifies thus much, that in stead of having any relief or ease,
they are hereby the more tormented, and that by fresh recollections, or by
bringing afresh their former ill spent life, while in the world, into their
remembrance: Son, Remember, thou had good things in thy life time, as much as
if he had said, Verse 24.
thou art now sensible what it is to lose thy soul, thou art now sensible what
it is to put off repentance; thou art now sensible that thou have befooled thy
self in that thou did spend that time in seeking after outward, momentary,
earthly things, which thou should have spent in seeking to make Jesus Christ
sure to thy soul; and now through thy anguish of spirit, in the pains of hell
thou would enjoy that which in former time thou did make light of, but
alas thou art here beguiled and altogether disappointed, thy crying will now
avail thee nothing at all. This is not the acceptable time. 2 Cor. 6.2. This is
not a time to answer the desires of damned reprobates; If thou had cried out
in good earnest while grace was offered, much might have been, but then thou
were careless, and did turn the forbearance and goodness of God into
wantonness: were thou not told that these who would not hear the Lord when he
did call, should not be heard (if they turned away from him) when they did
call, Prove. 1.24. to 28. But contrariwise he would laugh at their calamity and
mock when their fear did come. Now therefore instead of expecting the least
drop of mercy and favor, call into thy mind how thou did spend those days
which God did permit thee to live, I say, remember that in thy life time thou
did behave thy self rebelliously against the Lord in that thou were careless
of his word and ordinances, yea, and of the welfare of thine own soul also;
therefore, now I say, in stead of expecting or hoping for any relief thou must
be forced to call to remembrance thy filthy ways and feed upon them to thine
everlasting astonishment and consusion.

From these words therefore which say, Remember that thou in thy life time
had thy good things. There are these things to be taken notice of.

1. They that by putting off repentance and living in their sins lose their
souls, shall instead of having the least measure of comfort, when they come
into hell, have their ill spent life always very fresh in their remembrance.
While they live here they can sin and forget it, but when they depart they
shall have their ill spent life before them, they shall have a remembrance, or
their memory notably enlighrened and a clearer, Verse 25.
and a continual fight of all their wicked practices, that they wrought and did
while they were in the world. Son, remember says he, then you will be made to
remember. 1. How you were born in sin, and brought up in the same.

2. How thou had many a time the Gospel preached to thee for taking away of
the same, by him, whom the Gospel does hold forth.

3. That out of love to thy sins and lusts, thou did turn thy back on the
tenders of the same Gospel of good tidings and peace.

4. Then thou shall see clearly, that the reason why thou did lose thy soul
was, because thou did not close in with free grace, and the tenders of a
loving and free-hearted Jesus Christ.

5. Thou shall remember how near thou wast to turning at such and such a time,
only thou wast willing to give way to thy lusts when they wrought, to
drunkards when they called, to pleasures when they proffered themselves, to the
cares and encumbrances of the world, which like so many thorns did choke that
or those convictions that were set on thy heart.

6. How willing thou wast to satisfy thy self with an hypocrites hope, and
with a notion of the things of God without the real power and life of the same.

7. Thou shall remember how thou, when thou were admonished to turn, did put
off turning and repenting till another time.

8. How thou did dissemble at such a time, lie at such a time, cheat thy
neighbor at such a time, mock, flout, scoff, taunt, hate, persecute the people
of God at such a time, in such a place, among such company.

9. Thou shall remember that while others were met together in the fear of the
Lord to seek him, thou wast met with a company of vain companions to sin
against him; while the Saints were a praying thou were a cursing; while they
were speaking good of the name of God, thou were speaking evil of the saints of
God. O then thou shall have a scalding hot remembrance of all thy sinful
thoughts, words and actions, from the very first to the last of them that ever
thou did commit in all thy life time: Then thou will find that Scripture to
be a truth, ( Deuteronomy. 28.65, 66, 67.) The Lord shall give thee there a trembling
heart, and failing of eyes, and sorrow of mind. And thy life shall hang in
doubt before thee, and thou shall fear day and night, and shall have none
assurance of thy life. In the morning thou shall say, would God it were even:
and at even thou shall say, would God it were morning; for the fear of thine
hear wherewith thou shall fear, and for the sight of thine eyes which thou
shall see. Nay thou will find worse things to thy woe then this Scripture does
manifest. For indeed there is no tongue able to express the horror, terror,
torment and eternal misery, that those poor souls shall undergo, without the
least mitigation o^ ease, and a very great part of it shall flow, or come from
that quick, full, and continual remembrance that they shall have. And therefore
there is much weight in these words. Son, remember that thou in thy life time
had thy good things. That is, all thou art like to have.

From these words you see this is to be observed, that the ungodly shall
remember, or have in remembrance the mispending their lives, and that I gather
from these words, Remember that in thy life time thou had thy good things.
You may take these words good things either simply, for the things of this
world, which in themselves are called and may be called good things, or else
with these words, namely, (the things of this life) all the pleasures,
delights, profits, and vanities, which the ignorant people of the world do
count their good things, and do very much cheer themselves therewith. Soul,
soul, eat, drink and be merry, for thou have much goods laid up for many years.
Luke 12.20. Now I say, God according to his glorious power and wisdom will
make poor creatures have always in their minds a fresh and clear remembrance
of their ill spent life; he will say unto them, Remember, remember that in thy
life time, it was thus and thus with thee, and in thy life time thy carriage
was so and so.

It is like that if sinners might have their choice, they would not have their
sins and transgressions so much in remembrance; as is evident by their
carriages here in this world: for here they will not endure to entertain a
serious thought of their filthy life, but will labor by all means to put the
thought of it out of their mind: but there they shall be made to remember to a
purpose, and to think continually of their ungodly deeds. And therefore it is
said that when our Lord Jesus comes to judgment, it will be to convince the
ungodly world of their wicked and ungodly deeds. Mark, To convince them. Jude
14, 15. It is like they will not willingly take notice of them: But they shall
be convinced of them in spite of their teeth. And also between this and them,
these that die out of Christ shall be made to see, acknowledge, and confess, do
what they can, when they lift up their eyes in hell, and to remember their
transgressions. God will be a swift witness against them. Mat. 3.5. and will
say, Remember what thou did in thy life time, how thou did live in thy life
time. Ha friend! if thou do not in these days of light remember the days of
darkness, Eccles, 11.8. (the days of death, hell, and judgment) thou shall be
made in the days of darkness, death, hell, and at the judgment too, to
remember the days of the Gospel, and how thou did disregard them too, to thy
own destruction and everlasting misery.

Remember that in thy life time thou had thy good things.

The great God in stead of giving the ungodly any ease, will even aggravate
their torments, first, by slighting their perplexities. Secondly, by telling of
them what they must be thinking of; Remember, says he, O ye lost souls, that
you had your joy in your life time, your peace in your life time, your
comforts, delights, ease, wealth, health, your heaven, your happiness, and your
portion in your life time.

O miserable state! Thou will then be in a sad condition indeed, when thou
shall see that thou have had thy good things, thy best things, thy pleasent
things, for that is clearly signified by these words, Remember that thou in thy
life time had thy good things, or all the good things thou art like to have.
From whence take notice of another truth, (though it be a dreadful one to them
that fall under the sentence of it) which is this; there are many poor
creatures, who have all their good, sweet, and comfortable things in this life,
or while they are alive in this world: remember, says he, that in thy life
time thou had thy good things, Psalm. 17.14.

2. Observe, That the wickeds good things will shortly have an end: they will
last no longer with them then this life, or their life time. That Scripture was
not written in vain, It is like the crackling of thorns under a pot make a
little blaze for a sudden, a little heat for a while, but come and consider them
by and by, and instead of a comfortable heat, you will find nothing but a few
dead ashes; and instead of a flaming fire, nothing but a smell of smoke.

3. Again observe that there is a time coming that the ungodly would be glad of
a better portion, when they shall see the vanity of this; that is, when they
shall see what a poor thing it is for a man to have his portion in this world.
It Is true, while they are here on this side hell, they think there is nothing
to be compared with riches, honors, and pleasures in this world; which makes
them cry out, Who will show us any good, that is comparable to the pleasures,
profits, and glory of this world? but then they will see there is another thing
that is better, and of more value then ten thousand worlds. And seriously
friends, will it not grieve you, trouble, perplex and torment you, when you
shall see that you lost heaven for a little pleasure and profits in your life
time* certainly it will grieve you and perplex you exceedingly to see what a
blessed heaven you left for a dunghill world. Oh! that you did but believe
this, that you did but consider this, and say within your selves, What, shall I
be contented with my portion in this world? what, shall I lose heaven for this
world? I say, consider it while you have daylight, and Gospel Light, while the
Son of God does hold out terms of reconciliation to you, least you be made to
hear such a voice as this is, Son, remember, that in thy life time thou had
thy good things; thy comforts, thy joys, thy ease, thy peace, and all the
heaven thou art like to have: thou had, all thy good things in thy life time.
O poor heaven! O short pleasures! what a pitiful thing it is to be left in such
a case. Soul consider, is it not miserable to lose heaven for twenty thirty or
forty years sinning against God. Consider, when thy life is done thy heaven is
also done; when death comes to separate thy soul and body, in that day also
thou must have thy heaven and happiness separated from thee and thou from that.
Consider these things therefore betimes, lest thou have thy portion in thy life
time. For if in this life only we have our portion, we are of all people the
most miserable. Again consider, that when other men (the Saints) are to receive
their good things, then thou have had thine: when others are to enter into joy,
then thou art to leave and depart from thy joy: when others are to go to God,
thou must go to the devil. Oh miserable! thou had better thou had never
been born then to be an heir of such a portion, therefore I say have a care it
be not thy condition.

Remember, that thou had thy good things, and Lazarus evil things.

These words do not only hold forth the misery of the wicked in this life, or
world to come, but also great consolal^tion to the Saints, where he says, And
Lazarus evil things, That is, Lazarus had his evil things in his life time, or
when he was in the world.

From whence observe. 1. That the life of the Saints so long as they are in
this world, is attended with many evils or afflictions, which may be discovered
to be of diverse natures, as says the Scripture. Many are the troubles of the
righteous but the Lord delivers him out of all.

2. Take notice, that the afflictions, or evils, that accompany the Saints, may
continue with them their life time, so long as they live in this vale of tears;
yea, and they may be diverse, that is, of several sorts; some outward, some
inward, and that as long as they shall continue here below, as has been the
experience of all Saints in all ages, and this might be proved at large, but I
only hint in these things, although I might enlarge much upon them.

3. The evils that do accompany the Saints will continue with them no longer
then their life time; and here indeed lies the comfort of Believers, the
Lazarus's, the Saints, they must have all their bitter cup wrung out to them in
their life time: here must be all their trouble, here must be all their grief.
Behold, says Christ, the world shall rejoice, but you shall lament; but your
mourning shall, mark, it shall be turned into joy; you shall lament, you shall
be sorrowful, you shall weep in you life time, but your sorrow shall be
tur-turned into joy, and your joy no man (let him be what he will, no man)
shall take away from you. Now if you think, when I say the Saints have all
their evil things in their life time, that I mean they have nothing else but
trouble in this their life time, this is your mistake: for let me tell you,
that though the Saints have all their evil things in their life time, yet even
in their life time they have also joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet 1.6,
7, 8.
while they look not at the things that are seen, but at the things which are
not seen. The joy that the Saints have sometimes in their hearts by a believing
consideration of the good things to come when this life is ended, does fill
them fuller of joy then all the crosses, troubles, temptations, and evils that
accompany them in this life can fill them with grief, 2 Corinthians. 4.

But some Saint may say, my troubles are such as are ready to overcome me.
Answ. Yet be of good comfort, they shall last no longer than thy life time.

But my trouble is, I am perplexed with an heart full of corruption and sin, so
that I am much hindered in walking with God

Answ. It Is like so, but thou shall have these troubles no longer then thy life
time. But I have a cross husband and that is a great grief to me.

It is like so, but thou shall be troubled with him no longer than thy life
time, and therefore be not dismayed, be not discomforted, thou shall have no
trouble longer than this life time.

Art thou troubled with cross children, cross relations, cross neighbors, they
shall trouble thee no longer then this life time.

Art thou troubled with a cunning devil, with unbelief, yea, let it be what it
will, thou shall take thy farewell of them all (if thou be a believer) after thy
life time is ended. O excellent! O sweet! that there should be an end put to
all our troubles after this life is ended: this privilege have all the Saints.
But now on the contrary, if thou be not a right and sound believer, if thou be
no^ indeed effectual converted to the Lord Jesus Christ, then though thou
should live a thousand years in this world, and meet with sore afflictions
every day, yet these afflictions be they never so great and grievous, they are
nothing to that torment that will come upon thee both in soul and in body after
this life is ended.

I say, be what thou will, if thou be found in unbelief, or under the first
covenant thou art sure to smart for it at the time when thou do depart this
world? But the thing to be lamented is this: For all this is so sad a condition
to be fallen into, yet poor souls are for the most part senseless of it, yea,
so senseless at sometimes, as though there was no such misery to come
hereafter. Because the Lord does not immediately strike with his sword, but
does bear long with his creature, waiting that he might be gracious, therefore
I say the hearts of some of the sons of men, are wholly set upon it to do
mischief: Eccles.
And that forbearance and goodness of God, that one would think should lead
them to repentance; the devil hardening of them by their continuing in sin, and
by blinding their eyes, as to the end of Gods forbearance toward them, Rom 2.1.
they are led away with a very hardened and senseless heart, even until they
drop into eternal destruction. But poor hearts as they are, they must have a
time in which they must be made sensible of their former behaviors, when the
just judgments of the Lord shall flame about their ears, insomuch that they
shall be made to cry out again with anguish, I am sorely tormented in this
flame.

But now he is comforted, and thou art tormented.

As if he should say, Now has God recompensed both Lazarus and you according
to what you sought after, while you were in this world; as for your p^rt, you
did neglect the precious mercy and goodness of God, you did turn your back on
the Son of God that came into the world to save sinners: you made a mock of
preaching the Gospel; you was admonished over and over to close in with the
loving kindness of the Lord in his Son Jesus Christ. The Lord let you live 20.
30. 40. 50. 60. years, all which time you instead of spending it to make your
calling and election sure, did spend it in making of eternal damnation sure to
thy soul. And also Lazarus he in his life time did make it his business to
accept of my grace and salvation in the Lord Jesus Christ. When thou wast in
the Alehouse, he frequented the word preached; when thou were jearing at
goodness, he was sighing for the sins of the times; while thou were swearing,
he was praying; in a word, while thou were making sure of eternal ruin, he by
faith in the blood of the Lord Jesus Christ was making sure of eternal
salvation. Therefore, Now he is comforted and thou art tormented.

Here then yo^ ^ay see, that as the righteous shall (...) be always void of
comfort and blessedness, so neither shall the ungodly go always without their
punishment. No, as sure as God is in heaven, it will be thus; they must have
their several portions. And therefore you that are the Saints of the Lord
follow on, be not dismayed forasmuch as you know that your labor is not in
vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. last ver. your portion is eternal glory. And you
that are so loath now to close in with Jesus Christ, Verse 26.
and to leave your sins to follow him, your day is coming in which you shall
know that your sweet morsells of sin that you do so easily take down now and it
scarce troubles you, will have a time so to work within you to your eternal
ruin, that you will be in a worse condition than if you had ten thousand
devils tormenting of you; nay, you had better have been plucked limb from limb
a thousand times (if it could be) than to be partakers of this torment that
will assuredly without mercy lie upon you, if you lose the mercy of God in
Jesus Christ in this your life time.

Ver. 26. And be^^^es all this, between us and you, there is a great gulf
fixed, so that they which would go from hence to you cannot, neither can they
come to us that would come from thence.
THese words are still part of that answer that the souls in hell shall have
for all their sobbings, sighings, grievous cries tears and desires that they
have be released out of those intolerable pains they fell, and are perplexed
with, And O, methinks the words at the first view, if rightly considered, are
enough to make any heard-hearted sinner in the world to fall down dead. The
verse I last spoke to was, and is a very terrible one, and aggravates the
torments of poor sinners wonderfully. Where he says, Remember that thou in thy
ife time had thy good things, and Lazarus his evil things, but now he is
comforted, and thou art tormented, I say these words are very terrible to those
poor souls that die out of Christ. But these latter words do much more hold out
their sorrow. They were spoken as to the present condition then upon the
sinner, these do not only back the former but do yet further aggravate their
misery, holding forth that which will be more intolerable; the former verse is
enough to smite any sinner into a swound, but this to make him fall down dead.
Where he says, And besides all this, there is still something to aggravate thy
misery yet far more abundantly, I shall briefly speak to the words, as they
have relation to the terror spoken of in the verses before. As if he had said,
Thou think thy present state unsupportable, it makes thee sob and sigh, it
makes thee to rue the time that ever thou were borne: Now thou find the want
of mercy; now thou would leap at the least dram of it; now thou feel what
it is to slight the tenders of the grace of God; now it makes the to sobbe,
sigh, and roar exceedingly for the anguish that thou art in. But besides all
this, I have other things to tell thee of that will break thine heart indeed.
As if he should say, O it is true, thou art now deprived of a being in the world,
thou art deprived of hearing the Gospel, the devil has been too hard for thee,
and has made thee miss of heaven: thou art now in hell among an innumerable
company of devils, and all thy sins beset thee round, thou art all over wrapped
in flames, and can not have one drop of water to give the^ any ease; thou
cryest in vain, for nothing will be granted; thou see the Saints in heaven
which is no small trouble to thy damned soul; thou see that neither God nor
Christ takes any care to ease thee, or to speak any comfort unto thee. But
besides all this, there thou art, and there thou art like to lie, never think
of any ease, never look for any comfort; repentance now will do thee no good,
the time is past, and can never be called again; look what thou have now thou
must have for ever. It Is true I speak enough before to break thine heart asu
der, But besides all this, there lie and swim in flame for ever: these words,
Besides all this, are terrible words indeed. I will give you the scope of them
in a similitude. Set case you should take a man, and tie him to a stake, and
with red hot Pincers, pinch off his flesh by little pieces for two or three
years together, and at last, when the poor man cries out for ease and help, the
tormentors answer, Nay, but besides all this, you must be handled worse. We
will serve you thus these 20. years together, and after that we will fill your
mangled body full of scalding lead, and run you through with a red hot spit,
would not this be lamentable? yet this is but a flea-biting to the sorrows of
these that go to hell; for if a man were served so, there would ere it were
long be an end of him. But he that goes to hell shall suffer ten thousand times
worse torments then these, and yet shall never be quite dead under them. There
they shall be ever whining, pining, weeping, mourning, ever tormented without
ease, and yet never dissolved into nothing; if the biggest devil in hell might
pull thee all to pieces, and rend thee small as dust, and dissolve thee into
nothing, thou would count this a mercy. But here thou may lie and fry,
scorch and broil, and burn for ever. For ever, that is, a long while, and yet
it must be so long. Depart from me, says Christ, into everlasting fire, or
into the fire that burns for ever, prepared for the devil and his Angels, Mat.
25.41. Oh, thou that were loath to foul thy foot if it were but durty, or did
but rain; thou that were loath to come out of the chimney corner if the wind
did but blow a little cold; and were loath to go half a mile, yea half a
furlong to hear the word of God, if it were but a little dark; thou that were
loath to leave a few vain companions to edify thy soul: thou shall have fire
enough, thou shall have night enough, and evil company enough, thy belly full
if thou miss of Jesus Christ; and besides all this, thou shall have them for
ever and for ever.

O thou that do spend whole nights in carding and dicing, in rioting and
wantonness, thou that countest it a brave thing to swear as fast as the
bravest, to spend with the greatest spend-thrift (as we call them) in the
country: O thou that love to sin in a corner when no body sees thee! O thou
that for by-ends do carry on an hypocrites profession, because thou would
be counted some body among the children of God, but art an enemy to the things
of Christ in thine heart: thou that do satisfy thy self, either with sins,
or a bare profession of godliness; thy soul will fall into extreme torment, and
anguish so soon as ever thou do depart this world, and there thou shall be
weeping and gnashing thy teeth. And besides all this, thou art like never to
have any ease or remedy, never look for any deliverance, if thou die out of
Christ; thou shall die in thy sins; and be tormented as many years as there are
stars in the firmament, or sands on the seashore; and besides all this, thou
must abide it for ever.

And besides all this between us and you there is a great gulf fixed, so that
they which would pass from hence to you cannot, neither can they come to us
that would come from thence. There is a great gulf fixed.] You will say what is
that? Answ. It is a nice question, therefore, first seek thou, rather to enter
in at the straight, gate than curiously to enquire what this gulf is. But 2. if
thou would needs know, it is like that if thou do fall short of heaven thou will find it this; namely, the everlasting decree of God, that is, that there
is a decree gone forth from God, that those who fall short of heaven in this
world, God is resolved they shall never enjoy it in the world to come. And thou will find this gulf so deep, that thou shall never be able to wade through it
as long as eternity lasts. As Christ says, Agree with thine adversary quickly,
while thou art in the way with him, lest he hale thee to the judge, and the
judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison; I tell thee,
thou shall in no wise come out thence (there is the gulf) the decree; thou
shall not depart thence, till thou have paid the uttermost farthing, or very
last mite, Luke 12.58, 59. These words therefore, there is a great gulf fixed,
I do understand to be the everlasting decree of God; that is, God has decreed,
that those who go to heaven shall never go from thence again into a worse
place; and also those that go to hell, and would come out, they shall not come
out thence again. And friend this is such a gulf, so fixed by him that cannot
lie, that thou will find it so which way soever thou go, whether it be to
heaven or hell. Here therefore thou see how secure God will make those who
dye in the faith; God will keep them in heaven, but those that die in their
sins, God will throw them to hell and keep them there; so that they that would
go from heaven to hell cannot, neither can they come from hell that would go to
heaven. Mark, he does not say, they would not; for oh how fain would these who
have lost their souls for a lust, for two pence, for a jug of Ale for a
strumpet, for this world; come out of that hot scalding fiery furnace of Gods
eternal vengeance, if they might; but here is their misery, they that would
come from you to us, that is, from hell to heaven, cannot. They must not, they
shall not, they cannot, God has decreed it, and is resolved the contrary, here
therefore lies the misery, not so much that they are in hell, if they might
come out again; but there they must lie for ever and ever. O therefore if thy
heart would at any time tempt thee to sin against God, cry out, O no, for then
I must go to hell and lie there for ever. O if the drunkards, swearers, liars,
and hypocrites did but take this doctrine soundly down, it would make them
tremble when they think of sinning. But poor souls, now they will make a mock
at sin, and play with it as a child does play with a rattle; but the time is
coming that these rattles that now they play with, will make such a noise in
their ears and consciences one day, that they shall find, that if all the
devils in hell were yelling at their heels, the noise would not be comparable
to it. Numb. 32.23. O friend, thy sins, as so many bloodhounds will first hunt
thee out, and then take thee, and bind thee, and hold thee down for ever, Prove.
5.22. They will gripe thee and gnaw thee as if thou had a nest of poisonous
Serpents in thy bowels, and this will not be for a time, but as I have said,
for ever, for ever, for ever.

Ver. 27. Then he said I pray thee therefore father, Verse 27.
that thou would send him to my fathers house,
THe verses before, I told you, were spoken partly to hold forth a desire that
the damned have to be freed of their endless misery. Now this verse that I have
read unto you still holds forth that the cries of those poor souls very
vehement, they would very fain have something granted to them, but it will not
be; as will more clearly appear afterward.

Then he said I pray thee therefore Father, etc.] As if he should say, Seeing I
have brought my self into such a miserable condition, that God will not regard
me, that my exceeding loud and bitter cries will not be heard for my self,
seeing I must not be admitted to have so much as one drop of cold water, nor
the least help from the poorest Saint: And seeing besides all this, here my
soul must lie to all eternity broyling and frying: Seeing I must whether I will
or no, undergo the hand of eternal vengeance, and the rebukes of devouring
fire, seeing my state is such, that I would not wish a dog in my condition;
send him to my fathers house. It is worthy to be taken notice of, (again) who
it is he desired should be sent, namely Lazarus. O friend, see here how the
stout hearts and stomachs of poor creatures will be humbled, (as I said before)
they will be so brought down, that those things that they d sdained and made
light of in this world, they would be glad of in the life to come: He who by
this man was so slighted, as that he thought it a dishonor that he should eat
with the dogs of his flock. What, shall I r^gard Lazarus? scrubbed, beggarly
Lazarus? what shall I so far dishonor my fair sumptuous and g^y house, with
such a scabbed creep-hedge as he; no, I scorn he should be entertained under
my roof Thus in his lifetime, while he was in his bravery: but now he is come
into another world, now he is parted from his pleasures, now he sees his fine
house, his dainty dishes, his rich neighbors and companions and he are parted
asunder, now he finds instead of pleasures, torments; in^ ead of joy,
heaviness; instead of heaven, hell; instead of the pleasures of sin, the
horror and guilt of sin: O now send Lazarus..

Lazarus it may be, might have done him some good, if he might have been
entertained in time past: It may be God might have used him as an instrument to
do this ungodly wretch, some good, and might have persuaded him at least not to
have gone on so grievously wicked: but he slights him, he will not regard him,
he is resolved to disown him, though he lose his soul for so doing. I, but now
send Lazarus, if not to me, yet to my father house, and let him tell them from
me, that if they run on in sin, as I have done, they must and shall receive the
same wages that I have received.

Take notice of this, you that are despisers of the least of the Lazarus's of
our Lord Jesus Christ: it may be now you are loath to receive these little ones
of his, because they are not Gentlemen, because they cannot with Pontius Pilate
speak Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. Nay, they must not, shall not speak to them,
admonish them and all because of this.

Though now a Gospel-Sermon of the Lord Jesus Christ may be preached to them in
English, freely, and for nothing; nay, they are now desired to hear and receive
it, and they will do him that preaches a courtesy. I say, though now they
will not own; regard, or embrace these Christian profers of the glorious truth
of Jesus, because they come out of some of the basest earthen vessels: yet the
time is coming when they will both sigh and cry, sead him to my Fathers house.
I say, remember this ye that despise the day of small things; the time is
coming, when you would be glad, if you might enjoy from God, from Christ, or
his Saints, one small drop of cold water: though now you are unwilling to
receive the glorious distilling drops of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus.

Again, see here the lamentable state they are in that go to hell from their
Fathers, Mothers, Sisters, Brothers, etc. Now, while they are in this world,
men delight to set their children ill examples; and also children love to
follow the wicked steps of their ungodly parents, but when they depart this
life, and drop down into hell, and find themselves in irrecoverable misery,
then they cry, Send some body to my fathers house, to my brothers house; O tell
them my state is miserable, tell them I am undone forever; and tell them also,
that if they will be walking in these ungodly steps wherein I left them, they
will assuredly fall into this place of torments. I pray thee send him to my
fathers house.] Ah friends and neighbors, it is like you little think of this,
that some of your friends and relations are crying out in hell, Lord send some
body to my fathers house, to preach the Gospel to them, lest they also come
into these torments. Here, men while they live can willingly walk together in
the way of sin, and when they are parted by death, they that are living seldom
or never consider of the sad condition that they that are dead are descended
into. But ye ungodly fathers, how are your ungodly children, roaring now in
hell? and you ungodly children how are your ungodly parents that lived and died
ungodly, now in the pains of hell also; and one drunkard it is like singing on
the Ale-bench, and another roaring under the wrath of God, saying, O that I was
with him now, how would I rebuke him, and persuade him by all means to leave
off these evil courses. That he, or they, did but consider what I now suffer
for pride, covetousness, drunkenness, lying, swearing, stealing, whoring and
the like. Oh! did they but feel the thousand part thereof, it would make them
look about them, and not buy sin at so dear a rate as I have done; even with
the loss of my precious soul.

Send him to my fathers house.] Not to my father, but to my fathers house. It
may be there is ungodly children, there is ungodly servants, wallowing in their
ungodliness, send him therefore to my fath^rs house. It is like, they are still
the some that I left them; I left them wicked, and they are wicked still, I
left them slighters of ^he Gospel, Saints, and ways of God, and they do it
still; send him to my fathers house, it is like there is but a little between
them and the place where I am; send him to day, before to morrow, lest they
come into the same place of torment. I pray thee that thou would send him.] I
beg it on my bended knee, as it were, with crying and with tears, in the Agony
of my soul. It may be they will not consider, if thou do not send him; I left
them sottish enough hardened as well as I, they have the same devil to tempt
them, the same lusts and world to overcome them, I pray thee therefore that
thou would send him to my fathers house; make no delay lest they lose their
souls, lest they come hither, if they do, they are like never to return again.
Oh! little do they think how easily they may lose their souls, they are apt to
think their condition to be as good as the best, as I once through ignorance
did; But send him, send him without delay, lest they come into this place of
torment. O that thou would give him commission, do thou send him thy self;
it is true, the time was when I, together with them, slighted those that were
sent of God, and owned those that were sent of men, ye^ though we could not
deny but he sp^ke the word of God, and was sent of him as our consciences told
us; yet we preferred the calls of men, before the calls of God: for though they
had the one, yet because they had not the other in that Antichristian way which
we thought meet, we could not, would not, either hear him our selves, nor yet
give consent that others should. But now a call from God is worth all. Do
(thou) therefore send him to my fathers house. The time was when we did not
like it, except it might be preached in the Synagogue, and Steeple Houses, we
thought it a low thing to preach and pray together in houses: we were too high
spirited, too superstitious, the Gospel would not down with us unless we had it
in such a place, by such a man; no, nor then neither effectually: But now, Oh!
that I was to live in the world again; and might have that privilege to have
some acquaintance with blessed Lazarus, some familiarity with that holy man;
what attendance would I give unto his wholesome words? how would I affect his
doctrine; and close in with it? how would I square my life thereby? now
(therefore) it is better to hear the Gospel under an hedge, then to sit roaring
in a Tavern: it is better to welcome Gods begging Lazarus's, then the wicked
companions of this world. it is better to receive a Saint in the name of a Saint,
a Disciple in the name of a Disciple, then to do as I have done. Oh! it is
better to receive a child of God, that can by experience deliver the things of
God, his free love, his tender grace, his rich forbearance; and also the misery
of man, if without it, then to be daubed up with untempered mortar. Oh! I may
curse the day that ever I gave way to the flatteries, and fawning of a company
of carnal Clergymen, but this my repentance is too late; I should have looked
about me sooner if I would have been saved from this woeful place. O therefore
send him, not only to the town I lived in, and unto some of my acquaintance,
but to my fathers house. Or else thus also may they cry; In my life time I did
not care to hear that word that cut me most, and showed me mine estate aright.
I was vexed to hear my sins mentioned and laid to my charge; I loved him best
that deceived me most; that said peace, peace, when there was no such thing.
But now, I say, Oh that I had been soundly told of it! Oh that it had pierced
both mine ears and heart, and had stuck so fast that nothing could have cured
me saving the blood of Christ! It is better to be dealt plainly with, then that
we should be deceived! they had better see their lost condition in the world,
then stay while they be damned, as I have done; therefore send Lazarus, send
him to my fathers house. Let him go and say, I saw your son, your brother, in
hell weeping and wailing, and gnashing his teeth: Let him bear them down in it,
and tell them plainly it is so, Verse 28.
and that they shall see to their everlasting misery. if they have not a
special care* send him to my fathers house.

Ver. 28. For I have five brethren, that he may testify unto them, lest they
also come into this place of torment.
THese words are [if I may so say] a reason given by those in hell, why they
are so restless, and do cry so loud, it is that their companions might be
delivered from those intolerable torments which they must and shall undergo if
they fall short of everlasting life by Jesus Christ. Send him to my fathers
house, for I have five brethren, etc. Though while they lived among them in the
world they were not so sensible of their ruin, yet now they are passed out of
the world and do partake of that which before they were warned of, they can I
say, then cry out, now I find that to be true indeed which was once and again
told and declared to me that it would certainly come to pass.

For I have five brethren] Here you may see that there may be, and are, whole
households in a damnable state and condition, as our Lord Jesus does by this
signify. Send him to my fathers house, for they are all in one state, I left
all my brethren in a pitiful case. People while they live here cannot endure
to hear that they should be all in a miserable condition; but when they are
under the wrath of God, they see it, they know it, and are very sure of it, for
they themselves when they were in the world lived as they do, but they fell
short of heaven, and therefore if they go on, so shall they. Oh therefore send
him quickly to my fathers house, for all the house is in an undone condition,
and must be damned if they continue so. The thing observable is this, namely,
that those that are in hell, do not desire that their companions should come
thither; nay rather says he, send him to my fathers house, and let him
testify to them that are therein, lest they also come, etc.

Quest. But some may say, what should be the reason, that the damned should
desire not to have there companions come into the same condition that they are
fallen into, but rather that they might be kept from it, and escape that
dreadful state.

Answ. I do believe there is scarce so much love in any of the damned in hell,
as really to desire the salvation of any; it would seem strange to me, that
such a quality should be found in any there, as out of singleness of heart, to
desire the salvation of their neighbors, out of love to them. But in that
there is any desire in them that are damned, that their friends and relations
should not come into that place of torment. It appears to me to be rather for
their own ease then for their neighbors good; for let me tell you, this I do
believe, that it will aggravate or heighten the grief and horror of them, to
see their ungodly neighbors in the like destruction with them: For where the
ungodly do live, and die, and descend into the pit together, the one is rather
a vexation to the other, then any thing else. And it must needs be so, because
there are no ungodly people, that do live ungodly together, but they do learn
ill examples one of another, as thus. If there live one in the town that is
very expert and cunning for the world, why now the rest of his neighbors that
are of the same mind with him, they will labor to imitate him and follow his
steps: this is commonly seen. Again, if there be one given to drunkenness,
others of the town through his means, run the more into that sin with him, and
do accustom themselves the more unto it, because of his enticing them, and also
bysetting such an ill example before them. And so if there be any addicted to
pride, and must needs be in all the newest fashions, how do their example
provoke other to love and follow the same vanity; spending that upon their
lusts which should relieve their own and others wants. Also if there be any
given to jesting, scoffing, lying, whoring, backbiting, junketting, wantonness,
or any other sin; they that are most expert in these things do oft-times
entangle others that peradventure would not have been so vile as now they are,
had they not had such an example. Now these will by their doings exceedingly
aggravate the condemnation of one another, as thus. He that did set his
neighbor an ill example, and thereby caused him to walk in sin: He will be
found one cause of his and his friends destruction, insomuch that he will have
to answer for his own sins, and for a great part of his neighbors too, which
will still add to his destruction: as that Scripture in Ezekiel. shows, where
speaking of the watchman that should give the people warning, if he did not,
though the man did die in his sins, yet his blood should be required at the
watchmans hand, Ezekiel. 33. So here let me tell thee, that if thou should be
such an one, as by thy conversation and practices, shall be a trap and a
stumbling block to cause thy neighbor to fall into eternal ruin, though he be
damned for his own sin; yet God may, nay, he will charge thee as being guilty
of his blood, in that thou did not content thy self to keep from heaven thy
self, but did also by thy filthy conversation keep away others also, and
cause them to fall with thee. O therefore, will not this aggravate thy torment.
Yea, if thou should die, and go to hell before thy neighbor or companions,
besides the guilt of thine own sins, thou would be so laden with the fear
of the damnation of others to be laid to thy charge, that thou would cry
out; O send one from the dead to this companion, and that companion, with whom
I had society in my life time, for I see my cursed carriage will be one cause
of his condemnation, if he fall short of glory. It is true, I left him living
in foul and heinous offenses: But I was one of the first instruments to bring
him to them. Oh, I shall be guilty both of mine own and his damnation too! that
he might be kept out hence lest my torment be aggravated by his coming hither.

For as I said before, where ungodly people do dwell together, they being a
snare and stumbling block one to another by their practices, they must needs be
a torment one to another, and an aggravation of each others damnation. O cursed
be thy face, says one, that ever I set mine eyes on thee: It was long of thee;
I may thank the; it was thee that did entice me, and ensnare me; it was your
filthy conversation that was as a stumbling block to me, it was your
covetousness, it was your pride, your haunting the Alehouse, your gaming and
whoring, it was long o^ you that I fell short of life, if you had set me a good
example as you did set me an ill one, it may be I might have done better then
now I do: But I learned of you, I followed your steps, I took counsel of you. O
that I had never seen thy face! O that thou had never been born! to do my
soul this wrong as you have done: O says the other, And I may as much blame
you, for do not you remember how at such a time, and at such a time, you drew
me out, and drew me away, and asked me if I would go with you, when I was going
about other business, about my calling; but you called me away, you sent for
me, you are as much in the fault as I, though I were covetous, you were proud;
and if you learned covetousness of me, This language is sometimes heard at the
gallows, but for ought that I can learn, it is more to be heard in hell.
I learned pride and drunkenness of you; though I learned you to cheat, you
learned me to whore, to lie, to scoff at goodness. Though I base wretch did
stumble you in some things, yet you did as much stumble me in others. I can
blame you as you blame me; and if I have to answer for some of your most filthy
actions, you have to answer for some of mine. I would you had not come hither,
the very looks of you does wound my soul, by bringing my sins afresh into my
mind, the time when, the manner how, the place where, the persons with whom: it
was with you, you! grief to my soul! since I could not shun thy company there.
Oh! that I had been without thy company here.

I say therefore for these that have sinned together, to go to hell together,
it will very much perplex and torment them both. Therefore I judge this is one
reason why they that are in hell do desire, that their friends, or companions
do not come thither into the same place of torment that they are in. And
therefore, where Christ says, that these damned souls cry out, Send to our
companions, that they may be warned and commanded to look to themselves. O send
to my five brethren; it is because they would not have their own torments
heightened by their company; and a sense, yea, a continual sense of their sins
which they did cause them to commit, when they were in the world with them. For
I do believe that the very looks of those that have been beguiled by their
fellows, I say, their very looks will be a torment to them: for thereby will
the remembrance of their own sins be kept (if possible) the fresher on their
consciences, which they committed with them, and also they will wonderfully
have the guilt of the others sins upon them, in that they we^e partly the cause
of his committing ^^em, being instruments in the hands of the devil to draw
them into them. And therefore lest this come to pass, I pray thee send him to
my fathers house. For if they might not come hither, peradventure my torment
might have some mitigation: that is, if they might be saved, then their sins
will be pardoned, and not so heavily charged on my soul. But if they do fall
into the same place where I am, the sins that I have caused them to commit will
lie so heavy, not only on their souls but also on mine, that they will be
enough to sink me into eternal misery deeper and deeper. O therefore, send him
to my fathers house, to my five brethren, and let him testify to them lest
they come into this place of torment.

These words being thus understood. What a condition does it show them to be in
then, that now so much delight in being the very ringleaders of their
companions into sins of all sorts whatsoever.

Now while men live here, if they can be counted the cunningest in cheating,
the boldest for lying, the archest for whoring, the subtillest for coveting,
and getting the world: Now if men can but cunningly defraud, undermine, cross,
and anger their neighbors* yea, and hinder their neighbors from the means of
Grace, the Gospel of Christ; they can now glory in it, take a pride in it, and
think themselves pretty well at ease, and there minds and are somewhat quiet
being beguiled with sin.

But my friend, when thou have lost this life, and do begin to lift up thine
eyes in hell, and see what thy sins have brought thee to; and not only so,
but that thou by thy filthy sins did cause others, (devil-like) to fall into
the same condemnation with thee: And that one of the reasons of their damnation
was this, that thou did lead them to the commission of those wicked practices
of this world, and the lusts thereof. Oh! that some body would stop them from
coming, lest they also come into this place of torment, and be damned as I am;
how will it torment me? For the reason (as I said before) why some men's
condemnations are more intolerable then others, is sometimes, because they
have not only damned themselves by their sins, but their ungodly carriages
have been stumbling blocks to others; causing them also to stumble and fall at
that for which thou thy self art damned. Balaam could not be contented to be
damned himself, but also he must by his wickedness cause others to stumble and
fall. Rev. 2.14.
The Scribes and Pharisees could not be converted to keep out of heaven
themselves, but they must labor to keep out others too.

The deceived cannot be content to be deceived himself, but he must labor to
deceive others also. The drunkard cannot be contented to go to hell for his own
sins, but he must labor to cause others to fall into the same furnace with
him. O friends! look to your selves, for here will be damnation upon damnation,
damned for thy own sins, and damned for thy being a partaker with others in
their sins; and damned for being guilty of the damnation of others. O how will
the drunkard cry for leading their neighbors into drunkenness? How will the
covetous person howl for setting his neighbor, his friend, his brother, his
children and relations so wicked an example; by which he has not only wronged
his own soul, but also the souls of others. The liar by lying, learned others
to lie; the swearer learned others to swear, the whoremonger learns others to
whore. Now all these, with others of the like sort, will be guilty, not only
of their own damnation, but also of the damnation of others. I tell you, that
some men have been so much the authors of the damnation of others, that I am
ready to think that the damnation of them will trouble them as much as their
own damnation. Some men (it is to be feared) at the day of judgment will be
found to be the author of destroying whole nations. How many souls do you think
Balaam with his deceit will have to answer for? How many, Mahomet? How many,
the Pharisees, that hired the soldiers to say the Disciples stole away Jesus,
and by that means stumbled their brethren to this day; and was one means of
hindering them from believing the things of God and Jesus Christ; and so the
cause of the damnation of their brethren to this very day.

How many souls has Bonner to answer for think you? and several filthy blind
Priests? How many souls have they been the means of destroying by their
ignorance, and corrupt doctrine? preaching that that was no better to their
souls, than Rats-bane to the body, for filthy lucres sake. O ye Priests this
word is for you.
They shall see, that they, many of them, it is to be feared, will have whole
towns to answer for; whole cities to answer for. Ah, Friend, I tell thee, thou
that have taken in hand to preach to the people; it may be thou have taken in
hand thou can not tell what; Will it not grieve thee to see thy whole parish
come bellowing after thee to hell, crying out, this we may thank thee for, this
is long of thee, thou did not teach us the truth; thou did lead us away
with fables, thou wast afraid to tell us of our sins, lest we should not put
meat fast enough in thy mouth.
O cursed wretch, that ever thou should beguile us thus! deceive us thus!
flatter us thus. We would have gone out to hear the word abroad, but that thou
did reprove us; and also tell us, that that which we see now is the way of
God, was Heresy, and a deceivable doctrine; and wast not contented (blind
Guide as thou were) to fall into the dich thy self, but have also lead us
thither with thee.

I say, look to thy self, lest thou cry out when it is too late; O send Lazarus
to my people, my friends, my children, my congregation to whom I preached, and
beguiled through my folly. Send him to the town in which I did pr^ach last,
lest I be the cause of their damnation. Send him to my friends from whence I
came, lest I be made to answer for their soul and mine own too, Ezekiel. 33.1.2,
3, 4, 5, 6.

O send him therefore, and let him tell them, and testify unto them lest they
also come into this place of torment. Consider this ye that live in the world,
while you are in the land of the living, lest you fall into this condition. Set
case thou should by thy carriage destroy but a soul, but one poor soul, by
one of thy carriages, or actions, by thy sinful works; consider it now, I say,
lest thou be forced to cry, I pray thee therefore, that thou would send him
to my fathers house for I have five brethren, that he may testify unto them,
lest they also come into this place of torment.

If so, then I shall not only say to the blind guides, look you to your
selves, and shut out others: no, but this does reach in all those that do not
only keep souls from heaven by preaching, and the like, but this does also
speak forth the doom of those that shall any ways be instrumental to hinder
others for closing in with Jesus Christ. O what red lines will those be against
all these rich ungodly Landlords, that so keep under their poor Tenants, that
they dare not go out to hear the word, for fear their Rent should be raised, or
they turned out of their houses. What say thou, Landlord, will it not cut
thy soul, when thou shall see that thou could not be content to miss of
heaven thy self, but thou must labor to hinder others also? Will it not give
thee an eternal wound in thy heart, both at death and judgment, to be accused
of the ruin of thy neighbors soul, thy servants soul, thy wives soul,
together with the ruin of thy own. Think on this you drunken proud, rich, and
scornful Landlords, think on this you mad-brain'd blasphemous Husbands, that
are against the godly and chaste conversation of your Wives; also you that hold
your Servants so hard to it, that you will not spare them time to hear the
word, unless it be where, and when your lusts will let you. O if you love your
own souls your Tenants souls: your Wives souls, your Servants souls, your
Children souls: if you would not cry, if you would not howl, if you would not
bear the burden of the ruin of others for ever; then I beseech you to consider
this doleful story, and labor to avoid the soul-killing torment that this poor
wretch groaneth under, when he says, I pray thee therefore that thou would
send him to my fathers house.

For I have five brethren, that he may testify. Mark, that he may testify
unto them; lest they also come into this place of torment.

These words have still something more in them then I have yet observed from
them; there are one or two things more that I shall briefly touch upon, and
therefore, Mark, he says, That he may testify unto them, lest, etc. Mark, I
pray, you and take notice of the word, Testify. He does not say, and let him
go unto them, or speak with, or tell them such and such things. No, but let him
testify, or affirm it constantly, in case any should oppose it. Let him
testify to them. It is the same word the Scripture uses to set forth the
vehemency of Christ his telling of his disciples of him that should betray
him, And he testified, saying, One of you shall betray me. And he testified,
that is, he spoke it so, as to dash, or overcome any that should have said, it
shall not be so. It is a word that signifies thus much. That in case any should
oppose the things spoken of, yet that the party speaking should still continue
constant in his saying. And he commanded them to preach, and to testify that
it is he which was ordained of God to be the ju^ge of quick and dead. To
testify, Mark, that is, to be constant, irresistible, undanted, in case it
should be opposed and objected against. So here* let him testify to them, lest
they come into this place of torment.

From whence observe; That it is not an easy matter to persuade them who are
in their sins alive in this world, that they must and shall be damned if they
turn not, and be converted to God. Let him testify to them, let him speak
confidently, though they frown upon him, or dislike his way of speaking to
them. And how is this truth verified and cleared by the carriages of almost all
men now in the world, toward them that do preach the Gospel; and show their own
miserable state plainly to them if they close not with it. If a man do but
indeed labor to convince sinners of their sins, and lost condition by nature,
though they must be damned if they live and die in that condition; Oh how angry
are they at it. Look how he judges, say they; hark how he condemns us; he tells
us we must be damned if we live and die in this state; we are offended at him,
we cannot abide to hear him, or any such as he; we will believe none of them
all, but go on in the way we are a going.

I say, tell the drunkard he must be damned if he leave not his drunkenness,
the swearer, liar, cheater, thief, covetous, railers, or any ungodly persons,
they must and shall lie in hell for it, if they die in this condition, they
will not believe you, nor credit you. Again, tell others that there are many in
hell that have lived and died in their conditions, and so are they like to be
if they convert not to Jesus Christ and be found in him. Again, there are
others that are more civil and sober men, who, (although we know that their
civility will not save them) if we do but tell them plainly of the emptiness,
and unprofitableness of that, as to the saving of their souls, and that God
will not accept them, nor love them, notwithstanding these things, and that if
they intend to be saved, they must be better provided than with such a
righteousness as this; they will either fling away and come to hear no more, or
else if they do come, they will bring such prejudice with them in their hearts,
that the word preached shall not profit them, it being mixed, not with faith
but with prejudice in them that hear it. Nay, they will some of them be so full
of anger, that they will break out and call even those that speak the truth
Heretics; and say they would deceive them. And why so? Because they tell
them, that if they live in their sins that will damn them, yet if the turn
and live a righteous life, according to the holy and just and good law of God,
that will not save them. Yea, because we tell them plainly, that unless they
leave their sins and righteousness too and close in with a naked Jesus Christ,
his blood and merits, and what he has done, and is now doing for sinners, they
cannot be saved. And unless they do eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink
his blood, they have no life abiding in them: they gravel presently, and are
offended at it (as the Jews were with Christ for speaking of the same thing to
them, Joh. 6.53, 60.) and fling away themselves, the souls and all, by
quarrelling against the doctrine of the Son of God, as indeed they do, though
they will not believe they do; and therefore he that is a Preacher of the word,
had need, not only tell them, but testify to them again, and again, that
their sins, if they continue in them, will damn them, and damn them again.
And tell them again, their living honestly according to the law, their paying
every one their own, their living quietly with their neighbors, their giving
to the poor, their notion of the Gospel, and saying they do believe in Christ,
will do them no good at the general day of Judgment, they are offended also.
Ha friends! how many of you are there at this very day, that have been told
once and again, of your lost undone condition, because you want the right,
real, and saving work of God upon our souls. I say, has not this been told
you, yea, testified unto you from time to time, that your state is miserable,
that yet you are never the better, but do still stand where you did; some in an
openly ungodly life, and some drowned in a self-conceited holiness of
Christianity. Therefore for Gods sake if you love your souls, consider, and beg
of God for Jesus Christ's sake, that he would work such a work of grace in your
hearts, and give you such a faith in his Son Jesus Christ, that you may not
only have rest here, as you think, not only think your state safe while you
live here; but that you may be safe indeed, not only here, but also when you
are gone; lest you do cry in the anguish and perplexity of your souls, O send
one to my companions that have been beguiled by Satan, as I have been; and so
by going on, come into this place of torment, as I have done.

Again, one thing more is to be observed from these words, Let him testify to
them lest they come into this place of torment.

Mark, lest they come in, as if he had said, or else they will come into this
place of torment, as sure as I am here. From whence observe. That though some
souls for sin do fall into the bottomless pit of hell before their fellows,
because they depart this world before them; yet the other abiding in the same
course, are as sure to go to the same place, as if they were there already. How
so? Because, they are all condemned together, they have all fallen under the
same law, and have all offended the same justice; and must for certain, if they
die in that condition, drink as deep, if not deeper, of the same destruction.
Mark, I pray you what the Scriptures say, He that believes not, is condemned
already. John 3.18.


He is condemned as well as they, having broken the same law with them: if so,
then what hinders, but they will partake of the same destruction with them?
only the one has not the law yet so executed upon them, because they are
here; the other have had the law executed upon them, they are gone to drink
that which they have been brewing, and thou art brewing that in this life,
which thou must certainly drink, if thou be not found in Jesus Christ. Mark,
the same law I say, is in force against you both, only he is executed, and
thou art not. Just as if there were a company of prisoners at the bar, and all
condemned to die; what, because they are not all executed in one day, therefore
shall they not be executed at all? Yes, the same law that executed its severity
upon the parties now deceased, will for certain be executed on them that are
alive in its appointed time: Even so it is here, we are all condemned by
nature, if we close not in with the grace of God by Jesus Christ, we must and
shall be destroyed with the same destruction; and therefore, send him (says
he) lest. Mark, lest they come into this place of torment.

Again, Send him to my fathers house, and let him testify to them, lest they
come into this place of torment. As if he had said, It may be he may prevail
with them; It may be he may win upon them, and so they may be kept from hence,
from coming into this grievous place of torment. From whence observe again.

That there is a possibility of obtaining mercy, if now, I say, now in this day
of grace we turn from our sins to Jesus Christ; yea, it is more then possible.
And therefore for thy encouragement, do thou know for certain, that if thou
shall in this thy day accept of mercy upon Gods own terms, and close with him
effectually, God has promised, yea made many promises, that thy soul shall be
conducted safe to glory, and shall for certain escape all the evils that I have
told thee of; I, and many more then I can imagine. Do but search the
Scriptures, and see how full of consolation they are to a poor soul that is
minded to close in with Jesus Christ. He that comes to me (says Christ) I
will in no wise cast out. Though he be an old sinner, I will in no wise cast
him out. Mark, in no wise, though he be a great sinner, I will in no wise cast
him out, if he come to me. Though he have slighted me never so many times, and
not regarded the welfare of his own soul, yet let him now come to me, and
notwithstanding this, I will in no wise cast him out, nor throw away his soul,
Joh. 6.37. Again, says the Apostle. Now (Mark now) is the accepted time, now
is the day of salvation. Now here is mercy good store, now Gods heart is open
to sinners: now he will make you welcome; now he will receive any body if they
do but come to Christ. He that comes to me (says Christ) I will in no wise
cast out. And why? Because now is the accepted time, now is the day of
salvation. 2 Cor. 6.2, 3. As if the Apostle had said, If you will have mercy,
have it now, receive it now, close in with it now.

God has a certain day to hold out his grace to sinners; Now is the time, now
is the day. It Is true, there is a day of damnation, but this is a day of
salvation. It Is true, there is a day coming wherein sinners, must cry to the
mountains to fall on them, to the hills to cover them from the wrath of God;
but now, now, is the day in which he does hold out his grace. There is a day a
coming in which you will not be admitted to have the privilege of one drop of
water to cool your tongue; if now, I say, if now you slight his grace and
goodness which he holds out to you. Ah friends, consider there is now hopes of
mercy, but then there will not; now Christ holds forth mercy unto you, but then
he will not. ( Mat. 7.23.) Now there are his Servants that do beseech you to
accept of his grace, but if thou lose the opportunity that is put into thine
hand, thou thy self may beseech hereafter, and no mercy be given thee. And
he cried and said, Father Abraham have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he
may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue. And there was none
given. Therefore, let it never be said of thee as it will be said of some; Why
is there a price put into the hand of a fool, seeing he has no heart to it:
Seeing he has no heart to make a good use of it, ( Prove. 17.16.) consider
therefore with thy self, and say, It is better going to heaven then hell; it is
better to be saved then damned; it is better to be with Saints, then with
damned souls; and to go to God, is better then to go to the devil.

Therefore, seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is
near. Isa. 55.6. Lest in thy trouble he leave thee to thy self, and say unto
thee plainly, Where I am, thither ye cannot come. Joh. 8.21.

O if they that are in hell might but now again have one such invitation as
this, how would they leap for joy. I have thought sometimes, should God send
but one of his ministers to the damned in hell and give him commission to
preach the free love of God in Christ extended to them, and held out to them,
if now while it is proffered to them they will accept of his kindness; O how
welcome would they make this news, and close in with it on any terms.

Certainly they would say, we will accept of grace on any terms in the world,
and thank you too, though it cost life and limbs to boot, we will spare no
cost, nor charge, if mercy may be had. But poor souls, while they live here
they will not part from sin, with hell-bred, devilish sin: No, they will rather
lose their souls then lose their filthy sins. But friend, thou will change thy
note ere it be long, and cry O simple wretch that I am, that I should damn my
soul by sin. It Is true, I have had the Gospel preached to me and have been
invited in: I have been preached to, and have been warned of this; but how have
I hated instruction, and mine heart despised reproof: I have not obeyed the
voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them that instructed me. Prove.
5.10, 11. O therefore, I say, poor soul, is there hope, then lay thine hand
upon thy mouth and kiss the dust, and close in with the Lord Jesus Christ, and
make much of his glorious mercy, and invite also thy companions to close in
with the same Lord Jesus Christ, lest one of you do go to hell before hand, and
expect with grief of heart, your companions to come after: And in the mean time
with anguish of spirit do sigh and say,

O send him to my companions, and let him testify to them, lest they also come
into this place of torment.

Again I might observe from these words, that though men in their life time are
so proud and stout, that they will not hear nor regard the poor people of God,
and their exhortations, I say, in their life time: yet the time is coming, that
they would be glad, that the very meanest of all the servants of God, should
not only administer comfort to them, but also, (when once they are departed
this life) that even those whom once they slighted should go and testify the
certainty of eternal damnation to those their companions, Verse. 29.
and that at home, at their houses, in all plainness amd simplicity of soul.
But I pass by enlarging upon it, as having touched on it already.

Ver. 29. Abraham said unto him, they have Moses and the Prophets, let them
hear them.
IN the verses foregoing, you see there is a discovery of the lamentable state
of the poor soul that dies out of Christ, and the special favor of God. And
also how little the glorious God of heaven does regard and take notice of their
most miserable condition, that he will not so much as afford them one drop of
cold water; that is, the least ease or comfort. Now in this verse, the Lord
does magnify the word which was spoken to the people by the Prophets and
Apostles, where he says, They have Moses and the Prophets, let them here them.
As if he should say, thou ask me that I should send Lazarus back again into
the world, to preach to them that live there, that they might escape that
doleful place that thou art in: what needs that? have they not Moses and the
Prophets, have they not had my Ministers and servants sent unto them, and
coming as from me? I sent Enoch, and Noah, Moses, and Samuel. I sent David,
Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, Hosea, and the rest of the Prophets,
together with Peter, Paul, John, Matthew, James, Jude, with the rest; Let them
hear them. As if he should say again, what they have spoken by divine
inspiration, I will own, whether it be for the damnation of those that reject,
or the saving of them that receive their doctrine: And therefore, what need
have they that one should be sent unto them in another way? Seeing they have
Moses and the Prophets let them hear them; let them receive their word, close
in with the doctrine declared by them; let them hear them. I shall not at this
time speak any thing to that word (Abraham) having touched upon it already; but
shall tell you what is to be understood by these words, They have Moses and the
Prophets, let them hear them. The things that I shall observe from hence are
these. 1. That the Scriptures spoken by the holy men of God, are a sufficient
rule to instruct to salvation, them that do assuredly believe and close in with
what they hold forth. They have Moses and the prophets, let them hear them.
That is, if they would escape, that doleful place, and be saved indeed from the
intolerable pains of hell fire, as they desire, they have that which is
sufficient to counsel them, for their going aside from that. They have Moses
and the Prophets, let them be instructed by them, be admonished by them, let
them hear them; 2 Timothy 3.16.17.
for all Scripture is given by inspiration of God; and is profitable for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, why,
that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to every good work.

Do but mark the words. All Scripture is profitable, Mark All, take it where
you will, and in what place you will; profitable, for what? That the man of
God, or he that is bound for heaven, and would instruct others in their
progress thither.

It is profitable to instruct him, in case he be ignorant; to reprove him, in
case he transgress; to correct him, if he has need of it; to confirm him, if
he be wavering. It is profitable for doctrine, and all this in a very righteous
way, that the poor soul may not only be helped, but thoroughly furnished, not
only to some, but to all good works. And when Paul would counsel Timothy, to
stick close to the things that are sound and sure, presently he puts him upon
the Scriptures, saying, Thou have from a child known the Scriptures which are
able to make thee wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15.
through faith which is in Christ Jesus. The Scriptures holds forth Gods mind
and will, of his love and mercy toward man, and also the creatures carriage
toward him from first to last; so if thou would know the love of God in
Christ to sinners? Joh. 5.39.
Then search the Scriptures, for they are they that testify of him.

Would thou know what thou art, and what is in thy heart, then search the
Scriptures, and see what is written in them. Romans 3. from 9. to 18. Rom 1.19.30,
31, 32. Jer. 17.9. Genesis 6.5. chapter 8.21. Ephesians. 4.18. with many others. The
Scriptures I say, they are able to give a man perfect instruction into any of
the things of God necessary to faith and godliness, if he have but an honest
heart, seriously to weigh and ponder the several things contained in them. As
to instance in things more particular for the further clearing up of this; And
first if we come to the creation of the world.

Would thou know somewhat concerning that, then read Genesis 1. and 2. chap.
and compare them with Psalm, 33. at the 6. Also, Isaiah 66.2. Prove. 8. toward
the end.

Would thou know whether he made them of something or nothing, read Heb.
11.3.

Would thou know whether he put forth any labor in making them, as we do in
making things, read Psalm. 33.9.

If thou would know whether man was made by God corrupt or upright, read
Eccles. 7, 26. Genesis 1.10, 18, 25, 31.

Would thou know where God did place man after he had made him, read Genesis
2.15.

Would thou know whether that man did live there all his time or not, then
read, Genesis 3.23, 24.

If thou would know whether man be still in that state by nature, that God
did place him in, then read Eccles. 7.26. and compare it with Romans 5.16. and
Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. God made man upright, but he has sought out many inventions.

If thou would know whether the man were first beguiled, or the woman that
God made an help meet for him, read Genesis 3.6. and com. it with 1 Timothy 2.14.

Would thou know whether God looked upon Adams eating of the forbidden tree
to be sin, or no, read Romans 5.12, 13, 14, 15, and compare it with Genesis 3.17.

Would thou know whether it were the devil who beguiled them, or whether it
was a natural Serpent such as do haunt the desolate places, read Genesis 3.12.
with Rev. 20.1, 2, 3.

Would thou know whether that sin be imputed to us, read Romans 5.12.13, 14,
15. and compare it with Ephesians. 2.2.

Would thou know whether man were cursed for his sin, read Gal. 3.10. Romans
5.15.

Would thou know whether the curse did fall on man, or on the whole creation
with him, compare Gen, 3.17. with Romans 8.20, 21, 22.

Would thou know whether man be defiled in every part of him by the sin he
has committed, then read Isa. 1.6.

Would thou know man's inclination so soon as he is borne, read Ps. 58.3.

The wicked are estranged from the womb, they go astray as soon as they be
borne.

Would thou know whether man once fallen from God by transgression, can
recover himself by all he can do, then read Rom 3.20, 23.

Would thou know whether it be the desire of the heart of man by nature to
follow God in his own way, or no, compare Genesis 6.5. and Genesis 8.21. with Hos.
11.7.

Would thou know how Gods heart stood affected toward man before the world
began, compare Ephesians. 1.4. with 1 Timothy 1.9.

Woudest thou know whether sin were sufficient to draw Gods love from his
creatures, compare Jer. 3.7. and Micah. 7.18. with Romans 5.6, 7, 8.

Would thou know whether Gods love did still abide toward his creatures for
any thing they could do to make him amends, then read Deuteronomy. 11.5, 6, 7, 8.

Would thou know how God could still love his creature and do his justice no
wrong, read Romans 3.24, 25, 26. Being justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption that is in Christ Jesus. Whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation for sin, through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness
for the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God. To
declare, I say, at this time his righteousness, that he might be just, and the
justifier of him that believes in Jesus. That is, God having his justice
satisfied, in the blood, and righteousness, and death of his own Son Jesus
Christ, for the sins of poor sinners, he can now save them that come to him,
though never so great sinners, and do his justice no wrong, because it has had
a full and complete satisfaction given it by that blood, 1 John 1.7, 8.

Would thou know who he was, and what he was, that did out of his love die
for sinners, then compare Joh. 3.16, 17. Romans 5, 8. with Isa. 9.6.

Would thou know whether this Savior had a body of flesh and bones, before
the world was, or took it from the Virgin Mary, then read Gal. 4.4.

Would thou know whether he did in that body bear all our sins, and where,
then read 1 Pet. 2.21. Who bare our sins in his own body on the tree.

Would thou know, whether he did rise again after he was crucified with the
very same body, then read Luke 24. at ver. 38, 39, 40, 41.

Would thou know whether he did eat or drink with his disciples after he
arose out of the grave, then read Luke 24.42. and Acts. 10.41.

If thou would be persuaded of the truth of this, that that very body is now
above the clouds and stars, read Acts 1.9.10, 11. and Luke 24. toward the end.

If thou would know that the Quakers hold an error, that say the body of
Christ is within them, consider the same Scripture.

Would thou know what that Christ that died for sinners is doing in that
place whither he is gone, then read Heb. 7.24.

Would thou know who shall have life by him, read 1 Timothy 1.14, 15. and Romans
5.6, 7, 8. which say, Christ died for sinners, for the ungodly.

Would thou know whether they that live and die in their sins shall go to
heaven, or not, then read 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Rev. 21.8, 27. which says, They
shall have their part in the like that burns with fire and brimstone.

Would thou know whether man's obedience will obtain that Christ should die
for them, or save them, then read Mark. 2.17. Romans 5.7.

Would thou know whether right Justification and Sanctification does come
through the virtue of Christ's blood, compare Romans 5.9. with Heb. 13.12.

Would thou know whether natural man can abstain from the outward act of sin
against the law, merely by a principle of nature, then compare well Romans 2.14.
^ith Phil. 3.6.

Would thou know whether a man by nature may know something of the invisible
things of God, compare seriously, Romans 1.20, 21. with Rom 2.14, ^5.

Would thou know how far a man may go on in a profession of the Gospel and
yet fall away, then read, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. They may taste the good word of God
and the powers of the world to come. They may taste the heavenly gift, and be
partakers of the holy Ghost, and yet so fall as never to be recovered, or
renewed again unto repentance, see also, Luke 13.

Would thou know how hard it is to go to heaven, read, Mat. 7.13, 14. Luke
13.24.

Would thou know, whether a man by nature be a friend to God, or an enemy,
then read, Romans 5.11. Col. 1.21.

Would thou know what, or who they are that shall go to heaven; then read,
Joh. 3.3, 5, 7. and 2 Cor. 5.17. Also would thou know what a sad thing it is
for any to turn their backs upon the Gospel of Jesus Christ, then read, Heb.
10.28, 29. and Mark 16.16.

Would thou know what is the wages of sin, then read, Romans 6.23.

Would thou know whither those do go that die unconverted to the faith of
Christ, then read, Ps. 9.17. and Isa. 14.9.

Reader, here might I spend many sheets of paper, yea, I might upon this
subject write a very great book, but I shall now forbear, desiring thee to be
very conversant in the Scriptures, for they are they that will testify of
Jesus Christ, Joh. 5.39. The Bereans were counted noble upon this account;
These were more noble then those of Thessalonica, in that they received the
word with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily, etc. But
here let me give thee one caution, that is, have a care that thou do not
satisfy thy self with a bare search of them, without a real application of him
whom they testify of, to thy soul, lest instead of faring the better for thy
doing this work, thou do fare a great deal the worse; and thy condemnation be
very much heightened in that, though thou did read so often the sad state of
those that die in sin, and the glorious estate of them that close in with
Christ, thou thy self should be such a fool as to lose Jesus Christ,
notwithstanding thy hearing and reading so plentifully of him.

They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them.

As if he should say, What need have they, that one should be sent to them from
the dead? what need have they of such a thing? Have they not Moses and the
Prophets? has not Moses told them the danger of living in sin, Deuteronomy. 27. from
ver. 15. to ver. 26. And chap. 28.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. etc. to the end of
the chapter, also chapter 29.18, 19, 20, 21. has he not there told them what a sad
state these persons are in, that deceive themselves with the deceit of their
hearts, saying, They shall have peace though they follow their sins in these
words. And when he hears the words of this curse, he bless himself in his
heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I go on, or walk in the imagination
of my heart, to add drunkenness to thirst. The Lord will not spare that man,
but then the anger of the Lord* and his jealousy shall smoke against him, and
all the curses that are written in this book shall lie upon him: and the Lord
shall blot out his name from under heaven.

Ag^in, did not Moses write of the Savior that was to come afterward into the
world. Deuteronomy. 18.18. Nay have not all the Prophets from Samuel, with all those
that follow after, prophesied and foretold these things, therefore what need
^ave they that I should work such a miracle, as to send one from the dead unto
them? They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them.

From whence observe again? That God does honor the writings of Moses and the
Prophets, as much, nay more, then if one should rise from the dead: Should not
a people seek unto their God? what, seek for, seek for the living among the
dead? To the Law and to the testimonies, (says ^od) if they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. Isa. 8, 19,
20. And let me tell you plainly, I do believe that the devil knows this full
well, which makes him labor to beget in the hearts of his disciples and
followers light thoughts of them; and does persuade them that even a motion
from their own beguiled conscience, or from his own wicked Spirit, is to be
observed, and obeyed before them: when the very Apostle of Jesus Christ, though
he heard a voice from the excellent glory saying, This is my beloved Son, etc.
Yet writing to the Churches, and telling them he heard such a voice he commends
the writings of the Prophets before it, saying, We have also a more sure word
of the Prophets, unto which ye do well to take heed, etc. 2 Pet. 1, 17, 18, 19.
Now if thou doubtest whether that place be meant the Scriptures, the words of
the Prophets, or no, read but the next verse, where he adds for a certain
confirmation thereof these words. Knowing this first, that there is no prophecy
of the Scriptures. Mark, it is the prophecy of the Scriptures. There is no
prophecy of the Scriptures of any private interpretation: for prophecy came not
in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by
the Holy Ghost.

And therefore, O what a sad thing is it with those that go about to disown the
Scriptures. I tell you, however you may slight them now, yet when they come
into hell, and in bitterness of soul cry out, Oh that one might go to forewarn
my companions of their folly, lest they come into this place of torment. God
does and will answer them with these words, they have Moses and the Prophets,
let them hear them.

Again, it is very observable, who they are, that are so tossed to and fro with
the several winds of doctrine, that have been broached in these days. They are
such, for the most part, as have had a light esteem of the Scriptures: for the
ground of error (as Christ says) is because they know not them, Mark. 12.24.
And indeed it is just with God to give them over to follow their own dark
blinded consciences, to be led into errors, that they might be damned into
hell, who did not believe that the things contained in the Scripture were the
truth, that they might be saved and go to heaven. I cannot well tell how to
have done speaking for, and on the Scriptures side, only this I consider,
Verse 30.
A word is enough to the wise; and therefore I shall commit these things into
the hands of them that are of God: and as for the rest, if they convert not to
Jesus Christ, I shall say to them, rather then God will save them from hell
with the breach of his holy word, if they had a thousand souls a piece, God
would destroy them all; for the Scriptures cannot be broken, Joh. 10.35.

Ver. 30. And he said, nay Father Abraham, but if one went unto them from the
dead, they would repent.
THe verse before, you know, as I told you, it was part of an answer to such as
lose their souls, so it is a vindication of the Scriptures of Moses and the
Prophets, where he says, They have Moses and the Prophets let them hear them;
as if he had said, they should have closed in with the tenders of mercy held
out by Moses, Samuel, David, Isaiah, Jeremiah, together with the rest of the
glorious, and certain truths that I moved them to utter and hold forth in their
generation, to the world, and also which they have left on record both for the
warning, comfort, and reproof of them who in after ages should come into the
world, both by holding forth the state of man by nature, how miserable it was,
and by holding out the mercy and grace of God, and how large that was: and
also, how free God is and ever was to save them, that did come the right way to
him, namely by Christ: together with the lamentable and sad state that those
were, and are, and shall be in, that did turn their backs on what they did
then speak, and afterward leave on record for the good of succeeding
generations; if they would, or v ill be blessed that are yet alive, let them
own them, clo^e in with that which is held forth by them, namely the Mesias,
or Jesus, that came from heaven to earth on purpose to lay down his life for
the rebellious, (as I said before.)

Now this verse is an answer to the former, and such an one as has in it a
kind of reject^on of the former answer. Nay Father Abraham. Nay says he, do
not say so, do not put them off with this; send one from the dead, and then
there will be some hopes. It Is true; thou speak of the Scriptures of Moses
and the Prophets, and say, let them hear them, but these things are not so
well as I could vvish, I had rather thou would send one from the dead. In
these words therefore, Nay, Father Abraham, there is a repulse given. Nay, let
it not be so. Nay I do not like of that answer; Hear Moses and the Prophets?
nay. The same expression is used by Christ, Luke 13.2, 3. Think you that they
upon whom the tower of Siloe fell, were sinners above others? I tell you nay,
for except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. So here, Nay, Father
Abraham, etc. By this word nay, therefore is signified a rejecting the first
answer. Now observe, I pray you, the reason why he says nay, is, because
God does put over all those that will be saved to observe and receive the
truth contained in Scripture, and believe that. To have high esteem of them,
and to love and search them, as Christ says, Search the Scriptures, -- for
they are they which testify of me. Joh. 5.39. But the damned say, Nay; as if
he had said, It is true, the Scriptures are truth, and every curse contained
in, and held forth by them, shall be fulfilled, and have its time to be
executed on them who live and die in unbelief; as now I feel by woeful
experience, for I swim now in the curses and wrath which once they told me
I should partake of. But this is the thing to be short, my brethren are
unbelievers, and do not regard the word of God, I know it by my self, for when
I was in the world it was so with me. It Is true, many a good Sermon did I hear,
many a time was I admonished, desired, entreated, beseeched, threatened,
forewarned of what I now suffer: But alas, I was ignorant, self-conceited,
surly, obstinate and rebellious. It Is true, many a time the preacher told me,
hell would be my portion, the devil would wreck his malice on me, God would
pour on me his sore displeasure, but he had as good have preached to the stock,
to the post, to the stones I trod on. It Is true, his words rang in mine ears,
but I kept them from my heart. I remember he alleged many a Scripture, but
those I valued not; the Scriptures thought I, what are they? a dead letter, a
little ink and paper, of three or four shillings price. Alas, what is the
Scripture, give me a Ballad, a Newsbook, George on horseback, or Bevis of
Southhampton, give me some book that teaches curious arts, that tells of old
fables; but for the holy Scriptures I cared not. And as it was with me then, so
it is with my brethren now; we were all of one spirit, loved all the same sins,
slighted all the same counsels, promises, encouragements, and threatenings of
the Scriptures; and they are still as I left them, still in unbelief, still
provoking God, and rejecting good counsel, so hardened in their ways, so bent
to follow sin, that let the Scriptures be showed to them daily, let the
messengers of Christ preach till their hearts ache, till they fall down dead
with preaching, they will rather trampleit under foot, and swine like, rent
them, than close in with those gentle and blessed profers of the Gospel.

Thus therefore these words, ( Nay Father Abraham, but if one should rise from
the dead they would repent, are to be understood. That the world of ungodly men
will not regard the Scriptures seriously. Though they have Moses and the
Prophets, (the Scriptures) they will not repent or heartily close in with Jesus
Christ, though the Scriptures do witness against them. If therefore there be
any good done to them, they must have it another way. I think, says he, it
would work much on them, if one should rise from the dead. And this truth
indeed is so evident, that ungodly ones have a light esteem of the Scriptures,
that it needs not many strong arguments to prove it, being so evidently
manifested by their every days practice, both in words and actions, almost in
all things they say and do. Yet for the satisfaction to the Reader, I shall
show you by a Scripture or two, (though I might show many) that this was, and
is true with the ge^erality of the world. See the words of Nehemiah in his 9.
Chapter, concerning the children of Israel, who though the Lord afforded them
mercy upon mercy, as it is from ver. 19. to ver. 25. yet ver. 26. says he,
Nevertheless they were disobedient for all thy goodness toward them, and
rebelled against thee, (but how?) and cast thy law behind their back. And was
that all? No, for they slew the Prophets which testified against them, to turn
them to thee; and they wrought great provocations. Observe. 1. They sinned
against mercy. And then. 2. they slighted the law, or word of God 3. They slew
the Prophets that declared it unto them. 4. The Lord c^unts it a great
provocation. See Heb. 3. from ver 10. to ver. 19. And see Zach. 7.11, 12. But
they refus^d to hearken, (says he there of the wicked) and pulled away the
shoulder, and stopped their ears, that they should not hear the law: Yea, they
made their hearts hard as an adament stone, lest they should hear the law, and
the words which the Lord of hosts sent unto them by his spirit in the former
Prophets, etc. Mark I pray you, here is also, First, a refusing to hearken,
namely to the words of the Propehts.

2. That they might so do, they stopped their cares.

3. If any thing was to be done they pulled away their shoulder.

4. To effect this, they labor to make their hearts hard as an adament stone.

5. And all this, lest they should hear and close in with Jesus and live, and
be delivered from the wrath to come, all which things do hold out an
unwillingness to submit to, and embrace the words of God; and so Jesus Christ
which is testified of by them. Many other Scriptures I might bring in for
confirmation of the thing, as that in Amos 7.12, 13. also 2 Samuel 2.24, 25. 2 Chronicles. 25.15, 16. Jer. 7.23, 24, 25, 26, 27. and Chap, 16, 12. Read also
seriously that saying, in 2 Chronicles. 36.15. where he says, And the Lord God of
their Fathers sent unto them, How? by his messengers rising up betimes, because
he had compassion on his people, and on his dwelling place. And did they make
them welcome? No, But mocked (them) the messengers of God, and despised his
words: And was that all? No, they misused his Prophets. How long? until the
wrath of the Lord arose against them. In how high a measure? Till there was no
remedy. See also Jer. 29.19. Chap. 25.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Luke 11.49.

But alas we need not be so earnest in quoting the Scriptures so plentifully,
seeing any one or two places are enough. And besides, the conversation of
almost all men does bear witness to the same, both religious, and profane
persons: in that they daily neglect, reject, and turn their backs upon the
plain testimony of the Scriptures.

As 1. Take the threatenings laid down in holy writ, and how are they
disregarded; there are but a few places in the Bible, but there are threatenings
against one sinner or other; against drunkards, swearers, liars, proud persons,
strumpets, whoremonger, covetous railers, extortioners, thieves, lazy persons;
In a word, all manner of sins are reproved, and without faith in the Lord
Jesus, there is a sore punishment to be executed on the committers of them: and
all this made mention of in the Scriptures.

But for all this, how thick, and by heaps, do these wretches walk up and down
our streets? Do but go into the Alehouses and you shall see almost every room
besprinkled with them, so foming out their own shame, that it is enough to make
the heart of a Saint to tremble, in so much that they would not be bound to
have society with them any long while for all the world. For as the ways of
the godly are not liked of by the wicked, even so the ways of the wicked are
an abomination to the just, Prove. 29.27. Psalm. 120.5, 6.

As now to particularize some things. The Scriptures say, Cursed is the man
that trusts in man, that makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from
the Lord. Jer. 17, 5.

And yet how many poor souls are there in the world, that stand in so much aw,
and dread of man, and do so highly esteem their favor, that they will rather
venture their souls in the hands of the devil, with their favor, then they
will fly to Jesus Christ for the salvation of their soul, if they must lose
their favor, and have their frowns and displeasure for the same. Nay, though
they be convinced in their souls that the way is the way of God; yet how do
they labor to stisle convictions, and turn their ears away from the truth, and
all because they will not lose the favor of an opposite neighbor. Oh! I dare
not for my Master, my Brother, my Landlord, I shall lose his favor, his house
of work, and so decay my calling. O says another, I would willingly go in this
way, but for my Father, he chides and tells me, he will not stand my friend
when I come to wants; I shall never enjoy a penyworth of his goods, he will
disinherit me. And I dare not, says another, for my Husband, for he will be a
railing, and tells me, he will turn me out of doors, he will beat me, and cut
off my legs. But I tell you, if any of these, or any other things be so
prevalent with thee now, as to keep thee from seeking after Christ in his
ways; they will also be so prevalent with God against thee, as to make him
cast off thy soul, because thou did rather trust man then God; and delight in
the imbracings of man, rather than in the favor of the Lord.

2. Again, the Scripture says, He that being often reproved heardneth his
neck, shall suddenly be destroyed and that without remedy, Prove. 29.1. Yet many
are so far from turning, though they have been convinced of their wretched
state an hundred times; that when convictions or trouble for sin comes on their
consciences, they go on still in the same manner resisting and choking the
same, though remediless destruction be hard at their heels.

3. Again, thou have heard say, Unless a man be borne again, he cannot enter
into the kingdom of heaven. Joh. 3.3, 5, 7. And yet thou go on in a natural
state, an unregenerate condition, nay, thou do resolve never to turn nor be
changed, though hell be appointed on purpose to swallow up such, Isa. 14.9.
Psalm. 9.17. The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that
forget God.

4. Again the Scriptures says plainly, That he that loves and makes a lie,
shall have his part in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone. Rev.
21.8, 27. And yet thou art so far from dreading it, that it is thy delight to
jest and jeer, and lie for a penny or two pence or six pence gain. And also if
thou can make the rest of thy companions merry, by telling things that are
false of them that are better then thy self, thou do not care a straw. Or if
thou hear a lie from, or of another, thou will tell it, and swear to the
truth of it. O miserable!

5. Thou have heard and read, That he that believes not, shall be damned. Mar.
16.16. And that all men have not faith. 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. and yet thou do so much
disregard these things, that it is like thou did scarce ever so much as
examine seriously whether thou were in the faith or no; but do content thy
self with the hypocrites hope, which at the last God will cut off, and count it
no better then the spiders web. Job 8.13, 14. or the house that is builded on
the sands, Luke 6.49. Nay, thou peradventure do flatter thy self, and
think that thy faith is as good as the best of them all, when alas poor
soul, thou may have no saving faith at all; which thou have not, if thou be
not borne again and made a new creature. 2 Cor. 2.17.

6. Thou have heard, That he that neglects Gods great salvation, shall never
escape his great damnation. Heb. 2.3. compared with Luke 14.24. and Rev. 14.19,
20. And yet when thou art invited, entreated, and beseeched to come in, ( Luke
14.17, 18. 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. Romans 12.1.) thou will make any excuse to serve the
turn. Nay, thou will be so wicked, as to put off Christ time after time,
notwithstanding he is so freely proferred to thee: a little ground, a few oxen,
a farm, a wife, a two penny matter, a play, nay, the fear of a mock, a scoff,
or a jeer, to be of greater weight to draw thee back, than the salvation of thy
soul to draw thee forward.

7. And thou have heard that, Whosoever will be a friend of the world, is the
enemy of God. Jam, 4.4. But thou regardest not these things, but contrariwise,
rather then thou will be out of the friendship and favor of this world, thou will sin against thine own conscience, and get thy self into favor by
fawning and flattering of the world. Yea, rather then thou will go without it,
thou will dissemble, lie, backbite thy neighbor, and an hundred other tricks
thou will have. O sad!

8. You have heard that the day of judgment is near, in which you and I all of
us mu^t appear before the tribunal of Jesus Christ, and there be made to give
an account to him that is ready to judge the quick and the dead; even of all
that ever we did, yea, of all our sins in thought, and word, and deed, and
shall certainly be damned for them too, if we close not in with our Lord Jesus
Christ, and what he has done and suffered for eternal life, and that not
notionally or contradictionally, but really and savingly in the power and by
operation of the spirit, through faith ( Eccles. 11.9, 12, 14. Heb. 9, 27. Acts
10.42. Acts 17.30, 31. 2 Cor. 5.10. Rev, 20.12.) And I saw the dead, small and
great stand before God, and the books were opened, and another book was opened,
which is the book of life; and the dead were judged out of those things that
were written in the books. There is the book of the Creatures, the book of
Conscience, the book of the Lords Remembrance, the book of the Law, the book of
the Gospel. ( Romans 1.20. compare, with Romans 2.12, 15. Rev. 16. ver. 19. Joh.
12.48.) Then shall he separate them one from another, as a shepherd divides
his sheep from the goats, and shall set the sheep on his right hand, and the
goats on his left. (Matthew. 25.30, 31, 32.) And shall say to them on his right
hand, Come ye blessed, ver. 34. But to the other go, or depart ye cursed, (ver.
41.) Yet notwithstanding the Scriptures do so plainly and plentifully speak of
these things, alas! who is there that is so weaned from the world and from
their sins and pleasures, as to fly from the wrath to come, ( Mat. 3.7.)
notwithstanding the Scripture says also, That heaven and earth shall pass
away, rather than one jot or one tittle of the word shall fail, till all be
fulfilled, they are so certain, Luke 21.37.

But leaving the threatenings, let us come to the promises, and speak somewhat
of them, and you may see how light men make of them, and how little they set by
them, notwithstanding the mouth of the Lord has spoken them.

As first, Turn ye fools, ye scorners, ye simple ones at my reproof; and behold
I will pour out my spirit upon you. Prove. 1.24. And yet persons had rather be
in their foolishness and scorning still, and had rather embrace some filthy
lust then the holy, undefiled, and blessed Spirit of Christ through the promise,
though by it, as many as receive it, are sealed unto the day of redemption,
Ephesians. 4.30. And although he that lives and dies without it, is none of Christ's,
Romans 8.9.

2. God has said, If thou do but come to him in Christ, though your sins be as
red as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow: and he will by no means cast
thee away, (compare Isa. 1.18. with Job 6.37.) And yet poor souls will not come
to Christ that they might have life. (Joh. 5.41.) but rather after their
hardness and impenitent heart, treasure up unto themselves wrath against the
day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God. Romans 2.4, 5, 6.

3. Christ Jesus has said in the word of truth, That if any man will serve and
follow him, Where he is, there shall also his servant be, Joh. 12.26. but yet
poor souls choose rather to follow sin, Satan, and the world, though their
companions be the devils and damned souls for ever. Mat. 25.41.

4. He has also said, Luke 12.31.
Seek first the kingdom of God and all other things shall be added. But let
whosoever will seek after the kingdom of heaven, in the first place, for them; For
they will take time while time serves to get the things of this life for them
and their seed, while it is to be had: And if it be so that they must needs
seek after heaven, or else be damned in hell, they will stay till they have
more leisure, till they can better attend to it; till they have other things
handsome about them; till they are older; when they have little else to do; or
when they come to be sick, and to die. Then Lord have mercy upon them; though
it be ten thousand to one but they perish for ever.

For commonly the Lord has this way to deal with such sinners who put him off
when he is striving with them, and tenders his Son and his Gospel to them,
either to laugh at their calamity, and mock when their fear comes, (Prove. 1,
26.27, 28.) or else send them to the gods they have served, which are the
devils, Judge. 10.13, 14. (Go to the gods you have served, and let them deliver
you, says he,) compare this with Joh. 8.44.

5. He has said, There is no man that forsakes father, or mother, wife or
children, or lands for his sake, and the Gospels, but shall have an hundred
fold in this world, with persecution, and in the world to come, life
everlasting. Mark 10.29, 30.

But men for the most part are so far off from believing the certainty of this,
that the will scarce lose the earning of a penny to hear the word of God, the
Gospel of salvation. Nay, they will neither go themselves nor suffer others to
go, (if they can help it) without threatening to do them a mischief, if it lie
in their way: Nay further, many are so far from parting from any worldly gain,
for Christ's sake and the Gospels, that they are still striving, by hook and by
crook, as we say, by swearing, lying, cousening, stealing, covetousness,
extortion, oppression, forgery, bribery, flattery, or any other way, to get
more, though they get together with these worldly gains, death, wrath,
damnation, hell, the devil, and all the plagues that God can power upon them.
Now if any do not run with them to the same excess of riot, but rather for all
their threats, will be so bold, and careless (as they call it) as to follow the
ways of God; if they can do no more, yet they will whet their tongues like a
sword to wound them, and do them the greatest mischief they can, both in
speaking against them to neighbors, to wives, to husbands, to landlords and
raising false reports of them. But let such take heed lest they be in such a
state and woeful condition, as he was in, who said in vexation and anguish of
soul, One drop of cold water to cool my tongue.

Thus might I add many things out the holy Writ, both threatenings and
promises, besides those heavenly counsels, loving reproofs, free invitations to
all sorts of sinners, both old and young, rich and poor, bond and free, wise
and unwise. All which have been, now are, and it is to be feared as long as
this world lasts, will be trampled under the feet of those swine. (I call them
not men) who will continue in the same. But take a review of some of them.

1. Counsel.
What heavenly counsel is that where Christ says, Buy of me gold tried in the
fire, that thou may be rich, and white raiment that thou may be clothed,
that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear. Rev. 3.17, 18. Also that, Ho
every one that thirsts, come to the waters: Yea come, buy wine and milk
without money and without price, Isa. 55.1. Hear, and your souls shall live.
ver. 3. Lay hold of my strength that you may make peace with me, and you shall
make peace with me. Isa. 27.5.

2. Instruction. What instruction is here.
Hear instruction and be wise, and refuse it not. Why, what is it? Blessed is
the man that hears me, (says Christ) watching daily at my gates, waiting at
the posts of my doors: For who so finds me finds life, and shall obtain
favor of the Lord. Prove. 8.32, 33, 34, 35. Take heed that no man deceive you
by any means. Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for that which
endures unto everlasting life. Joh. 6.27. Strive to enter in at the strait
gate, Luke 13.24. Believe on the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved. Act.
16.31. Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits. Quench not the spirit.
Lay hold on eternal life. Let your light so shine before men that they may see
your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven. Mat. 5.16. Take
heed and beware of hypocrisy; watch and be sober. Learn of me (says Christ.)
Come unto me.

3. Forewarning. What forewarning is here.
Because there is wrath, beware lest he take thee away with his stroke, then a
great ransom cannot deliver thee, Job 36.18. Be ye not mockers, lest your
bands be made strong, for I have heard from the Lord God of hosts a consumption
even determined on the whole earth. Isa. 28.22. Beware therefore lest that come
upon you that is written: Behold ye dispisers, and wonder and perish. For
behold I work a work in your days which ye shall in no wise believe, though a
man declare it unto you, Act. 13.40, 41. Let him that thinks he stands take
heed lest he fall, 1 Cor. 10.12. Watch and pray lest you enter into temptation,
Luke 22.40. Let us fear therefore, lest a promise being made, or left us, of
entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of it. Heb. 4.1. I
will therefore put you in remembrance, though you once knew this, how that the
Lord having saved the people out of Egypt, afterward destroyed them that
believed not. Jude 5. Hold fast that thou have, let no man take thy Crown, Rev.
3.11.

4. Comfort. What comfort is here.
He that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out. Joh. 6. ver. 37. Come
unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Mat.
11.28. Be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee. I will never leave thee
nor forsake thee, (for) I have loved thee with an everlasting love. Jer. 31.3.
I lay down my life for my sheep; I lay down my life, that they might have life.
I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more
abundantly. I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of salvation
have I succored thee. 2 Cor. 6.2. Though their sins be as scarlet, they shall
be as white as snow; though they be as crimson, they shall be as wool. For I
have blotted out as a thick cloud thy transgressions, and as a cloud thy sins;
return unto me, for I have redeemed thee, Isa. 44.22.

5. Grief to those that fall short. O sad grief.
How have I hated instruction, and mine heart despised reproof, and have not
obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them that instructed
me, Prove. 7.11, 12, 13. They shall curse their king and their God, and look
upwards. And they shall look to the earth, and behold trouble and darkness, and
dimness of anguish: and they shall be driven into darkness, Isa. 8. ver. 21,
22. He has dispersed abroad, he has given to the poor, his righteousness
endures for ever. -- The wicked shall see it, and be grieved, he shall gnash
with his teeth, and melt away; the desire of the wicked shall perish, Psalm.
112.9, 10.

There shall be weeping when ye shall see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all
the Prophets in the Kingdom of heaven, and your selves thrust out. Luke 13.26,
27, 28. all which things are slighted by the world.

Thus much in short touching this; that ungodly men undervalue the Scriptures,
and give no credit to them, when the truth that is contained in them; is held
forth in simplicity unto them, but rather cry out, nay, but if one should rise
from the dead, then they think something might be done: when alas, though
signs and wonders were wrought by the hands of those that preach the Gospel,
these poor creatures would never the sooner convert, though they suppose they
should, as is evident by the carriages of their forerunners, who, albeit the
Lord Jesus Christ himself did confirm his doctrine by miracles, as opening
blind eyes, casting out of devils, and raising the dead, they were so far from
receiving either him, or his doctrine, that they put him to death for his
pains. But to pass this I shall lay down some of the grounds of their rejecting
and undervaluing ^he Scriptures, and so pass on.

1. Because they do not believe that they are the word of God, but rather
suppose them to be the inventions of men, written by some politicians, on
purpose to make poor ignorant people to submit to some religion and government.
Though men do not say this with their mouths, yet their practices testify the
same; as he that when he hears the words of the curse, yet blesses himself in
his heart, and says, he shall have peace, though God says he shall have none.
And this must needs be, for did but men believe this that it is the word of
God, then they must believe that he that spoke it is true, and that; because he
that spoke it is true, therefore shall every word and tittle be fulfilled. And
if they come once to this, unless they be stark mad, they will have a care how
they do throw themselves under the lash of eternal vengeance. For the reason
why the Thessalonians received the word, was, because they believed it was the
word of God, and not the word of man, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13, 14.

When ye received the word which ye heard of us (says he) ye received it, not
as the word of man, but as it is indeed the word of God; which effectually
works in you that believe. So that did a man but receive it in hearing, or
reading, or meditating, as it is the word of God, they would be converted. But
the word preached does not profit, not being mixed with faith in them that hear
it. Heb. 4.1, 2.

2. Because they do not indeed see themselves by nature heirs of that exceeding
wrath and vengeance that the Scriptures testify of. For did they but consider
what God intends to do with those that live and die in a natural state, it
would either sink them into despair, or make them fly for refuge to the hope
that is set before them. Heb. 6.18.
But if there be never such sins committed, and never so great wrath denounced,
and the time of execution be never so near; yet if the party that is guilty be
senseless and altogether ignorant thereof, he will be careless and regard it
nothing at all. And that man by nature is in this condition it is evident. For
take the same man that is senseless and ignorant of that misery he is in by
nature, I say, take him at another time, when he is a little awakened, and then
you shall hear him roar, and cry out so long as trouble is upon him, and a
sense of the wrath of God hanging over his head: Good sirs, what must I do to
be saved? Though the same man at another time (when his conscience is fallen a
sleep, and grown hard) will lie like the Smiths dog at the foot of the anvil
though the fire-sparks fly in in his face. But as I said before, when any one
is a little awakened, O! what work will one verse, one line, nay one word of
holy Scriptures make in his heart, so that he cannot eat, sleep, work, keep
company with his former companions; and all because he is afraid that the
damnation spoken of in Scripture will fall to his share, Like Balaam, who said,
I cannot go beyond the word of the Lord, so long as he had something of the
word of the Lord with authority, severity, and power on his heart: but at
another time he could teach Balak to cast a stumbling block before the children
of Israel. Rev. 2.14.

3. Because the carnal Priests do tickle the ears of their hearers with vain
Philosophy and deceit, and thereby harden their hearts against the simplicity
of the Gospel, and word of God, which things the Apostle admonished those that
have a mind to close in with Christ, to avoid, Col. 2.8. saying, Bewar^ ^est
any man (be he what he will) spoil you, through Philosophy and vain deceit,
after the traditions of men, and rudiments of the world, and not after Christ.
And you who nuzzle up your people in ignorance with Aristotle, Plato, and the
rest of the heathenish Philosophers, and preach little, if any thing of Christ
rightly. I say unto you, that you will find that you have sinned against God,
and beguiled your hearers, when God shall in the judgement-day lay the cause of
the damnation of many thousands of souls to your charge, and say, He will
require their blood at your hands. Ezekiel. 33.6.

4. Another reason why the carnal unbelieving world do so slight the
Scriptures, and word of God, is, because the judgment spoken of in the
Scripture is not presently executed on the transgressors. Because sentence
against an evil act is not speedily executed, therefore the hearts of the sons
of men are wholly set in them to do evil. Eccles. 8.11. Because God does not
presently strike the poor wretch as soon as he sins, but waits, and forbears,
and is patient; Therefore the world judging God to be unfaithful, go to it
again and again, and every time grow harder and harder, till at last God is
forced either to stretch out his mighty power to turn them, or else send death
with the devil and hell to fetch them. Thou thoughtest (says God) that I was
altogether such an one as thy self, but I will reprove thee, and set them in
order before thy face. Now consider this, ye that forget God lest I tear you in
pieces, and there be none to deliver, Psalm. 50.20, 21.

5. Another reason why the blind world do slight the authority of Scripture,
is, because they give ear to the devil, who through his subtilty casts false
evasions, and corrupt interpretations on them, rendering them not so point blank
the mind of God, and a rule for direction to poor souls, persuading them, that
they must give ear and way to something else besides, and beyond that: or else
he labors to render it vile and contemptible, by persuading them that it is a
dead letter, when indeed they know not what they say nor whereof they affirm.
For the Scripture is not so dead, but that the knowledge of it is able to make
any man wise unto salvation through faith and love which is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3.15. And is profitable for instruction, reproof, and correction in
righteousness; that the man of God may be thoroughly furnished to all good
works, ver. 17.

And where it is said the letter kills, he means the law, as it is the
ministration of damnation, or a covenant of works, and so indeed it does kill,
and must do so, because it is just: forasmuch as the party that is under the
same, is not able to yield to it a complete and continual obedience. But
otherwise I will call Paul and Peter to witness, that the Scriptures are of a
very glorious concernment, in as much as in them is held forth to us the way of
life; and also, in that they do administer good ground of hope to us, Romans
15.4. For whatsoever things were written a foretime (Mark, whatsoever) were
written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scripture
might have hope. And again, Romans 16.25, 26. Now to him that is of power to
stablish you according to my Gospel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ
according to the revelation of the mystery which was kept hid since the world
began, but now is made manifest, and by the Scriptures of the prophets,
according to the commandment of the everlasting God, made known to all nations
for the obedience of faith. And therefore whosoever they be that slight the
Scriptures, they slight that which is no less then the word of God; and they
who slight that, slight him that spoke it; and they that do so, let them look
to themselves, for God will be revenged on such. Much more might be said to
this thing, but I would not be tedious.

A word or two more, and so I have done with this. Consider the dangers of
slighting the words of the Prophets or Apostles, whether they be, correction,
reproof, admonition, forewarning, or the blessed invitations and promises
contained in them.

1. Such souls do provoke God to anger, and to execute his vengeance on them.
They refused to hearken, they pulled away their shoulder, they stopped their
ears lest they should hear the law, and they made their hearts adament stone,
that they might not hear the law, and the words that were spoken to them by his
spirit in the former prophets: Therefore came a great wrath upon them. Zach.
7.11, 12.

2. God will not regard in their calamity. Because I called and ye refused, I
stretched out my hand and no man regarded, but set at naught all my counsels,
and would none of my reproof: I also will laugh at your calamities, and mock
when your fear comes. When their fear comes as desolation, and their
destruction, like a whirlewind. Then shall they call, but I will not answer;
they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me, Proverbs, 1.25, 26, 27.

3. God does commonly give up such men to delusions to believe lies. Because
they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved, therefore God
shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe a lie. That they all
might be damned, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12.

4. In a word, they that do continue to reject and slight the word of God, they
are such, for the most part, as are ordained to be damned. Old Eli his sons not
hearkenning to the voice of their father reproving them for their sins, but
disobeying his voice, it is said, It was because the Lord would slay them. 1 Samuel 2.15. Again, see in 2 Chronicles. 25.15, 16. Amaziah having sinned against the
Lord, he sends to him a prophet to reprove him: But Amaziah says, Forbear,
wherefore should thou be smitten? (he did not hearken to the word of God)
Then the Prophet forbear, saying, I know that God has determined to destroy
thee, because thou have not hearkened to my counsel. Read therefore, Verse 31.
and the Lord give thee understanding. For a miserable end will those have that
go on sinning against God, rejecting his word.

Other things might have been observed from this verse, which at this time I
shall pass by; partly because the sum of them has been touched already, and
may be more clearly hinted at in the following verse, and therefore I shall
speak a few words to the next verse, and to draw toward a conclusion.

Ver. 31. And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets,
neither will they be persuaded, though one rise from the dead.
ANd he said] That is, and God made answer to the words spoken in the verse
before, And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses. etc. As if he had said,
Moses was a man of great renown, A man of worthy note, A man that talked with
God face to face, as a man speaks to his friend; The words that Moses spoke
were such as I commanded him to speak. Let who will question them, I will own
them, credit them, bless them that close in with them, and curse those that
reject them.

I my self sent the prophets they did not run of their own heads: I gave them
commission: I thrust them out, and told them what they should say. In a word,
they have told the world what my mind is to do both to sinners and to saints.
They have Moses and the Prophets let them hear them. Therefore he that shall
reject and turn his back either upon the threatenings, counsels, admonitions,
invitations, promises, or whatsoever else I have commanded them to speak, as to
salvation and life, and to directions therein, shall be sure to have a share in
the many curses, that they have spoken, and the destruction that is pronounced
by them.

Again if they hear not Moses and the Prophets, etc. As if he had said, thou
would have me send one from the dead unto them, what needs that? They have
my mind already, I have declared unto them what I intend to stand to, both for
saving them that believe, and damning them that do not. That therefore which I
have said I will make good, whether they hear, or forbear. And as for this
desire of yours, you had as good desire me to make a new Bible, and so to
revoke my first sayings by the mouth of my prophets. But I am God, and not man,
and my word is immutable, unchangeable, and shall stand as fast as my decrees
can make it; Heaven and earth shall pass away, but one jot or tittle of my word
shall not pass. If thou had ten thousand brethren, and every one in danger of
losing his soul, if they did not close in with what is contained and recorded
in the Scriptures of truth, they must even every one of them perish and be for
ever damned in hell: for the Scriptures cannot be broken. I did not send them
so unadvisedly to recall it again by another consideration. No, for I speak it
righteousness and judgment, Isa. 63.1, 2, 3. and in much wisdom and counsel.
It being therefore gone out of my mouth in this manner, it shall not return in
vain until it has accomplished the thing whereto I have sent it.

But again, thou supposest that miracles and wonders will work more on them,
which makes thee say, send one from the dead. But herein thou art mistaken, for
I have proved them with that once and again, by more then one, or two, or three
of my servants. How many miracles did my servant Moses work by commandment from
me in the land of Egypt, at the red sea, and in the wilderness; yet they of
that generation were never the sooner converted for that, but notwithstanding
rebelled and lusted, and in their hearts turned back into Egypt, Acts 7. How
many miracles did Samuel, David, Elias, Elisha, Daniel, and the Prophets,
together with my Son, who raised the dead, cast out devils, made them to see
that were borne blind, gave and restored limbs, yet for all this (as I said
before) they hated him, they crucified him. I raised him again from the dead,
and he appeared to his disciples who were called, and chosen, and faithful, and
he gave them commandment and commission to go and testify the truth of this to
the world: and to confirm the same he enabled them to speak with diverse
tongues, and to work miracles most plentifully, yet there was great persecution
raised against them, insomuch that but a few of them died in their beds. And
therefore, though thou think that a miracle will do so much with the world,
yet I say, No. For if they will not believe Moses and the Prophets, neither
will they be persuaded though one should rise from the dead.

From these words therefore take notice of this truth, namely that those who
reject, and believe not Moses and the Prophets, are a very hard-hearted people,
that will not be persuaded though one rise from the dead.

Again, they that regard not the holy Scriptures to turn to God, finding them
to testify of his goodness and mercy, there is but little hopes of their
salvation; for they will not, Mark, They will not be persuaded though one
should rise from the dead. This truth is confirmed by Jesus Christ himself. If
you read Joh. 5. where the Lord is speaking of himself, that he is the very
Christ: he brings in four or five witnesses to back what he said. First, John
Baptist. 2 The works that his Father gave him to do. 3. His Father speaking
from heaven. 4. The testimony of the Scriptures; when all this was done, seeing
yet they would not believe, he lays the fault upon one of these two things. 1.
Their regarding an esteem among men. 2. Their not believing of the Prophets
writings, even Moses and the rest. For had ye believed Moses (says he,) ye
would have believed me; why? For he wrote of me. But if ye believe not his
writings, how can ye believe my words. Now I say, he that shall slight the
Scriptures, and the testimony of the prophets in them concerning Jesus Christ,
must needs be in great danger of losing his soul if he abide in this condition;
because he that slights the testimony, does also slight the thing that is
testified of, let him say what he will, and say the contrary never so often.
For as Jesus Christ has here laid down the reason of men's not receiving him,
so the Apostle in another place lays down the reason again with an high and
mighty aggravation. 1 John 5.10. saying, He that believes on the Son of God
has the witness in himself: he that believes not God has made him a liar;
because he believes not the Record. Mark, the Record that God gave of his Son.
The record, you will say, what is that? Even the testimony that God gave of him
by the mouth of all the holy Prophets since the world began, Acts 3.20. That
is, God sending his holy Spirit into the hearts of his servants the Prophets
and Apostles, he by his Spirit in them did bear witness, or record, to the
truth of salvation by his Son Jesus, both before, and after his coming. And
thus is that place also to be understood which says, There are three that bear
record in earth, the Spirit and the Water, and the Blood. That is, the Spirit
in the Apostles which preached him to the world, as is clear if you read
seriously, 1 Thessalonians. 4.8. The Apostle speaking of Jesus Christ, and obedience to
God through him, says thus, Now he that despises, despises not us, No? who
then? Why God: But it is you that speak. True, but it is by and through the
Spirit. He therefore that despises, despises not man, but God, who also has
given us of his holy Spirit. This is therefore a mighty confirmation of this
truth, that he that slights the record or testimony that God by his spirit in
his Prophets and Apostles has testified unto us, slights the testimony of the
spirit who moved them to speak these things: and if so, then I would fain know,
how any man can be saved by Jesus Christ that slights the testimony concerning
Christ, yea, the testimony of his own spirit concerning his own self. It Is
true, men may pretend to have the testimony of the Spirit, and from that
conceit set a low esteem on the holy Scriptures: But that spirit that dwells
in them and teaches them so to do, it is no better then the spirit of Satan,
though it calls it self by the name of the spirit of Christ. To the law
therefore and to the testimony, Try them by that: If they speak not according
to this word, it is because there is no light in them.

The Apostle Peter when he speaks of the glorious voice that he had from the
excellent Majesty, saying of Christ, This is my beloved Son, hear him, says
thus to them whom he wrote unto; You have also a more sure word of prophecy (or
of the prophets, for so you may read it) unto which you do well that you take
heed. That is, though we tell you that we had his excellent testimony from his
own mouth, evidently, yet you have the prophets: we tell you this, and you need
not doubt of the truth of it, but if you should, yet you may not, must not,
ought not, to question them, Search therefore unto them until the day dawn, and
the day star arise in your hearts. That is, until by the same spirit that gave
forth the Scripture, you find the truth confirmed to your souls which you have
recorded in the Scriptures. That this word of prophecy, or of the prophets, is
the Scriptures, read on. For (says he) knowing this first that no prophecy of
the Scriptures, is of any private interpretation, etc. 2 Pet. 1.18, 19, 20. But
you will say, What needs all this ado, and why is all this time and pains spent
in speaking to this that is surely believed already? This is a thing received
by all, that they believe the Scriptures to be the word of God, that sure word
of prophecy, and therefore you need not spend your time in proving these things
and the truth of them seeing we grant and confess the truth of it before you
begin to speak your judgment of them.

Answ. The truths of God cannot be borne witness unto too often, you may as
well say, You need not preach Jesus Christ so much, seeing he has been and is
received for the true Messiah already.

2. Though many may suppose that they do believe the Scriptures, yet if they
were but well examined you would find them either by word of mouth, or else by
conversation, to deny, reject, and slight the holy Scriptures. It Is true, there
is a notional, and historical assent in the head, I say, In the head of many,
or most, to the truth contained in Scripture: but try them, I say, and you
shall find but a little, if any, of the faith of the operation of God, in the
hearts of poor men to believe the Scriptures and things contained in them. It Is
true, many, yea most men believe the Scriptures as they believe a fable, a
story, a tale, of which there is no certainty; but alas! there are but few do
intend, and in truth believe the Scriptures to be the very word of God.

But you will say, this seems strange to me. Answ. And it seems as true to me,
and I doubt not but to make it manifest, and plainly to appear, that there are
but few, yea, very few, that do effectually (for that I aim at) believe the
Scriptures, and the truths contained in, and spoken of by them. But to make
this appear, and that to purpose (if God will) I shall lay you down the several
operations that the Scriptures have on them who do effectually believe the
things contained in them.

1. He that does effectually believe the Scriptures, has in the first place
been killed, I say killed by the authoirty of the holy Scriptures; struck stark
dead in a spiritual sense by the holy Scripture, being set home by that spirit
which gave them forth upon the soul. The letter kills; the letter strikes men
dead, 2 Cor. 3.6. and this Paul witnessed and found before he could say, I
believe all that the prophets have spoken. Where he says, I was alive without
the Law once; That is, in my natural state, before the Law was set on my heart
with power: But when the commandment came, sin revived and I died, Romans 7.9.
and that law that was ordained to life I found to be unto death: For sin taking
occasion by the commandment deceived me, and thereby stew me. v. 10. Now that
which is called the Letter in Cor. is called the Law in Romans 7. which by its
power and operation, as it is wielded by the Spirit of God, does in the first
place kill and slay all those that are enabled to believe the Scriptures. I
kill says God; That is, with my law. I pierce, I wound, I prick men into the
very heart by showing them their sins against my law, Acts 2.36, 37. And he
that is ignorant of this, is also ignorant of, and does not really and
effectually believe the Scripture.

But you will say, how does the law kill and strike dead the poor creature?
Answ. First the letter or law, do kill thus. It is set home upon the soul, and
discovers to the soul its transgressions against the law; and shows the soul
also that it cannot completely satisfy the justice of God for the breach of
his law, therefore it is condemned, Joh. 3.19. Mark, He that believes not is
condemned already; To wit, by the law, that is, the law does condemn him, yea,
it has condemned him already for his sins against it, as it is written, Cursed
is every one that continues not in all things that are written in the book of
the law to do them, Gal. 3.10. Now all men as they come into the world are in
this condition, that is, condemned by the law. Yet not believing that their
condemnation by the law really, they do not also believe really and effectually
the law that does condemn them. For as men have but a notion of the one, that
is, their condemnation, because of sins against the law; Verse 3
so they have but a notion of the condemning, killing, and destroying power of
the law; for as the one is, so in these things, always is the other; there is
no man that does really believe the law or Gospel further, then they do feel
the power and authority of them in their hearts. Ye err, not knowing the
Scriptures nor the power of God. Now this letter, or law, is not to be taken in
the largest sense, but is strictly to be tied to the ten Commandments, whose
proper work is only by showing the soul its sins against this law to kill, and
there leaves him stark dead, not giving him the least life, or support, or
comfort, but leaves the soul in an helpless and hopeless condition as from it
self, or any other mere creature. It Is true, the law has laid all men for
dead, as they come into the world; but all men do not see themselves dead,
until they see that law that struck them dead, sticking in their souls, and
having struck them that fatal blow. As a man that is fast asleep in an house,
and that on fire about his ears, and he not knowing of it, because he is
asleep; even so, because poor souls are asleep in sin, though the wrath of God,
Verse. 31.
the curse of his law, and the flames of hell have beset them round about, yet
they do not believe it because they are asleep in sin. Now he that is awakened
and sees this, sees, that through this he is a dead man: Even so they that do
see their state by nature, being such a sad condition, do also see themselves
by that law to be dead men naturally.

But now, when did thou feel the power of this first part of the Scripture,
the law, so mighty as to strike thee dead? if not, thou do not so much as
verily believe that part of Scripture that does contain the law in it, to be
the truth of God. Yet if thou should have felt something, I say something of
the killing power of the law of God in thine heart, this is not an argument to
prove that thou believe all the things contained in Scripture; for there is
Gospel as well as Law, and therefore I shall speak to that also. That is,
whether thou have felt the power of the Gospel, as well as something of the
power of the Law.

2. Then if, thou have found the power of the Gospel, and so believed it; thou
have found it thus with thy soul. 1. Thou have been showed by the word or truth
of the Gospel in the light of the Spirit of Christ, that by nature thou were
without the true faith of the Son of God in thy soul: For when He, the Spirit
is come, he shall show men that they believe not in me, says Christ, Joh.
16.9. For mark, though thou have, as I said before, felt somewhat of the power
of the Law, Letter, or ten Commandments, yet if thou have not been brought to
this, to see by the spirit in the Gospel, that thou art without faith by
nature, thou have not yet tasted, much less believed any part of the Gospel.
For the Gospel and the Law are two distinct covenants (as I have before
showed:) And they that are under the law maybe convinced by it, and so believe
the law or first covenant, and yet in the mean time to be a stranger to the
covenant of promise; that is, the Gospel, and so have no hope in them, ( Ephesians.
2.12.) There is not any promise that can be savingly believed, until the soul
be by the Gospel converted to Jesus Christ. For though men do think never so
much that they believe the things of the Gospel, or the word of the Gospel of
our salvation, yet unless they have the work of grace in their souls, they do
not, cannot rightly believe the things contained in the Scriptures.

Again, as the law kills those that believe it, even so the promises
contained in the Gospel, do through faith administer comfort to those that
believe it aright. My words (says Christ) my words, they are spirit, and they
(Mark, and they) are life, Joh. 6.63. As if he had said, The words contained in
in the law as a covenant of works, they wound, they kill, they strike dead
those that are under them. But as for me, the words that I speak unto you,
they are spirit and they are life. That is, whosoever does receive them
believingly, shall find them full of operation to comfort, quicken, and revive
their soul. For as I did not come into the world to destroy men's lives, so the
words that I speak, as I am sent to preach the Gospel, they have no such
tendency unto those that believe them. The promises that are in the Gospel, Oh,
how do they comfort them? such a promise, and such a promise, O how sweet is
it? O how comfortable to those that believe them? Alas, there are many poor
souls that think they believe the Scriptures, that they believe the word of
God, and yet poor souls that they are, they never enjoyed any thing of the life
and power of the promises to comfort them, after they were killed by the law:
For mark, If thy comfort be indeed by the promises they come in upon thy heart
to quicken, to revive thee, to raise thee from the sentence of death that is
passed on thee by the law. And through the faith that is wrought in thy soul by
the operation of Gods holy Spirit (though once killed by the Law or Letter)
thou art made alive in the Lord Jesus Christ, presented to thy soul in the
promises.

3. Do thou indeed and in truth believe the Scriptures to be the word of God,
then the things contained in them, especially the things of the Gospel are very
excellent to thy soul, as the birth of Christ, the death, resurrection,
intercession, and second coming of Christ, O how precious and excellent are
they to thy soul, insomuch, that thou regardest nothing in comparison of them.
O! it is Christ's birth, death, blood, resurrection, etc. according to the
Scriptures, that thou do rejoice in exceedingly, and abundantly desire
after, 1 Cor. 15.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. compare with Phil. 3.6, 7, 8.

4. Do thou believe the Scriptures to be the word of God? Then thou stand
in aw of, and do much reverence them. Why, they are the word of God, the true
sayings of God; they are the counsel of God; they are his promises and his
threatenings. It Is like, poor souls are apt to think, If I could hear God speak
to me from heaven with an audible voice, then sure, say they, I should be
serious, and sure I should believe it. But truly if God should speak to thee
from heaven except thou were converted, thou would not regard nor really
believe him. But if thou do believe the Scriptures thou see that they are
the truth, as really as if God should speak to thee from heaven through the
clouds, and therefore never flatter thy self, foolishly thinking, that if it
were so, and so, then thou could believe. I tell thee, says Christ, If they
believe not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they believe though one should
rise from the dead. But,

5. Do thou believe the Scripture to be the word of God? Then through faith
in Christ, thou endeavourest to have thy life squareed according to the
Scriptures, both in word and practice. Nay, this, I say, thou may have,
though thou do not believe them all. My meaning is, that if thou believe none
but the ten Commandments, thy life may be according to them a legal holy life:
and if thou do believe the Gospel too, then thy life will be the faith of the
Lord Jesus Christ; that is, either thou will live in the blessed and holy
enjoyment of what is testified in the Scripture concerning the glorious things
of the Lord Jesus Christ, or else, thou will be exceedingly panting after them.
For the Scriptures carry such a blessed beauty in them to that soul that has
faith in the things contained in them, that they do take the heart and
captivate the soul of him that believes them, into the love and liking of them.

6. He that believes the Scriptures to be the word of God, if he do but suppose
that any one place of the Scripture does exclude him, and shut him out of, and
from a share in the promises contained in them: O it will trouble him, grieve
him, perplex him, yea he will not be satisfied until he be resolved, and the
contrary sealed to his soul, for he know^ that the Scriptures are the word o^
God, all truth; and therefore he know^ that if any one sentence does exclude^
or bar out him, for want of this or the other qualification; he knows also that
not the word alone shuts him out, but he that speaks it, even God himself; and
therefore he cannot, will not, dare not be contented until he find his soul
and Scripture together (with the things contained therein) to embrace each
other, and a sweet correspondency and agreement be between them. For you must
know, that to him that believes the Scriptures aright, the promises, or
threatenings are of more power to comfort or cast down, then all the promises or
threatenings of all the men in the world. And this was the cause why the Martyrs
of Jesus, did so slight both the promises of their adversaries, when they would
have overcome them with profering the great things of this world unto them, and
also their threatenings, when they told them they would rack them, hang them,
burn them; none of these things could prevail upon them, or against them,
because they did most really believe the Scriptures, and the things contained
in them; as is clearly found, and to be seen in Heb. 11. and also in Mr. Fox,
his records of their brethren.

7. He that believes the Scriptures to be the word of God; believes that men
must be borne again, and have that faith which is of the operation of God, or
else they cannot be saved. And he that believes this, believes also, that if
he be not borne again, and also be partakers of that faith which is of the
operation of God, (according as he has read and believed,) he must and shall
be damned. And he that believes this aright, will not be contented until
(according as it is written,) he do partake of, and enjoy the new birth, and
until he do find through grace that faith, that is wrought by the operation of
God, in his soul. For this is the cause why men do satisfy themselves with so
slender a conceited hope that their state is good, (when it is nothing so)
namely, because, they do not credit the Scripture; for did they, they would
look into their own hearts, and examine seriously whether that faith, that
hope, that grace which they think they have, be of that nature, and wrought by
that spirit and power, that the Scripture speaks of. I speak this of an
effectual believing, without which all other is nothing unto salvation. Now
then because I would not be too tedious, I shall at this time lay down no more
discoveries of such an one as does savingly believe the Scriptures, and the
things contained in them, but shall speak a few words of examination containing
the things already mentioned. As,

1. Thou say thou do indeed and in truth effectually believe the
Scriptures, I ask therefore, wast thou ever killed stark dead by the law of
works contained in the Scriptures? To be killed, and to be struck dead, you
will say, what is that? Why, to be killed by the law or letter, is by the power
thereof to be made to see thy sins against it, and to be left in an helpless
condition by that law, for I say the proper work of the law is to slay the
soul, and to leave it dead, in a helpless state. For it does neither give the
soul any comfort it self, when it comes, nor does it show the soul where
comfort is to be had; and therefore it is called the ministration of
condemnation, as in 2 Cor. 3.9. Yea in plain terms, the ministration of death,
2 Cor. 3.7. For though men may have a notion of the blessed word of God as as
the children had, yet before they be converted, it may truly be said of to
them, Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God, Mark 12.24.

2. You say you do believe the Scriptures to be the word of God. I say again,
examine, wast thou ever quickened from a dead state by the power of the Spirit
of Christ through the other part of the Scripture. That is to say, by the power
of God in his Son Jesus Christ through the covenant of promise. I tell thee
from the Lord, if thou have, thou have felt such a quickening power in the words
of Christ, ( Joh. 6.) that thou have been lifted out of that dead condition
that thou before wast in, and that when thou wast under the guilt of sin, the
curse of the law, and the power of the devil, and the justice of the great God;
that thou have been enabled by the power of God in Christ revealed to thee by
the Spirit, through, and by the Scripture, to look sin, death, hell, the devil,
and the law, and all things that are at enmity with thee for thy sins, with
boldness and comfort in the face, through the blood, death, righteousness,
resurrection, and intercession of Christ made mention of in the Scriptures.

And thirdly, on this account, O how excellent are the Scriptures to thy soul!
O how much virtue do thou see in such a promise, in such an invitation! O
say thou! there are some promises in the book of God that I have had
nourishment from, and through Christ in them! O they are so large; they say
Christ will in no wise cast me out! My crimson sins shall be white as snow. I
tell thee friend there are some promises that the Lord has helped me to lay
hold of Jesus Christ through, and by, that I would not have out of the Bible,
for as much Gold and Silver as can lie between York and London piled up to the
stars. And why so? O because through them Christ is pleased by his Spirit, to
convey comfort to my soul! O I say, when the law curses, when the Devil tempts,
when hellfire flames in my conscience, my sins with the guilt of them tearing
of me, then is Christ revealed so sweetly to my poor soul through the promises:
that all is forced to fly and leave off to accuse my soul. So also, when the
world frowns, when the enemies rage and threaten to knock me in the head, then
also the precious, yea, the exceeding great and precious promises do weigh down
all, and comfort the soul against all. This is the effect of believing the
Scriptures savingly; for they that do so, have by and through the Scriptures
good comfort, and also ground of hope. Romans 15.4. believing those things to be
its own which the Scriptures hold forth.

4. Examine, do thou stand in aw of sinning against God, because he has in
the Scriptures commanded thee to abstain from it? Do thou give diligence to
make thy calling and election sure, because God commands it in Scripture?
Do thou examine thy self whether thou be in the faith or no, having a command
in Scripture so to do? Or do thou (notwithstanding what thou read in the
Scripture, follow the world; delight in sin; neglect coming to Jesus Christ;
speak evil of the Saints; slight and make a mock at the ordinances of God,
delight in wicked company, and the like. Then know that it is because thou do
not indeed and in truth believe the Scriptures effectually. For as I said
before, if a man do believe them, and that savingly, O then he stands in aw, he
looks to his steps, he turns his feet from evil, and endeavors to follow that
which is good, which God has commanded in the Scriptures of truth; yet not
from a legal or natural principle, that is, to seek for life by doing that good
thing, but knowing that salvation is already obtained for him, by the blood of
that man Christ Jesus on the Cross, because he believes the Scriptures;
therefore (mark I pray) therefore I say, he labors to walk with his God, in
all well pleasing and godliness because the sweet power of the loves of Christ
which he feels in his soul by the Spirit according to the Scriptures, constrain
him so to do, 2 Cor. 5.14.

5. Examine again, do thou labor after those qualifications that the
Scriptures do describe a child of God by? that is faith, yea the right faith,
the most holy faith, the faith of the operation of God. And also do thou
examine whether there is a real growth of grace in thy soul, as love, zeal,
self-denial and a seeking by all means to attain, (if possible) to the
resurrection of the dead; that is, not to satisfy thy self until thou be
dissolved and rid of this body of death, and be transformed into that glory
that the Saints shall be in after the resurrection day; and in the mean time
do labor, and take all opportunities to walk as near as may be to the pitch,
though thou know thou can not attain it perfectly, yet I say, thou do aim
at it, seek after it, press toward it, and to hold on in thy race thou
shunnest that which may any way hinder thee, and also close in with what may
any way further the same: knowing, that that must be, or desiring that it
should be thine eternal frame, and therefore out of love and liking to it, thou
do desire and long after it, as being the thing that does much please thy
soul.

Or how is it with thy soul? Art thou such an one as regards not these things?
but rather busy thy thoughts about the things here below, following those
things that have no sent of divine glory upon them: if so, look to thy self,
for it is high time for thee so to do, for thou art an unbeliever, and so under
the wrath of God, and wilt for certain fall into the same place of torment that
thy fellows have fallen into before thee, to the grief of thy own soul, and
everlasting destruction both of soul and body.

Consider and regard these things, and lay them to thy heart, before it be too
late to recover thy self by repenting of the one, and desiring to close in with
the other. O I say, regard, regard, for hell is hot, Gods hand is up, the Law
is resolved to discharge against thy soul; the judgement-day is at hand; the
graves are ready to fly open, the trumpet is near the sounding, the sentence
will ere long be past, and then you and I cannot call time again.

Now then from what has been spoken, there might many things be spoken by way
of Use and Application: But I shall be very brief, and but touch some things
and so wind up. And first, I shall begin with the sad condition of those that
die out of Christ and speak something to that. Secondly, to the latter end of
the parable which more evidently concerns the Scripture and speak somewhat to
that.

1. Therefore you see that the former part of the parable contains a sad
declaration of the state of one living and dying out of Christ; how that they
lose heaven for hell, God for the devil, light for darkness, joy for sorrow.

2. How that they have not so much as the least comfort from God, who in the
time they live here below, neglect coming to him for mercy; not so much as one
drop of cold water.

3. That such souls will repent of their folly when repentance will do them no
good, or when they shall be past recovery.

4. That all the comfort such souls are like to have, they have it in this
world.

5. That all their groanings and sighs will not move God to mitigate in the
least his heavy hand of vengeance that is upon them, for the transgressions
they have committed against him.

6. That their sad state is irrecoverable; or they must never, (mark) never
come out of that condition.

7. There desires will not be heard for their ungodly neighbors.

From these things then I pray you consider the state of those that die out of
Christ Jesus, yea I say, consider their miserable state; and think thus with
thy self. Well, if I neglect coming to Christ, I must go to the devil, and he
will not neglect to fetch me away into those intolerable torments. Think thus
with thy self; What, shall I lose a long heaven for short pleasure? shall I buy
the pleasures of this world at so dear a rate as to lose my soul for the
obtaining of that? Shall I content my self with a heaven, that will last no
longer then my life time? What advantage will these be to me when the Lord
shall separate soul and body asunder, and send one to the grave, the other to
hell, and at the judgement-day the final sentence of eternal ruin must be past
upon me?

6. Consider, that the profits, pleasures, and vanities of this world will not
last ever, but the time is coming, yea just at the doors, when they will give
thee the slip, and leave thee in the suds, and in the brambles of all that thou
have done.

And therefore to prevent this thy dismal state, think thus with thy self. It Is
true, I do love my sins, my lusts, and pleasures, but what good will they do me
at the day of death, and of judgment? Will my sins do me good then, will they
be able to help me when I come to fetch my last breath? What good will my
profits do me? and what good will my vanities do when death says he will have
no nay? What good will all my companions, fellow jesters, jeerers, liars,
drunkards, and all my wantons do me? will they help to ease the pains of hell?
will these help ^o turn the hand of God from inflicting his fierce anger upon
me? Nay, will not they rather cause God to show me no mercy, to give me no
comfort; but rather to thrust me down in- into the hottest place in hell where
I may swim in fire and brimstone.

3. Consider thus with thy self; Would I be glad to have all, every one of my
sins to come in against me to inflame the justice of God against me? would I be
glad to be bound up in them as the three Children were bound in their clothes,
and to be as really thrown into the fiery furnace of the wrath of almighty God,
as they were into Nebuchadnezzars fiery furnace.

4. Consider thus. Would I be glad to have all and every one of the ten
Commandments to discharge themselves against my soul? The first saying damn
him, for he has broken me. The second saying damn him, for he has broken me,
etc. Consider how terrible this will be, yea more terrible then if thou
should have ten of the biggest pieces of Ordnance in England to be
discharged against thy body; thunder, thunder, one after another. Nay, this
would not be comparable to the reports that the law (for the breach thereof)
will give against thy soul: For those can but kill the body; but these will
kill both body and soul; and that, not for an hour, a day, a month, or a year,
but they will condemn thee for ever. Mark, it is for ever, for ever. It is into
everlasting damnation. eternal destruction, eternal wrath and displeasure from
God, eternal gnawings of conscience, eternal continuance with devils.

O consider, it may be the thoughts of seeing the devil does now make thine
hair to stand right up on the head. O but this to be damned, to be among all
the devils, and that not only for a time, as I said before, but for ever to
all eternity.

This is, wonderfully miserable, even miserable; that no tongue of man, no nor
of Angels is able to express it.

5. Consider thus with thy self, not only my sins against the law will be laid
to my charge, but also the sins I have committed in slighting the gospel, the
glorious Gospel; these also must come with a voice against me. As thus, Nay, he
is worthy to be damned, for he rejected the Gospel, he undervalued the Gospel,
he slighted the free grace of God tendered in the Gospel. How many times wast
thou (damned wretch) invited, entreated beseeched to come to Christ, to accept
of mercy, that thou might have heaven, thy sins pardoned, thy soul saved,
and body and soul glorified, and all this for nothing but the acceptance, and
through faith forsaking those imps of Satan, which by their embracements have
drawn thee downward toward the gulf of Gods eternal displeasure.

How often did thou read the promises, yea the free promises of the common
salvation? How often did thou read the sweet counsels and admontions of the
Gospel to accept of the grace of God, but thou would not, thou regardest it
not, thou did slight all.

2. As I would have thee to consider the sad and woeful state of those that die
out of Christ, and are past all recovery; so would I have thee consider the
many mercies and privileges thou enjoyest above some (peradventure) of thy
companions that are departed to their proper place. As first, consider thou
have still the thread of thy life lengthened which for thy sins might seven
years ago, or more, have been cut asunder, and thou have dropped down among the
flames.

2. Consider, the terms of reconciliation by faith in Christ, is still
proffered unto thee, and thou invited, yea entreated to accept of it.

3. Consider, the terms of reconciliation is but (bear with me though I say
but) only to believe in Jesus Christ with that faith that purifies the heart
and enables thy soul to feed on him effectually, and be saved from this sad
state.

4. Consider, the time of thy departure is at hand, and the time is uncertain,
and also that for ought thou know the day of grace may be be past to thee
before thou ^iest, not lasting so long as thy uncertain life in this world. And
if so, then know for certain that thou art as sure to be damned as if thou were
in hell alread^, if thou convert not in the mean while.

5. Consider, it may be some of thy friends are giving all diligence to make
their calling and election sure, being resolved for heaven, and thou thy self
endeavourest as fast to make sure of hell, as if resolved to have it: and
together, with this, consider how it will grieve thee, that while thou were
making sure of hell, thy friends were making sure of heaven: but more of this
by and by.

6. Consider, what a sad reflection this will have on thy soul to see thy
friends in heaven and thy self in hell; thy Father in heaven, and thou in hell;
thy Mother in heaven, and thou in hell; thy Brother, thy Sister, thy Children
in heaven, and thou in hell. As Christ said to the Jews of their relations
according the flesh, so may I say to thee concerning thy friends, There shall
be weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see your Fathers
and Mothers, Brethren and Sisters, Husbands and Wives, Children and Kinsfolk,
with your Friends and neighbors, in the kingdom of heaven, and thou thy self
thrust out, Luke 13, 27, 28, 29.

But again, because I would not only tell thee of the damnable state of those
that die out of Christ, but also persuade thee to take hold of life and go to
heaven, take notice of these following things. 1. Consider, that what ever thou
can do, as to thy acceptance with God, is not worth the dirt of thy shoes,
but is all as menstruous rags, Isa. 64.6.

2. Consider, that all the conditions of the new covenant (as to salvation) are
and have been completely fulfilled by the Lord Jesus Christ, and that for
sinners.

3. Consider, that the Lord calls to thee for to receive whatsoever Christ has
done, and that on free cost, Rev. 22.17.

4. Consider, that thou can not honor God, more then to close in with his
profers of grace, mercy, and pardon of sin. Romans 4.

And because there is a gap open for poor sinners to come from under the curse
and condemnation of the Law into the grace of Christ, (for there is one made by
the blood of Christ, he having broken down the middle wall of partion) I shall
speak a few words further, and they are these.

To invite sinners, seeing there is mercy and deliverance to be had, to come in
and accept of it, and that from these considerations.

1. Consider thy state by nature if thou come not in, which is this. Thou art
under the breach of the law, and so under the curse, which does call for
inexpressible destruction. I mean destruction of soul, destruction of body,
destruction by fire, by hell fire; by the fire the devils must be burned in,
even eternal fire: destruction from God for sins against the law, without
intermission, without ease, without end, without hopes of any recovery, or of
ever coming out of this sad and miserable condition.

2. Consider, thou will bring all this upon thy self for having some of the
devils brats, some hellish lusts, that like so many witches, imps, will suck
and draw thy soul from God, Christ, Angels, Saints, Heaven and all happiness.

3. Consider, thou will buy sin at a dear rate, inasmuch as it will cost the
body, soul, ease, peace, joy, comfort, heaven, God, Christ, etc.

4. Consider, that that Christ who will ^ow save the soul and body if thou will
come in, will hereafter reject thee, and cast thee out from the joys of the
world to come, and damn thee, though thou had a thousand souls, without any
pity or yerning of bowels toward thee, if thou shall refuse him now.

5. That which is worse then all the rest thou shall have the very mercy of
God, the blood of Christ, the preachers of the word, together with every
Sermon, all the promises, invitations, exhortations, and all the counsels and
threatenings of the blessed word of God: Nay, besides, thou shall have all thy
thoughts words and actions, together with all thy food, thy raiment, thy sleep,
thy goods, and also all hours, days, weeks, months, and years, together with
whatsoever else God has given the^e, I say, thy abuse of all these shall come
up in judgment against thy soul. For God will reckon with thee for every
thing, whether it be good or bad, Eccles. 12.14.

Again. 7. Thy damnation will be worse then the damnation of the very devils,
forasmuch as thou will have not only the law from God as a Creator (which they
also had) to answer for the breach of; But thou will have thy rejection of the
tenders of the glorious Gospel of the glorious Lord Jesus to answer for, (as I
said before) which sin the devil was never in a capacity to commit, inasmuch as
he never had the Gospel tendered to him. But thou vile wretch have had it over
and over, once and again, time after time, and that with entreaties,
beseechings, wishings and wooings, by one messengers after another, and yet
have reject^d. O wonderful calamity that is coming upon thee! For first, thou
shall fall into endless torment. Secondly, thou shall groan and weep to see for
what thou have brought thy self into such a sad and miserable condition.
Thirdly, thou shall weep to think that weeping and repenting will do thee no
good. Fourthly, thou shall see thy neighbors in heaven, thy Father Mother, or
other of thy relations, but they shall not groan for thee, but rather rejoice
that the judgments of God have found out thee so vile a wretch and are a
punishing thee. The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance: he
shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked. Psalm. 58.10. O woeful! woeful!
One would think this enough (if thou be not stark mad, and fully bent to give
the devil thy soul) to make thee fly to Christ for succor and help that thou
may be delivered in the day of trouble.

I say therefore consider seriously of these things. 1. May not the very devils
themselves come in against thee, as well as Sodom that damned crew? May not
they I say come in against thee and say, O thou simple man or woman! O vile
wretch that had not so much care of thy soul, thy precious soul, as the beast
has of his young, or the dog of the very bone that lies before him. Was thy
soul worth so much, and did thou so little regard it? were the thunderclaps
of the law so terrible, and did thou so slight them? Besides, was the Gospel
so freely, so frequently, so fully tendered to thee, and yet have thou rejected
all these things?

Have thou valued sin at an higher rate then thy soul? then God, Christ,
Angels, Saints, and Communion with them in eternal Blessedness, and Glory? Wast
thou not told of hell fire, those intolerable flames? Did thou never hear of
the intolerable roarings of the damned ones that are therein? Did thou never
hear or read that doleful saying in the 16. of Luke, how the sinful man cries
out among the flames, One drop of water to cool my tongue. Thus I say may the
very devils, being ready to go with thee into the burning furnace of fire and
brimstone, though not for sins of so high a nature as thine, tremblingly say,
Oh that Christ had died for devils, as he died for man! And, Oh that the Gospel
had been preached to us, as it has been to thee! O how glad would we have been
of it! How would we have labored to have closed in with it? But woe be to us,
for we might never have it proffered; no, not in the least, though we would have
been glad of it. But you, you have had it proffered, preached, and proclaimed
unto you; besides, you have been entreated, and beseeched to accept of it, but
you would not. O simple fools! that might have escaped wrath, vengeance, hell
fire, and that to all eternity, and had no heart at all to do it.

2 May not the messengers of Jesus Christ also come in with a shrill and
terrible note against thy soul, when thou stand at the bar of Gods Justice,
saying, Nay, thou ungodly one, but how often have thou been forewarned of this
day? Did we not sound an alarm in thine ears, by the trumpet of Gods word day
after day? How often did thou hear us tell thee of these things? Did we not
tell thee sin would damn thy soul? Did we not tell thee, that without
conversion there was no salvation? Did we not tell thee, that they who loved
their sins, should be damned at this dark and gloomy day, (as thou art like to
be.) Yet did we not tell thee, that God out of his love to sinners sent Christ
to die for them, that they might (by coming to him) be saved? Did we not tell
thee of these things? Did we not run, ride, labor, and strive abundantly (if
it might have been) for the good of thy soul, (though now a damned soul? Did we
not venture our goods, our names, our lives? Yea, did we not even kill our
selves with our earnest intreatings of thee to consider of thine estate, and by
Christ to escape this dreadful day? O sad doom! when thou shall be forced full
sore against thy will to fall under the truth of this judgment, saying, O how
have I hated instruction, and how has my heart despised reproof? for indeed) I
have not obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them that
instructed me, Proverbs 5.11, 12, 13.

Thirdly, may not thy Father, thy Mother, thy Brother, thy Sister, thy Friend,
etc. appear with gladness against th^e at the terrible day? Saying, O thou
silly son, or daughter, brother, or sister, or friend! Oh ^ow rightly has God
met with thee! O how righteously does his sentence pass upon thee? Remember,
thou would not be ruled nor persuaded in thy life time: as thou did not
care for us, and our admonitions then, so neither do we care for thy ruin,
terror and damnation now. No, but we will stand on Gods side in sentencing of
thee to that portion which the devils must be partakers of. O sad! it is enough
to make mountains tremble, and the rocks to rend in pieces, to hear this
doleful sound. Consider these things, and if thou would be loath to be in
this condition, then have a care of living in sin now. O consider how loath thou will be to be thrust away from the gates of heaven, and how lo^^ thou will be
to be deprived of the ^^rcy of God.

2. How unwillingly will thou set foot forward toward the lake of fire. Never
did Malefactor so unwillingly turn off the ladder, when the halter was about
his neck, as thou will turn from God to the devil, from heaven to hell, when
the sentence is passed upon thy soul.

Oh how will thou sigh and groan! Oh how willingly would thou hide thy self,
and run away from Justice; but alas! as it is with them that are on the ladder
ready to be executed, so it will be with thee. Alas, they would fain run away,
but there are many Halberd-men to stay them: And so the powers of God will
beset thee round, I say, round on every side, so that thou may indeed look,
but run thou can not; thou may wish thy self under some great rock or
mountain, but how to get under thou know not.

3 Oh how unwilling will thou be to let thy father go to heaven without thee,
thy mother or friends, etc. go to heaven without thee? O how willingly would
thou hang on them, and not let them go! O Father, cannot you help me? O Mother,
cannot you do me some good? O how loath am I to burn and fry in hell, while you
are singing in Heaven! But alas, the father, mother, brother, sister, son,
daughter, or friend rejects them, slights them, and turn their backs upon them,
saying, You would have none of heaven in your life time, therefore you shall
have none of it now: you slighted our counsels then, and we slight your tears,
cries, and condition now. What say thou sinner, will not this persuade thine
heart, nor make thee bethink thy self? This is now before thou fall into that
dreadful place, that fiery furnace. But O consider how dreadful the place it
self, the devils themselves, the fire it self will be. And this at the end of
all, here thou must lie for ever, here thou must fry for ever, and for ever.
This will be more to thee, then any man with tongue can express, or with pen
can write; there is none that can, I say, by the ten thousand part discover the
state and condition of such a soul. O sad.

And now I shall give thee a few considerations more, and they shall be thus,
and so conclude.

1. Consider, (for I would fain have thee come in sinner) that there is way
made by Jesus Christ for them that are under the law of works, to come to this
comfortable and blessed state that I was speaking of. See Ephesians 2.

2. Consider, if thou never come, thy blood will be charged on thy own head;
and so much the more, because thou have been told of thy misery and sin: and
also of the safety thou shall be in, if thou do indeed come into this Lord
Jesus. Ezekiel. 33.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Then whosoever hears the sound of the trumpet,
and takes not warning, if the sword comes, and takes away any person, his
blood shall be upon his own head. He heard the sound of the trumpet, (that is,
the good news of the Gospel) and takes not warning, that is, did not fly to
Jesus Christ for succor, his blood shall be upon his own head.

3. Consider, what pains Christ Jesus took for the ransoming of thy soul from
all the curses, thunderclaps, and tempests of the law; from all the
intolerable flames of hell; from that soul sinking appearance of thy person
(on the left hand) before the judgment seat of Christ Jesus, from everlasting
fellowship with innumerable companies of yelling, and soul-amazing devils. I
say, consider what pains the Lord Jesus Christ took in bringing in redemption
for sinners from these things.

1. In that, Though he were rich, yet he became poor, that thou through his
poverty might be made rich, 2 Cor. 8, 9. He laid aside his glory, John 17. and
became a servant, Phil. 2. He left the company of Angels, and incountred with
the devil, Luke 4. Mat. 4. He left heavens ease for a time to lie upon hard
mountains, John 8. In a word, he became poorer then they that go with flail and
rake; yea, then the very birds or foxes; and all to do thee good. Besides,
consider a little of these unspeakable and intolerable slightings, and
rejections, and the manifold abuses that came from man upon him. How he was
falsely accused, being a sweet, harmless, and undefiled Lamb. How he was
undervalued, so that a Murderer was counted less worthy of condemnation then
he. Besides, how they mocked him, spat on him, beat him over the head with
staves, had the hair plucked from his cheeks. I gave my back to the smiters,
(says he) and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair; I hid not my face
from shame and spitting. His head crowned with thorns, his hands pierced with
nails, and his side with a spear; together, with how they used him, scourging
him, and so miserably misusing him, that they had even spent him in a great
measure before they did crucify him. Insomuch, that there was another fain for
to carry his Cross.

Again, not only this, but lay to heart a little what he received from God his
dear Father, though he were his dear and tender Son. First, in that he did
reckon him the greatest sinner, and rebel in the world: for he laid the sins
of thousands, and ten thousands, and thousands of thousands of sinners to his
charge, Esaias 53. And caused him to drink the terrible cup that was due to them
all: and not only so, but did delight in so doing; For it pleased the Lord to
bruise him. God dealt indeed with his Son, as Abraham would have dealt with
Isaac, I, and more terribly by ten thousand parts: for he did not only tear
his body like a lion, but made his soul an offering for sin. And this was not
done fainedly, but really (for justice called for it, he standing in the room
of sinners) witness that horrible and unspeakable agony that fell on him
suddenly in the Garden, as if all the vials of Gods unspeakable scalding
vengeance had been cast upon him all at once, and all the devils in hell had
been broken loose from thence at once to destroy him, and that for ever;
insomuch, that the very pangs of death seized upon him the same hour. For says
he, My soul is exceeding sorrowful and amazed, even unto death, Mark 14.33, 34.

Witness also that strange kind of sweat, that trickled down his most blessed
face, where it is said, And he sweat, as it were, great, mark I beseech you,
great drops, or clodders of blood trickling down to the ground. O Lord Jesus,
what a load did thou carry! what a burden did thou bear of the sins of the
world, and the wrath of God! O thou did not only bleed at nose and mouth
with the pressure that lay upon thee, but thou wast so pressed, so laden, that
the pure blood gushed through the flesh and skin, and so ran trickling down to
the ground, And his sweat was, as it were, great drops of blood, trickling or
falling down to the ground Luke 22.44. Can thou read this, O thou wicked
sinner, and yet go in sin? Can thou think of this, and defer repentance one
hour longer? O heart of flint! yea, harder. O miserable wretch! what place in
hell will be hot enough for thee to have thy soul put into, if thou shall
persist, or go on still to add iniquity to iniquity?

Besides, his soul went down to hell, Psalm. 16.10. Acts 2.31. and his body to
the bars of the grave. And had hell, death, or the grave been strong enough to
hold him* then he had suffered the vengeance of eternal fire to all eternity.
But O blessed Jesus! how did thou discover thy love to man in thy thus
suffering? And O God the Father! how did thou also declare thy purity and
exactness of thy justice, in that, though it was thine only, holy, innocent,
harmless, and undefiled Son Jesus, that did take on him our nature, and
represent our persons, answering for our sins instead of our selves: thou did
so wonderfully pour out thy wrath upon him, to the making of him cry out, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And O Lord Jesus! what a glorious
conquest have thou made over the enemies of our souls, even wrath, sin, death,
hell, and devils in that thou did wring thy self from under the power of them
all? and not only so, but have led them captive, which would have led us
captive; and also have received for us that glorious and unspeakable
inheritance, That eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into
the heart of man to conceive. And also have given thine some discovery thereof
through thy Spirit.

And now sinner, together with this consider. Fourthly, That though Jesus
Christ has done all these things for sinners, yet the devils make it their
whole work, and continual study how they may keep thee and others from enjoying
of these blessed privileges that have been thus obtained for sinners by this
sweet Jesus. He labors I say, first, to keep thee ignorant of thy state by
nature. Secondly, to harden thy heart against the ways of God. Thirdly, to
inflame thy heart with love to sin and the ways of darkness. And fourthly, to
get thee to continue herein. For that is the way he knows to get thee to be a
partaker with him of the flaming hell fire, even the same that he himself is
fallen into; together with the rest of the wicked world by reason of sin. Look
to it therefore.

But now in the next place a word of encouragement to you that are the Saints
of the Lord.

1. Consider, what an happy state thou art in, that have gotten the faith of
the Lord Jesus into thy soul. (But be sure thou have it) I say, how safe, how
sure, how happy art thou. For when others go to hell, thou must go to heaven;
when others go to the devil, thou must go to God; when as others go to prison,
thou must be set at liberty, at ease, and at freedom; when others must roar for
sorrow of heart, then thou shall also sing for the joy of heart.

Secondly, consider thou must have all thy well spent life to follow thee,
instead of all thy sins: and the glorious blessings of the Gospel, instead of
the dreadful curses and condemnations of the Law. The blessing of the Father,
instead of a fiery sentence from the Judge.

Thirdly, let dissolution come when it will, it can do thee no harm; for it
will be but only a passage out of a prison, into a palace; out of a sea of
troubles, into an haven of rest; out of a crowd of enemies, to an innumerable
company of true, loving, and faithful friends; out of shame, reproach, and
contempt, into exceeding great, and eternal glory. For death shall not hurt
thee with his sting, nor bite thee with his soul-murthering teeth, but shall be
a welcome guest to thee, even to thy soul, in that it is sent to free thee from
thy troubles which thou art in whiles here, in this world, dwelling in the
tabernacle of clay.

Fourthly, consider, how ever it goes with friends and relations, yet it will
go well with thee, Ecclesiastes 8.12 However it goes with the wicked, yet I
know, Mark, yet I know (says he) that it shall go well with them that fear the
Lord, that fear before him. And therefore let this in the first place cause
thee cheerfully to exercise thy patience under all the calamities, crosses,
troubles and afflictions that may come upon thee: and by patient continuance in
well doing, to commit both thy self and thine affairs, and actions into the
hands of God, through Jesus Christ, as to a faithful Creator, who is true in
his word, and loves to give unto thee whatsoever he has promised to thee.

And therefore to encourage thee while thou art here with comfort, to hold on
for all thy crosses in this thy journey, be much in considering the place that
thou must go into, so soon as dissolution comes. It must be into heaven, to God
the Judge of all, to an innumerable company of Angels, to the spirits of just
men made perfect, to the general Assembly, and Church of the first born, whose
names are written in heaven, and to Jesus (too the Redeemer) who is the
Mediator of the new covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks
better things for thee, then Abels did for Cain, Hebrews 12.22, 23, 24.

3. Consider, that when the time of the dead that they shall be raised is come
then shall thy body be raised out of the grave, and be glorified, and be made
like to Jesus Christ, Phil. 3.21. O excellent condition.

4. When Jesus Christ shall sit on the throne of his glory, you also shall sit
with him, even when he shall sit on the throne of his glory. O Will not this be
glorious, that when thousands and thousands of thousands shall be arreigned
before the judgment seat of Christ, then for them to sit with him upon the
throne, together with him to pass the sentence upon the ungodly, 1. Cor. 6.2,
3. Will it not be glorious to enjoy those things that eye has not seen, nor
ear heard, neither has entered into the heart of man to conceive.

Will it not be glorious to have this sentence, Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the kingdom prepared for you before the foundation of the world. Will
it not be glorious to enter then with the Angels and Saints into that glorious
kingdom? Will it not be glorious for thee to be in glory with them, while
others are in unutterable torments? O then! how will it comfort thee to see
thou have not lost that glory; to think that the devil has not got thy soul;
that thy soul should be saved, and that not from a little, but from an
exceeding danger; not with a little, but a great salvation. O therefore let the
Saints be joyful in glory, let them triumph over all their enemies. Let them
begin to sing heaven upon earth, triumph before they come to glory, salvation,
even when they are in the midst of their enemies; For this honor shall all his
Saints have, Psalm. 149.6, 7, 8, 9.

But secondly, for the latter part of the Parable, touching the Scriptures, and
the certainty of them. Seeing they are so certain, so sure, so irrevocable and
firm; and seeing the saving faith of the things contained therein, is to reform
the soul, and bring it over into the things of God, really conforming to the
things contained therein, both to the point of Justification, and also an
impracticall walking, and giving up the soul and body to a conformity to all
the commands, counsels, instructions, and exhortations contained therein. This
then will learn us how to judge of those who give up themselves to walk in the
imaginations of their own hearts, who slight and lay aside the Scriptures,
counting them but empty and uncertain things, and will live every day in open
contradiction to what is contained, commanded, and forbidden therein.

As first, this will show us that all your Drunkards, Whoremasters, Liars,
Thieves, Swearers, Back-biters, Slanderers, Scoffers at goodness, etc. I say,
we may see by this, that they that live in such things, have not the faith of
the things contained in their hearts; seeing they delight to practice those
things that are forbidden by, and in them. And so they continuing living and
dying in this state, we may conclude without fear, that such portions of holy
Scripture belong unto them, and shall for certain be fulfilled upon them. He
that believes not, shall be damned, Mark. 16. 16. The unrighteous shall not
inherit the kingdom of God, 1. Corinthians 6.9, 10. But the abominable, the
unbeleiving, the whoremongers, and all liars shall have their part in the lake
that burns with fire and brimstone, Revelation 21.8. Depart ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels, M^tthew 25.41. Depart,
that is, as if he should say, Depart from me, for I will not save you. Depart,
for my blood shall not at all wash you. Depart, for you shall not set one foot
into the kingdom of heaven.

Depart ye cursed, that is, ye are cursed of God, cursed of his Law, cursed of
me, cursed by the Saints, and cursed by the Angels, cursed all over, nothing
but cursed, and therefore depart from me, and whither? Into everlasting fire;
fire that will scald, scorch, burn, and flame to a purpose; fire that never
shall be quenched, Mark 9. fire that will last to all eternity. And must we be
all alone? No, you shall have company, store of company with you. Namely, all
the raging, roaring devils, together with an innumerable company of fellow
damned sin^ers, men, women, and children. And if the Scriptures be true, (as
they will one day wonderfully appear to be) then this must, and shall be thy
portion if thou live and die in this state, and of all them who continue in
sinning against the truths contained in Scriptures.

As first, Do thou delight to sin against plain commands, thou art gone?

Secondly, Do thou slight and scorn the counsels contained in Scriptures, and
continue in so doing, then thou art gone.

Thirdly, Do thou continually neglect to come to Christ, and usest arguments
in thine own heart to satisfy thy soul with so doing, then thou art gone? Luke
14.17, 18. compared with verse 24. and Hebrews 2.3. How shall we escape, if we
neglect so great salvation? How shall we escape, that is, t^ere is no way to
escape.

First, because God has said we shall not, Heb. 12.25. See that ye refuse not
him that speaks, for if they escaped not who refused him that spoke on earth
(that was Moses) much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him that
speaks from heaven.

2. Because he has not only said, they shall not, but also has bound it with
an oath, saying, So I swear in my wrath, they shall not enter into my rest,
Hebrews 3.11. But you will say, To whom did he swear that they should not enter
into his rest? Ans er. To them that believed not. So we see, they could not
enter in, because of unbelief. verse 18, 19.

Secondly, this will teach us what to think and conclude of such, who though
they do not so openly discover their folly by open and gross sins against the
Law, yet will give more heed to their own spir ts, and the movings thereof,
though they be neither commanded, nor commended for the same in Scripture; nay,
though the Scripture command and commend the contrary, Isaiah 8.20. then they
will to the holy and revealed will of God* I say, such men are in as bad a
state as the other to the full, being disobedient to Gods will revealed in his
word, as well as they, though in a different manner; the one openly
transgressing against the plain and well known truths revealed in it; the other
though more close and hidden, yet secretly rejecting and slighting them, giving
more heed to their own spirits, and the motion thereof, although not warranted
by the Scriptures.

A few words more, and so I shall conclude.

And first, take heed that you content not your self with a bare notion of the
Scriptures in your heads, by which you may go far, even so far as to be able to
dispute for the truth, to preach the Gospel, and labor to vindicate it in
opposition to gainsayers, and yet be found at the left hand of Christ at the
Judgement-day, forasmuch as thou did content thy self with a notion or a
traditionall knowledge of them.

2. Have a care, that thou own the whole Scripture, and not own one part, and
neglect another, or slight it, as thus. To own the law, and slight the Gospel;
or to think that thou must be saved by thy good doing and works, for that is
all one, as if thou did thrust Christ away from thee; or else so to own the
Gospel, as if by it thou were exempted from all obedience to the ten
Commandments, and conformity to the Law in life and conversation. For in so
doing thou will for certain make sure of eternal vengeance.

Thirdly, have a care that thou put not wrong names on the things contained in
the Scriptures, as to call the Law Christ, and Christ the Law. For some having
done so (in my knowledge) have so darkened to themselves the glorious truths of
the Gospel, that in a very little time they have been resolved to thwart and
oppose them, and so have made room in their own souls for the Devil to inhabit,
and obtained a place in hell for their own souls, to be tormented for ever and
ever.

Against this danger therefore in reading and receiving the testimony of
Scripture, learn to distinguish between the Law and the Gospel, and to keep
them clear asunder, as to the salvation of thy soul, and that thou may so
do. In the first place, beg of God, that he would show thee the nature of the
Gospel, And set it home effectually with life and power upon thy soul by Faith.
Which is this, That God would show thee, that as thou being man have sinned
against God; so Christ being God Man has bought thee again, and with his most
precious blood set thee free from the bondage thou wast fallen into by thy
sins; and that not upon condition, that thou will do thus and thus, this and
the other good work, but rather, that thou being first justified freely by mere
grace, through the blood of Jesus, should also receive thy strength from him
who has bought thee, to walk before him in all well pleasing, being enabled
thereto by virtue of his Spirit, which has revealed to thy soul, that thou art
delivered already from wrath to come, by the obedience not of thee, but of
another man, (viz.) Jesus Christ.

Secondly, Then if the law thou read of, tell thee in thy conscience, thou
must do this and the other good work of the Law, if ever thou will be saved.
Then answer plainly, that for thy part thou art resolved now not to work for
life, but to believe in the virtue of that blood shed upon the Cross upon
Mount Calvary, for the remission of sins: and yet, because Christ has
justified thee freely by his Grace, thou will serve him in Holiness and
Righteousness all the days of thy life, yet not in a legal Spirit, or in a
covenant of Works, but mine obedience (say thou) I will endeavor to have it
free, and cheerful, out of love to my Lord Jesus.

Thirdly, Have a care thou receive not this doctrine in the notion only, lest
thou bring a just damnation upon thy soul, by professing thy self to be freed
by Christ's blood from the guilt of sin, while thou remainest still a servant to
the filth of sin. For I must tell you, that unless you have the true and
saving work of the Faith and Grace of the Gospel in your hearts, you will
either go on in a legal Holiness according to the tenor of the Law; or else
through a notion of the Gospel (the Devil bewitching, and beguiling thy
understanding, will, and affections) thou will Ranter-like turn the Grace of
God into wantonness, and bring upon thy soul double, if not treble damnation,
in that thou could not be contented to be damned for thy sins against the
Law, but also to make ruin sure to thy soul: thou would dishonor the
Gospel, and turn the Grace of God held forth, and discovered to man by that
into licentiousness.

But that thou might be sure to escape these dangerous rocks on the right
hand and on the left, see that thy faith be such, as spoken of in Scripture:
and that thou be not satisfied without that, which is a faith wrought by the
mighty operation of God, revealing Christ to, and in thee, as having wholly
freed thee from thy sins by his most precious blood. Which faith if thou attain
unto, will so work in thy heart, that first thou will see the nature of the
Law, and also the nature of the Gospel, and delighting in the glory of it; and
also thou will find an engaging of thy heart and soul to Jesus Christ, even to
the giving up of thy whole man unto him, to be ruled and governed by him to his
glory, and thy comfort, by the Faith of the same Lord Jesus.

The End.
Errata.
Courteous Reader, before thou read this Treatise, thou art desired to
correct these Faults with thy pen, which herea^ter follows.
PAge 1. for Luke 19. read Luke 16 p. 6. l. 15. r. whence. p 44. l 18. for
means 1. names. p. 54. l. 5. put out, and the practice of the Saints. p. 64. ^.
15. after seek r. not p. 81. l 17. for them r. then. l 26. for friends r.
friend. p. 92. l. 27. r. to be. p. 104. l. 6. for sead r. send p. 120 l. 9. for
converted r. contented. p. 129 l. 12. for the r. their. p. 144. l. 16. for 1 Timothy 1.9. r. 2 Timothy 1. 9. p. 145. l 27 for 1 Pet. 2.21. r. 1 Pet. 2.24. p. 166.
l. 26. for contradiction r. traditional. p. 171. l 23 r. of. p. 194. l. 14. for
intend r. indeed. p. 196. l. 24. leave out that. p. 229. l. 6. for powers r.
angels.

Page 199. line 18. thou will find these words, (as I said before) which I
desire thee to leave ou^. The reason why I put th m in, was, because at the
first I thought to put out wi h this a Discourse of the two Coven^^^s, which
since I thought to put f^r h in a Piece by ^t self, and therefore should have
put ou^ these words.

Bunyan's Sighs from Hell.


