THE MAGISTRATES COMMISSION FROM HEAVEN. Declared In a SERMON preached in
Laurence jury, London, the 28. day of Sept. 1644. at the Election of the Lord
Major. By Anthony Burgess, sometimes Fellow of Immanuel College in Cambridge;
now Pastor of Sutton Coldfield in Warwick shire, and a Member of the Assembly.

Imprimatur

THOMAS GATAKER.



LONDON, Printed by George Miller for Thomas Underhill at the Bible in
Woodstreet. 1644.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sr John Wollaston Knight, Lord Major; AND To the Right
Honorable Thomas Atkin Esquire, Lord Major Elect of the City of London.
Right Honorable,
IT is a serious and grave resolution of CALVIN, Calvin. in 1. Epist. in Tim.
cap. 2.
Tenendum est illud principium, etc. That principle and maxim is firmly to be
kept, viz. That Magistrates are appointed by God, to safeguard, and preserve
Religion and public honesty, even as the earth is ordained to bring forth
fruit for nourishment, and therefore as when we pray for our daily bread, we
also entreat God to make the earth fertile and fruitful; so when we pray, that
Christ's Kingdom may come; we also beseech God to raise up Magistrates, that
may preserve and propagate his truth; But as the earth is many times cursed,
because of the sins of the inhabitants thereof, so God for the iniquities of a
Nation, raises up Governors in his wrath, to be a scourge to them; All which
shows the great necessity of that injunction, to pray for Kings, and those
in Authority, that we may live a quiet and godly life under them; and this is
the intent of the future discourse, which by your Command is now published,
that otherwise had been buried in silence: I have not launcht into that great
question, De jure Magistratus circa sacra, though I have spoken a little obiter
of it, The Magistracy and Ministry have their distinct bounds, and yet are
mutually to help each other, Quamdiu Respublicae manent hospitia Ecclesiae,
tamdiu sint mansurae; As long as Commonwealths are Innes, like that in
Bethlehem, to lodge Christ in, so long they will abide and flourish. I have
adventured to join you both in the Dedication of this Sermon; partly, because
you both did encourage to the publishing of it: and partly, because the Lord
has raised you both up in the place of Authority; The one being almost at his
races end, and the other beginning his journey. The one having found the
experience of Gods Protection in the managing of that Office, which is
surrounded with so many discouragements; and the other needing all provocations
not to faint in such a public work: The Lord so bless your Honors in this
public Service, that the whole City, yea, whole Kingdom may praise God for
your Fidelity, Prudence, and Piety therein.

Your Lordships, to serve you, ANTHONY BURGESS.

THE MAGISTRATES COMMISSION FROM HEAVEN.
ROMANS 13.4. For he is the Minister of God to thee for good.


WHat the Father Gregory Nazianzen said of Moses, that he was (...), an Ocean
of Divinity, the same may be said of Paul: for do but view this particular
Epistle to the Romans, you shall see in the former part of it, that he has a
Medulla, or a Synopsis, as I may so say, purioris theologiae, he has a
Synopsis of the pure and exact Divinity of Original sin, of Sanctification,
of Justification, and of Election. In the twelfth Chapter you may see Paul's
Ethics and Morals, wherein the efficient cause of Actions is made, not with
Aristotle, man's power, but the grace of God; and the end, not man's glory, but
the glory of God. And in the fourteenth Chapter, there you have Paul a Casuist,
determining cases with a great deal of circumspection and caution. And then in
this Chapter here you have Paul's politics: The beginning of this Chapter is
the Magistrates Magna Charta, or his Commission sealed from Heaven, whereby he
may be encouraged to go through his office, notwithstanding all men that
dispute about lawfulness of Magistracy: and notwithstanding all the
discouragements that he shall meet with in the practice of it; there being
nothing more necessary to a Magistrate then to be informed of this, that his
Calling is of God, and that God has a peculiar providence over such. It is
related of Frederick Duke of Saxony, when he was almost discouraged by the
popish doctrine about Magistracy, and the office of a governor; at last, when
Luther writ a book De magistratu, and the Duke had read it, he lifts up his
hands to Heaven, thanking God that at last he was convinced, the state of
Magistracy he lived in, to be pleasing to God, and that he might in it do him
a great deal of service. Now the Apostle, he deals very exactly, and
methodically about a Magistrate.

First, he lays down a general Proposition at the 1. verse: Let every soul
be subject to the higher powers: or unto the high powers: for it is (...) in
the Greek: and this translating of it, Higher powers is periculose says Beza:
as if none but higher powers were to have obedience. Let every soul be
subject: this brings in Papists, Monks, the whole Clergy of Popery: It brings
in all spiritual men (as they call them) whatsoever: And as for that same
evasion, Let every soul, Omnis anima, id est animalis homo, as they cite it
out of Origin, it is very ridiculous: And as vain is that of others, who say,
he speaks here of Ecclesiastical power, for he gives a sword and tribute to
this power, which cannot be understood of Ecclesiastical power: So you have
then the Proposition laid down: and this he backs with many Arguments: First
from the efficient Cause: The powers that be are of God: how this is to be
understood, I shall show you anon in the Text, only thus: when he says, there
is no power but of God, it is not to be understood permissive, or ordinative,
or directive, for so sin, and evil, and wickedness, or the devil; these are
of God by way of permission, and by way of ordering and directing: But the
Apostle means more: He is of God approbative and mandative, by way of
approbation and by way of command, as I shall show you anon. And the Apostle
lays it down both affirmatively and negatively, That there is no power but
of God: This is more then affirmatively: for some might think, though the
kingdom and power of Israel was of God, yet notwithstanding, is the power of
the Roman Emperors of God? and then amongst Roman Emperors, the Christians
might have thought, though Titus and Vespatian, these that were called,
diliciae generis humani, the darlings of mankind, yet was Domitian and Tiberius
Nero of God? He answers, There is no power but of God, that is the first
Argument.

The second Argument is brought from the contrary: Whosoever resists the
power, resists the Ordinance of God. This place you know is frequently
brought by Court Divines against the Parliaments defensive war: but no such
inference can be made; for the Apostle speaks generally: we may as well prove,
that they that refuse the Parliaments war, resist the Ordinance of God; for
the Apostle speaks largely, All power is of God; And Parliamentary power being
power is rightly of God: therefore he that resists that power, resists the
Ordinance of God: So that that makes nothing but the clean contrary may be as
well proved from thence. As for the maine question it self that is so
frequently agitated, I need not insist on it, wherefore I proceed.

The third Argument that he brings, it is from the end of these, they are not a
terror to good works, but to evil, facile est imperium in bonos, the
Government on those that are good, it is easy. And so he comes to this reason
in my Text: For he is the Minister of God to thee for good. In which words
observe,

First, the Magistrate described by his Office or Nature, he is a Minister.
Secondly, by the Efficient Cause, he is of God. And thirdly, by the end, To
thee for good.

1. He is a Minister, a Minister in what sense you heard: Not a minister as
Nebuchadnezzar was said to be a minister: or as Attila was called flagellum
Dei, a scourge of God, by way of Gods providence, working such and such things,
no, but he is a Minister by way of command, and by way of approbation. The
Greek word is diaconos, those words that are applied now, and appropriated to
Ecclesiastical Governors, they were at first used of Civil; as, Episcopos,
the same is used by the Septuagint, for one that has an oversight, or
inspection in Civil matters: And so Tully uses the word Episcopos, for one
that had an oversight over some State commodities. And thus diaconos here in
the Text, though it is used now Ecclesiastically, yet at first it was taken
largely, for any one that did serve: and so (...) the word afterward here used;
it is not as the Papists would have it, only to be appropriated to sacrificing,
but is extended largely unto all kind of Service: he is a Minister, his power
therefore is bounded.

And secondly, He is said to be of God, that is the Efficient Cause: (I shall
speak more of that anon.)

And thirdly, You have the End: First there is the finis cui, the End for whom,
and that is for Thee; for Thee a Christian, though he be a Heathen Emperor.
And then the finis cujus gratia, for what it is, and that is for thy good: For
he is the minister of God to thee for thy good. Thus you have the words
explained. Now the Doctrine that I will raise from the points shall be this:

That Magistracy or Government is appointed of God, for the good of mankind.

In the handling of this: First I shall show you, how it is of God, with the
Attributes that the Scripture gives to the persons in it. Secondly, the End of
it. Thirdly, the Extent of this power. And fourthly, the Qualifications of the
person. And the Reasons of it: And so make Application, not intending to be
tedious.

Magistracy or Government it is appointed and ordained of God for the good of
mankind.

First, the Apostle here speaks not of persons, but he speaks of the office,
and of the Government it self: And then withal, he speaks not of the abuse
of the power, and of the Office, but he speaks of the use of it, the right use
of it: Now, I say, Magistracy it is an Ordinance of God not only under the old
Testament (as Anabaptists would have it) but also under the New Testament. And
that it is so, it will appear by places of Scripture that I shall bring: only,
this you are to take notice of: That Magistracy may be said to be of God;
partly, because God is the God of order, and so positively he commands it. And
then partly, because he has ingrafted it in the Law of Nature, that there
should be a Government, and that there should be power: Those two ways it is
of God. But now in Magistracy or government there are these four things
considerable:

First, there is the Nature, and the forms or kinds of it: As Government,
whether Monarchical, Aristocraticall, or Democraticall: now all these are of
God, one as well as the other.

And then in the second place, You have the Designation, or the Application of
Government unto this or that man: and this is of man.

And then thirdly, You have the Extent of this power, how far their power
shall reach: and this, also is of man.

And then lastly, There is the use of this power: and this, also, is of man;
though to use it well, be of God. So then you may see in what sense it is said,
That Magistracy, or Government is of God. And that it is so appears by these
Arguments.

First, Because the Apostle, not only here to the Romans, but likewise in the
Epistle to Timothy, and in the Ephesians, does diligently press this duty of
submitting unto Government: now if it were a thing absolutely unlawful, if it
were a thing that were absolutely a sin, why then would the Apostle press
those duties?

And secondly, You have Examples in the Scripture of those that did make use of
the Magistrate: As Paul when he was in danger of his life, he makes use of the
Magistrate for the saving of himself, which, how could he do if it were a
sin? Thirdly, The second Psalm: and in the Prophet Isaiah, you have
prophecies, and Psalms by way of Exhortation and Instruction unto Magistrates,
that they should receive Christ, and his Kingdom, and order, and worship, and
government: now all these things could not be, if the thing were unlawful.

Yea, it is so of God, and so natural, that Divines do think that Magistracy
and government would have been in the state of Innocence: for certainly there
would have been paternall authority, and filial subjection: and why (when the
World should have increased by time) should there not have been subjection unto
Magistrates? not indeed by way of fear, or by way of pain, as it is now; no
more then a child would have been obedient to his parents, on such terms, but
in a happy, and in a blessed way, and for order sake. Thus you see, it is of
God, and in what sense.

In the next place, Consider the titles that the Scripture gives unto
Magistrates, which mightily sets forth their duty, and their office. As in Joh.
10.35. they are called Gods: it is a place that is quoted out of the Psalm: If
he called them Gods to whom the word of God came: Hensius, would have it,
Against whom the word of God came: and certainly, if you consult with the
Psalm, That seems to be reprehensory and objurgatory; to those that were
Governors; and our Saviors argument is stronger: If he calls them, against
whom the word of God came; came condemning of them, and chiding of them, and
reprooving of them; if he calls them Gods, then is it any great matter that I
am called God? But take it as we render it: yet you see it is, they are Gods:
and the word of God came to them: that is, the word of God came to them, and
appointed them; as well as it came to Ministers and appointed them, thus they
are Gods.

Furthermore, they are called Shepherds, often by the Prophet: and these sheep
what have they done? and to feed the flock: this denotes what a great deal of
care, ought to be in them about the Commonwealth.

They are called Fathers: patres patriae: I rose up a Mother in Israel: to show
that there is no Governor or Magistrate, but ought to love the Commonwealth
more then his own child and the offspring that comes from him.

They are also called (...), men that do good, (...) by some is properly
applied to God, yet given to the Magistrate. So that these set forth the sweet
affections, that ought to be in those that are Magistrates and Governors.
Caligula, was a Monster rather then a Magistrate; he complained there was no
public calamities, nor public judgment to destroy his people. And so Nero,
when he heard that spoken out of the Tragedian, (...), when I die, let all the
world be set on fire: he added, (...), yea, while I am alive. These were
Monsters of men, rather then Magistrates, according to these titles and offices
that are prescribed.

The Scripture also gives them Metaphorical Titles: as sometimes: in Genesis 45.
they are called Adonim, the basis, foundation, the pillars: sometimes the
shields, the corner-stones, the repairers, the Physicians: in Isa. 5. I am no
healer, (says he) that is, I am no Magistrate: this shows forth the great
power, and great excellency of Government. And therefore in Dan. 4. Governors
are compared to great trees, under the shadow of which there is a great deal
of safety, ease and protection; And the reason (say some) why that Samuel in
the sacrifice, gave Saul the shoulder, was to denote, how that Saul should
bear upon his shoulders, the people, and be able with a great deal of
strength, to govern and to rule them. Thus you see the second thing. That as
they are instituted and ordained of God, so they have likewise glorious Titles
and Names put on them whereby they may be made sweet to mankind.

In the nexe place, You are to consider the end, for which they are: and that
is laid down here in the text; For thy good, for the Commonwealth. And this
is mainly to be considered, that the Commonwealth is not for Governors, but
Governors are for the Commonwealth: they are the great servants of the
Commonwealth: like the sun that has not light for it self but for the world:
and therefore the Hebrew word for the same (...) comes from a root that
signifies to be a servant: the Sun it is the great servant of the world, it
has a light for the world and not for it self: and so likewise Governors
they have wisdom, not for themselves but for the Commonwealth: they have
parts, they have power, they have strength; all these things not for themselves
but for the Commonwealth: That was a good Emblem of a Governor, that had a
Torch burning with this Motto: Alijs inserviens meipsum consumo, While I serve
others I spend my self; the propriety is in the Commonwealth, the
administration, that is in Governors, so that this is mainly to be considered
by Governors. And, oh! that this were planted in all their hearts, we are not
here in this place to set up our selves, we are not for our own honors, for
our own wealth, for our own riches, but we are for the Commonwealth. Ideo haec
feci (says he) ut conscientia and respublica mibi gratias agerent, therefore
have I done these things, that the Commonwealth might thank me, and my own
conscience. Among the Grecians there was an action called (...) against those
Officers that did not administer for the public good: so by this you may see,
that Officers, Magistrates, Governors, they are not to say, this is the glory
I will have in such a place, and this is the pomp that I will have; but only,
they are to consider the end, and that the people may know of them and say of
them, that they are, tam pro se, quam super se, that they are as well for them,
as above them, and if this were laid in the hearts of men, how would they be
willing with Saul, to hide themselves among the stuff, rather then to be taken
into public places; considering that as long, as they are there, they are not
their own, but for the Commonwealth: this is the end of Government.

Now in the next place, I come to show you the extent of their power.

First it extends, unto the reforming, and to the redressing, of all the
corruptions that creep into the Church of God, and into the Worship of God:
this the Magistrates power reaches unto, in Deuteronomy. 23. And so we read of
Josias, Moses, Hezekiah, all these worthy Governors, their power did reach to
the redressing of the abuses that were in the Church of God, when Idolatry and
superstition came in: so that it is made their sin, that the high places were
left: Why the Magistrates had power then; and should not have power now, there
can no solid reason be given. Indeed the manner of the punishment, belonging to
Gods Judicial Law, that may be altered, but their duty to preserve the Worship
of God, which sloweth from the Moral Law, cannot cease: And certainly, such
Governors that do arise to do so, they are as welcome as those men were that
we read of, that came and rolled away the stones from the springs, and took
away the earth which the Philistines had thrown in, that so the cattle might
drink: I say, no less welcome are those Magistrates and those Governors to
be that rise up, and take away the stones that have been rouled on our springs
we drink of, and throw away the earth that was cast into them by the
Philistines. Yea Magistrates are to do this in the first place, before all
other considerations whatsoever: So Moses he began with the Administration of
the Pascall Lamb, when he carried them out of Egypt: And Gideon began with the
erecting of an Altar to God, before he purged the Commonwealth: And so Josias
did, and others, they began in the first place with that.

Again, in the second place, their power extends yet farther, and that is to
restrain Heresies and Errors, or any thing that may spread it self to the
destruction of the Church, they are to restrain them also. I know that this is
a Question of a great and large dispute, and I have not time to venture into
such an ocean as this is; only a little I will say of it: Austin, he was indeed
of judgment once, that the Magistrate ought not forcibly to repress Errors
and Heresies; but afterward, when by experience he did see, that the Gangreen
did increase, and that it would spoil the whole body; and when he had
experience that men who were by fear brought into their duties, at first, yet
afterward they began to know and love the truth, he altered and changed his
mind: yet notwithstanding many things are warily to be said here: I will but
briefly touch them, and so go on to other matters.

As in the first place, the most proper, and suitable, and genuine way to cure
an Error is, to bring Arguments out of the Scripture. Fides est donum Dei non
Caesaris, says he well; Faith it is not Caesar's gift, but it is Gods gift: and
so, Fides est suadendo non imperando, many such things are out of Lactantius to
that purpose: For certainly if humane persuasion cannot bring a man to
believe: Veritas (as Tertullian says well) docendo persuadet, non suadendo
docet, Truth persuades a man by teaching, it teaches not a man by persuading:
it is much more true then of Threatening, and of outward violence.

But then afterward, if men still remain refractory, then the Magistrate has
a power to compel to the external means of faith, though the Magistrate
cannot ad fidem cogere, compel to believe; and no man does credere invitus,
believe against his will, all this is true, yet notwithstanding he may compel
to the external means of faith and of salvation, as you see all the
Magistrates in the Old Testament did: and Parents may do it, and ought to do
it: and then why should it be denied unto a Magistrate?

Again in the next place, there is a wary distinction to be made between
Errors, some that overthrow fundamentals, whether directly, or indirectly,
immediately or mediately, and here a great deal more severity is to be used:
As, Popery, that overthrowes fundamentals, directly or indirectly. Arrians and
Socinians, that immediately oppose the deity of Jesus Christ, and such things.
Also such, that deny Magistracy, and so overthrow politic societies: So
likewise Antinomians, or Autonomians, men that would overthrow the Law of God,
or be a law to themselves merely without any bounds: These opinions are
plainly prejudicial to piety, or to civil societies, therefore the Magistrate
is to see, that such fire do not kindle, and by degrees burn, till all be
consumed into ashes; but yet still he is patiently to try all fair ways of
convincing before he proceeds otherwise.

But then there are others that are of an inferior nature, and there Austins
rule is good, Saeviant illi, qui nesciunt quantis gemitibus datur vel tantillum
de Deo intelligere, let them be sierce, and cruel, who know not with what
sighs it is given, even to understand but a little of the truth of God: In
Romans 14. there you may see a tenderness, ought to be allowed to those that are
weak: and as the Physician says, dies and quies quandoque sanant hominem, so
it is true likewise of Errors that are of a less size, many times, ease and
time they will heal the man: howsoever, the Magistrate is here to be wary,
for, nihil est periculosius immatura medicina, nothing is more dangerous then
an unripe, or an unseasonable medicine: But this requires a large Tractate.

In the third place: Their power extends to all the outward moral duties of
the second Table: and here properly the power of the Magistracy is to be seen:
to set themselves against all wickedness, to be zealous against vice, to see
that the Law of God in all the Commandments of it be kept, remota justitia
quid sunt regna, nisi magna latrocinia, said Austin, let Justice be taken out
of the way, and then what are Kingdoms, but great piracies, and robberies? and
therefore he ought to be zealous against vice, and to set against all impiety;
if thou do evil be afraid: Beloved! how happy is it, when the drunkard is
afraid, and the swearer afraid, and when the ungodly man is afraid of a
Magistrate: this is the end for which God has given him his power: if thou
do ill (says he) be afraid: so then, his power, extends to the keeping up
all the duties of the Law of God.

Now in the next place, I must give you a limitation of this, that though the
power of the Magistrate extends to all these things, yet for all that, there
is a bounding of his power: therefore it is distinct from the Ministers power;
it is distinct, I say, from Ecclesiastical power; Whose sins ye remit, are
remitted, these things are not said to a Governor, nor to a Magistrate; And so
to preach the word of God by way of office: And to administer the Sacrament,
They are a distinct power, they are not to be confounded, though they mutually
help one another: if we have a Ministry, but not a Magistracy, we may live
(pie) godly, but not (commode) quietly, and if we have a Magistracy and not a
Ministry, we may live (commode) quietly, but not (pie) godly, they mutually
help one another. And yet for all that they are distinct, they are not to
invade one another, but they are to remain different in their bounds: Besides,
they are bounded in regard of their power; because they may not do any thing
against God, he is but the Minister of God, and therefore is to take heed, what
God will have done in his way and worship; least of a Minister of God, he be
made an adversary to God: Hence people are not to obey a Magistrate, nor a
Governor when he commands against the word of God. Colimus Imperatorem (said
Tertullian) quemadmodum Deo libet, and ipse expedit, we honor the Emperor as
its commanded by God, and as it is expedient for him. This was their resolution
in the Acts, whether it be fitter to obey God, or man, judge ye, da veniam o
Imperator, tu carceres, ille gehennam minatur, pardon, O Emperor! thou
threatnest prisons, but God threatens Hell; So that we are not to obey him
against the word of God: He is but a Minister, and being but a Minister, he is
bounded still, that he may not prescribe any thing in the worship of God, nor
in the Law of God, that God has not laid down. We read in Leviticall
ordinances, that always the head of a Sacrifice was to be thrown away: though
this beast were to be offered and that, yet still the head was to be thrown
away: to teach (say some Expositors) that a man's head in the worship of God, it
is to be laid aside: he is not to go according to his own inventions, but he
is to keep merely to the command of God. And thus have I done with the first
part of the Doctrine.

In the next place, I come to show you the Qualifications of the person that is
to govern: and so shall make Application. I intend to be short because of your
great and weighty business. And therefore in the,

Deuteronomy, to write out the Law of God himself, with his own hand,
notwithstanding all his public employments, that so he might be understanding
of the word of God, and acquainted with it: nay, and not only to know it, but
if he do err, that he be willing to be reprooved and informed: dilexi virum
qui magis arguentem quam laudantem probaret, I love the man (said Ambrose of
Theodosius) that does delight more in one that would reproove him, then one
that would flatter him, (...), either nothing, or that which is sweet, is the
rule given among the Heathens: either we must speak sweet things unto
Governors, or else we must speak nothing at all: but now (says David) Let
the righteous smite me; though it be a smiting, yet notwithstanding for all
that, he shall count it better then oil: so that he ought to be understanding
of the word of God, that is, willing to be informed, and reprooved, if he go
out of the way.

And then this knowledge is to have all the affections joined with it; fear,
and love, etc. to say as he said, Pereat magis totum regnum, quam ut semel
contra Deum peccem, Oh! let all this earthly Kingdom of mine perish: yea,
totus orbis, (as he adds) let the whole world, rather then that I should once
sin knowingly against God: this ought to be the resolution in every Governor
and officer; Let the whole Kingdom perish, let all my estate, let all my
glory, let all my pomp perish, rather then I should once offend against God:
And as he is to have the fear of God in his heart, and the knowledge of God
out of his word: so his delight is to be unto those that are godly, and to
those that are holy: as David makes it his resolution, My delight (says he)
shall be on the faithful of the Land. So then, this is the first thing
necessary unto a Governor, one that understands the word of God, one that has
knowledge, soundness of judgment out of the same.

Argus, to find out profit, and matters of gain: and as many hands as
Briarius, to receive and take the same: We told you they are for the
Commonwealth, and the Commonwealth is not for them; and so they ought to
labor for a public heart and a public spirit: My parts they are the
Commonwealths, my power it is the Commonwealths, my time it is the
Commonwealths: He ought to abhor all enriching of himself, on the loss of
the public: oh! what a woeful thing will it be at the day of judgment, to
have a man crying as Judas said, here, take this silver, and take the gold
again, or take this estate again that I have got by robbing of the
Commonwealth: And how necessary is this to our Governors, to our Magistrates,
to our Commanders, to our Soldiers; all that have to do in the public, that
they would consider, that they are for the public, and the public is not for
them: Austin considers much that out of Tully, respublica, is, res populi, the
Commonwealth it is the peoples good, it is, res populi, and therefore now,
they are not to enrich themselves by it, nor to look at their own ends in the
public.

Ulysses would not go to sea till he had gotten all the winds in his vessel,
that so he need not care for a tempest: and so thou that art to enter on an
office, or a government, do not do it till thou have prevailed with God by
prayer; and be much seeking of him, that he might give thee wisdom; You see
Solomon did it, he begged of God, that God would give him wisdom to go in
and out before the people: and certainly, a great deal of reason there is,
why they that are Governors should beg wisdom of God, if you consider but,
how hard a thing it is, to judge of men that are of various dispositions, and
various judgments, nullum animal est majori art tractandum, (says he) there
is no creature in the world that is to be handled with more art, then man is:
And Father Nazianzen, he cries out, ars artium est, and scientia scientiarum,
etc. it is an art of all arts, and a knowledge of all knowledges, to be able to
govern a man: he is the most various, and the most uncertainest of all things
in the world, and therefore he ought to be much in prayer to God.

And then besides, the discouragements that are in the way, the murmurings and
repinings of people; the loss of opportunities, and not laying hold of
advantages: and then the miscarriages, that they cannot fall, but they fall
like great trees, that beat down the lesser: if thou be a Governor, and
thou art damned, thou damnest many with thee; therefore thou have the greater
cause to pray to God.

Moses, that he did lead them with the skilfulnesse of his hands; there was a
great deal of prudence and wisdom requisite in it, to be able to think
thoughts of good for the public, to be able to know which is the best way to
do good to the public: these are mighty things. And therefore you see how
David was afraid of an Achitophel, he thought that a wise man would do him
more hurt, then all the men in the world: They must be men, that can lay hold
of all occasions, that are able to overcome difficulties, and able to compose
them; able to heal breaches: it is true indeed, it is many times the fate of
wise men, and those that are most prudent, to be less accepted with the
people; because they are circumspect, and cautelous, and wary in what they do:
whereas, papulus favet fervidis, the people they favor those that are violent:
and they had rather have faelicia ex casu, then bona ex consilio, they had
rather have happy things, by mere chance if it fall out by a bold venture:
then to have good things slowly by a way of counsel and prudence: yet for all
that wisdom is necessary: no man will bring a little light into a great
room: and a little wisdom ought not to be brought into the office, that
requires all the parts, and all the powers of a man.

Elim, they are called the strong ones: as therefore, I told you, it is not
enough for a Magistrate to say, I desire to do good, and I feign would do
good, but he must know how to do good: So on the other side, he ought to be
full of courage, and full of fortitude, that he be not any way hindered in the
doing of the same, that he neither be flattered out, nor frighted out of his
duty: not to be afraid of the people, nor yet to be afraid of great ones. You
may see Saul for fear of the people, and Aaron for fear of the people, how
they were forced to commit sin: And so likewise on the other side, not for
fear of great ones, that was Zedikiahs fault, that for fear of the Nobles, he
deliverd up Jeremy.

David in the 101. Psalm: it is a Psalm that it is well if all Governors
would be diligent in; you may see what he did resolve on, when he came to be a
Governor, what family he would have, and what Officers he would have: thore
should be no liar in his house, nor no man profane in his house, and he would
destroy the wicked betime: and this was the purpose he did take on him: So that
he ought to be careful of his Family, and of those that are under him, that
they be not profane, that they be not bribed, that they be not deboist or
ungodly. Beloved, to see a Governor with those following of him, that fear
God, and that fear an oath, this is the best Lord-Majors show (as I may say.)
It is spoken of Constantine to his great praise, that he would gather all his
Court together, and have the Scripture read in his Palace, and pray with them,
this showed his care of his Family. That was Joshua's resolution, I, and my
house will serve the Lord.

Attending continually upon this very thing: the word is emphaticall: they
attend only to this, and they attend wholly to this, they make it their
business: Beloved! you ought to see the Laws be executed: it is a vain thing
to have good laws, unless Governors be diligent to see them executed; a good
Law without execution, is like a Bell without a Clapper: and therefore the good
Laws that are against Swearers, and against Drunkenness, and breaking of the
Sabbath, and the like; these things Governors are to be diligent in the
executing of them: he ought to be (...), a walking and a living Law, diligent
in this, Woe be to thee, says he, in Eccles. 9. when thy Prinoes eat in the
morning: implying, that all the morning, all the day (almost) it ought to be
taken up in the public business, and that it ought to be your day-care, and
your night-care, and your morning-care, even the Commonwealth.

Moses and Aaron, though they took them out of bondage, and would have led
them into Canaan: yet the people when they were always in streights, were
ready to cry out, these have undone us, and brought all this evil upon us. And
so David, notwithstanding his good government, yet when the people were in
danger, they spoke of stoning of him: And so we might speak of Themistocles,
and Cato, and many others; that when they had spent themselves for the good of
the Commonwealth, yet were most ungratefully, and unthankfully requited again
by the people; so that they had need of a great deal of Patience and
forbearance, regarding the public more then their private injuries: It is
related of Themistocles that when he was old, and had long governed the people,
being wearied out with their unthankfulness, he said; That if he had the power
to dispose of his life, and that there was one way wherein the greatest and the
highest honors were for him in the Commonwealth; and another way was present
death; he would rather choose the one then the other. And so likewise of
Aeschines, when he was delivered out of his office, he thanked God he was freed
of the Commonwealth, tanquam a rabida cane. Thus there needs a great deal of
Patience to go through the unthankfulness of people, through their
murmurings, discontents, when then have labored for the public good, and
spent themselves.

languor justitiae does come sub nomine pietatis, when a faint-kind of Justice
comes under the name of piety: but yet notwithstanding when we are bent for,
and set wholly for God, then the Administration of Government with a great
deal of moderation and meekness is very excellent: it is true, Arduum est
misereri simul and sapere, it is a hard thing to be pitiful, and to be wise
too; to have ones affections up, and to be wise too; yet notwithstanding we
ought to do it: and a man is to have command over his passions; especially a
man that is in authority: it is more then to win, or overcome a great City;
there is a great deal of difference between a moderate man, and a middle man;
a middle man that lies down in a cursed indifferent neutralitie (as the
Covenant well calls it) He is not for the Cause of God, or the public good; but
the moderate man is fully for God, wholly for the Cause of God; only the
Administration of his power it is with a great deal of wisdom and mildness:
here is a world of difference between these two; and therefore you ought
mightily to distinguish them. It was noted as a wicked thing of Tiberius, that
he medios viros optimos judicare, he did judge the middle men to be the best
men: but what did he mean by middle men? Men that could not abide eminent
virtues, nor great vices: He did hate eminent virtues, because from them he did
metuere periculum sibi, he was afraid of danger by them. And then he did hate
vice too, because by them he did metuere publicum dedecus, he was afraid of
public disgrace: There are many of that temper: But now a moderate man, he is
a man whose heart is faithfully set for God, and who is bent for the public,
and all his soul is in it, and he is immovable in it; yet notwithstanding the
administration of this is with a great deal of meekness.

Contemnitur Magistratus qui seipsum prius contempsit: that Magistrate must
needs be contemned by the people, that has first contemned himself by his low
carriage. But yet on the other side, he ought to be sull of humility, to
tremble under the account he is to give: what shall he say to God? what shall
he answer to God? might not he have hindered this measure of vice? might not he
have done this good, and that good? It was a good saying of Seneca, Principi
non minis turpia sunt multa supplicia quam medico funera. Many punishments,
they are as great a shame to a Governor as funerals are to a Physician: for it
implies, that the Governor should have had a great deal of care, and have
prevented the punishment: happily his carelessness has wrought it; happily his
negligence, or want of zeal has wrought it.

Now in the managing of these he is to follow the rule of the Word of God,
without any carnal policy, or without any subtle considerations whatsoever;
to be plain hearted in carrying on the work of God; and you see when David
would run to carnal policy, it spoiled him. And so Jeroboam, it was his
worldly and state policy that did undo him: we ought to be so trusting of God,
and depending on his Word, that when we do our duty, we are to leave the
success wholly to him.

The Reasons why they that are in Government must be thus qualified:

and therefore it behooves them more then others to be so. The Eclipse of the
Sun makes a great deal of motion and alteration in things below; and so, any
Eclipse in those that are in Authority, and Government works great but sad
effects in inferiors.





Anabaptists and Socinians that question the Authority of Magistracy: and so
likewise Papists, though they question it not, yet notwithstanding have many
destructive opinions about it.

And then, on the other side, in the Excess, for there is politic idolatry
as well as spiritual; we may make a Magistrate an idol; and that is, when we
will obey him against God, when we have no other ground for our Worship or
Religion then the Authority of a Magistrate, we look not to the Word of God;
this is politic idolatry, Quicquid rex Demetrius jubet id erga homines justum
and Deos sanctum, that was their resolution.

if thou do evil be afraid: Oh beloved, were not the times, when men to do
good were afraid? were not the times, when if men prayed fervently, and when
men preached powerfully, and when men stood for the public good of the
Kingdom; when they did these good things, were they not afraid? how terrible
is it therefore, when the Nature and the Office of Government is altered, when
men to do good were afraid; and when men that did evil were not afraid, nor
discouraged: when the Text now is altered, in stead of being a Minister of God
to men for good, when Magistrates and Governors shall become Ministers of Satan
for the evil and hurt of men, this is terrible.



all that do belong to them: Men that will be diligent: Men that are of
Public spirits, that will abhor to make a public place, matter of their
own gain: Men that shall be diligent in these things, to the execution of the
good Laws, that may be, or shall be established: whosoever is thus, think of
such a man; whosoever, I say, is thus Wise, thus Diligent, thus Faithful; thus
Pious, thus Godly: whosoever is such, set up such a man. Beloved, you may bring
a great deal of comfort, or a great deal of trouble to your selves this day:
what a Comfort will this be to thee, that have disposed thy Vote and suffrage;
to say thus: I have chosen the man that will be a good Pilot of the Ship in the
storm: I have chosen the man that will be a good Physician, that will heal
the breaches. Nay, all the good that comes by such a Magistracy will at last
come to be thine, thou may say, his Integrity is thine, the good he has
done is thine, it will all be counted to thee, who have given thy suffrage for
it. Therefore (beloved) deal faithfully with God; and the Commonwealth this
day: and do you so set about your work, that God may be pleased; the good
Cause of God may be advanced; the Parliament may be encouraged; the
Commonwealth may be blessed; the City may be made happy; and we all may be
made rejoicing, and praising of God for this days work.

FINIS.

