A PROPOSAL FOR THE Speedy Enriching Both of the KING And PEOPLE.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1662.

To my ever honored Friend, Sir EDWARD FORD, Knight.
SIR,
THe various fortune generally befalling Papers that have taken leave of their
Authors, has brought one of yours into my hands, (which I found to be a
design might (if once known) happily prove of singular benefit and advantage
to our King and all his People, by proposing one self same way, and that easy,
and certain for the general happiness of both: though our modern Politicians
(who have not yet the milk of their beloved Nurce Rebellion squeesed out of
their Noses) with unparalleld arrogance endeavor to make the world believe the
welfare of our King and his Subjects altogether incompatible) I could no more
avoid publishing this excellent Subject, than I now know how to excuse my self
for doing it: but like a Girl that marries without her Friends consent (which
she was sure never to obtain) I thought 'twas less sin to do it without your
knowledge, than against your will, and so more pardonable in

Sir Your most faithful humble Servant F. BURGHILL.

A PROPOSAL for the speedy enriching both of the KING and PEOPLE.
NEcessity, we truly say, is the Mother of Invention, and if so, all thriving
ways are more likely to be found in Petty States, than in great Monarchies;
especially where the Subjects hearts are poisoned with, that groundwork of
Rebellion, an endeavor to keep their King poor, that his necessities may
compel him to sell his just Prerogatives for their inconsiderable money; his
Birthright for their Mess of Pottage.

If we look into the several good Husbandries of Free States, we find their
design, to get themselves credit, one of the first and most thriving. To
compass this credit they prudently observing that all coin is (really) but such
tokens of account between men, as are certain to yield so much as they are
received for; and that other like tokens of account, as Letters of Credit,
Bills, Bonds, etc. are, for their greater conveniences, accepted, nay, often
preferred before money, though their security is far from being infallible:
upon these observations they most politically raise themselves a Bank of money,
enough to give them credit, and no more (for no considerate man can believe
that they have so much money, as they give out Bills for, what then do they
get? but lose their charge of guarding their Banks, and keeping accounts) And
with this (truly deceitful) credit they drive on all profirable Trades and
Designs, and so grow really rich.

By these then (though their Bill-credit be visibly capable of deceiving their
Creditors, and no way able to give such satisfaction that a Land Bank may) we
may learn, That

1. It is practicable; for all free States have it. 2. It is profitable; or
else they would not all continue it. 3. It is compassable; for they have
brought their people to it on slender and unknown security. 4. It is not
grievous to the Subject; for they never complain or grumble at it. 5. It
lesseneth not, but increases, coin; for what Monarch lends such sums, as
little Genoa to the King of Spain? that great Master and Merchant of Gold and
Silver.
Having then before us such Clear, Profitable, and Long practiced Presidents,
why may not we also erect the like office (and as much more satisfying as land
security is to an uncertain money Bank) and this office either, to be the
same, or like, our Statute office, (which yet never deceived) where all who
have lands of clear title, may by engaging them there have 5 l. Bills of Credit
made transferrable and current to half the value of the Land; for such a Land
Bank cannot fail, or deceive the receivor of such Bills: and the Debtor on
these Bills, or the Office, may easily make good any of them, being in effect
but changing the 5 l. Bills into shillings, the Bill being still current. And
to encourage both borrower and lender, every Bill shall show the person and
land engaged, and shall be eminently free from counterfeiting, loss by thieves,
or any other casualty, or accident.

The borrower shall pay but 4 or 5 l. per annum use for this Bill, or more
properly Land-money, (for we do not call our Statutes Mortgages, etc. paper or
parchment money, but we reckon, (and truly) that thereby we have in our
pockets, or boxes, so much land.)

And yet the Lender shall have 6 l. per cent. use for any money or Bills he
will lodge here, which may be done, because there will be twenty borrowers for
one lender.

The Orphan also has here a sure place for his Portion, so that his Guardian
cannot (as now usually) cheat him, by accounting unto him little or no use,
pretending that his money lay dead for want of good security: And all others
(whose only revenue is their money) are hereby free from ruin by broken
Debtors, or deceitful security: And as by this all landed men may easily have
money to complete all provident good improvements, and trade, so will any
ingenious person, though he has no land to mortgage, because there will be 20
Masters of money for one now. By this also (besides many innumerable
improvements by it, and so increase of all vendibles which bring us Bullion) we
may go through with the Herring, and other fishing Trades, sufficient (almost
alone) to enrich the Kingdom: for if we had but two millions Credit (only for
a few years) we might bring our fishing to such a Revenue, that of it self
would be sufficient to pay our first charge, and for ever employ our poor,
breed up Mariners, make us rich, and much more powerful both by sea and land:
And all this without altering, straining, or thwarting, any Law or Custom now
in force amongst us, or raising any new Tax from the Subjects; which really is
the only cause of the Vulgars discontent, and the principal ingredient our
Kings old (and never to be reconciled) enemies have ever used to poison the
poor deceived people, and make them swell into Rebellion.

FINIS.

