THE DOCTRESSE: A plain and easy method, of curing those diseases which are
peculiar to Women.

Whereunto are annexed Physical Paradoxes, OR A new discovery of the aeconomy
of nature in man's body.

Written by R. B. etc.

LONDON. Printed by J. F. for Nicolas Bourne, at the South entrance of the
Royal Exchange. 1656.

To the Reader.
HAving continual experience in a more particular manner in those diseases
which are peculiar to women, by reason of my constant and daily employment,
which is, to be assistant to those that have hard and difficult labors; I
conceive my self in some capacity to become yet more serviceable unto the
female sex, by divulging that part of my practice in the cure of women's
diseases which I have observed to have been most succesfull.

Herein I am so far from making collections out of Authors, that I have on
purpose for brevities sake omitted all those things in my own practice which I
know to be familiar unto most Physicians: and have divulged only such as I
find by experience to be proficuous, and have not been hitherto published.

This, Courteous Reader, I thought good to premise; and withal to advertise
thee of my intent herein, which is to inform the ignorant, and to give some
hints to the learned: that so I may do real service to the female sex.
Wherein you may also take notice that I am somewhat indulgent to their modesty
in avoiding all obscenity, as also to their capacity in writing in our mother
tongue.

Hereunto I have annexed that which you find in the title page, viz. Physical
paradoxes etc. The first, of women's diseases is plain and obvious to all. And
this latter is not obscure: yet I would advise the Courteous Reader, to read it
twice over; first cursorily, that thou may have a general conceit of the
thing I do intend: and then with some observation, that thou may so digest it
as to make it thine own. It gives me so much satisfaction as I am not able to
express: in that it makes clear unto me all those Physical Notions, which
before upon other hypotheses were more confused in mine understanding. And I
cannot but hope that it will do the like to any one else who shall read and
digest it.

There is not any thing to my knowledge, upon this account, difficult in
Physic: but all things may hereby be so clearly demonstrated from sensible
experience how they work generally upon man's body, and how each particular
has also its private operation: that I cannot but admire how it could be
possible that it should lie hidden so many ages, yet I am not ignorant that now
at the last it will find amongst some but slender entertainment, especially
amongst those which dislike all things but their own. However Courteous
Reader, I here present it unto thee, supposing thou will be in thy censure
neither uncandid nor disingenious, so hoping it will give thee some
satisfaction I rest

Thine to use Rich: Bunworth.
From the sugar loaf in Duck-lane London. May. 1656
A Table of the Chapters.
CHAP. I GEneral observations concerning women's diseases. page 1. CHAP. II To
procure the months. page 10 CHAP. III To stop the immoderate flowing of the
months. page 20 CHAP. IV For the rising of the matrix or womb called commonly
the mother page 28 CHAP. V For the falling down of the womb. page 35 CHAP. VI
To stop the flowing of the whites. page 38 CHAP. VII For the Chlorosy or green
sickness. page 41 CHAP. VIII. To prevent abortiveness or miscarriage. page 46
CHAP. IX Sterility or Barrenness. page 50 CHAP. X To cause speedy delivery in
childbirth page 57 CHAP. XI To expel the secondine or Afterbirth page 60 CHAP.
XII For the overflowing of milk in women's breasts. page 62 CHAP. XIII To dry
up the milk in women's breasts page 64 CHAP. XIV For an ulcer in the womb. page
65 CHAP. XV For a Cancer in the womb. page 69 CHAP. XVI For a dropsy in the
womb. page 73 Physical Paradoxes. page 77
CHAP. I. General observations concerning Women's diseases.
WOman, that she might be fruitful and multiply, and might become the Mother
of all living, had in the beginning, by God and Nature such accomplishments
bestowed upon her as are most suitable for such a condition. She has given her
a fabric of body different from Man, and a peculiar constitution, colder than
Man: That whereas Man's body, by its greater heat, does dry up and transpire
whatsoever superfluous moisture is remaining after ultimate concoction; the
same superfluity in Woman might not be consumed by a devouring heat, but might
pass through fit channells into a convenient receptacle, there to be retained,
or from thence expelled, according to her present condition whither pregnant or
otherwise.

The throwing out of this superfluous moisture, which the remiss heat of
Woman's body cannot absume, is in no healthful Woman, performed by a confused
motion, at uncertain times, but as the sea, the sap of trees, the juice of
fruits, and all other moist bodies do observe, in their ebbings and flowings
the dictate of their governesse, the Moon; Even so do the humors of the bodies
of most healthful Women ferment and purify themselves at set times,
answerable to the Aspects of the Moon with the Sun. And as at some time of the
month the sea does receive from the Moon a greater fermentation than ordinary,
swelling and dilating it self into the bowels of the earth; Even so the
humors of a Woman's body have, once every month, their spring tide, not only
fermenting within their usual limits, but also swelling to a greater extent,
and are extravasated into the womb to fertilize the same.

Luna vetus veteres purgat, nova luna puellas. Experience teaches that young
Women have their monthly evacuation when the Sun and Moon are in Conjunction,
that is, at the time of New Moon: and ancient Women, who have still their
months, have them when the Moon is opposite to the Sun, that is, at the time of
Full Moon. Other Women, according as they are more or less in years do
symphathize with the proportionable age of the Moon, and are purged at other
intermediate Aspects: Viz: Sextile, Trine, Quartile, etc.

Some men, who make much blood, and are of a colder temperament, come so near
to the Nature of Women, that they have constantly every month an evacuation of
blood by the haemorrhoidall veins. And again on the contrary some few Women
are of so hot a constitution, and are such Viragos, participating so much of
the nature of Man, that they have seldom or never any evacuation at all, and
yet enjoy their perfect health. Of such as these our present discourse is not;
but of others whose health or infirmity does depend upon the expulsion or
retention of that superfluous blood which is by most Women monthly evacuated.

From the stopping, or the immoderate slowing, of the months may proceed all
manner of diseases which can possibly happen unto mankind, for all diseases
whatsoever have their original either from repletion or inanition, from
fulness or emptiness.

The stopping of the months does produce at first a general cachexy, or evil
habit of body, that is, want of appetite and disgestion, indisposednesse to
exercise, dullness and drowsynesse, etc. This cachexy, if it be not taken away
by bleeding, purging, sweating, abstinence or the like does beget some other
disease unto which the body is most inclined. The distempers which do
generally ensue hereupon are pains in the head, back, and other parts of the
body, intermitting fevers, the black and yeallow jaundise, difficulty of
breathing, the dropsy, the scurvy, the plurisy, the squinancy, etc. Such like
diseases do most frequently happen upon the obstruction of the monthly course:
Yet is not the body wholly exempted from any other distemper whatsoever, upon
this account, whereof fulness is the cause. For by the retention of the
months not only the grosser par s of the humors do putrefy; but even ^he
thinner parts thereof* or spirits may become more disposed to receive and
cherish the seed^ of pestilentiality, whereby the b^dy is rendered more
obnoxious to those epidemicall diseases, Viz: the small Pox, the Measells, the
spotted Fever the Purples, the Plague, or wha^soever other contagious disease.

As the retention of the months does procreate all manner of diseases which
have their original from repletion; Even so from the immoderate flowing of the
same do proceed those other distempers which are the of-springs of inanition,
Viz: convulsions, cramps, syncopes, etc. Of which it will be too tedious to say
any thing in particular.

Having generally considered the error in quantity committed by the retention
or immoderate expulsion of the months, from whence may proceed all those
diseases in Women which are common unto all Mankind: we come now to take
notice of the evil quality of the humors so retained or expelled, from whence,
proceed diseases of the womb and such as are peculiar unto Women.

The womb is a tender part, nervous, and exquisitely sensible, apt to receive
a various impression according to the diversity of the quality of the humor
which is cast into it, and contained in it. Sharp and bilious humors ulcerate
the womb; melancholic juice hardens it, and breeds a Scirrhus therein; hot
blood does inflame it; crude and indigested humors putrefy and cause a
suffocation thereof, which is called the hystericall passion. And so is it
humected, dried, cancerated, etc. According to the nature of the humor which it
receives

Those humors which hurt the womb have other passages appointed them by
Nature, by which they might be expelled without prejudice to the parts through
which they pass, (such is the tenderness of the womb in respect of other
parts) as the bladder, the intestines, the pores, and other particular
emunctories. Now when these, or some of these, by any cause whatsoever, are
stopped whereby there is some offensive humor retained which should, but cannot,
by these passages be expelled; Nature, out of her providence to the whole, is
forced to throw out this offensive humor into the tender womb, which presently
receives the impression thereof and suffers, more or less, after a diverse
manner according to the quality of the humor. Sometimes the womb suffers by
procatarcticall or outward causes: it may be indurated by cold injections: it
may be inflamed by too hot a pessary: and by too long continuance of too sharp
a pessary it may be ulcerated. What prudence then, and religion is there
required in that practitioner, whether physician or Surgeon, that is
concerned in the cure of diseases in the womb! How possible is it for an
unskilful hand to ulcerate or inflame the womb in attempting by pessary to
cure the hystericall passion! So likewise in the cure of any other distemper of
the womb, as also of all other diseases which are peculiar to Women, without
much prudence, skill and caution, there is much danger.

CHAP. II. To Procure the months.
FIrst of all take notice of the patients pulse, which you shall observe to be
either too quick, too flow, or moderate.

If her pulse be quicker than ordinary, it will be convenient for her to be let
blood; if slower than is usual to healthful Women, the best way is to refrain
bleeding: if her pulse be moderate, Viz: neither too quick nor too slow, she
may bleed or not bleed according to these following condit^ons.

The patient must be let blood upon a moderate pulse, if she do sometimes
bleed at nose, or if she have pain in her head, or in her back, or in any of
her sides, or if she be naturally subject to warts, or have a wenn in any part
of her: for all these are signs of a melancholic constitution wherein letting
blood is in the first place required.

She must not bleed upon a moderate pulse if her legs be subject to swell and
pit, or if she be sick after her meat, or if she be very drowsy and inclined to
sleep much: for these are signs of a Phlegmatic Constitution, wherein letting
blood is some what dangerous in regard of a dropsy.

I have set down severally the signs whereby may be known whether it will be
necessary for her to bleed or not to bleed, yet often times these signs which
I distinguish, may happen together in the same body: as the same Woman which
has pain in her head, sides or back, which I call signs that letting blood is
requisite, may also have a swelling in her legs, which, of it self, is a sign
that letting blood is not necessary: in this case it will be Convenient for her
to bleed; for these several signs concurring are an argument that she does
labor with a plechora, or fullness of humors, which must be emptied by letting
blood which is the most general Evacuation.

Blood must be taken away upon this occasion, always from those veins which
are in the lower parts of the body; it is most commom to let blood in one of
the feet, yet if the Patient have a pain in her back, or in the hinder part of
her head, it will be more proper for her to bleed with leaches in the
Haemorrhoidal veins: if she have pain in any of her sides, or in the side of
her head, she must bleed in the foot of the same side where the pain is; Except
her feet or ancles swell, then must she not bleed in the foot, least thereby
the ^umors of her body be too much called down. But let her rather bleed in the
vein under the ham. If she have pain on both sides alike, or athwart her chest,
or if she have no pain, it will be most convenient for her to bleed in the left
foot, because the spleen is on the left side, whose fullness and stopping is
commonly the cause of this distemper.

After bloodletting the next thing in order to be done is vomiting. But if the
Patient, upon bleeding, perceive a Manifest alteration to the better, it will
be wisdom to let her alone some time, and to observe whether Nature, having
some part of her load taken of, be not able to govern the rest the better, and
whether she may not, by the help of convenient diet* and moderate Exercise,
without Physic, do the rest of what is to be done.

But in those bodies which are Cacochymous or of evil juice bleeding will not
be sufficient, wherefore they must, as I said, after bleeding proceed to
vomiting* and others which are not let blood must begin with a vomit.

Vomits are of several natures, and may be contrived into several forms, as
into a Pill, a Potion, a bole, etc. all which I shall, at present, pass by, and
propound one only Vomit which is so safe that it may be given to a Child of a
year old, and does agree with all constitutions, all ages, and all diseases
wherein Vomiting is necessary.

The Vomit which I mean is Oxymel of Squills. The dose of it is from one ounce
to 3 ounces: it is of the consistence of a Syrup, wherefore the best way to
take it is to mix it with 5 or 6 spoonefulls of posset drink, and so to drink
it down upon a full Stomach, about four in the afternoon, having dined 2 or 3
hours before. This Oxymel of squills will either Purge, or Vomit, or both,
according to the Constitution of the body, and the nature of the Superfluous
humor. Let her intermit two days betwixt Vomiting and bleeding. The next day
after her Vomit let her begin to take of a Chalybeate Electuary: let her take
the quantity of a nutmeg of it at a time twice every day viz: in the morning
fasting and at 4 in the afternoon, so long as it shall last let her be sure to
exercise always immediately after the taking of her Chalybeate Electuary* if
she be of a hot Constitution let her make use of the first Electuary, if cold,
let her take the second, if moderate, the third.

The first Chalybeate Electuary for hot Constitutions.
TAke Conserve of Berberies, 3 ounces, Conserve of wood sorrel 2 ounces,
prepared steel one ounce, red coral prepared, Cream of Tartar of each a Dram,
Oil of Vitriol twenty drops, Syrup of Lemons as much as is sufficient to make
it up into an Electuary.

The second Chalybeate Electuary for cold Constitutions.
TAke Conserve of Scurvigrass four ounces, Tartarum Vitriolatum, Salt of
Steel, Species Diagalanga of each a Dram, with Syrup of Coral as much as is
sufficient, make it up into an Electuary.

The third Electuary for moderate Constitutions.
TAke Conserve of Scurvigrass 3 ounces, Conserve of Berberies two ounces, red
Coral prepared a Dram, prepared Steel 6 Drams, Syrup of Wood sorrel an ounce,
Oil of Sulphur thirty drops, mix them together into an Electuary.

After the use of any one of these Electuaries according to the manner above
written, there will remain nothing else to be done, but only for the Patient
once or twice a day to drink a cup of white wine mixed with 2 or 3 spoonefuls of
Syrup of mugwort: this she may continue a fortnight or 3 weeks together.

Let her diet be chiefly Flesh meat, Broth, and the Gravy of Meat, let her
drink be new Beer: let her by all means abstain from Fish, Water Gruel and
Gritts, it is good now and then to boil in her broth the roots of Fennel,
Smallage, Butchers-broome, Parsley, and Asparagus.

If there shall be a greater fullness of blood than ordinary in the body, it
will be more safe and convenient to let her blood first in the arm, and then
two days after in the foot, and so to proceed according to the aforesaid
method. Yet if she bleed at the Nose or vomit blood, let her not bleed in the
arm by any means, but only in the lower parts of the body: and apply
Cupping-glasses with scarification unto her thighs.

Some have had their Months procured by taking the quantity of a Nutmeg of old
Leaven, mixed with the like quantity of Sugar, for three or four days together.

These following Pills provoke the Months in some women without any other means
whatsoever. Give the patient two of them every night when she goes to bed, for
the space of three weeks together.

The Pills.
Take Myrrh three drams, Aristolochia rotunda two drams, Agarick, Cinnamon,
dictamnus Creticus, of each a dram, Saffron two scruples, Spikenard half a
dram: with as much syrup or rather juice of Mugwort, as shall be sufficient,
make them into a Mass, out of which make small Pills as big as Peace.

The juice of the white Flower de Luce root provokes the Months, if it be
given to the patient in the morning fasting, for three mornings together four,
five, or six spoonfuls at a time, according to the strength of the patient,
about the time when she expects her monthly evacuation.

The juyces of Penny royal and Balm are sometimes effectual, but they are of
less force then the juice of the white Flower de luce root; wherefore they are
fittest to be given to those that are of weak constitutions.

CHAP. III. To stop the immoderate flowing of the Months.
LEt a large Cupping glass be applied once or twice to each breast, without
scarification. This does immediately stop the immoderate flowing of months: and
to those that are of a healthful temperament, having fallen into this distemper
by some accident, as a fright or the like, this alone will be sufficient. But
others whose distemper does proceed from an inward cause, after the application
of Cupping glasses to their breasts, which does at present stay the effect,
must take something inwardly to take away the cause, least the effect return
again.

The cause is always either a sharp choleric humor in the body: or else a
thin, putrid, and watrish moisture. The difference of the causes, may be known
by the difference of the signs: If the patient be naturally of a hot temper,
and be subject unto flushing heats into the neck and face, and, for matter of
diet, has delighted in Salt meats, Mustard, Pepper, etc. from hence the cause
will appear to be a sharp choleric humor; for which let her take three or
four spoonfuls at a time of this following Julape three or four times a day,
for a fortnight or three weeks together; and after that let her take the
quantity of a Nutmeg at a time of this following Electuary in the morning
fasting, at four in the afternoon, and at night to bedward, until she shall
perceive the cause to be abated.

The Julape.
TAke Plantain water twelve ounces, syrup of Violets six ounces, oil of
Vitriol so much as shall make it very tart, shake them together in a glass.

The Electuary is only a mixture of conserve of Barberies and red Coral. Take
conserve of Barberies three ounces, red Coral prepared three drams: mix them
together.

Once in five or six days let her purge with lenitive Electuary.

Let her by no means eat any flesh meat, or broth of meat: But let her diet be
Water Gruel, Panado, Cream of barley, and such like thickening and cooling
diet. Let her drink be small Beer, or rather small Ale.

If the cause be a thin and putrid humor, it will appear by that which comes
from her, which will be discolored and stinking. Let her first take this
following purging Potion.

The Potion.
TAke Sena three drams, Rubarb and Agarick of each a dram, Caruay seeds and
Coriander seeds prepared, of each half a dram: infuse them in a quarter of a
pint of White Wind for the space of twelve hours. Strain them, and put to the
strained liquor an ounce and half of syrup of Roses, and five drops of oil of
Vitriol: Give it her to drink in a morning fasting with due observation
according to the usual manner of purging.

After she has purged, let her take plentifully of conserve of Red-roses
vitriolated for the space of a week, then let her purge again as formerly:
After that continue her with this following Electuary until she be well.

The Electuary.
TAke conserve of Red-roses vitriolated four ounces, conserve of Barberies two
ounces, Lapis haematites two drams, Dragons blood a dram and half, Crocus
Martis a dram: with as much syrup of Quinces as shall be sufficient, make it
into an Electuary: of which give her the quantity of a small nut five or six
times a day.

If her flux return before her body be altered, stay it by a second application
of Cupping-glasses to her breasts, as above written.

Let her diet be the same with that before mentioned. For flesh meat does beget
both a sharp, and also a putrid humor in the body, whereupon it is so strictly
forbidden immediately after childbirth (besides upon the account of a Fever)
lest it should put either a sharpness, or else a putrefaction upon the blood,
and thereby cause a greater flux.

It is a common observation, that they that are much inclined to the immoderate
flowing of the Months, are almost continually bound in their bodies, which is
oftentimes the cause wherefore this immoderate Flux does so long continue. For
Nature endeavoring to discharge her self of some superfluous humor, by the
common sink of the body, the Guts finding that passage stopped, throws it out by
that passage which is most open.

Wherefore whatsoever is given to stop this immoderate flowing of the Months,
it will be to no purpose, except a due regard be had to the keeping of the
Patients body soluble; which must not be by strong and violent purgers, but by
such Medicines as do but gently purge, and withal have a power to cool the
body and allay the sharpness of humors; of which sort are Catholicon, Lenitive
Electuary, Diaprunum, syrup of Damask roses, etc.

The same things which are commonly given unto those that bleed much at the
nose, or vomit blood, are also very good in this case; As the juices of
Plantain and Nettles, the powder of Colophony, Dragons blood, Lapis haematites,
the powder of Acorn cups, the powder of Comfrey ^^ots, etc.

But above all things let the Patient be conversant in a cool air. In the
Summer time let the room wherein she is be cooled with green boughs, and let
water be sprinkled upon the floor, and in the Winter time let there be little
or no fire in the room.

Upon a Miscarriage, and sometimes after Childe-bearing, it has been observed;
that the blood which the Patient voids being drunk in White wine, does
immediately stay the immoderate Flux: Insomuch, that many Midwives account this
as a great secret, and mix it privately lest they should communicate their
skill to others. I have some acquaintance with a Gentlewoman who could by no
means possibly be cured, who was brought so weak with this continual flux of
blood, that she always fainted away when she was but turned in her bed,
insomuch that her friends and Physicians despaired of her life, seeing that all
those means which have been effectual to others, proved not at all succesful to
her: At length she was advised to have a live Toad put up in a Napkin and bound
to her back; which was no sooner done but her flux of blood was staid from
thence forward; and to the admiration of all, this Gentlewoman was thereby
recovered.

CHAP. IIII. For the rising of the Matrix or Womb, called commonly the Mother.
THe present paroxysme or fit is first to be abated. After that, the cause must
be taken away, otherwise, upon the least disturbance of mind, during her whole
life time, she must expect several fits in the like Nature.

To abate the present fit, first of all apply a Cupping-glass to her navel:
after it has continued on some few minutes take it off, and lay two or three
grains of Civet, received into a little cotton or lint, upon her navel, and
keep it on with a plaster of Galbanum as broad as the mouth of a Cupping
glass. Let the plaster remain on so long as it will stick.

Then proceed to take away the cause; but in the mean time, lest the fit should
return before the cause be wholly abated, give her now and then, as often as
you please, a spoonful or two of compound Pyony-water sweetened with white
Sugar Candy; and let her sometimes take a whift or two of Tobacco in a pipe;
or, if she observe a fit approaching, let another take tobacco, and blow the
smoke to her: for this is better then the smoke of feathers, or Assafoetida.

The cause of this distemper is a putrid humor collected in the womb,
proceeding from too great a quantity of blood, in respect of the patients
strength to govern it.

First, breath a vein in the right arm to the quantity of seven ounces of
blood. The next day after, if the patient be of a sanguine complexion, or
melancholic, let her blood in the foot to the quantity of about eight or nine
ounces. The day after bleeding give her this following Clyster.

The Clyster.
TAke Mugwort, Penny royal, the flowers of Centuary of each a small handful,
Chammomile and Mellilot flowers of each half a handful, Bayberries and
Cummin-seeds bruised of each two drams, French barley half an ounce: boil them
in a pint and half of water until half be wasted, strain away the liquor, and
dissolve therein an ounce of Diaphaenicon, the yolk of an egg, and two drams
of Venice-terpentine washed. The Venice terpentine must be first mixed with the
Yolk of the egg in a mortar, and so be incorporated into the rest of the
liquor by degrees.

The next day after her Clyster, let her purge with three, four, or five pills
of Extractum Rudii, more or less according to the constitution of her body,
whether easy or hard to work upon. The day after purging let her make use of
this following Pessary.

The Pessary.
TAke Mugwort and Feaversue of each half a handful, Diaphaenicon and Venice
terpentine of each six drams, species hiera picra three drams, beat them
together into a mass; then make a little bag of sarcenet shaped like unto a
suppository, but let it be bigger both in thickness and length. Then crowd so
much of the mass into it as it will contain, that so it may be stiff, like unto
a suppository, though bigger: tie it up, and leave the string hanging, whereby
it may be pulled out upon occasion. Use this Pessary unto her so often, until
her womb be thoroughly cleansed: then let her drink a quarter of a pint at a
time of this following drink thrice a day, for the space of thirty or forty
days.

The Drink.
TAke of the wood of Guajacum half a pound, Guajacum bark four ounces, the
roots of China and Sarsaparilla of each two ounces* Liquorice an ounce and
half. Raisins stoned four ounces: boil them a little over night in two gallons
of water in an iron pot close covered; let them infuse all night, the next
morning boil them again until half the liquor be wasted: strain it, and drink
thereof as aforesaid.

In some women this disease may be cured by this following Apozeme alone
without any other course of Physic: And many have been cured ^nly with these
following Pills.

The Apozeme.
TAke Motherwort a handful, Ceterach and Maidenhair of each half a handful,
Raisins stoned two ounces, Liquorice an ounce, Cassa lignea half an ounce, red
Madder roots half an ounce, squinanth two drams. Boil all these in six pintes
of water in an earthen vessel close covered, over a gentle fire, until half be
wasted. Strain away the ingredients, and dissolve in the strained liquor salt
of Steel two drams, syrup of the five opening roots six ounces. Let her drink
a quarter of a wine pint of this Apozeme warm every morning fasting, and as
much at four in the afternoon, for a fortnight or three Weeks together, and let
her always exercise after it.

The Mass for Pills.
TAke Aloes two drams, Trochis of myrrh a dram and half, Trochis of Alhandal
half a dram, Castoreum two scruples, Diacrydium twenty grains: powder them
finely, and with as much juice of Garlic as shall be sufficient make them into
a Mass: Let her swallow two scruples of it made into five pills every fourth
morning so long as it shall last.

Some after all possible means used in vain, have at length been cured only by
the drinking of water. Doubtless those physical Waters which purge either by
Seat or Urine would be much more efficacious.

Married women have their present fit taken away by the knowledge of their
husbands, and Widows and Maids are oftentimes thoroughly cured by marriage.

Ale is very hurtful, as also strong Beer, and whatsoever else is vaporous, and
does fume much into the brain.

CHAP. V. For the falling down of the Womb.
MAny women have this distemper, yet know not what it is, and are ashamed to
ask counsel of a Physician concerning it. They observe a hard bearing down in
their birth, in some of the bigness of a Gooses egg, though in others less. It
is scarce in any woman at all times alike, but at several times bears down
more or less, according as she has lately more or less strained her body by
walking or other exercise. It is at first caused commonly by hard travel in
childe-bearing, which weakeneth the womb, and does relax the adjacent parts.

Take Plantain, Shepherds purse, and Knotgrass of each a handful, dried Mint
half a handful, Comfrey roots an ounce, Bistort and Tormentil roots of each a
quarter of an ounce, sweet Fennel seeds half an ounce, bruise the roots and
seeds, and cut the herbs, then boil them all together in three pintes of water
until half be wasted, when it is almost boiled, put into it a pint of Redwine.
Strain it, and sweeten the strained liquor with six ounces of syrup of
Quinces. Let her take nine spoonfuls of this Apozeme every morning fasting, and
as much at night to bedward, for the space of twenty days. Let her in the mean
time use frictions or Cupping-glasses to her breasts: Let her neither stand nor
walk much: Let her very often receive into her nosthrils sweet and grateful
sinels; as the fume of Benzomin, Storax, Labdanum, Rosewater, etc. Let her wear
a plaster of Oxycroceum athwart her back: Let her never keep her urine too
long.

Able Physicians report that some women have been cured of this distemper by
fear only. Let the Patient be persuaded that the bearing down or swelling must
be seared with a hot iron, and let an iron be put into the fire, and other such
like preparations made in the sight of the Patient, that she may really think
that she must be immediately cauterized; the apprehension and fear of this
will, without doubt, cause the Womb to shrink up, and return to its proper
place.

If the Womb be ulcerated, it must not by any means be reduced into its place,
until the Ulcer be healed.

CHAP. VI. To stop the flowing of the Whites.
LEt the Patient purge with this following Potion.

Take Sena two drams, Agarick a dram, white Ginger half a dram, Tartarum
vitriolatum half a dram: infuse them all night in a quarter of a pint of
White Wind, in the morning dissolve in the strained liquor an ounce of the
whitest Manna, and give it her to drink; with due observation of thin broth
after every stool, according to the custom of Purging.

After two days intermission give her this following potion, called commonly
--

The white Potion.
TAke Venice terpentine washed in Plantain water half an ounce, the yolk of a
new laid Egg, Plantain water four ounces: incorporate the yolk of the Egg and
the Terpentine together in a mortar, then by degrees mix them with the
plantain water, and give it her to drink in a morning fasting so soon as it is
mixed. Let her keep in, and drink a draught or two of broth before she eats
any thing else.

Lay this following Plaster athwart the small of her back.

The Plaster.
TAke Venice Terpentine washed in Plantain water six drams, white Wax half an
ounce, white Sealed earth two drams. Melt the wax and terpentine together in
an earthen porrenger; then take it from the fire, and when it is almost cold,
stir in the white sealed earth being first finely powdered, and spread it upon
Sheeps leather, to be applied as above written.

Three weeks after, let her take the same purging Potion again: and so once
every three weeks until she perceive the cause to be wholly abated.

The same things which cure the Gonorrhaea or running of the Reins in a man, do
also cure the immoderate flowing of the Whites in a woman. This following
Electuary alone has cured many.

The Electuary.
TAke Diacatholicon, Diaprunum, Lenitive Electuary of each an ounce and half,
Venice Terpentine washed in Plantain or Red-rose water two ounces, Sena
powdered a dram and half, Anniseeds in powder two drams, mix them all together
into an Electuary; of which let her take the quantity of a Nutmeg every morning
fasting, and as much at four in the afternoon so long as it shall last.

Gellies of Isinglass and Hartshorn stop the Whites, but they are not safe
until the body be sufficiently purged. The Mucilage of Quince seeds, and the
decoction of Comfrey roots do the like, but purging is also first required.
Some Physicians do commend the decoction of Nettle seeds.

CHAP. VII. For the Chlorosy, or Green Sickness.
IF the Patients pulse be quick, take away seven or eight ounces of blood from
the left arm, otherwise, not. Two days after her bleeding, or if she does not
bleed, in the morning fasting give her a Vomit consisting of an ounce of Oxymel
of Squils, and half an ounce of infusion of Crocus Metallorum mixed together.
Give her posset drink after every fit of vomiting, according to the custom of a
vomit.

The next day after her vomit let her begin to take of a Chalybeate Electuary,
and continue it from thence forward for the space of one and twenty days. She
may take the quantity of a Nutmeg of it at a time twice every day, viz. in the
morning fasting, and at four in the afternoon, exercising after it. In the mean
time once in seven days let her purge with two scruples of Pilulae Cochiae made
up into five Pills. The Chalybeate Electuary is as follows.

Take conserve of Scurvigrass 3 ounces, conserve of roman Wormwood two ounces,
Species Dianisum two drams, salt of Steel a dram and half, Tartarum vitriolatum
and red Coral prepared of each a dram, Saffron two scruples; with as much
syrup of Hysop as is sufficient: mix them together into an Electuary.

There are many other several ways of curing this disease; as by a Cordial, by
Pills, by an Apozeme, by a Bag. The particular forms whereof are hereunder
written.

The Cordial.
TAke Maskadel half a pint, syrup of Wood Sorrel three ounces, Mint water an
ounce, Gascons powder a dram and half, Saffron a dram; mix them together. Let
her take two spoonfuls of this Cordial at a time, every morning fasting, at
four in the afternoon, and at night to Bedward, so long as it shall last.

The Pills.
TAke Aloes Rosata two drams, Myrrh a dram, Saffron half a dram, Faecula
Brioniae, Faecula Aronis, salt of Steel of each two scruples; with syrup of
Lemmons as much as shall be sufficient. Make them up into a Mass: Out of which
make Pills of the bigness of large Peace. Give her three of these Pills every
morning fasting so long as they shall last, and let her exercise after them.

The Apozeme.
TAke Hart's-tongue, Betony and Maidenhair of each a handful, Raisins stoned
two ounces, Liquorice an ounce, the roots of red Madder, Parsley, Fennel and
Asparagus of each half an ounce, two large Nutmegs, Mace a dram and half. Boil
them all together in five pintes of spring water over a gentle fire, in an
earthen vessel close covered, until there be but two pintes remaining. Strain
away the ingredients, and dissolve in the strained liquor common Triacle four
ounces, salt of Steel a dram. Let her drink eight or nine spoonfuls of this
Apozeme warm every morning fasting, exercising after it, and as much at four in
the afternoon, so long as it shall last.

The Bag.
TAke Scurvy Grass two large handfuls, Watercresses and Brooklime of each a
handful, Raisins stoned four ounces, Dates two ounces, Sena an ounce and half,
Sassafras an ounce, Anniseeds, Caruay seeds, Coriander seeds prepared of each
half an ounce. Put them all together in a Bag and tun it up into three gallons
of small Ale, when it is three days old let her begin to drink of it. Let her
drink, half a pint every morning fasting, and as much at four in the afternoon
so long as it shall last.

Some are cured only by exercise without any other means whatsoever, and
indeed without exercise all things else are in vain.

CHAP. VIII. To prevent Abortiveness or Miscarriage.
IT is a common observation, that they that have once miscarried are more
subject to miscarry again, then they that have never miscarried before.
Wherefore I would advise them that have never miscarried, by no means to take,
or do, any thing to prevent Abortment, lest thereby they bring upon themselves
that which they do without cause fear. But whosoever has once by any accident
whatsoever miscarried, she is thereby rendered in much danger of after
miscarriages whenever she shall be with child. To prevent this let her
observe, as near as she can, the time when the occasion was given of her former
abortment: and when she shall be again with child let her bleed in the right
arm seven ounces, more or less according to her strength, six weeks before the
time of her former miscarriage: As if she should have formerly miscarried when
she was sixteen weeks gone with child, or thereabouts; when she shall be with
child again, let her bleed when she is about ten weeks gone. But if she can
know exactly to a day, how long she was gone with child when the occasion of
her former abortment was given, and also does certainly know the very time of
her conception again, let her omit her bleeding until a just fortnight before
the time of her former miscarriage. After she is let blood, let her take the
quantity of a Nutmeg of this following Electuary thrice a day, viz. in the
morning fasting, at four in the afternoon, and at night to bedward, so long as
it shall last; always drinking after it five or six spoonfuls of Red wine.

The Electuary.
TAke conserve of red Roses three ounces, conserve of Sage flowers two ounces,
conserve of the flowers of water Lillies an ounce, the powder of Date stones
two drams, fine Bole powdered a dram, with as much syrup of Comfrey as is
sufficient; mix them into an Electuary.

Let her use moderate exercise during the time of her being with child; and by
all means let her diet be whatsoever she has a mind to.

Some have used only the powder of Date-stones, and fine Bole mixed together
with good success.

This following Plaster applied athwart the small of the back is very good.

The Plaster.
TAke Emplastrum ad Herniam an ounce, Bees wax half an ounce, Cyprian
terpentine and oil of Myrtils of each two drams. Melt them together, and spread
it upon leather to be applied as above written.

Let her boil Shepherds purse and Comfrey roots in her broth; and let a gad of
Steel be quenched in all the Beer she drinks. It is good for her to sweat a
little now and then; but rather let it be procured by exercise then any
sweating Medicine whatsoever.

CHAP. IX. Of Sterility or Barrenness.
THe cause of Barrenness proceeds commonly from the distemper of the Womb,
which is either too moist, or too dry; both which I shall prosecute in their
order: and first, of the first.

The too much moisture of the womb proceeds either from the knowledge of
several men as commonly in Whores, or else from the loose and humid temperament
of the whole body, as sometimes in other women. The womb being too much
humected and moistened, does thereby lose its retentive faculty of keeping the
seed; the slipperiness whereof must be corrected by altering the moist
temperament of the body.

TAke a Cock and break all his bones, then boil him in six quarts of Water,
with these following ingredients, in an earthen or iron pot close covered, over
a gentle fire, until the liquor when it is cold, shall be of the consistence of
a Gelley. Strain it and sweeten it with double refined sugar: and let her drink
a porrenger of it at a time, three or four times in a day, for the space of
thirty or forty days.

The Ingredients.
RAspt Hearts horn six ounces, the roots of China and Sarsaparilla of each an
ounce and half, Shepherds purse a handful, Bistort roots an ounce, Cinnamon
half an ounce, Nutmeg and large Mace of each a dram.

In the mean time let her swallow three small Pills made out of this following
Mass, every other night when she goes to bed.

The Mass for Pills.
TAke Aloes three drams, Myrrh two drams, the gum of Guajacum a dram, Saffron
half a dram: Make them all into fine powder, and with as much syrup of Mugwort
as is sufficient; beat them into a Mass or Paste, out of which let her form
Pills as she shall have occasion.

After she has done taking her pills and gelley, let her return to her usual
Diet, only let her be sure to quench a gad of Steel in all the Beer she drinks.

The dryness of the womb does also cause sterility, in that the womb is thereby
rendered incapable of making its application to the seed so soon as it is
injected: for if the seed be not immediately embraced by the contraction and
application of the womb unto it, it cannot ferment: and consequently it does
become useless for generation.

From the defect of moisture proceeds a scirrhosity or hardness in the womb;
unto which hardness we must have a respect in our prescriptions, as well as
unto the alteration of the whole body.

Let her make three small Pills out of this following Mass, and swallow them
down every morning fasting for the space of ten days together, always
exercising after them.

The Mass for Pills.
TAke Aloes three drams, Gum Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar two drams, salt of
Steel a dram. Crabs eyes and Tartarum vitriolatum of each half a dram; with as
much Oxymel of Squills as shall be sufficient: make them up into a Mass
according to art.

After ten days let her begin to bath in a Semicupium, that is, to sit in an
artificial Bath up to her navel: let her first continue half an hour in the
Bath, and so longer and longer by degrees, that in her latter bathings she may
continue a full hour or more.

Boil a good quantity of these following ingredients in so much water, as that
when they are sufficiently boiled there may be liquor enough for her to sit up
to the navel therein in a convenient Tub or bathing vessel. Let not the
ingredients be taken out of the liquor wherein she does bath. Let her bath one
day, give her a Clyster the second day; and the third day let her take three of
the same pills whereof she took every morning before her bathing. Let her
continue this course for the space of 30 days. The Clyster which she is to take
every third day is as follows.

The Clyster.
TAke Mallows, Mercury, Beets, Chamomile and Mellilot flowers of each half a
handful, Aniseeds half an ounce, boil them in a pint and half of water until
half be wasted: strain away the ingredients, and dissolve in the strained
liquor brown Sugar two ounces, the yolk of one Egg, Castle-soap one dram.

Let there be injected into her womb with a Matrix-Syringe some of the
aforefaid Clyster about a quarter of an hour before she takes it Clyster-wise.

This, by Gods blessing will make her that is barren a happy mother, and take
away her reproach amongst women. But before she uses the aforesaid means, let
her be very certain whether the distemper of her womb be from dryness or from
moisture, which she shall know by these following signs.

If the distemper of the womb proceed from dryness, there is oftentimes felt a
sensible hardness therein, which is called a Callus, proceeding from a
melancholic juice in the body. She is scarce satisfied with the act of Venus.
She has commonly a heat and dryness in her hands. She is much inclined to
Warts in other parts of her body. She commonly disgests her meat well.

But if from moisture, she is of weak disgestion. She has never any appetite
to her meat immediately after sleep. She is often sick or sleepy after meat.
She has a heaviness like unto a weight in her head. She is listless and
indisposed to exercise.

By such like signs it is not hard to determine certainly the true cause of
Sterility in any woman whatsoever.

Mineral waters which come from Iron Mines do sometimes help those that are
barren.

The frequent use of Sage is much commended by ancient Writers; the reason is
because it is rough and fixing, and consequently it does correct the
slipperiness of the womb.

The Cock-treadings of three new laid Eggs dissolved in four or five spoonfuls
of Vinegar, and drunk down about half a quarter of an hour after she has had
to do with her husband, is accounted a great secret.

CHAP. X. To cause speedy delivery in Childe-birth.
BE sure her appointed time be come before you attempt to use means for the
hastening of her delivery. Give her nothing which nourishes, but only those
things which have a Physical respect to her present condition. I am of opinion,
that they which have difficult and long Labors, are hindered by the too much
indulgence of those that are about them, in giving them nourishing things, as
they think, to support nature: whereas in several respects nature is thereby
prevented from doing those offices which are suitable to the present condition
of the Patient. Let her wholly abstain from all things that nourish. Let a
Suppository be put up made of Honey and Salt according to art; and after that
is com'd away put up another.

Boil three or four handfuls of Mugwort a little while in Spring water, then
strain it from the liquor and put the herb into a bag and apply it warm to her
navel.

They which are so good accountants as to know to a day the time of their
Travail, may assure themselves of easy and speedy labor, if three or four
days before they do observe a strict and sparing diet.

A dram of Myrrh powdered and given to drink in white Wine, causes speedy
Delivery.

Some have used Irish Slate with good success; others do commonly use Sperma
Caeti, or Bezoar: And some Midwives give only the powder of Aristolochia or
Birth-wort, because that does after a more powerful manner cause speedy
Delivery then those before mentioned: But this is fittest to be given to those
that are of strong constitutions.

CHAP. XI. To expel the Secondine or Afterbirth.
THe same things which cause speedy Delivery, do also help to expel the
Afterbirth, or part thereof, if it be broken and left behind in the body. Yet
notwithstanding all means used, sometimes there is some part of the Afterbirth
left behind, which cannot speedily be brought away, but does putrify in the
womb, and does cause dangerous symptoms, and oftentimes death. I would
therefore advise all Midwives to be sure that the whole Afterbirth come away
in its proper time, so soon as the Child is born, without mangling or tearing:
which may be done with ease, speed, and safety, by putting up their whole hand
into the body, and therewith gently separating the same from the walls of the
womb. I confess they that trust to the strength of the Navel-string (which I
presume most do) have scarce the Afterbirth of one in twenty broken. Yet it is
great pity that one in a hundred should suffer in the like nature, there being
such a way and means to prevent it, whereupon there is no other inconvenience
does ensue. Upon all occasions when I have been called to cases of great
difficulty, I have ever made sure with the Afterbirth, by putting up my whole
hand as aforesaid; and, with what success, they which have had experience do
well know. Neither have I ever observed any inconvenience ensuing: which makes
me bold to counsel all Midwives to do the like.

CHAP. XII. For the overflowing of Milk in women's Breasts.
MAny women are inclined to this distemper: which proceeds either from the
weakness of the breasts, the retentive faculty thereof being lost, or else from
the waterish temperament of the Mass of blood or humors contained in the Veins
and Arteries, and in some women there are both these causes.

Let her drink a quarter of a pint of this following Apozeme in a morning
fasting, at four in the afternoon, and at night to bed-ward, so long as it
shall last.

The Apozeme.
Take Guajacum four ounces, China, Sassafras, and Sarsaparilla of each an
ounce, Liquorice an ounce and half, Agrimony and Betony of each a handful,
Raisins stoned four ounces: infuse them all night in two gallons of warm water;
in the morning boil them in a Vessel close covered, until half be wasted.
Strain away the ingredients, and drink the liquor as aforesaid.

After she has taken this Apozeme, let her take the quantity of a Nutmeg of
conserve of red Roses vitriolated three or four times a day until her
constitution be altered. Let her, all this while, wear upon her Breasts
plasters of Oxycroceum.

CHAP. XIII. To dry up the Milk in women's Breasts.
TAke Vnguentum Populeon and Diachylon Plaster of each an ounce and half, melt
them together, and when it is almost cold, stir into it two drams of the powder
of Alabaster, and a dram of Lapis calaminaris finely powdered. Make two large
plasters hereof, and apply them to her breasts. Let her wear black wool in her
armpits. If this succeed not, let her purge with a dram of Pilulae Cochiae. If
after her purging she perceive not her Milk to dry up, give her the Apozeme in
the foregoing Chapter, For the overflowing of Milk, etc.

CHAP. XIV. For an Ulcer in the Womb.
FIrst take away eight ounces of blood, more or less according to the Patients
strength, from her right arm, the next day after her bleeding let her begin to
take of this following Electuary; let her continue the same for the space of
one and twenty days, give her the quantity of a Nutmeg of it at a time twice a
day, viz. in the morning fasting, and at four in the afternoon, in the mean
time, once in seven days let her purge with this following Potion.

The Electuary.
Take conserve of Scurvy Grass four ounces, conserve of Roman Wormwood two
ounces, Crabs eyes finely powdered three drams, Tartarum Vi^riolatum a dram and
half, salt of Steel a dram, w th as much syrup of Mint as shall be sufficient;
mix them together into an Electuary.

The purging Potion.
Take Sena three drams, Rubarb a dram, Agarick half a dram, Coriander seeds
prepared a scrupl^, Spikenard ten grains; infuse them in four ounces of white
Wine for the space of twelve hours, strain away the ingredients, and dissolve
in the strained liquor syrup of Roses solutive an ounce, Manna half an ounce,
oil of Vitriol seven drops.

After she has taken one and twenty days of her Electuary, and purged thrice,
viz every seventh day, let her drink of this following Apozeme for the space of
one and twenty days more, eight or nine spoon^uls at a time every morning
fasting, and at night to bed-ward.

The Apozeme.
Take the roots of China and Sarsaparilla of each an ounce and half, Agrimony,
Mugwort, Sanicle, Shepherds purse of each half a handful, Liquorice an ounce
and half; boil them in three quarts of water until half be wasted: strain away
the ing^ed^ents, and sweeten the liquor with syrup of Mint: whereof let her
drink as aforesaid.

During the time of taking her Apozeme, let her use injections twice a day,
viz. in the morning, and at four in the afternoon. Let her use this following
injection in the morning, and the next after in the afternoon.

The Injection for the morning.
Boil a quarter of a pound of Guajacum in two quarts of water until half be
wasted, then dissolve in the strained liquor Calcanthum Romanum called commonly
the Celestial stone two drams. The stone will of it self dissolve in the
liquor being put therein.

The Injection for the Afternoon.
Take the flowers of St. John's wort, Plantain, Knot-grass, Shepherds purse,
and Horse-tail of each a handful, red Rose leaves half a handful, Bistort roots
an ounce and half: boil them in four pintes of Spring water, until half be
wasted* strain away the ingredients, and reserve the liquor for your use,
putting thereto four ounces of syrup of dried Roses.

After she has made use of these injections and taken her Apozeme as
aforesaid, let her drink, until she be well, twice or thrice in a day, a
draught of Whay wherein some Vulnerary herbs have been steeped or boiled: of
which sort are Avens, Bugle, Comfrey, St. John's wort, Dandelion, Agrimony,
Hony-suckles, Mugwort, Mint, Plantain, Ribwort, etc.

Let her eat no flesh-meat during the whole time of her cure.

CHAP. XV. For a Cancer in the Womb.
FIrst take away eight ounces of blood from her left arm, the next day after
let her begin to take of this following Electuary and Apozeme, continuing the
same for the space of twenty days. Give her the quantity of a large Nutmeg of
her Electuary every morning fasting, and immediately after it let her drink a
quarter of a pint of the Apozeme.

The Electuary.
Take conserve of Borage and Bugloss flowers of each two ounces, prepared Steel
three drams, the black ends of the claws of Crabs finely powdered two drams,
black Amber, that is, Jet, finely powdered a dram and half, oil of Vitriol
twenty drops wi^h as much syrup of Coral as shall be sufficient; mix them
together into an Electuary.

The Apozeme.
Take Garden Scurvigrass three handfuls, Fumitary and Maiden hair of each a
handful, Sena two ounces, Pollypody of the Oak an ounce and half, Epithymum an
ounce, Liquorice and Fennel seeds of each six drams, black Hellebore half an
ounce. Boil them all together in a gallon of Rain water over a gentle fire, in
an iron pot close covered, until half be wasted: Strain away the ingredients,
and sweeten the strained liquor with brown Sugar or common Triacle.

After she has taken her Apozeme and Electuary, let the part be fomented twice
a day with this following fomentation, and presently after it is fomented,
anoint it with this following Liniment. Continue the fomentation and liniment
until she be cured.

The Fomentation is only the decoction of the herb Isatis, called in English,
Woad; you may have the liquor out of a Diers fat ready for your use.

The Liniment.
Take twenty Eggs, boil them or roast them hard; then take out the yolks and put
them into a Skillet, and set it over a gentle fire, then break the yolks with a
spoon, and stir them continually that they may not burn: keep them stirring
over the fire, until you shall perceive them to be full of oil, then take them
from the fire and strain out the oil. Take of this oil two ounces, of the
juyces of Houseleek, Nightshade, and Rue of each half an ounce, Quicksilver
two drams: beat them all together in a Leaden Mortar with a Leaden Pestel,
until they be perfectly incorporated: Use this Liniment as aforesaid.

During the whole time she uses the Liniment and Fomentation, let her every
morning drink a draught of Whay or Posset Drink, wherein have been dissolved
ten grains of Tartarum Vitriolatum. Let her eat no kind of flesh-meat, except
Rabbets or Partridges.

CHAP. XVI. For a Dropsy in the Womb.
GIve her three small Pills made out of this following Mass for the space of
ten days together.

The Mass for Pills.
Take Aloes Rosata two drams, Myrrh two scruples, Castoreum half a dram,
Saffron a scruple: make them all into very fine powder, and with as much syrup
of Mugwort as is sufficient make thereof a Mass for Pills.

After she has taken all her Pills, let her drink a quarter of a pint of
this following Apozeme every morning fasting for the space of ten days more.

The Apozeme.
Take horse Radish-roots an ounce and half, Sassafras an ounce, the roots of
red Madder, Butchers broom, and Asparagus, of each half an ounce, Fennel seeds,
Dill seeds, Caruay seeds of each two drams; boil them in White wine and Spring
water of each three pintes until half be wasted; sweeten the strained liquor
with syrup of the five opening roots.

When she has done all her Apozeme, let her bath in a Semicupium every other
day until her belly be fallen.

The Semicupium.
Boil a sufficient quantity of these following ingredients in so much water,
that when the liquor is strong of the ingredients, there may be enough for her
to sit up to the Navel therein, in a Tub or convenient bathing vessel.

The Ingredients.
Chammomile and Mellilot flowers, Bay berries, Cummin seeds, Sage, Wormwood,
Penny royal, Mugwort Bryony root, Horse-raddish roots, Anniseeds, Fennel seeds,
Thime, Majoran, Rose-mary. Always immediately after her bathing, let her belly
be anointed with Chemical oil of Dill.

Let her diet be very spare, but chiefly of flesh meat, let her exercise much:
let her sleep but moderately.

Physical paradoxes.
Physical knowledge, which is nothing else but an observation of the order and
course of Nature, was by the Ancients begun and founded upon experience, and
afterward traditionally communicated unto posterity. It was first in the
particular senses, then in the common sense, and by degrees introduced into the
intellect, and there digested into a science: which science, being analyz'd or
resolved into parts, might with ease by others be attained unto by reading*
although by the beginners thereof it was only elaborated by experience: as for
example. Any one of an indifferent capacity may in a short time have the whole
body of natural philosophy in his mind, by reading over some short physical
systeme whereas another of a most penetrating wit cannot attain thereto in many
years by the only light of Nature. Hence it is that the Ancients who had no
considerable writings from others were so laborious and industrious in the
inventing of arts and sciences; that they esteemed man's life too short for the
perfecting of one art* (...) says Hippocrates* life is short but art is long.
But the succeeding ages, being heirs to the writings of their predecessors,
became so careless and negligent of farther knowledge, that they did wholl
forsake that way which their ancestors used, and did content themselves only
with a speculative knowledge of reading over the writings of others, this
book-learning has been so sacred amongst suchlike scholars of superficial
and speculative knowledge, that it has been by them accounted a Piaculum to
gainsay the least tenet of generally received philosophy. It is not long since
our universities were to guilty of taking upon trust the opinions of others,
confirming their assertions by sic dicit Aristoteles, whereas Aristotle himself
could say Amicus Plato, amicus Socrates, sed magis amica veritas. Aristotle
well knew that if some doubt should not be made of the positions of the best
Author, truth could not possibly be discerned from error. And indeed if
Aristotle himself should have been believed in all things, the world should
have still retained those chimeras of the elementary fire, the motions of the
heavens by intelligences etc. If faith should have been given to the writings
of Hippocrates without all exceptions, many women with child had perished
whose lives have been saved by letting blood. If succeeding ages had rested in
Galens knowledge, the sciolists of our days would have made mad work with
hellebore, scammony, colocynth etc. such violent and dangerous purging
medicines as Galen only knew.

If some in this age had not doubted all authority whatsoever, the circular
motion of the blood had not been discovered.

Is qui nil dubitat. The common wealth of learning has received the greatest
advantages from such as have not been contented to tread in the common road,
but have taken to themselves the liberty to try whether the most generally
received tenets might not have been at first taken up by a misunderstanding of
circumstances.

Now they which have made the best discoveries in all ages have always found
many adversaries, and have been accused of affecting singularity until such
time as their opinions grew popular, the reason is because the world takes no
notice of that way and means by which the ancients got their knowledge.

They which make new discoveries, and do add to arts and sciences, or do
obliterate any thing which has been generally received, have no other way to
do this then the ancients had for the invention of the said arts and sciences,
for there cannot possibly be any physical knowledge in the intellect which
has not first been in some sort in the sense. He that could never see or hear
cannot possibly have any notion of sounds or colors in his mind: because the
notion of sounds or colors is nothing else but the remembrance of such things
seen or heard. Seeing then it is so that sens^ble experience is the first
foundation of all science; why should not we, that have had more experience,
make collections of our experiments as the ancients did; thereby not despairing
to gain a more exquisite knowledge?

We have meditated upon some experiments, from whence there do seem unto us
to result some conclusions which whether they agree or not with what others
have concluded it is not on our parts either to examine or to regard: but it
more concerns us to examine and take notice whether such conclusions be rightly
taken up from such experiments and whether we may not be deceived by
misunderstanding some circumstances.

We have observed in several creatures that the blood which is found in the
heart and adjacent parts does differ from that which is in the smaller veins.

The opening of a jugular vein eases the extreme pain in the head, when
phlebotomy in other parts is not proficuous.

A small quantity of blood taken from the sublinguary veins abateth an
inflammation of the eyes, whereas letting blood as a general evacuation does
not conduce, the like is observed in inflammations of the throat, ears, and
other adjacent parts. In the toothache a horse leach applied to that very gum
where the pain is although it draw but a very small quantity of blood yet it
does immediately and wholly abate that extreme pain.

Bleeding in the left side is known by experience to be conducible to the cure
of the splenetick distempers* and so likewise to take blood from the right side
is observed to be most proficuous in those affections of the liver wherein
phlebotomy is required.

Bleeding in the Hemarrhoidal veins is an admirable remedy for those
distempers of the adjacent parts, especially of the kidneys, wherein there is
required evacuation.

A quartain ague is commonly abated, and sometimes wholly cured by opening of
the Salvatella.

Upon distempers of the spleen, the veins of the left side are fuller than
those of the right.

In the Hemicrania there may be seen a large vein in the temple of that side
where the pain is, whereas the temporal vein of the other side is scarce
visible, and in all other parts where there is present pain proceeding from
fullness, the veins of those parts are much fuller than the veins of other
parts wherein there is no pain.

Often letting blood in the same vein causes a diminution of the vein. I
presume by the same reason that the umbilicall vein in infants having no blood
in it to extend it, does by degrees lessen, and at length degenerate into a
nervous substance.

From these observations I conclude that there is given by Nature a peculiar
blood to each extreme vein in man's body: and that although the whole mass of
blood does indifferently pass through the arteriall vein, the venall artery,
the heart, and part of the Aorta; yet it is afterward divided in its passage
toward the extreme parts, in such sort, that the several veins and arteries
of the extreme parts do receive blood of some what a more different temperature
the one from the other.

The blood of the Salvatella does differ in temperature from that which is in
the temporal veins although they do both meet together and mix in the
subclaviary veins. And the blood which is in the subclaviary veins, consisting
of several parts, does differ from that which is in the lower part of the
hollow vein (which does consist also of other several parts, being a
composition of all that blood which was more simple in the respective branches
of the hollow vein) although they are compounded in the upper part of the
hollow vein, entering together into the right ventricle of the heart, for
farther illustration hereof we may compare the mass of blood in man's body to
the sea in the greater world. The sea by its Diastole does send into the more
inward parts of the earth, even to the extremes thereof a great quantity of
water, which we know must necessarily be mixed in the ocean, as also in the
great gulf which is the aorta thereof, where it first enters the earth; yet in
the capillary veins, viz. the beginnings of springs we observe it to be pure
and simple: although again it does become more and more mixed and compounded,
as by degrees, passing through the veins, viz. the more superficial cavities
of the earth, it does approach nearer and nearer to the sea* we know that the
most simple part of the blood is in some sort a heterogeneous body: yet
comparatively we may call the blood in the extreme parts and capillary veins
homogeneous or similar, and that which is in the larger vessels and center of
the body heterogeneous or mixed which, though it be mixed, is in no wise
confused: but it is even there so digested and so orderly disposed; that upon
the next pulsation of the heart it is dispersed according to the order of
Nature. Blood of such like temperature as came from each particular vein is
orderly returned thither again by the pulsation of the heart* no otherwise then
Bees, that in a summers day disperse themselves severally according to each
ones genius some miles distance from the hive, and when at night they are
returned again, being all in the hive together, every one finds out his proper
habitacle or place of abode (more by the wisdom of Nature than the knowledge
of each individuum) that so they may be disposed and ready each one to take the
same journey the next day as it did the day before.

Nature, abhorring confusion even as she does a vacuum, has so oeconomiz'd the
humors of man's body, that as they are mixed by degrees in approaching nearer
and nearer to the center, so they do meet with the graduall augmentation of
heat, whose property it is to keep them still in order by joining the
homogeneal and disjoyning the heterogeneall parts thereof* and that the blood
may not be two much mixed at too great a distance from the center where it
cannot have heat sufficient to govern it, Nature has provided valves and put
them in fit places, viz. the meetings together of the veins* for farther
explanation of my meaning take an example, the blood which is in the
subclaviary veins is a mixed blood: and so is that which is in the hollow vein:
yet neither of themselves severally are so much mixed as afterward at their
entrance together into the heart: Now as the heat of man's body is most intense
in the heart and by degrees more and more remiss toward the extreme parrs; so
is the blood most mixed in the heart and adjacent parts, and so less and less
mixed as it is more and more remote from the center, so that the hollow vein and
the subclaviary veins have such a mixture of blood as is answerable to their
distance from the heart as also a heat proportionable. But this just order and
proportion might be violated, if Nature had not appointed valves to do what on
their parts is to be done* that blood which is in the hollow vein in its motion
upwards, might, some of it, pass beyond the heart and enter into the
subclaviary veins, if Nature had not placed valves there to forbid it: there
might, I say, be in the subclaviary veins blood as much heterogeneous as that
in the heart, whereas the heat is not there accordingly. And so if there were
not valves in the meetings together of other veins, there might be a return of
some blood, and consequently too great a mixture at too great a distance, where
it should want heat sufficient to govern it.

We have perceived sensibly in several creatures that the blood of the heart
and adjacent parts does differ from that blood which is in the extreme parts,
but we never could perceive any sensible difference of that blood which is in
the several veins of the extreme parts: yet notwithstanding we have concluded
that there is a difference. The reason is because we know that all that blood
which is found in the heart came from the several veins of the extreme parts.

We know likewise that if that blood which was in the extreme parts in
several veins had not differed, there could not have resulted in the
composition thereof such a manifest difference* as for example. I know some few
springs meeting together which make up a brook able to turn a mill: this brook
in its farther descent meets with another brook of suchlike pedigree as was
the former: the water still descending increases into a river. Now knowing that
this river is nothing else but the mixture of waters flowing from such several
springs, although the waters of these several springs seem not to differ
amongst themselves, yet there being a manifest difference between the river
water and that of the springs, (the river water being able to bear soape and
yest, whereas the water of any one of these springs severally is of no use
either for brewing or washing) I must necessarily conclude that the springs do
also differ. If I had not this argument of the river to convince me, I
confess, I should think there were scarce any difference in the several
waters of all these springs yet they which do wholly drink water say that they
could never yet find the water of any two springs in all respects alike.

Braceletts, or such as physicians call periapta, if they be used loco et jure
they do perform a manifest alteration upon man's body, for we know by
experience that camphor included in a nodule and hung about the necks of
Children has cured diverse agues in a short time, without any other means
whatsoever, the bloodstone is known by experience to stanch bleeding; pyony
roots either cure or abate epilepticall fitts, with many others.

Many have been cured of lingering and cacheticall distempers only by the
change of the air.

They which have hot and costive bodies do not excerne by seat and urine a
third part of what is ingested, yet their bodies are not at all increased
either in weight or bulk.

Infectious diseases, which are seated chiefly in the spirits, are sooner
received by a body that is sweating, then by the same body at on other time

Hot bodies are sooner fluxed by unctions or plasters wherein there is
mercury, then bodies more temperate.

The same body sweating is also sooner fluxed by such like unction or plaster
then at another time.

Salivation is stayed, and the mercury carried out of the body, by sweating.

From these observations digested, and made to conspire in one there seem unto
us to result these three conclusions.

First, there is in man's body a continual circulation of spirits through the
pores, whereby the miasmes of the air are received into the body and the
excrementitious vapors expired.

Secondly, the pores are of two sorts, the one kind for expiration, wherein the
motion of the spirits and vapors is from the base to the point, and the other
for inspiration, wherein the motion of the returning spirits together with the
infection of the air is from the point to the base.

Thirdly, the pores for inspiration are valvous, that is, so contrived that the
spirits cannot possibly go out again the same way they came in.

We mean by spirits that vapor or effluvium which, by the natural heat is
raised from the sincere humors of the body or from that part of the mass of
blood which is uncorrupted, now the spirits being an exhalation from the purest
blood, they are also in themselves pure, and are so continued by this regular
motion which Nature has provided them* (...) is an aphorism recorded by wise
Hippocrates Nature cannot remain in the same state* there is nothing in the
whole world stands still if we rightly consider it. All bodies are either
continually acting upon their own excrement, and so moving toward a higher
degree of perfection, or else they are suffering by some excrementitious
matter, and declining toward a state of corruption* now whether they act or
suffer, they have in them a circular motion, which is the only condition by
which this action or passion is performed* as for example. A piece of pure and
polished iron, if it be wetted and put into a moist air which is not agreeable
to its nature, will corrupt, and by degrees become more and more corrupted
until the whole body thereof be converted into rust. But on the contrary iron
that has contracted rust will refine and purify it self, if it be oyled and
kept in a dry air* the reason of this is the motion of the spirits, which are
bound by the law of Nature to keep a just correspondence between the body and
the ambient air.

This regular motion of the spirits is as the first wheel in a clock, or as
the primum mobile to the lower sphaeres in the greater world, the spirits
moving do put the secondary spirits into a motion of consent, and the secondary
spirits do move the lighter humors, and so at length by a subordination of
motion the grossest humors, are constrained to move; and the whole body is
continued in and preserved by this perpetual motion* hereby the influences of
the heavens which wander in the air are ushered in the body* hereby sensation
is performed, and a just intelligence given unto Nature how in each moment the
air does stand affected.

We have observed that if the head be but moderately heated, the whole body is
immediately put into a sweat: yet if the body be very hot and the head cold,
sweat is not procured.

The head, and those parts that are nervous and membranous are most prone to
sweat.

They which are prone to the epilepsie, convulsions, or any other distemper
proceeding from the obstruction of the brain, are not at all proclive to
sweating.

They which are subject to sweat much have seldom the headache: and so on the
contrary.

Those things which are diaphoretick, as Guajacum, China, Sarsaparilla, have an
immediate operation upon the brain, and are known by experience to have cured
inveterate pains in the head proceeding from obstructions, whereas all other
means have failed.

From hence we conclude, that all that matter which is transpired, either by
sweat or insensibly, is first conveyed into the brain, and from thence by the
nerves scattered into the habit of the body.

That which is transpired is, in the body, a spurious spirit, and is regulated
by the motion of the spirits, passing through the same channels, although it
have no reentrance into the body or motion of return, it is to the spirits as
a meteor to the stars, which by the stars is put into a motion of consent,
although to no other end than speedily to be dissolved or to vanish.

The spirits we conceive to be, in all respects, the primum mobile of of the
microcosme: which do move in the largest circumference and utmost orb of the
body, and did first begin that motion which is essential to the life of man*
which whole motion must be first accurately explained, before we can enucleate
the order of Nature in transpiration or other excretion.

We did denominate the spirits to be an exhalation from the purer blood: which
exhalation is the product of heat, and heat the offspring of motion* yet
notwithstanding we conceive that the first thing that did move in man's body was
the spirits. These positions do imply a seeming contradiction, for if the
spirits be the beginners of motion how is it that they do become the ofsprings
thereof at a third remove? I answer that the spirrits are to be considered
after a twofold manner* they are either innate, such as were the beginners of
motion or else adventitious, those that are the continuers or preservers
thereof, the spirits which did begin motion in man's body were nothing else but
the spirituous part of the seed: which from the first instant of its motion
must necessarily become more and more refined, and so by degrees exhale until
it be all spent* the adventitious spirits are an exhalation from the purest
blood which does make a continual supply for the continual expense of the
innate spirits: that so that regular motion which is essential to the life of
man may be continued and preserved. The spirits do continually move in the
veins and arteries together with the mass of blood: yet their proper orb is
from the beginnings of the nerves to all the extremes thereof, as also to the
whole surface of the body. There is a continuation of pores from the brain and
spinall marrow through all the nerves* fibers and membrans of man's body:
through which pores there can nothing but spirits, or that which is transformed
into the shape of a spirit, these pores as we said before, are of two sorts,
through which the spirits which are natures intelligencers do pass and
repasse, through the one kind of pores the spirits are continually passing from
the brain, to give intelligence to all parts how the brain does stand affected,
whereby motion is performed, and through the other pores the spirits move
backwards toward the brain whereby there is performed sensation: we conceive
that there are several degrees of spirits, viz. Finer and grosser: and
according to those several degrees we suppose them to move in a greater or
lesser circuit* the grossest spirits move only in the veins and arteries
together with the mass of blood: those which are finer pass through the
arteries of the rete mirabile into the brain, and from thence are carried down
by the nerves into the habit of the body, and do return again by the same
nerves (although they do pass through different pores) into the brain, and
then they enter into the veins of the rete mirabile, from whence they pass
toward the heart and are again circulated with the blood: these spirits which
move in the nervous parts, which are properly called animal spirits, are also
of several degrees. viz. some purer and others less pure* the purest Spirits
expatiate themselves at some distance from the surface of the body* those that
are less pure move but to the surface, and those that are yet grosser come not
so far; but they do in the mid way by an anastomosis of pores Change their
path, and make a more speedy return unto the brain* even as in the circular
motion of the blood the purer parts thereof are conveyed by the pulsation of
the heart to the extremities of the arteries, and are received again by the
extremities of the veins: but the grosser parts come not so far, but are let
into the veins by an anastomosis, whereby they do obtain a shorter journey to
the heart.

Here we must take notice that the purer part of the purest spirits does
continually vanish into air, and is continually supplied by that which is in
the next degree of purity: so that each moment every particle of the spirits
becomes more and more refined: and has such a successive being that it cannot
twice be called the same. The humors and spirits are in continual motion,
which renders them obnoxious to continual alteration.

The grossest blood does continually become more and more refined: and whereas
at first it moved no farther than the first anastomoses or openings of the
arteries into the veins, it does afterward increase in its circuit until at
length it move to the utmost parts of the body: then is it resolved into a
vapor, to the end it may increase and feed the grosser spirits which are in
the veins and arteries* which spirits, by their circular motion, increase in
purity, until they move, first, out of the veins and arteries into the nervs,
so far as the first anastomosis of the pores, afterward even to the surface
of the body, and at length they do move out from the surface, being then in
such a degree of purity, that afterward by their perpetual motion they do
perpetually lose themselves in the air.

Now as the motion of the spirits is conformable to their beginning, increase,
state and declination; even so is the motion of that excrementitious matter
which is, or should be, transpired either by sweat or insensibly* it is at
first a vapor raised from the impurer parts of the blood: which vapor is
afterward rarefied unto such a tenuity that together with the spirits it
passes out of the veins and arteries into the nerves, when it is in the
nerves, being capable of several degrees of rarity and density, it is either
transpired, or left in the habit of the body, however, the thinner parts
thereof are carried out by an insensible transpiration.

I have observed that after the puncture of a nerve in the arm, the whole arm
has been much lessened.

Many which have received some hurt in the os sacrum have had an extenuation of
their thigh and leg of that side wherein they received the hurt.

They which do lose the use of any part, have also an abatement of flesh in
the same part.

They which are much prone to sweating do neither pinguefie nor increase in
flesh.

In consumptive bodies where there is an abatement of flesh, there is a more
then ordinary transpiration.

From hence we conclude that the nerves are the immediate organs of nutrition:
that is, that part of the blood which serves for nutriment is carried by the
nerves into the habit of the body.

The veins and arteries are the elaboratory of the whole body, or the
preparatory vessels wherein the humors are made fit for Natures use: the brain
is the first receptacle of the humors so prepared: and the nerves are those
organs through which they are conveyed unto all the parts* there is nothing
in the veins and arteries, except that which the gall and spleen do receive,
which is not transported unto the several parts by the nerves, and before it
can be received by the nerves it must necessarily be resolved into a vapor,
this vapor is multiforme answerable to the heterogeneity of the humors, the
several parts whereof it will be too tedious to prosecute: yet by a more
general division, for our present purpose, we may divide it into three parts,
which three parts, considered as well jointly as severrally, may perhaps bring
us unto the knowledge of Nature in all her actions. One part hereof is
excrementitious, another part nutritive, and a third part spirituous* that
which nourishes is of a middle nature between the spirits and excrementitious
vapors* it agrees with the spirits in its equality of parts, which makes it
less capable of being excerned: and it is like to the excrementitious vapors
in its aptitude to condense: thus by an equal participation of both natures it
has a propriety of its own, viz. assimilation. The spirits, in their motion
toward the external parts, by acting upon the excrementitious vapors do in
some sort suffer, and are precipitated or embodyed with the said vapors,
whereby there is begotten a third which does participate, as I said, of both
natures* the most sound and tenacious nutriment is a mixture of the grosser
spirits, and most sincere part of that which is excrementitious* and on the
contrary that nutriment which is most volatile or consumptive is the finest
spirits interred in the impurest excrements. Hence it is that so great a
quantity of this false nutriment is so speedily congested, and again so
suddenly dissolved* for when the nerves are so oppressed and loaded with
excrementitious vopours, that even the purest spirits are clowded therewith;
needs must these vapors which cannot be transpired settle themselves in the
habit of the body, and increase into a considerable bulk in no considerable
time: and afterward it must as suddenly wast by reason of the
disproportionable mixture whereof its nutriment does consist. The spirits,
being too fine to continue fixed, do in a short time fly away, whereupon the
condensed vapors which were underpropped thereby, can no longer subsist, but
do putrefie and dissolve, and do also by motion of consent bring the most
solid nutriment into a state of dissolution.

There is much difference between the flesh of the same body in its infancy and
afterward when it is grown up.

The flesh of the same body although it be nourished with the same diet has
oftentimes a manifest change in a short time only by the alteration of the
air.

They whose flesh is most solid, close, and compact are not so apt to feed, as
others whose constitution is more weak, and their flesh of a more Spongious
and loose temperament.

Eunuchs and such as do seldom use the act of Venus are most apt to pinguefy*
and we have observed in several creatures that only upon the the loss of a
testicle they have suddenly grown fat.

These observations do give us occasion to doubt whether or no there be any
assimilatrix in each part to make that nutriment which it receivs like unto it
self. It seems unto us that the spirits and humors do rather act upon the
parts, then the parts upon them: otherwise the parts would not be so
conformable to the alteration of air and diet, but should keep constantly the
same temperament* how is it then that the whole body is not confusedly
nourished, but every part and particle thereof does receive nutriment according
to its own kind? I answer that the spirits which are the chief instruments of
nutrition, which are as multiforme as are the humors and parts, although they
do meet altogether in the brain yet afterward they are divided, in their
passage toward the several parts, and as they do divide they do take along
with them such parts of the excrementitious vapors as are most agreeable to
their particular natures* so that by virtue of that action and passion which is
betwixt the vapors and spirits as they are moving in their proper orbs, there
is such nutriment made as is suitable to each part; which nutriment as it is in
fieri, is moving toward its center, wherein, being completed, or in facto
esse, it does acquiesse.

Doubtless there is the same reason in a kernel for its first expansion into
parts, as afterward for the growth thereof: and at length being grown to a
great tree it has the same principle for the continuation of its bulk, as it
had for its first growth. In like manner we conceive it most probable that the
same internal principle which did at first form the parts, and did make the
first flesh in man's body, does make an addition thereto: and not that the body
is made by one principle, and preserved by another. If the more spirituous part
of the seed, being cherished by the warmth of the womb could at first, by
moving in a figure agreeable to its Nature, make it self a habitation to dwell
in: it may as well be thought to increase this habitation, and continually
continually to repair it being increased.

These tenets which we have delivered look not asquint nor thwart one another,
but they are so harmonious in themselves, and do so agree with all manner of
experiments of what kind soever, that we must necessarily make nature a monster
if we deny them, but on the contrary paint her to the life in the
acknowledgment thereof. According to these Hypotheses we will first
recapitulate the economy of Nature in man's body, beginning with him before he
had a being, and so by degrees bring him on to his Journeys end: then
afterward we will consider whether all operations of external things upon
man's body be not involved in this economy.

To omit much which may be spoken concerning the harmony of the well tuned
Spirits in healthful bodies of consistent years: how the spirits moving from
the surface of the body, bring pleasant objects into the brain, which do so
delight the fantasy, that she is unwilling to dismiss them into the storehouse
of memory, but is eager to give them present entertainment* how the fantasy by
hovering upon such pleasant objects must necessarily arrest the spirits which
are the supporters thereof: and how the spirits, which can no longer be then
move by delay are condensed. I say, to omit much which may be spoken concerning
the first original of seed, I conceive it will be sufficient for our present
purpose to begin with the seed ready made, which is the first original of man.

The seed is nothing else but condensed spirits: as may appear by its tenacity
and equality of parts* herein we must take notice of such a mediocrity of
condensation, that the major part is apt to be brought back again to its own
nature, and be continued therein; provided it have such circumstances as are
required for the effecting hereof: that is, such a degree of heat as the
spirits always had, and such matter annexed unto it* hereby the purer part of
the seed may not only be resolved into their first principles, viz. into
spirits, but also this matter may be resolved into a vapor, which the spirits
may receive for their nutriment. Now these conditions are to be found in a well
constituted womb; into which the seed being injected is formed into parts
after this following manner.

The purer part of the seed, which is included in the center, is at first
rarefied into a gross spirit, which has a slow motion in a narrow or be
proportionable to its gross consistence: but afterward, as by degrees it does
revive and put on its own nature by being more and more rarifyed it does move
quicker and in a larger circuit. Now as the spirits by condensation do cease
to move, and by rarefaction do recruit in their motion; even so by their
return unto their own nature they do obtain the same motion which they had
before condensation* the spirits revived in the seed do not only regain their
motion, but also such motion as they had in the body of man* they move in the
same figure in the seed as they did in the body: so that by granting the
spirits a motion agreeable to their own nature, we have the parts carved out
unto our intellect, which we may easily conceive to be but the footsteps of the
spirits.

That particle from whence the spirits do first move and unto which they do
return, is afterward the heart* their first footsteps are the greater veins
and arteries: having at first a regular motion in the seed analogicall to that
of the grosser humors in man's body, that is, from the heart to the first
anastomoses of the veins and arteries* from thence by degrees they tread
farther, until at length they have completed their double path for the
humors to walk in, and have finished the whole series of the veins and
arteries* after that the purer parts of the spirits do carve out the menynges
of the brain, and by a farther progress of their natural motion they do make
the nerves, and then do run divisions thereupon, dividing them into fibers, and
dilating them into membrans.

After this manner is the first foundation of man's body laid: and then as these
spermatick parts do increase in bulk, they have added unto them such
appurtenances as are suitable to their several natures: the veins and arteries
of the Embryon, as by degrees they do become more capacious, do receive by the
umbilicall vein the purer parts of the mothers blood, and then the grosser:
whereas at first the spirits by their motion drew into consent nothing else but
an exhalation from the mothers seed. And as by degrees the veins and arteries
are filled with blood: even so are the fibers of the muscles clothed with
flesh by virtue of the said blood in the veins and arteries, which is first
rarefied and made to put on the nature of a spirit, and is carried along with
the spirits through the nerves, and afterward amongst the fibers of the
muscles is recondensed* in the mean time the purer parts of the spirits are
together with some excrementitious vapors coagulated into marrow in the center
of all the parts throughout the whole body: the more spernatick part whereof is
afterward secerned from that which is more excrementitious, and, by degrees,
by the heat of the body is ossiated. In this Coagulum of spirits and vapors we
include all kind of medullossity, as the spinall marrow, and the substance of
the brain.

Such parts only of the mass of blood are carried into the nerves as are
capable of being rarefied to the consistence of spirits: but those parts which
are of a different nature, and are too much fixed or curdled, are coagulated in
their distinct places, according to their peculiar differences, in the right
and left side: and do make up the liver and the spleen* the liver was by the
ancients thought to be the only organ of sanguification* and Fernelius
attributed the like office unto the spleen, upon consideration of that
multiplicity of veins and arteries which are disseminated throughout the whole
body thereof. But these opinions are now exploded by all since the discovery of
the circular motion of the blood. Doubtless the spleen as the Ancients held,
is the receptacle of the more gross and melancholic blood; by virtue whereof
the mass of humors are purified from their feculencies. It is our opinion
that not only the spleen, but also the liver has no other office than to
purify the blood, by taking into it such parts, as if, they were in the veins
and arteries, would fix the blood too much and by consequence prevent
nutrition. For we have observed in an Atrophia, and in any manner of
cachecticall distemper that always either the liver or spleen, or else both
are obstructed: and upon the opening of such like obstructions nutrition is
again performed, and the body returns to its natural temperament. We have
likewise observed in those bodies of children that we have dissected, which
have languished a long time, and at length dyed of an atrophie, that the liver
has been full of scirrhous tubercles, and very small: the reason of this we
conceive to be because those parts of the mass of blood which should have been
separated and left congested upon the liver were kept moving still in the veins
and arteries, by reason of those scirrhous tubercles which did obstruct those
narrow passages of the liver through which the blood should have been strained:
whereas if it had been strained those parts should have been left behind in the
Parenchyma of the liver which is their proper center.

And so it is with the spleen: when its transcolatory office is by any means
prevented, the humors have an unjust consistence and are not so apt to be
rarefyed, whereupon nutrition cannot be so well performed.

If sanguification had been the office of the liver, Fernelius had done well in
attributing the same to the spleen: for they do both alike consist of almost
infinite small veins and arteries interwoven with their Parenchyma: but if the
office of all these small veins and arteries in the liver be to strain the
blood, we must allow the same office to the spleen: yet the veins and arteries
of the liver are somewhat smaller then those of the spleen* the reason is,
because it is required that the blood of children, which is strained chiefly by
the liver, should be somewhat thinner then that of those which are grown up,
which is percolated by the spleen, for as we affirm that the spirits by their
first motion do bore the veins and arteries, and do move alone therein until
such time as the veins and arteries are capacious enough to receive the mothers
blood: so it is required that the blood which first enters into the veins and
arteries be almost as thin as spirits, by reason of their slenderness, and
afterward that it have such a consistence as shall be agreeable to the
smalness or largnesse of the vessels. So that the blood of children is so much
purer than that of those that are grown up, by how much their veins and
arteries are smaller. And that it may be continued so, the liver, as I said,
has veins and arteries somewhat smaller then the spleen, that being the chief
percolatory of childrens blood, and this of those that are old. Those that are
of middle age have their liver and spleen alike proportionable to their bodies,
and doubtless they do their offices alike: but children have large livers and
very little spleen, and on the contrary old men have their liver somewhat
wasted, and their spleen much enlarged.

The Embryon, having all its parts finished, and the whole clock-work of nature
completed, does struggle in its determinated time, to get out of the womb, as
from too narrow an enclosure, and is extruded by the mothers body as too great
a burden.

No sooner is the inf^nt born, but the lungs are set on work, and the
Diaphragma made capable to conspire with the muscles of the Abdomen for the
excretion of some excrementitious matter, which before could be carried no
farther then into the intestines. The serous part of the blood is also now
evacuated through the urinatory passages, whereas before it was transpired, and
left in the secondine, to polish the skin, as also to extend and burst the
secondine, and make it slippery for the better extrusion of the infant, now the
head by degrees comes into shape, whereas before it was disproportionable to
the body. Here we cannot but admire the great wisdom and providence of Nature
in throwing out the serosity of the blood by transpiration whilst the Embryon
is in the womb, that thereby the grosser parts thereof may be coagulated with
some spirits within the menynges to make up the substance of the brain, whose
office is to fix the spirits, for several uses, of which we shall speak
hereafter; and afterward in expelling the said serous parts through other more
open passages, least the brain should be too bigg, the spirits too much fixed,
and the infant borne become lethargicall

Nature willing to continue what she has produced, and desirous to preserve
what she has made, has provided the infant borne such a diet as is spirituous
viz. its mothers milk: which being received into its body warm from its
mothers breast, does very much support and strengthen the first foundation of
its body, the spirits, and does nourish and increase the spermatick parts which
are the main architecture upon this foundation* yet children, as by degrees
they do grow up, and get strength, are afterward nourished as well with other
diet as they were before with milk: although by how much the body is more
increased in bulk, by so much the greater quantity of spirits is required for
nutrition thereof. Here we must know that as the body becomes stronger, there
are spirits extracted by the Chemistry of Nature out of that diet which is
less Spirituous, or at least has its spirits locked closer up in its parts.

As the spirits are the only ingredients which do enter the composition of
sperme, so are they the nourishers and augmenters of the spermatick parts: yet
as the spirits are insufficient to make seed except they be condensed, even so
are they incapable to nourish and increase the spermatick parts, except they be
first tuned and fixed by a well constituted brain. Hence it is that both
children and those that are grown up do oftentimes pine away and languish, not
for want of spirits or other nutriment; but by reason of the evil constitution
of their brain: which being rectified by shaving the hair, and application of
corroborating emplaisters, they do regain their flesh, and are nourished as
well as ever. Although the flesh receive not its nutriment wholly from the
spirits, yet they are the chief instruments of its nutrition: which do qualify
the nutritive part of the blood, and are themselves qualifyed by the brain. Now
the chief office of the brain is, as I said, to fix the spirits for several
uses: and first, that they should not be too much dispersed, secondly for
nutrition and auction of the parts, thirdly for the making of seed, and
fourthly for ratiocination. Here we do not conceive that the brain does
primarily act upon the spirits; for we think it would be absurd to ascribe
action to any part which is not in motion, and passion to the spirits which do
continually move: but we suppose that the spirits by acting upon the brain do
accidentally suffer and become more fixed.

As the spirits are always passing through the brain which is in the midway
of their journey backwards and forwards betwixt the veins and arteries and the
nerves, so part of them do always suffer condensation from the time they do
begin to move until their motion cease: that is, from the first original of man
until he die. And as there is a continual fixation of spirits, so there is a
continual expense and a continual increase thereof, although sometimes the
expense is greater then the increase, and on the contrary, those spirits which
are fixed, are not afterward lost by transpiration, but they do either
nourish and increase the spermatick parts for preservation of the individuum as
in those of under years, or else they are converted into seed for propagation
of the species as in those of consistent age. In most old men, whose brain is
of a dryer constitution, there is a less quantity of spirits condensed,
perhaps so much as is sufficient only for nutrition of the spermatick parts,
but no superfluity for seed: and in those aged men whose brain is so well
constituted as to prepare more nutriment then is required for the spermatick
parts, it is either left in the brain (the seminary vessels being closed by
reason of dissuetude) and so does cause a great swimming and disyness in the
head: or else it is carried toward the spermatick parts which have no need
thereof, and there does putrefie and corrupt, which does produce aches and
pains in several parts of the body.

How ratiocination is performed by the condensation or fixation of the spirits
it may appear as follows.

As sensation is performed by the motion of the spirits from the extreme parts,
which do carry their respective objects into the brain, so is raciocination by
the retention of the said objects: that is, by the memory of suchlike sensible
perception, as we said before that the notion of sounds or colors is nothing
else but the remembrance of such things seen or heard. Now these objects are
retained, or this sensible perception is remembered by the fixation of those
spirits wherein the said objects do abide. So that as the spirits are fixed and
continued in the substance of the brain, even so are the objects treasured up
together with the spirits: the comparison of which past objects with others
that are present or to come is called ratiocination.

The spirits, being pure of themselves, would by their continual motion be so
attenuated that they could not be contained in the body, if they had not a
refrigeratory, the brain, to contemper and allay them: by virtue hereof the
sensories are shut up, and sleep is caused, that there may be a reparation made
for those spirits which were lost while the sensories were open. Whereas,
notwithstanding the coldness of the brain, some spirits do continually lose
themselves in the air; it is out of the great providence of Nature, that
thereby they may make the air a fit medium betwixt the sense and the object.
So we see the spirits for smelling do disperse themselves in the air
indifferently, but the visive spirits are not scattered except in the
illuminated air.

It will be too tedious to discourse at large how the object, by how much it is
more pleasant, by so much it does the more entice out the spirits and how the
exercise of the several senses upon pleasant objects does become hypnoticall.
It is sufficient to know that as the spirits were the first movers in man's
body, upon whose motion all other natural actions do depend, even so all
actions cease, when the spirits cease to move. And as life does commence by the
motion of the spirits, even so the cessation of this motion is the next and
immediate cause of death: whether it be by solution of continuity in some
principal organ whereby the spirits are made incapable of keeping their
circuit, or by some mercuriall vapor which does suddenly or by degrees
intercept their motion, or else by something which is stupefying that does
suddenly thicken them: I say by what accident soever the motion of the spirits
is staid death must necessarily ensue thereupon. And no man ever yet dyed
either a natural death, or by any accident whatsoever, but the next and
immediate cause of his death was the cessation of the motion of his spirits.

We call that a natural death when the spirits are not violently intercepted
or discontinued: but as by degrees they are thickened and have a slower motion,
as is evident by the slownesse of the pulse, dimnesse of light, thickness of
hearing, coldness of the body etc. so in process of time they are wholly
staid, although nothing violent does happen unto them.

Thus we see that both the beginning, increase, state, and declination of man's
life does depend wholly upon the motion of the spirits: as also all
circumstances contained in the said beginning, increase, state and declination.
As nutrition, auction, excretion, voluntary motion, sense, ratiocination, and
whatsoever else is comprehended under these. And as the spirits do govern the
body within it self, so by the mediation thereof all things else do operate
upon the body: not only that which nourishes and increases, but whatsoever
purges, vomiteth, procures sweat etc. has its qualities first received by
the spirits, and from thence communicated to the humors or parts according to
the particular natures of such like qualities.

Aloes and Colocynth taken inwardly, purge the body, and so they do by outward
application. Terpentine taken inwardly provokes urine, and emplaisters of
terpentine applied to the back and belly do the like. Emplaisters of Ammoniacum
dissolve and mollify scirrhous tumors, no otherwise than Ammoniacum taken
inwardly does dissolve scirrosities of the liver and spleen. Lapis haematites,
dragons blood, bole etc. stop a flux whether inwardly exhibited or outwardly
applied. Quicksilver taken inwardly procures salivation: and so it does by
outward application. Pills and plasters of Asa Faetida are both good against
the rising of the womb. Unctions of Brimstone cure the itch; and so does
Brimstone taken inwardly. In a word, all things whatsoever have their operation
alike upon the body whether they be used inwardly or outwardly. But this could
not be, if the operation of those things which do alter the body was not
performed by the immediate act of the spirits, neither could the spirits so
act, if they had not both a circular motion betwixt the center and the surface,
whereby they do keep a correspondence between all the diversity of parts of
the body and did not also expatiate themselves at some small distance from the
surface whereby they do take into the body the infection of the air. There is
nothing whatsoever which is not continually spending its spirits in the air,
as is demonstrable in all things, which are subject to wax old, I mean not
only living creatures in the course of their life, but even vegetables, and
the parts of living creatures* which we call druggs, unto which we ascribe
several virtues. Let them be kept never so choicely, yet they will in time
decay, and lose the said virtues which we ascribe unto them, the reason is
because they do subsist, and preserve themselves, that time they do continue,
by this expense of their virtues, that is, their spirits in the air; otherwise
they should suddenly be corrupted. And if they be so attenuated that they may
be, and are taken into the body of man, or if they be contiguous to his body
they do the like. Now the spirits of man's body, as they are always moving out
and returning into the body, they do continually lay hold on that which they
find in the air to be most agreeable to their own nature, that is something
which is most spirituous, and do carry it into the body* and whatsoever they
find in the stomach and guts of a spirituous nature they do likewise carry it
into the more inward parts viz. into the veins and arteries: and afterward
perhaps into the nerves* so that whenever any medicament, whether drug or
composition, happens within the reach of the spirits, the body is thereby
altered: and so much the more by how much the parts of the said medicament are
separated, because thereby its atoms are more speedily scattered. Here we must
know that the medicine: acts not primarily upon the spirits, but the spirits
upon the medicine* although afterward they do accidentally suffer* hence it is
that emplasters do perform no alteration upon a mortifyed part: neither do
external things act at such a distance, whereunto the spirits of the body
cannot come to lay hold upon the spirits, atoms, or qualities thereof.

I could make a closer illustration of the spirits of the body acting upon the
spirits of the medicament by almost infinite of examples, but for brevities
sake I shall propound two or three.

Let any one swallow ten or twelve seeds of coloquintida whole: he shall have
the seeds again in his excrements, yet notwithstanding his body shall be
purged, this is a sufficient argument to convince any one that it is the
spirits of the medicine that purges.

Let the seeds of coloquintida be powdered and mixed with honey, and then
spread upon leather and applied to the belly: and this also purges, this is
another cogent argument to demonstrate that as the spirits of medicaments do
operate, even so they are carried by the spirits into the body.

Three seeds of coloquintida in powder purge as much as twelve seeds whole.
This at the first sight should seem to be an argument to prove that it is the
substance of things that works: but when we seriously consider that the seeds
whole do also work, although not so powerfully, and that purging medicines do
also work by outward applicacation, we must conclude that the reason why the
seeds powdered work more than the seeds whole, is because the spirits of
medicines being locked closer up in their parts do disperse themselves but
moderately, whereas after they are opened, and their parts separated they do
fly away with more alacrity* hence it is that all manner of drugs, if they be
kept entire do retain their virtues longer then when they are powdered. Here
we may take notice of a vulgar error which is generally received concerning
the virtues of simples, which they say are either actually or in power: as if
the body did reduce them out of power into act. I confess the heat and
moisture of the body may so soften them and open their parts, that they may
spend their virtues faster, no otherwise than as if they were infused or
decocted: but I deny that there is any essential difference between their
power and their action: because they do always act, although according to
several circumstances with more or less vigor* but this concerns not our
present purpose.

Those things that alter the body do not only in a general way make evident
these positions which we have delivered, in that it does plainly appear that
it is their spirits which do act upon the spirits of man's body etc. But they
do also confirm the same if we consider them severally in their private and
particular operations* as for example.

Cordials, and such things as are spirituous are commonly given with good
success indifferently unto all that faint and swound away: although such like
fainting or swounding in several persons does proceed from several causes, the
reason of this is because the result of all things which do injury to the body
is the fixing, stopping, or intercepting of the spirits* so that such like
cordials which have power to rescue the arrested spirits, do for the present
revive the body, in that they do move the said spirits which are the cause of
all other motion.

Those things which do violently purge, if they be given without any
preparative unto those bodies wherein there is a tenacity of humors, they do
commonly cause Syncopes or sudden faintings away. The reason is because the
atoms of such like purging medicines, finding those passages bolted up through
which they should enter into the intestines, are immediately carried into the
nerves, where they do intercept, or confound the regular motion of the
spirits. The reason also wherefore purging and vomiting medicines do oftentimes
procure sweat, is because their spirits are carried into the nerves.

Opium does allay pain: and does cause sleep, the reason of the first is,
because it thickens the spirits and intercepts their motion toward the brain.
The reason of the second also is, because it does, by condensing the spirits,
shut up the sensories.

Those things which are drying and astringent as china, guajacum, sarsaparilla,
conserve of red roses vitriolated etc. do oftentimes prove analepticall. The
reason is, because they do fix the spirits which are the chief instruments of
nutrition.

Camphor causes sleep, by attenuating the spirits and causing expense thereof.

Milk, and some other things which being eaten are straightway converted into
a milky nature as almonds, the four greater cooling seeds etc. do resist
drunkenness. The reason is, because they do precipitate the spirituous part of
beer, wine, or any other liquor, which would sly up into the brain, and
disturb the regular motion of the sp^ri^s. ^o we see posset drink is less
vapo^ous than beer or ale, because the sp^r^^s of the said beer or ale are
precipitated with milk.

S^l P^^unellae, Vinegar, and al acide juices are proficuous in pestilentiall
diseases. The reason is, because they do precipitate that mercuriall vapor
which does intercept the motion of the spirits. No otherwise than Aqua fortis,
which is made of vitriol and saltpeter, does precipitate and tame quicksilver,
and make it less fluid and vaporous.

New milk warm from the cow, and milk sucked from a woman's breast is a great
restorative. The reason is, because it does in a more than ordinary manner
increase the spirits which are the chief instruments of nutrition.

Those things which are known by experience to be hurtful to the eyes, and to
dim the sight, as garlic, lettice, colewort etc. do it upon no other account
than by thickning the visive spirits: and on the contrary where the eye sight
is not perfect, it is oftentimes helped by such things as do rarifie the said
spirits, as fennel, betony, Eyebright etc. Here we must take notice that
condensation and rarefaction are not of themselves hurtful or profitable to
the sight, but as they do retard or accelerate the motion of the visive spirits
which is the next and immediate cause of seeing, they do by consequence become
hurtful or profitable,

The water of the sperm of froggs preventeth the spreading of a gangrene, by
intercepting the spirits, which would carry the septick quality of the extreme
part gangrenated nearer unto the center of the body.

In contused wounds the part is preserved from mortification by injecting of
spirit of wine into the wound, or fomenting the part therewith: the reason is
because it does both comfort the spirits and rarefie the pores, that so the
motion of the spirits in the part may not be hindered.

Add hereunto the virtue of actual heat in any manner of distemper whatsoever
either outward or inward. They that are well versed in chirurgicall operations
cannot but know the efficacy of hot stupes. And so in feverish distempers
those things which are given actually hot, provided they nourish not too much,
do sooner quench thirst, and abate the praeternatural heat of the body, than
cooling Iulapes. The reason is, because heat does open the pores and by
consequence make way for the spirits to move.

This motion of the spirits, Courteour Reader, is that we did intend, in this
inconsiderable treatise, to propound unto thee. Wherewith we were loath on a
sudden to interrupt thee: thinking it more convenient first to broach some
tenets, which are involved in it, under the notion of Paradoxes. Yet we presume
that upon serious consideration thou will look upon all we have here written
as Orthodox. And that for two reasons. First, because all operations of
external things upon man's body are reducible to reason upon this account. And
secondly because there is no contradiction in the whole Series of our
discourse, but each position does so confirm another, that in the whole there
is such a symmetrie as does become the simplicity of truth.

FINIS.

