Iovis 27. November. 1645.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament, That M. Burroughes, who Preached yesterday
in the Abby-Church Westminster before the Lords in Parliament, being the day of
the Public Fast, is hereby thanked for the great pains he took in the said
Sermon; And desired to Print and Publish the same; which is only to be Printed
by Authority under his own hand.

Io: Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum.
I appoint Robert Dawlman to print this Sermon, and no other.

Jer: Burroughes.



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, The House of PEERS, assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable,
GOd calls you to days of Fasting and Prayer, you call his Ministers to join
with you, to be helpful to you in them. When should you ever think to be dealt
faithfully with, if not now? How can we recompense better any faithfulness of
yours to God and the State, but by being faithful to your souls? These
Prayers and Sermons pass away month after month, but know, that God will
call them all over again, he will require an account of them one day. It is a
happiness you have beyond the greatest part of the Nobility of the Christian
world, that you have the Word in the plainness and power of it administered to
you. You cannot honor the Word so much as it honors you; the Preachers of the
Word have not so much need of you, as you have of that Word they preach to you.
Your Honors have the largest opportunities to honor God, and to do good to
his Saints, that ever Noblemen had since the world began. God has laid out
work for you fit for truly noble spirits; you have as many Saints to take care
of in these Kingdoms, as ever any on earth had, use them kindly, that they may
bless you, and bless God for you; be not exasperated against any of them by
those who know not, or consider not of what spirits they are. Although we
should account it a heaven upon earth that there were nothing but wheat growing
in that part of the field where we live; yet seeing there are many tares sprung
up, many errors and sinful practices; if your Lordships should now be put upon
such severity, as out of zeal to pluck up all the errors which are not
venomous weeds destroying, but tares only, some way disturbing the growth of
the wheat, you shall as much as in you lies pluck up much of the wheat, denying
such as are godly and peaceable the enjoyment of the Ordinances of Christ, (for
so it is, if they cannot partake of them, without that which is sin to them)
and as some would have it, cast them out of the Kingdom: This, I fear, will
not be acceptable to the meek, gentle, forbearing spirit of Jesus Christ, in
the day of your account.

For connivence at Blasphemies or damnable Heresies, God forbid any should open
his mouth; those who are guilty herein against the light of nature, should be
taken off from the face of the earth; and such as are guilty against
supernatural light, are to be restrained and kept from the society of men,
that they infect not others. But if on the other side, your Lordships be put
upon this principle, that those who appear to be men holy and gracious, yet
must not be suffered in opinion or practice wherein they differ from what such
a company of learned and godly men shall determine. The Lord prepare me for
himself, and quickly call me out of this world, that my eyes may not behold
such a sad spectacle, as the hard usage (to say no worse) of so many thousands
of Saints, and that by such who are also I believe the true Saints of God.

When I look upward to God, to your Honors, and the Honorable House of
Commons, I see less cause of fear: God is full of mercy, love, patience, and
tenderness toward those who are godly, and desire to walk peaceably with his
Saints; if they can appeal to him; Oh Lord, the searcher of the secrets of
hearts, thou know not only our desires, but our painful sincere
endeavors, are to find out thy mind, and to submit our understandings, wills,
affections, practices, to whatsoever in the use of any means, we can see to be
thy will: but after all our diligent endeavors, we yet cannot apprehend such
opinions and practices, which our brethren hold forth to us to be what thou
requirest of us; and thou chargest us not to acknowledge or practice any thing,
where we feel not a bottom of thy Word to rest upon; therefore if it be
through our weakness that we do not join with our brethren in what they
would have, yet out of a sincere desire that we may do nothing displeasing to
thee, Lord pardon this to us: Surely God in this case will pity his people, he
will not charge such error, in judgment or practice upon them.

And as for your Honors, together with the Honorable House of Commons, we
have that which cannot but be a comfort to thousands of truly godly people in
the land, for which they praise God. Namely, an Order from you that the
Commit of Lords and Commons appointed to treat with the Commissioners of
Scotland, and the Committee of the Assembly do endeavor the finding out some
way how far tender consciences who cannot in all things submit to the common
rule, may be tolerated according to the word of God; We see in your Lordships
and the Honorable House of Commons, a Nobleness, joined with much tenderness
to the godly party, whom God has made so isntrumental for you; for which, the
blessing of God be upon you, and your posterities. But it cannot but much
sadden our hearts, that any party in the Kingdom should seek to quench that
spark of favor and hope, that so good a hand of God has begun to kindle, for
his people who fear him. Yea, that so many of our brethren who lately were
under bondage, with whom we joined in fasting and prayer, crying to heaven for
deliverance from our yokes; and that those who awhile since were left
destitute, and fled to this City for refuge from the rage of the enemy: yet as
soon as they have found succor here, that they should rise up to oppose a
forbearance of their brethren, who together with them love Jesus Christ, and
agree with them in the substance of worship, and the doctrinall part of
Religion; yea, and in matter of Discipline differ not from them but in that
which is controversall; not so clear to themselves, but that they will
acknowledge, godly and peacable men may mistake in; what no forbearance in
these things? How comes this hardness, this severity, into those hearts, where
the spirit of Jesus Christ rules? where are those bowels? those bowels they say
are so stirred in them, surely there is want of bowels, or if they be there, Oh
that they would work some other way then yet they have done. Nay further, this
cannot but go to our hearts, to see these brethren to stir up the Assembly
and City against them who love them in the Lord; Si tantu^ habet pondus aliquod
verum, ut vires discentis excedat, suspendendum est, ut extendat crescentem,
non imponendum, ut obterat parvulum. August. Quest. in Mat. 11.
and to be so vehement to promote that, which very lately many, if not most of
them understood not, of which they have given out no Model to the Kingdom,
with proofs and reasons. If I know mine own heart, I can say, Peace is dearer
to me then my life, I could joyfully lay down my life to procure peace between
brethren, but surely this is not the way.

It is a good rule of Augustine, If any truth has that weight, that it exceeds
the strength of the learner; it is to be suspended, that that which is little
and tender, may have liberty by degrees to put forth it self; it must not be
imposed, left it bruise and oppress it, and so hinder the growth.

Whatsoever liberty shall be granted according to the Word, I hope there is a
generation that will not abuse it, but will in the midst of their liberties
be servants to Peace and Concord, according to that I find in an Epistle of
Master Calvin's to Farell, Nos liberi, Servi sumus Pacis and Concordiae.

And my Lords, seeing there is such an outcry against Toleration and Schism,
I beseech your Honors that there may be a full debate, how far Christ would
have Brethren tolerate one another, both in matters of judgment and practice;
and what that Schism is, which the Scripture condemns as a thing not to be
suffered, and that the result of this debate may be published to the Kingdom
for their satisfaction. We know what abuse there has been of words, by them a
spirit of opposition has been stirred up in people against they know not what.
And I the rather humbly beseech this, because many presume to interpret the
Covenant against all kind of Toleration, and whatsoever they are pleased to
call Schism, and so they make the Covenant which we have made with the high
God, to become a snare to many thousand consciences of godly and peaceable men.

The Lord God guide your Honors, and give unto every one of you the wisdom of
an Angel of God, in these miserable distracting times, that you may do
worthily in your generation, that in all your ways Christ may own you, and
all the godly of the Land may with one spirit join together and bless you,
which is and shall be the prayer of him who is

Your Honors In all humble service for Christ, Jer: Burroughes.

A SERMON PREACHED at a late FAST, before the Right Honorable the House of
PEERS.
PHILIP. 4.12. I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound: every
where, and in all things I am instructed.


BEsides the Apostolical call Paul had to preach to all Nations, he had a
special extraordinary call to preach to these Philippians. Act. 16.9. A man of
Macedonia appears in a vision, and prayed him, saying, Come over into
Macedonia and help us. By which, ver. 10. he assuredly gathered that the Lord
had called him to preach the Gospel there. The first place in Macedonia where
he preached, was Philippi, a chief City in that part of Macedonia, ver. 12.
But was Paul's encouragement according to what might have been expected from his
extraordinary call? one would have thought the people should have come
presently in to embrace the Gospel. And when I consider of this place,
[Westminster] the extraordinary hand of God in bringing the Gospel to be
preached to you here in power, these thoughts presently arise, there is hope
that there are many souls here that belong to Gods election, surely many will
come in and embrace the Gospel here. Who could have thought six years since,
that instead of every mornings chanting, this place should be the most eminent
for having the Gospel preached in it? I think I may say of any place in all the
world. How extraordinary has the providence of God been toward you, in
working thus for you! One would think now the hearts of people should be
mightily stirred; God forbid the success here should be no better then Paul's
preaching at Philippi was at the first. For the first Sabbath he came thither,
he went to a Rivers side to preach; and what, did the Nobles, the Magistrates,
the Gentry, the chief Citizens come out to hear him? No, only a few women
came to him: ver. 13. We spoke (says he) to the women which resorted thither.
Paul is a woman's Preacher. Well, but did the Word work upon any of the women?
Yes, There was a certain woman named Lydia, a trades-woman, a seller of
purple, whose heart the Lord opened. But though he had no better success at
the first, yet after perhaps he might.

The next thing that you hear of him, is, that he, together with Silas who
went along with him, is dragged before the Magistrates for factious troublers
of the City, the rude multitude are raised against them. The Magistrates look
upon them as men most vile and guilty of horrid things, so as they are enraged
against them; they rend off their clothes, and whip them, they put them into
prison, they are thrust into the dungeon, and put into the stocks: and is this
the fruit of that wonderful call of God, of that vision from heaven, that did
so encourage Paul, a man of such a mighty Apostolical spirit as he had, to
come to this place to preach?

Oh the sad discouragements that some meet with, in works that God calls them
unto! Learn by this never to conclude that a work is not of God, because you
meet with discouragements at the first. Bare your hearts upon Gods call, there
will come forth good at the last.

The spirits of Paul and Silas were not daunted by this hard success; for 1
These. 2.2. he tells us, that After they were shamefully entreated at Philippi,
they were bold in their God There was as famous a Church gathered in Philippi
at the last, as free from mixture, as eminent in godliness as any. That way
men slight, contemn, cast dirt upon, stir up Magistrates and people
against, may prevail at last. Phil. 1.3, 4, 5. Paul thanks God for them upon
every remembrance of them, always in every prayer, he makes his request for
them with joy. Oh that those Ministers whom God sends to you to preach every
morning, might from that they see in you say thus: Every time we think of
Westminster, we give God thanks, we cannot but remember that place with joy, in
regard of the happy success of our Ministry there. But though these
Philippians were stirred at first, did those workings of the Gospel upon them
hold? Many have hopeful workings upon them, when the Gospel comes first among
them; but after a while all vanishes and comes to nothing: but it was not so
here, for ver. 5. he says, Their fellowship in the Gospel had continued from
the first day until now, which was about ten years: For Paul's first coming
to Philippi was in the 7. of Claudius, and this Epistle was wrote in the 3. of
Nero. Many Churches at their first gathering have sweet fellowship, but in
less then five years it is much interrupted by divisions, the glory of it is
much darkened.

At this time Paul was in prison at Rome. These Philippians hearing it, having
received the Gospel by his Ministry, send Epaphroditus their Minister to visit
him, and by him they send relief to his necessities. Paul's sufferings did not
take off their hearts from him or his doctrine. It is not the way to prevail
against Saints, against truths, or ways of God, to use violence against them;
hypocrites may be taken off that way, but those who are sound, will be the more
confirmed.

Now upon the Philippians sending to relieve him in prison, Paul takes this
occasion to write this Epistle to them, wherein he manifests his rejoicing at
their care of him: but because some might think he loved to receive gifts from
them, (which indeed are oftentimes snares, not only to the ministers of
Justice, but to the ministers of the Gospel) No, says Paul, it is not in
respect of want that I thus write to you, want troubles me not, do not think
that I desire to gain by my imprisonment, for I have learned in whatsoever
state I am therewith to be content. Let it be want or not, it makes no great
difference in my estate, for I know how to be abased, and how to abound: in
every thing I am instructed.

I know. Humility is a knowing grace. Paul would not in a foolish sordid way
debase himself, neither would he venture himself sillily; I know when God
calls me to suffer, then I will suffer; and when God does not, then I will not.
I know how to be abased. Humility is not unlearned. Non indocta humilitas, sed
quae habet scientiam laudi datur est humilitas formidinis, imperitiae,
ignorantiae. Ambr.
There is a humility of fear, and of ignorance, and unskilfulnesse, but this
is a knowing humility.

I know. (...), I have known it, I have been acquainted with this, I am not now
to learn it. When God first called me, he showed me what things I must suffer
for his Name, it is not a lesson now to learn, I know how to be abased, I have
learned in the school of Christ, (...), even to be trampled under feet. (...)
quasi (...), se pedibus proculcandum substernat.
A godly heart is willing to lie under the feet of any for good. I know how.

I know how to judge of my abasement; not to look upon it as such a hideous
thing, as carnal hearts would; I can see honor to be in my abasement; I know
how to make other interpretations of Gods meaning in my abasement then the
world does; I know how to bear it with a quiet spirit; I know how to satisfy
my heart in it; I know how to improve it to the glory of God, to the spiritual
good of mine own soul and others; I know how to exercise faith and other
graces in it; how to get out the sting, the venom of it; I know how to carry
my self graciously, comfortably, heavenly in my abasement; so as though the
world puts dishonor upon me, I shall not by any unbeseeming carriage dishonor
my self or my cause. And it appears he did know how, for his gracious carriage
in his bonds was such, as furthered the conversion of diverse, some of the
Courtiers of Caesar's household, Phil. 4.22.

And I know how to abound. If God sends in supplies to me, if he gives me
respect and honor among the Churches, I know who to look up to as the cause of
all, I know how to carry my self holily and spiritually in the midst of all my
enjoyments; if God sends me in so much as to run over, (...), I know how to
make use of it. (...), sicut fons scaturiens in se aqua^ non retinet, sed for as
emittens exundat ad alios. Zanch. in Phil. c. 1. 9.


Every where, and in all things, (...), In every place, in every time, in every
thing, the words will bear all this. It is a harder thing either to be abased,
or to abound in one place more then another; in some place men may be honored
much in their sufferings, in other places there will be no regard given to
them, yea they will be made a scorn and contempt in some places; there are more
and stronger temptations to the abuse of a prosperous condition, then in others.

2. In every time. Some men can carry themselves stoutly in their abasement at
first, but after a while it grows too burdensome to them, they begin to have
repenting thoughts, wishing they had not engaged themselves so as they have. So
some are free in that abundance God has sent in, to good uses at some time,
but come to them at other times, and they are not the same men; but I have
learned how to be abased, and how to abound, in every time, and in every thing.
Some can bear abasement in some things, but not in others; some can better
manage wealth, then honor; others better honor then wealth: but I, says
Paul, in every thing am instructed.

Am instructed, (...), I am taught as in a mystery, initiatus mysterius, I had
not this by nature, I am taught it, and I see it is a mystery. It is not
through the strength of reason I am able to do this, though that will go a
great way, but it is a great mystery of godliness to know how to carry ones
self graciously, through variety of conditions. It is not through a natural
stayednes of temper, nor through a sturdy resolution that I will not be altered,
through the variety of conditions I am cast into, but Jesus Christ has taught
me the art and mystery of this.

This chosen vessel of God, set apart to do the greatest service for Christ
that ever man did, was tossed up and down in the world, sometimes he wanted
bread, sometimes he was clothed in rags, he had not enough to cover his
nakedness. Hearken to this you who are delicate in your diet, and brave in
your clothes, that nothing but curiosities can content you; here is one who did
Christ more service then a thousand of you, and yet you see what served his
turn. (...), etc. Chrysostom. in Col. Hom. 12
Chrysostom makes notable use of Paul's sufferings, to check the vanity and
pride of men's hearts, set upon delicacies. Would you (says he) be clothed in
silks? remember the bands of Paul, and silken clothes will be vile unto thee.
Would you be bespangled with gold? remember the bands of Paul. Would you be
brave with your hair? (we may say now with other men's, nay with other women's
hair, having consumed your own heir by your lusts) consider (says he) of the
filth and deformity of Paul in prison. Would you have sweet ointments and
powders? choose rather Paul's tears. And for dishonor, he tells us that he and
those who joined with him, were accounted the offscouring and filth of all
things, (...), Rejectamentu^, so Erasmus.
it signifies the dirt scraped off men's shoes, or from the pavement of the
ground; he has reference to that, Lam. 3.45. Thou have made us the
offscouring and refuse in the midst of the people, (...) Nauseam, so Arias
Montanus turns it, the loathing of the people, their stomachs were ready to
turn when they saw them, when they thought or spoke of them, as when a man is
ready to vomit. And (...), the filth gathered by sweepings up and down, and
cast upon the common dung-cart in the street. Budaeus thinks these words have
reference to the custom of the Heathens, who in times of infectious diseases
or public calamity, sacrificed certain men to their gods, for the removing
those evils that were upon them, and upon these men they lay all the
execrations of the people, as if they had been the causes of all their misery:
So are we accounted, says Paul, men cry out of us as the plague of the world,
they curse us as the plague of all their misery. At other times, Paul had
honor enough: Gal 4.15. Where is the blessedness? I bear you record, you
would have plucked out your own eyes, and have given them to me. They turned
upon their own heads, says Luther upon the place, the cruel hatred and
indignation both of Jews and Gentiles, because they were the receivers and
countenancers of Paul: So at this day (says he) the name of Luther is most
odious in the world, he that praises me, sins worse then an Idolater,
blasphemer, perjurer, adulterer, murderer, thief: it must needs be therefore
(says he) the Galatians were well established in the faith of Christ, seeing
they with so much danger received Paul. It has been the honor of some of you
heretofore to receive and countenance godly Ministers, who suffered under the
tyranny of Prelates; you were willing to venture the discountenance of the
times in owning them. This Christ has owned you for, and we hope it shall be
remembered for good to you and yours. Let not your hearts be changed toward
these men.

If you think or say, Now the case is altered, they stood out then against
Prelates and Innovations, now they hinder Reformation.

Ans.
That which some call a hinderance of Reformation, it may be Christ another day
will call by another name, a conscientious seeking to know his mind, and a
sincere endeavor to come up the nearest to the rule of his Word.

Do not these men in the change of times and variety of conditions that God
has cast them into, keep a constant evennesse in their respects to God, and
their holy walking before him? It argues an excellency of spirit to be acted by
such principles as carries the heart and life on in a gracious even course
through changes of times and variety of conditions. Some men know not how to
manage any condition, they are never well either full or fasting, as we use to
say. As Hannibal said of Marcellus, Nec bonam nec malam fortunam far potuit;
but Grace knows how to manage every condition. That Ship is well ballasted
that sails cleaverly, though never so much tossed with winds and waves. It is
the excellency of grace to be able to turn this way or that way, as God calls,
to make use of the weapons of righteousness, both on the right hand and on the
left. 2 Cor. 6.7.
Truth and falsehood, good and evil are at such a distance, as by the same
principle a man cannot apply himself to either side; but as for honor or
dishonor, poverty or riches, liberty or restraint, they are at no such
distance, but that the same grace may apply it self this way or that way, as
occasion serves.

We read of that Grace, (Hope) sometimes it is called a Helmet, sometimes an
Anchor; if you be at land, and meet with enemies, Hope is your Helmet; if at
sea, and meet with storms, Hope is your Anchor. Like Mertylus his shield,
which after the use he had of it in the field, having it with him at sea, and
suffering shipwreck, it served him for a boat to waffe him to shore. Compare
Psalm. 57. with Psalm. 108. you shall find David's condition various, but his
spirit the same. In the 57. he is fled for his life from the rage of Saul, and
hid in a cave; in 108. he is triumphing, God has spoken in his holiness, I
will rejoice, I will divide Shechem, I will mete out the valley of Succoth.
Gilead is mine, Manasseh is mine, Ephraim is the strength of my head, Moab is
my washpot, etc. yet a great part of these Psalms is in the very same words,
My heart is fixed, my heart is fixed, to God will I sing and give praise, etc.
from the 7. ver. in the 57. to the end; and in Psalm. 108. from the 1. to the 7.
ver. It is a great part of the glory of God to be unchangeable, and yet to
operate in all changes. It is a great excellency of the image of God in the
hearts of the Saints, that in the variety of conditions it still abides the
same, to know how to be abased, and how to abound.

These are the two great Lessons in the Text, Paul had learned them both. We
read Prove. 30. Agur, though wise and godly, yet he desired to have neither
riches nor poverty; he was afraid of abasement, or abounding; but the Gospel
gives higher degrees of grace, Paul was afraid of neither, he knew how to
manage either abasement or abounding. Both these Lessons do nearly concern
this Honorable Auditory; of both, the second is most difficult, in which we
shall be largest.

The greatest on the earth had need learn how to be abased: God knows how to
abase you thousands of ways, but you must know how to be abased, it were happy
if you did.

1. Know therefore that there is an infinite distance between God and you. What
are you, though Nobles, Earls, yea though you were the Lords of the whole
earth, but poor vile worms, under the feet of the Almighty? You love to have
men know their distance between you and them; it is fit it should be so; it is
your due, their duty; but do you know also the infinite distance there is
between the high God and you: Constantinus, Valentinianus, Theodosius, three
Emperors, called themselves Vasallos Christi, Christ's vassals, such is the
distance between him and the greatest Emperors, as it is their honor to stand
even in that relation to him. Had you all your former Lands, Possessions,
Honors, were they increased a thousand fold, yet one sight of the glory of the
great God were enough to abase your hearts to the dust.

Especially when you come into Gods presence, you must be sure to have your
hearts abased before him; Let not your thoughts, your eyes wander in Prayer;
let there be no whisperings, no carriage unbeseeming the presence of the great
God: And in hearing the Word, your hearts must lie low. It is true, the
condition of the Messenger is beneath you, but the word he brings is above you;
God expects you should hear his word with trembling hearts. It may be some
Trencher-Chaplains preaching to some of you, have out of hope of preferments by
you, labored to satisfy your humors, which has made some of you slight the
Word; but when the Word is spoken as the Word of God unto you, he expects your
hearts should fall before it, and yield due subjection to it. 2 Chronicles. 26.12.
Zedekiah a great King is charged for this, that he did not humble himself
before Jeremiah the Prophet. Paul, a prisoner at the Bar, preaching to Felix
the Judge, of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come, made him
tremble upon the Bench, Act. 24.25. And especially in the days of Humiliation,
God looks for hearts broken, humbled and abased; Take heed these days be not a
mere form to you; seeing you hold forth to the world that you acknowledge God
calling you to such days, he expects that your souls should be afflicted in
them, that you should come into and continue in his presence as poor wretches,
begging for your lives.

2. Lay to heart the vileness of sin which has stained your births; your
births otherwise are honorable: but every one of you have your blood stained
with High Treason against the God of heaven. The many and foul sins of your
youth and latter time, has dishonored you; all the world cannot put such
glory upon you, as sin puts baseness. Dan. 11.21. Antiochus Epiphanes is
called a vile person, though a great Prince. Josephus reports, that the
Samaritans petitioning him, styled him The mighty God; but the holy Ghost
looking upon him as wicked, says, he is a vile person. Sin makes those who are
otherwise honorable, to be vile in the presence of God.

3. And what are those great things you have in reference to God? Tantus
quisque est, quantus est apud Deum; What a man is to God, so indeed he is to be
esteemed. What are houses or lands, titles or gay clothes to God?

4. Consider the service that others do for God more then you; God has more
honor in one month from some poor families who work hard to get their bread,
then in some of yours in many years. Now the excellency of men is according to
their usefulnes. That man is the most honorable man that is the most useful
man. The Lord has not been much beholding to the great men of the earth for
the carrying on his great designs in the world, especially since Christ's time,
except some few, they have been laid aside in the great works that God has
done. Not many rich, not many noble, but God has chosen the poor of the
world, the vile and contemptible things of the world, to carry on his most
precious works by. This is a humbling consideration to the great ones of the
earth.

Turcium imperium quantum quantu^ est, mica tantum est quam paterfamilias
proficit canibus.
5. All the honors and riches you have, are no other then may be the portion of
a Reprobate. True, you have more then others, but not more then a Reprobate may
have. The whole Turkish Empire, says Luther, is but a crumme that the Master
of the Family throws to a dog, all but a mere fancy.

Acts 25.23. Bernice and Agrippa came with great pomp, (...), so are the words
of the holy Ghost. I find after God had rejected Saul, yet he lets him prosper
much, he had many victories, great riches. 1 Samuel 13. he was rejected, but
read farther, Chap. 14. and Chap. 15. Learn then to be abased,
notwithstanding your greatness in the world.

6. And if you belong not to God, that title you have to all your greatness is
no other then that which a Malefactor has to what is given him by the bounty
of the Prince, to preserve him till his execution. I deny not but wicked men
have a right not only before men, but before God to what they enjoy in the
world; but it is such a right as the Malefactor has to what is allowed him
after he has forfeited all, he does not usurp it, it is given him. There is
little cause such should pride themselves in what they have.

Lastly, it is no long time that you are like to enjoy, that now you have above
others; within a while there will be little difference between you and others;
only this, you will have more to answer for then others.

When I appear before God, says Pelican, a German Divine, I shall not appear
in my robes as a Doctor, but as a Christian; so when you shall appear before
Christ, you shall not appear in your Parliament robes, with your ensigns of
honor and Nobility, but as naked, mean as the poorest; only you must answer
for your honor, your Nobility you had here, how they were improved for God.
Many men of great estates and dignities, when they come to dye, would be glad
to be as such and such poor men, who have walked with God in their integrity.
Granatensis reports of one Eucritus, who being asked, Uter mallet esse Craesus
vel Socrates, whether he had rather be Craesus, or Socrates? he answered,
Vivens Craesus, moriens Socrates; while he lived, Craesus; when he dyed,
Socrates. God will have glory from all his creatures; he has sworn by
himself, and the word has proceeded out of his mouth in righteousness, that
Every knee shall bow unto him, and every tongue confess his Name.

Learn then how to be abased now; do not stay till God forces abasement; if
you stay till then, God may justly refuse to receive any glory from you, in any
other but a passive way.

Baseness should be farthest from the spirits of Noblemen; but to know how to
be abased, that is, humbled before God, this is a lesson of great use for men
of noble families, and noble spirits; it will no way hinder the nobleness of
your spirits, but heighten and enlarge them.

1. A base spirit sinks down to low unworthy things, as the adequate object of
it; it has no high or honorable designs for God, or any thing of worth; but
if the flesh may be satisfied in the lusts of it, this is all it minds.

2. A base spirit is discouraged by any difficulties it meets with in the
greatest businesses; it lets the work go, rather then it will encounter any
difficulty.

3. Baseness causes men to regard only the serving their own turns; if they
be served, let come of others or public good what will, they care not.

4. Base spirits are led along by every little temptation like fools, they are
not able to withstand scarce any temptation.

5. A base spirit will insult over those that are beneath it; but in a vile
manner subject it self to those who are above it, even to lie under their
lusts. God deliver you from this. This need not be learned. The lusts in men's
hearts, if let alone, will quickly bring down men's spirits to this baseness.
This has been and is the cause of much evil among us: such a base spirit, oh
how unsuitable is it to a noble birth!

But by learning this lesson of the Apostle, to be willing to have the heart,
the estate, name, and whatsoever God pleases to lie low before him, this is of
great use to deliver men in high places from the power of Temptations. The
temptations are great that you are subject to, by reason of your greatness.
When Marcus Curio was told, if he would please Dyonisius, he needed not feed
upon turnips; he answered him that told him so, If he could but bring himself
to feed upon turnips, he need not please Dyonisius. What is the reason that so
many of the Nobility have betrayed their trust, have debased themselves, have
brought a stain upon their families, but because they could not tell how to be
low? They were afraid of loss of honor, or estate, they dared not trust God
with them. If some of you could have trusted God with your Honors, you might
have been the most honorable Noblemen in Christendom. He that knows how to
be abased, will know better how to abound, which is the second Lesson, I know
how to abound.

If I could tell this Congregation how every one might get abundance, I believe
I should have an attentive Auditory if it were till midnight; but I am now to
show you how you should sanctify Gods name in your abundance.

You will say, These are times of want, rather then of abounding.

I answer, Ans.
if indeed I should now preach this point in some places of England, it would
be a very unseasonable argument unto them; but among us, there are some who do
now more abound then ever they did in their lives; some who lived meanly enough
before these times, yet now they can live bravely, who have raised their
estates out of the misery of the times. Certainly it will never be any honor
to a man and his posterity, if hereafter it shall be found that he has grown
rich by the evil of the times. That which is reported of Sir Thomas More, who
was Lord Chancellor of England many years, was much to his honor, that when
he dyed, he left his son not above 25. l. per annum more then the inheritance
his father left him. It will be to the honor of men to be found rather poorer
then richer in after times. But though you have not that abundance that you
have had, yet in respect of thousands, yea millions of your brethren, ye do
now abound. You think perhaps that except you have many thousands coming in,
you are in want. Some of you are it may be of the judgment of Marcus Crassus,
whom Plutarch speaks of, who accounted no man rich, except he could of his own
charges maintain an Army. It may be you have not enough to satisfy your
phansies, yet you have enough to supply your wants, and over. I am sure you
abound more then Paul did, yet he says in this Chapter, ver. 18. I have all,
and abound, I am full. Oh that you would but give your hearts to learn how to
abound in what you have. It is a good sign of grace to be more solicitous to
know how to abound, then to get abundance; to be more careful to use what you
have for God, then to maintain it for your selves. Therefore the argument
being of that great necessity and use, as I hope I shall make it appear to you
before I have done, I shall enlarge my self in it, and divide it into these
seven Heads.

1. I shall show, first, When a man may be said to abound. 2. The difficulty of
this Lesson. 3. The necessity of it. 4. The mystery of godliness that is in
it. 5. The excellency of it. 6. The several lessons that are to be learned, to
make a man skillful in it. 7. The Application of all.
For the first. When may a man be said to know how to abound?
When he can set a due value and price upon the good things he enjoyes, so as
neither to prize them too low nor too high. Honors and riches are in
themselves the good blessings of God, they come out of Gods good treasure.
Deuteronomy. 28.12. The Lord will open to thee his good treasure. And if you be godly,
they are unto you the fruit of the Promise, they are given to you as
encouragements in the ways of God, as good utensils for Gods service, giving
you larger opportunities for the work of the Lord, then those have who are
poor. I beseech you, Right Honorable, consider of this one note, it is an
excellent argument of truth of grace, yea and of a good measure of grace, to
account the excellency of honors and riches to consist in this, that they give
larger opportunities for the service of God, then others have, who are in a
lower condition; to make the estimate of your honors and estates, by the
opportunity of your service. A poor man may be as precious to God as you, but
he can do but little for him, because he has not those outward helps that ye
have. You enjoy great mercies, but wherein lies the excellency of them? can you
say as in the presence of God, I bless God for these outward mercies I have,
but that which enlarges my heart most in blessing his Name for them, is the
large opportunities they afford me to honor his Name, which otherwise I should
not have? Many great men make the estimate of their honors and estates to be
this, they have more ability and opportunity by them to satisfy their lusts
without control, which others have not.

They are the good blessings of God, but they are but common blessings; the
enjoying of them makes not a man the better by them; as the letter in a word
that has a flourish about it, puts not more to the sense of the word then
another does. These things make no man more acceptable to God, they are no
signs of a good condition, more then a painted face is a sign of a good
complexion. You would be loath to choose a wife by the painting of her face; it
would be your folly to judge of her complexion according to her paint.
Certainly it is as good an argument to prove the goodness of the constitution
of her body, as honors and riches are to prove the good condition of any man
before God. These things are blessings, but they are blessings of the left
hand, they are outward blessings; if they be good to you, it must be from some
goodness in you, to use them for good; as a man's clothes first warmed by the
heat of the body, and then they heat, they are good things; but man's happiness
is not in the having them, nor his misery in the want of them, they make no
great difference in men's estates.

Zeno the Philosopher reproved one for immoderate feasting, he answered, He
spent of his own, and he had enough: Zeno replied, If your Cook should put two
or three handfuls of salt into your meat more then was fit, and should say, He
had salt enough by him that cost nothing; would this be a good answer? So for
the time of the enjoying of your abundance, you must know your season, there is
a time to mourn as well as to rejoice; at some times you may take a more free
use of the creature, at other times you must deny your selves. It was a great
charge of God upon those, Esaias 22.12, 13. when God called to weeping and to
mourning, there was joy and gladness, eating flesh and drinking wine.

Thirdly, when a man can so use his abundance, as to Crates, Aristippus, and
other Philosophers did foolishly. It is weakness to have need to deny ones
self the use of the creature, because of the danger in it; but yet he had need
to be very vigilant in observing the temptation in it, that he may avoid it.
You greedily many times swallow in the sweetness of your abundance, not
considering what poison of temptation may lie in it, and so swallowing down
all, you are undone by it. The prosperity of fools destroys them, (says
Solomon. Ei conciliandae pacis and concordiae cum Luthero idem accidisse, quod
illis qui prae nimia aviditate etiam faeces haurirent.
) It was said of Bucer, that he was so eager of peace with Luther, that he was
like to a man that through much greediness takes in dregs and all. The foolish
hearts of men are so taken with the sweet of their prosperity, that they scarce
have a serious thought of any danger in it, to avoid it.

Fourthly, then a man knows how to abound, when he can have command over his
spirit in the use of what he enjoyes; when a man can so take pleasure, that his
pleasure takes not him: you say of such men, that they have great possessions,
but their possessions rather have them. It is sordidnesse in a man to be a
servant to his servant. It was the curse of Cain, A servant of servants shall
thou be. Thus when a man has no command over his spirit, but is a servant to
what he has, the curse of Cain is upon him. When you cannot be merry in
company, nor in the liberal use of the creatures, but by them are made unfit
for holy duties, you now are brought under the power of them, you do not enjoy
them. How seldom have you been able to let out your hearts to mirth, jollity,
and contentment to the flesh, so as you could at the evening freely pour them
forth before God in Prayer? No, many times it is a day or two before you can
get any command over your spirits again. Certainly you have not learned how to
abound.

The Lord gives, the Lord takes, blessed be the Name of the Lord; this man
has learned how to abound: but when men's hearts cannot enjoy these comforts,
but they so cleave to them, that they cannot part with them without the rending
of their hearts, if they lose a little of what they have, they presently cry
out, They are undone; these men never knew how to abound.

Sixthly, when men know how to enjoy God in their Esaias 6.3. The whole earth is
full of thy glory, Plenitudo totius terrae gloria ejus.
so you have it in your books, but it is more proper to read it thus, His glory
is the fullness of the earth. When a man can say, It is the glory of God that
is the fullness of my honor, and my estate, and of my comforts, it is
communion with God that I enjoy in these, that rejoices my soul: it is true,
the Ordinances are the special channels that let out Gods goodness to me; yet
that sweetness of his love, that communion which I have with him in these
outward things, are more to me then all the world; this man has learned how to
abound. Phil. 4.7. the Apostle says, The peace of God shall keep their hearts;
but ver. 9. The God of peace shall be with you. It is not enough to a gracious
heart to have the peace of God, but he must have the God of peace; so it is not
enough for him to have honor from God, but he must have the God of that
honor; all the riches in the world cannot satisfy him, except he has the God
that gave him those riches. When thy heart can be carried quickly through the
creatures, to enjoy God as the fullness of what thou have; and when the
creature is made use of, to draw forth the graces of the Spirit of God in thee;
so that the more thou do abound, the more are thy graces acted to God the
fountain of all, now thou have learned how to abound: but where is the man who
does enjoy more of God in abundance then in want?

Seventhly, then has a man learned how to abound, not how to keep it to
himself, but how to improve it for God, and the Public, and the relief of
his Brethren, according to what he is able, when he improves his honor to lift
up Gods honor on high, and his riches, by being rich in good works, when he
accounts himself a steward, and all he has to be as talents given him to trade
with, not for himself, but for his Master.

Haman knew not how to abound, when he was but crossed in the want of having the
bowing of Mordecai's knee; all the honor he had in the Court was nothing to
him. So it was with Ahab, one would think he had enough to have satisfied one
man, being so great a King; yet because he had not Naboths vineyard, he is
sick, and will not eat. A small thing laid upon a man's eye, will keep the
sight of all the heavens from him; so many times a little affliction keeps the
sight of abundance of mercies, yea heavenly mercies from you. Surely you have
not learned how to abound.

Psalm. 9.20. Put them in fear Oh Lord, that they may know themselves to be but
men. When men are got above their brethren, their hearts begin to swell, as if
they were not men, as if all the world were made only to give them content.
Right Honorable, while I am mentioning of these things, see what cause you
have to be humbled, to fall down before the Lord this day; you have enjoyed
abundance, but either you have not been in the school of Christ, or you have
been but ill proficients in it. How few of you have learned thus to abound? Let
this be the matter of your humiliation in the days of your Fasting. Some of
you are cut short of your former abundance, God calls you now to be humbled for
your abuse of it.

The difficulty of this lesson.
Men think it is hard to be brought down under afflictions, but verily to know
how to abound is much harder. You who live in this place, think your conditions
to be far better then of those who live under the rage of the enemy; you yet
enjoy so much, as if you be not unthankful, you must needs acknowledge, that
in comparison of them, you abound in mercies. You think their lesson, how to
bear patiently such great afflictions as are upon them; is very hard; but the
truth is, of both, you have the hardest lesson to learn. It is harder to know
how to abound, then to know how to want. This may seem a paradox; but before we
have done, I hope I shall make the truth of it out fully to you.

Mariners use to say, if they have sea-roome enough, they care not; but your
greatest danger is in your sea-roome. It is a saying of Augustine, and a very
true one, Difficilius est pugnare cum libidine, quam cum cruce. Aug Omne malum
facilius vincitur quam voluptas. Cypr.
It is a harder thing to fight with a man's lusts, then to fight with the
cross: And of Cyprian, There is no evil but is easier overcome then pleasure.
There is more skill required to manage an East-Indie Ship, then a Boat in the
Thames. The warm beams of the Sun gets the Travelers cloak sooner from
him, then the wind and storms can do. Many who fled for Religion in Queen
Mary's time, knew how to want; but coming again in Queen Elizabeth's time,
enjoying prosperity, they knew not how to abound, they proved naught. Manna
could endure the heat of the fire, for the people baked it; Elisaeus cum magno
honor and saeculi dignitate prophetiae donum habuit; Elias profugus and
persecutus. Aug. de Mirab. l. 2. c. 26.
but it melted before the heat of the Sun. Many have been melted by the heat
of prosperity, who stood it out against the scorching heat of affliction.
Elisha prayed for a double spirit of Elijah to be upon him; and why so?
Augustine gives a reason, Elijah was persecuted, banished, lived in the
wilderness; but Elisha was to live at Court, and therefore he had need of a
double spirit, that he might know how to carry himself.



Beelzebub, which signifies the god of flies, the prince of devils, loves most
to be amongst men who do most abound. Rats and Mice come to full barnes,
rather then to empty places; so the vermin of temptations do more haunt
abundance then want. We read of Joseph's portion, Deuteronomy. 33.13. Blessed of the
Lord be his land, for the precious things of heaven, for the dew, and for the
deep, and for the precious fruits brought forth by the sun, and for the
precious things put forth by the moon, and for the chief things of the
ancient mountains, and for the precious things of the lasting hills, and for
the precious things of the earth, and fullness thereof. Thus we find Joseph
was very rich, but we read of no Tribe that was to suffer so much opposition
as the Tribe of Joseph. Genesis 49.22. Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a
fruitful bough by a well, whose branches run over the wall. The archers have
sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him. None of the Patriarchs did
so much abound as Joseph; none were so sorely shot at and hated as he was.
Travailers fling not at a tree that is empty, but at such as is full of fruit.

Thirdly, the temptations of those who abound, are

Fourthly, Temptations in abundance are more subtle, Mar. 4.19. the
temptations that come by riches are called the deceitfulness of riches.

Fifthly, But above all it is difficult to learn how to lusty pampered horse.
Difficile est esse in honor, fine tumore. Bern.
The lust of pride, how is it fed by honors and riches, and what more unruly
in the heart, then pride fed to the full? whereas in afflictions, the pride of
men is almost starved. Hos. 13.6. They were filled, their heart was exalted,
they have forgotten me. So uncleanness, men who have estates have fuel for
that lust, and those who are above others, whom none dare meddle with, can
satisfy it without control, this they account the bravery of their lives. The
like may be said of Malice and Revenge.

The Scripture gives us many evidences of this, that it is harder to know how
to abound, then how to want: As,

Deuteronomy. 6.11, 12. When thou shall have eaten, and art full, then beware lest
thou forget the Lord. Oh would to God this Scripture were writ over your full
table. And Chap. 8. ver. 12. lest when thou have eaten and art full, and have
built goodly houses, and dwelt therein, etc. Then thy heart be lifted up and
thou forget the Lord thy God. As if God should say, I am not so solicitous
about you when you are in the wilderness, you will not so easily forget me
when you are there, but when you are come to your houses, when your herds, your
flocks, silver and gold are multiplied, oh then beware that you forget not the
Lord. And Chap. 31. ver. 14, 15, 16. That thou may gather in thy corn, thy
wine, and thine oil, that thou may eat and be full, take heed to your
selves that your hearts be not deceived. Virtus fidei periculis secura,
securitate periclitatur.
It is a good speech of Augustine, The virtue of faith in dangers is secure,
and in security it is in danger.

of any to God: but we find in Scripture that an afflicted estate has been
blessed to many for this end, 2 Chronicles. 33.12. Hos. 5.15. Job 33.14.

Thirdly, few of Gods children have been the worse Chron. 17.3. it is said,
Jehoshaphat walked in the first ways of David. David's first ways were in his
afflicted estate, and they were the best; notwithstanding all Solomon's wisdom,
you see how foully he fell by his prosperity.

Fourthly, it has been the way of God constantly to

The necessity of this lesson.
But though the lesson be very hard, yet it is very necessary.

First, if you abound, and know not how to abound, Romans 8.22. who are they that
do most keep the creatures in bondage, but those who have the most plentiful
use of them, and subject them to their lusts? These creatures cry, Oh Lord, we
were made for thee, and we would be working for thee, who art the chief good,
and the highest end; but here is a man that has us at his command, and he
forces us to that which is contrary to our nature: This cry of the creatures
is very sad against thee who do abuse them; they were never made to be
serviceable to thy lusts; thou art an oppressor of the whole Creation.

Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do you thus requite the Lord? 2 Samuel 12.8. It is miserable, when
there shall be no other use of mercy, but to aggravate thy sin. Nehem. 9.25,
26. They delighted themselves in thy great goodness. Nevertheless they were
disobedient, and rebelled against thee, and cast thy law behind their back.
This Nevertheless is very dreadful; such a man is raised to a high estate and
honor, Nevertheless he is a swearer, Nevertheless he is unclean, his family
is profane.

Job 21.13, 14, 15. They spend their days in wealth, therefore they say unto
God, Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. What is the
Almighty, that we should serve him? Jer. 2.7, 8. Their land is full of silver
and gold, it follows, their land also is full of Idols. It may be thus said of
many Families, They are full of riches, of the good blessings of God, and they
are also as full of sin. What is the greatness of many men's spirits, but this,
that they dare boldly sin against the God of heaven? they account it their
excellency to go beyond others in wickedness, they glory in their shame, like
those Nobles I have read of in the Isle of Samobarre in the East Indies, who
stigmatized themselves with a hot iron, in token of honor.

Ps. 17.14. I have read of Gregory, when he was advanced to high preferment,
professed no Scripture was ever so terrible in his ears, as that, Luke 6.24. Ye
have received your consolation; it sounded in his ears as Jerome said that
Scripture, Arise ye dead and come to judgment, sounded in his. If God should
say to any of you, You shall have all your estares as full as ever, yea with a
hundred fold increase, but that shall be your portion, all the good that ever
you are like to have from me, there would be cause for you to wring your
handss, to fall down upon your faces in the anguish of your souls, to cry and
howl at the hearing of such a doom as this. For though it is true in regard of
your sinfulness you should judge your selves unworthy of the least crumme of
bread, yet woe unto you that ever you were borne, if your portion should be the
enjoyment of the whole world; you had need then learn how to abound; for if you
do not, God thereby does manifest that he has separated you to this doom, to
give you no other portion but what you have here.

Fifthly, you had need learn how to abound, for otherwise Psalm. 69.22, 23. Let
their table be made a snare to them, and that which should have been for their
welfare, let it become a trap; but few understand this: it is their misery, yea
a part of the curse that is upon them, for so it follows, Let their eyes be
darkened that they see not.

Sixthly, you had need learn how to abound; for il

Chrysostom upon the Hebrews says, he wonders how any Governor can be
saved; and our Savior, Matthew. 19.24. says, It is easier for a Camel to go
through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of
heaven.



4. The mystery of godliness there is in learning how to abound. (...), I am
instructed.
The strength of reason may go far in ordering a prosperous condition so as
not to be very offensive, but there is a great mystery of godliness in knowing
how to abound in a christian spiritual way.

1. A godly man learnes to abound by being faithful, Prove. 28.20. A faithful
man shall abound with blessings. Many think the only way to get abundance is by
being false, by shifting courses; they dare not trust to the ways of
faithfulness, they see a mighty Current of opposition against them, but the
godly man desires neither to get nor to enjoy more in the world, then he may
have by being faithful.

2. He learnes to abound by often resigning up all his abundance to God, not by
keeping it to his own proper advantage; Lord I profess all to be thine, to
enjoy nothing but in order to thee; take all, improve all, lay out all for the
praise of thine own name; by this he enjoyes his abundance with more comfort
and freedom of spirit. The oftener any thng is given up into Gods hands, and
comes out of them to us, the better it is; those men who having got any thing
out of Gods hands once, dare not venture to put it into them again, enjoy not
the comfort and blessing of what they have; that man who can daily as freely
and cheerfully resign what he has to God, as receive any thing from him, is
the only man that is blessed in what he enjoies in this world.

3. He seeks to preserve his estate, and to enrich himself by communicating
what he has to the necessities of others, and the public. This is a mystery
to the world. Isay 32.8. The liberal man devises liberal things: and what
then? so he may lose all he has? No, by liberal things he shall stand. He
thinks it more gain to part with any thing to do good by, then to keep it for
himself. 1 Timothy v. 17. Charge them that are rich in this world that they be
not high minded, that they trust not in uncertain riches, but that they be rich
in good works. Here is a way of being rich that the world is not acquainted
with, by being rich in good works; the more he lays out in good works, the
richer he is. God himself accounts his riches to be in the works of mercy,
Ephesians. 2.7. That he might show the exceeding riches of his grace, in his
kindness toward us. The Apostle, 2 Cor. 9.8. brings this argument to move men
to communicate their estates for the good of others; God is able to make all
grace abound toward you, that ye always having all sufficiency in all
things, may abound to every good work.

4. He learns how to abound by moderating his affections in his abundance, by
the moderation of his joy he increases his joy, Phil. 4.4, 5. Rejoice, and
again rejoice. This is a good exhortation. Well then, let us let out our hearts
to the uttermost in joy: nay, says the Apostle, you must take care you keep
your affections within bounds. Let your moderation be known to all men. You
will have more solid comfort in the moderation of your affections, then others
shall have in the greatest liberty they take to give up themselves to mirth and
jollity.

5. By his abundance, his humility is increased; to be humble in the enjoyment
of abundance is much, but to be humbled by it is a mystery. 2 Samuel 7.18. The
Lord having spoken of great riches and honor he bestowed upon David, and would
still further bestow upon him; he tells him his house should be great among the
great men of the earth; was David's heart puffed up by this? No; Then (says the
Text) went King David, and sat before the Lord, and what is my house that thou
have brought me hitherto? wherefore thou art great oh God. Saul was little in
his own eyes, before God made him great: But when he was made great, God was
less esteemed by him. The greater David was, the less he was in his own eyes,
and the greater was God in them; not, Lord I am a happy man, that I am made so
great; but who am I, and what is my house? but thou art great oh Lord.

6. Though he judges himself unworthy of the least good he has, yet his heart
is raised in a holy manner above all his abundance; at the same time he judges
himself unworthy of the least crumme, and yet he thinks all creatures in
heaven and earth too low for him to be his portion, this is a mystery. No man
knows in a spiritual way how to abound, Sive vivimus, sive morimur, Domini
sumus; non tantum Genitivo casu, sed Nominat. plur. vitae and morti dominamur.
but he who is above all his abundance. Luther speaking of that place, Whether
we live, or whether we dye, we are the Lords: This, says he, is not only to
be understood in the Genitive case singular, Domini; but in the nominative
plural: we are Domini, the Lords of life and death, whether we dye or live;
though we be not Lords of so much Land, of such Manors; we cannot Lord it
over so many Tenants, yet over life and death we are Lords; we can Lord it over
them. Death takes away all your possessions and Lordships from you, but death
is part of the possessions of the Saints, they are Lords over it. 1 Cor. 3.22.
Life, or death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours. A gracious
heart who lies low under God and Christ, yet has all other things under his
feet; yea, the lower he lies, the more has he; all the bravery, pomp, and
glory of the world, under his feet: great is this mystery of godliness.

7. According to the increase of his abundance, he seeks a proportionable
measure of holiness. Solomon desired much wisdom, because he had a great
people to govern; men who have sensual hearts, think a little Religion is
enough for a Gentleman or Nobleman; it is for poor men who have little else to
mind or content themselves in, to look after Religion in the strictness of
it. But if God gives a gracious man abundance, he does not think that measure
of grace that he had before, will serve his turn now, except God causes his
grace to abound as well as his estate and honor, he looks upon himself as
miserable.

8. He is as much apprehensive and sensible of his dependence upon God in the
height of prosperity, as in the depth of adversity. Hence Noblemen and
Princes are taught by Christ to come every day to Gods gate to beg their bread.

9. A godly man enjoyes his abundance aright by getting all he has sanctified
to him by the Word and Prayer. 1 Timothy 4.4, 5. All a man has is sanctified when
it is consecrated to the last end, for God, and for the furtherance of eternal
good; as time and place is sanctified when there is a consecration upon them
for God; so when the blessing of God is upon my estate, all I have, so as all
works to my eternal good in the glory of God, now it is sanctified to me.

But how comes it to be so?

By the Word and Prayer.

1. Through the Word of the Gospel, revealing the restitution of my right,
forfeited by sin, yea a higher title then ever I had in Adam.

2. By the Word of Promise, which gives nothing without a blessing to it. If
indeed I had what I enjoy merely in a natural way of general providence, I
could not expect such a blessing; but now enjoying all by the Word, I enjoy it
all in a spiritual way, all is sanctified to me. Hence of all men, Gentlemen
and Noblemen have most cause to be much conversant in Scripture; it would be a
sad charge upon any of you, who abound so much in the world, that you have not
a Bible in your closets, or seldom look into it.

And by Prayer. The more any man has, the more he had need to pray. Carnal
men will pray much in affliction, but to be put on to prayer by prosperity,
this is rare. Gentlemen had need pray more then poor men, Noblemen more then
Gentlemen. But if this be a truth, certainly it is a mystery; few of you think
so, fewer do so.

The excellency of this lesson.
1. When this is learned, grace in you will be very conspicuous; it will
appear in the luster of it as a Diamond in a golden ring, Magna faelicitatis
est, a faelicitate non vinci. Aug.
or rather set in a Crown, sparkles, and is more glorious then in a dirty rag.
Zech. 9.16. there is a Prophecy that the Saints shall be as the stones of a
Crown lifted up; it is in part made good, when grace appears in the glory of
it in you who are in eminent place.

2. You may do abundance of good: many souls will bless God for you, and for
all the abundance you enjoy, of which there is so good an improvement. Blessed
be God that ever such men lived in such places and times; the Cause of God, and
the good of his Saints, how has it been promoted by them! will not this be a
greater good to you, then all your titles of honor, and bravery of your lives?
Judges 5.9. My heart is toward the governors of the people which offer
themselves willingly: Bless ye the Lord. Because of the great service that a
rich man may do, Paul was so moved, when he had liked to have lost Sergius
Paulus, the Deputy of the country, Act. 13.7, 8. etc. he set his eyes upon
Elimas, who sought to turn him away from the faith, which he began to hearken
after and embrace, and said, Oh full of all subtilty and all mischief, thou
child of the devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, will thou not cease to
pervert the right ways of the Lord?

3. This argues much strength of grace, Magni pectoris inter secunda moderatio.
Sen.
as the brains resisting abundance of vapors, so as not to be hurt by them,
argues the strength of it.

4. From these who have learned thus, God receives most of that rent of praise
and honor that is due to him for all the good things of the earth, he lets out
to the children of men. You who are great Landlords, complain much that in
these times you cannot receive your rents, they were never so ill paid as they
are now: call your selves to account, how well you pay your rents to the Lord,
of whom you hold all you have. You esteem well of such as are certain and
punctual in paying your rents, God esteems high of those who render to him in
a constant way his rent for those many plentiful enjoyments they have in this
world.

5. There is no fear that adversity, that any afflictions should do hurt to
such who know thus how to use prosperity. If you can deliver your selves from
the deceits of the one, it will not be very difficult to resist the temptations
of the other. Nulla infaelicitas frangit, quem nulla faelicitas corrumpit.

6. This is the more excellent, because it is so rare. Where is the man who is
able to stand against the temptation of a prosperous estate? if Adversity has
slain her thousands, Prosperity has slain her ten thousands. Rara virtus
humilitas honorata.

7. How sweetly and comfortably may such dye, who have honored God with their
riches and honors? They may with a holy boldness in the close of all, look up
to God, and say with Nehemiah, Chap. 13. verse. last, Remember me oh my God for
good. Let God be remembered with your goods, and he will remember you for good.

6. He that will be skillful in this mystery of knowing how to abound, must
learn also these lessons.
1. The lesson of the fear of God. Deuteronomy. 6.11, 12. God forewarnes his people
that they should not forget him, when they enjoyed abundance of all good
things. Ver. 13. he adds as a means thereunto, Thou shall love the Lord thy
God, and serve him. You must not presume to do what you list; let the fear of
God be upon you to keep you from pride, wantonness, and licentiousness. We
read of Nehemiah, Chap. 5. though he were in honor, and had much power in his
hands to satisfy his will upon men as others did, they made their servants
rule over the people, ver. 15. but so did not I, says he, why? because of the
fear of God. My Lords, God has raised you high above others, much power is in
your hands, take heed of abusing it to oppression. If your spirits be too
generous and noble to oppress any your selves take heed that your servants be
not made to rule with rigor over the people. That great outcry against
Committees for rigorous oppressing, partial ways, and against some of your
servants for exacting extreme fees, comes not it may be so high as to your
ears; of all oppressions, the oppressions by servants, by men of mean
quality, is the worst. Oh that you all could say, If others do thus, as for us
we do not so, because of the fear of God; whatsoever other Lords have done,
do, or shall do, in the abuse of their power, and the great trust committed
to them, God forbid we should do so, for the fear of God is upon us.

2. Learn the lesson of the different principles from whence creature comforts
come, sometimes from Love, sometimes from Anger and hatred; Admone^di sunt qui
hoc mundo prosperantur, ut solerter considerent praes^rti vitae prosperitas,
aliquando datur ut ad meliorem vitam provocet, aliquando ut in aeternum before
damnet. Greg.
the right understanding this, would cause you to be unsatisfied in all your
abundance, till you know from what principle it flows. The very searching for
satisfaction in this, would have great power upon your spirits, to order and
regulate them in the enjoyment of your abundance.

3. Learn the lesson of your own unworthiness, why should God give you rather
then others? who has made you to differ?

4. Learn that all you have are talents that your great Lord has betrusted
you with to trade for him; you are but Stewards of what you have; you are to
give an account of all; you had need then keep your books even. How can you
give account of your mercies, when you cannor count them?

5. Learn that man is borne to labor, yea the greatest upon the earth not
exempted; none of you are born to live like the Leviathan. Psalm. 104.26. There
is the Leviathan, whom hou have made to play in the sea. You came not into the
world, your lives are not continued for this end; there are other labors in
the world besides servile, that God has fitted for the most noble spirits.

6. Learn the excellency of spiritual riches, of true riches; the least
degree of grace, yea every gracious work is more worth then heaven and earth,
says Luther. He professed he preferred the understanding of one of the
Psalms, above all the riches of the world. If we were got up to heaven, the
earth would seem as little to us, as now we being upon the earth, the stars
seem to be.

7. Learn that the least sin is a greater evil, then all earthly prosperity
can be good. When you commit any one sin, in that you are more miserable,
then you can be happy in all your honors and estates. If you were thoroughly
instructed in this, then 1. you would take heed of getting or preferring riches
or honors by any way of sin. Abraham would not have it said, that the King
of Sodom made him rich: let it never be said that sin has made me rich, or
preserved me being so.

2. If you had learned this, whatsoever you have or shall get by sin, you
will certainly restore to the uttermost of your power.

3. This would make you take heed of the abuse of what you have to sin: for
it tells you you shall do your selves more hurt by any sin, then all you
have in the world can do you good.

8. Learn, this time of your life is the time that God has set to provide for
eternity. This would make you serious, and see need so to be; it would take off
much of the vanity and jollity of your spirits, whereas now every thought that
does but tend to any seriousness, you think is melancholy. This would make you
take heed how you spend so much time in the enjoyment of the things of this
world, or make any use of them, that might be the least hinderance to you in
that great work you live for, this would cause you to improve all you have to
the uttermost, for the furtherance of the Gospel and your own spiritual good.
In doing thus, you will learn how to abound.

APPLICATION.
FIrst, you see of what great use Religion is to great men. You who are
Noblemen and Gentlemen, who have great estates to leave to your children, are
not your desires and endeavors that they may have breeding suitable to your
estates you intend to leave them? how vile a thing is it in the eyes of all
men, for one to have a great estate, but no breeding! he is a fool, he knows
not how to manage his estate now he has it, he will quickly embezell it away,
and undo himself. Why should you not then account it a great evil for your
selves or children, to have honors and estates, but no skill to know how to
use them for God, and the furtherance of your or their eternal good? It is
only godliness learned in the school of Christ teaches this. This is the
most necessary, the most honorable breeding. Breed up your young heirs, and
the rest of your children, in the knowledge, and as much as in you lies, in the
love of godliness, that when they come to enjoy those fair estates they
succeed you in, they may be eminent for the honor of God, and the good of
their Country, in their generation. Be in love with godliness, ye rich men,
and especially the Nobles of our Land; how happy were we if there were a
hopeful succession of Nobility and Gentry! our sufferings are from the
disaffection so many of these have had to Religion; I hope there is yet a time
when godliness shall be honored upon the earth by great ones. Seek for grace
for your selves and posterity; God has given you plenty of the lower springs,
seek the upper.

Jude 12. this among other characters is given of a wicked man, that he eats
without fear, he takes in freely the delight of the creature; but there is no
fear lest God should not have that glory that is due to him from it, this he
minds not at all; we have not heretofore learned how to abound, Let us
justify God in cutting us short now of what formerly we had; the abuse of
abounding that was formerly, was most dreadful; if God should now only take
off the excess there was in the Kingdom, though we be pinched for a while, the
evil would not be much; our blood grew very rank by our fat pastures. No
marvel though God now letts us blood. Luther speaking of excess in meats
and drinks in his time, Si nunc Adam resurgeret, and videret hanc insaniam
omnium ordinum, profecto credo quod prae stupore tanquam lapis staret. Luth. in
Genesis c. 3.
has this speech, If Adam did now rise again and see the madness of all sorts
of men, I believe he would stand senseless through sudden astonishment.

Few places in the world have been guilty of greater excess then we have
been. I have heard of a Nobleman in this Kingdom that said, Fifteen hundred
pounds a year was little enough to keep him sweet with linen. Surely his
body was not like Alexanders. The hand of God is at this time heavy upon many
of the Nobility and Gentry of the Land, it is most righteous that his sore
displeasure should be shown against that extreme wanton excess there was
among them, prostrating those good blessings of God wherein they abounded, to
the satisfying their base lusts. Let those who yet abound, take heed of this;
the sin in it self it is very great; but when it has these aggravations, it is
vile indeed.

1. If you abuse your abundance, when others suffer want, when thousands are
ready to perish for want of necessaries, as at this day, how great is then your
sin before God? it has now a loud cry in Gods ears against you.

2. When God has raised you from mean beginnings, the more remarkable Gods
hand appears in giving you abundance, the greater is your sin in the abuse
of it.

3. If your estates have been preserved through many difficulties, and that
diverse times when you have even given all for gone, yet God has come in and
continued to you the enjoyment of a very full estate. What do you think in
your consciences was Gods end in continuing it to you? Was it that you should
yet have farther opportunity to satisfy your lusts, and to be hinderers of
good, and promoters of evil in the places where you live? God forbid.

4. If you enjoy your estates still, notwithstanding your consciences tell you
that you have been guilty of very great abuse of them: What a wonder is it
that God has not violently rent away all from thee, or thee from what thou
have thus abused all this while; and do thou continue to provoke God against
thee still? is not thy former abuse of mercies enough, and too much, but will thou add farther? The Lord strike thy heart.

5. If the mercies thou have be renewed mercies, after grievous afflictions
have been upon thee, after God has brought thee low, he has restored a great
deal again, it may be as much, if not more then you had formerly, and will
you again abuse his mercies? with what face will thou look upon God, when thou
shall come to give an account of this?

6. If in times of opportunities of great service, God gives thee abundance,
and thou do now instead of taking the opportunity, mind nothing else but to
satisfy thy lust, living uselesly in all that abundance thou enjoyest, thou
art vile in Gods eyes; if some other had half thy estate and means of doing
good that thou have, how useful would he be! God should have much service from
him, he would bless God for those opportunities thou mindest not at all. If
there be any light of conscience in thee, oh that it might cause some misgiving
thoughts to arise in thee, that may wound thy heart this day for this thy great
sin.

7. If after thou have promised to God in a solemn way, that if he shall
preserve thy estate, or restore thee to the enjoyment of it, thou will give it
up to his honor; many thousands in this Kingdom have done thus of late in
their earnest seekings of God for their preservation and deliverance. If when
God shall settle thee again, thou forgettest him, regarding little the making
good thy engagement to him, know, that not only sin, but sin with a high
aggravation is upon thee.

8. If together with thy abundance the means of grace does also abound,
whereby thou might learn how to abound, and yet thou do not know, nay you
little mind it, this still increases the guilt of thy sin. If it were in
times of Popery, of darkness, it were not so much; but being at such a time,
the guilt of thy sin is raised very high.

Seeing there is so much required to this learning how

4. You who have rich friends, you see what cause you have to pray much for
them, they are set in slippery places, no men have more need of prayers then
they.

5. But the close of all is a word of Exhortation. Set your hearts to these
truths God has this day set before you. Right Honorable and beloved, consider
what a mercy it is to you, that the greatest work you have to do, is to
improve mercies. The work of thousand thousands is to get mercies, you have
them, and all you have to do from morning to night is to bless God for
mercies, and to improve them. If God has taught you this lesson to know how to
abound, bless his Name. What? all this honor, this great estate, and heaven
too? What? shall these things which are means of undoing others, help forward
my salvation? how excellent is thy loving kindness, oh Lord!

While you are above and abound, let your hearts be kept sensible of the mean,
low condition of others, of their straits, their oppressions; let it be your
honor to relieve the oppressed: 2 Cor. 8.7. As ye abound in every thing, see
you abound in this grace also. He means the grace of liberality. 2 Samuel 24.23.
it is said of Araunah, he gave like a King. Some of you have gloried, that you
have spent like Princes; let it be rather your glory, that you give like
Princes. You have been means to help this oppressed Kingdom, now, as Ier. cap.
28. ver. 29. presented his supplication, that he might not return to the house
of Jonathan to die there; so we this day to your Lordships, let us not be
brought again into bondage, and have nothing to lighten our bondage, but a new
name.

Let not violence be used to force people to things spiritual that they know
not, if those who now have but food and raiment should have great penalties
inflicted upon them for not submitting to what they yet have had no means to
instruct them in; how grievous would it be? The Votes of Parliament are to be
honored, and the judgment of an Assembly of godly and learned men is not to
be slighted; but that which must subject men's consciences in matters
concerning Christ and his worship, must be light from the word. Let not the
greatness of your power be exercised upon those who do what they can to know
the mind of Jesus Christ, and would fain understand and practice more; only
they dare not go further then they see Christ before them. You cannot say men
are obstinate and will not see, for what means has the generality of the
Kingdom had to see ground out of Scripture for such great changes?

To use force upon people before they have means to teach them; is to seek to
beat the nail in by the hammer of authority, without making way by the wimble
of instruction. Indeed, if you have to deal with rotten or soft sappy wood,
the hammer only may make the nail enter presently; but if you meet with sound
wood, with heart of oak, though the hammer, and hand that strikes be strong,
yet the nail will hardly go in; it will turn crooked or break; or at least,
if it enters, it may split that wood it enters into; and if so, it will not
hold long: you have not your end, consider you have to deal with English
consciences; there is no country so famous for firm strong oaks as England; you
will find English consciences to be so.

My Lords, you are advanced to high power and honor in a Kingdom, where
Christ has as many dear Saints of his, as (I had almost said) in all the
world besides; he expects you should use them kindly; they have been faithful
to you, even such as cannot fully come up to you in some things you have
published to the world; where has any one of them (though cried out upon, as
troublers of the Kingdom) falsified their trust in any thing you have
committed to them? you sit here in peace, and enjoy your honors with abundance
of mercies; in part through the blessings of God upon their faithfulness and
courage in venturing their lives for you: God forbid you should fall upon them,
when your turns are served by them. Listen not to any who shall whisper such
suggestions, or boldly vent such things as tend to the exasperation of your
spirits this way. There is a great outcry against the toleration of all
religions, and we are willing to join against such a toleration; but that which
fills the mouths of many in this, is the heat of their spirits against those
that differ from them in any thing, that they might with the more strength be
able by this to strike at them: suffer not your power to be abused to serve
men's designs, be faithful with God, encourage those that fear him, and God will
take care of your honors; he will do good to you, and your posterity after you.

Do not hearken to those who tell you these men would lay all level, they
would make no difference between the Nobleman, and Tradesman. Yes; we know
honor is to be given to whom honor belongs, God has made a distance between
man and man, it is fit it should be acknowledged and observed.

There is no such way to preserve and increase your honors, as by joining to
those whom you are sure to find faithful. Account the service of God your
greatest honor. 2 Pet. 1.17. it is said of Christ, he received honor and
glory when there came a voice from the excellent glory, This is my beloved
Son in whom I am well pleased. If it be the glory, the excellent glory of
Christ, to please his Father; surely it must needs then be yours. Let
godliness be set up by you in these latter times, God is about to advance
Religion, and happy are you that ever you were born, if you be made
isntrumental for it.

Let there be something spared out of that abundance God has given you for the
furtherance of the Gospel; how great the want of able men fitted for the
Ministry is, the woeful dark places of the Kingdom give sad testimony,
except God persuade the hearts of those who are of estates, and have power to
help, dreadful darkness will come upon a great part of the Kingdom, before
we are aware. There are now many hopeful youths godly, and fitted for the
University; in the Western parts; especially, where their parents have been
plundered, spoiled of their estates, now wholly disinabled to maintain them at
the University. Here are crying objects of charity, yea, the relieving of
them that they may be fitted for the ministry, would be a work fit for the
charity and piety of a State to be exercised in. If Learning be not maintained,
not only Ignorance, but Barbarism will come in upon us; the Lord deliver us
from that judgment of an ignorant Ministry. I this day in the Name of Jesus
Christ beseech you, who have had your estates, or a great part of them
preserved, that before you sleep, you would in your secret thoughts separate
something for this so great, so good a work; this would be a good testimony of
your thankfulness to God for the preservation of them from the common burning.
If some of you would but set aside so much for the promoting of the preaching
of Jesus Christ as you have heretofore spent upon your dogs, the blessing of
many souls may be upon you and your posterity; and if hereafter your selves or
some of your children should come into such congregations, to whom you have
been the means of sending the Gospel, and you or they should hear that people
blessing God for those who were the instruments of so great a blessing to their
souls, would not this be a more delightful sound in your or their ears, then
a cry of dogs? The same charge that heretofore went for that, would help very
much in this so great a work, so worthy of those who profess they live and
enjoy all they have, that they may promote the honor of Jesus Christ in their
generation.

And further, I beseech your Lordships, that the door of the preaching of the
Gospel may not be straightened, to keep those out of it, who have hearts to it,
and abilities fitted for it.

There are at this day, thousands of Congregations in England, who want able
Preachers, especially in remote parts, as Cumberland, Westmerland, diverse parts
of Yorkshire, many live like Heathens, scarce knowing that Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh, whether there be a Christ, or a holy Ghost or no. Now there
are diverse godly, learned young men, who have been called into those parts, and
have been willing from their pity to those poor souls, to quit those places,
in Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen's houses, where they had comfortable
maintenance, to go into those places; but they not having yet studied the
Controversies of Church Government, could not for the present see sufficient
ground to satisfy their consciences in that way of Ordination, by a company of
Ministers of several Congregations, made up into a Presbytery, only by the
Civil power, limited to the power of Ordination, having no Church act to make
them a Presbytery, nor no power of government in them; or if government that
extended beyond their ministerial charge for Word and Sacraments, there being
so many Controversies in this point, and being new to most men, it is no
marvel though young men who are conscientious, and love to search into things
that they may understand that which may bear up their consciences, have doubts
arising, which for the present they know not how to satisfy themselves in: Now
shall these who are every way (otherwise) fitted for the Ministry, be denied
the preaching of the Gospel in such remote dark places of the Kingdom, though
they agree in all other things with their brethren, merely because they cannot
satisfy themselves in this scruple of conscience? God forbid.

I do not here stand to plead fot a liberty for every man to step up into the
Pulpit that will; it is fit men should be examined and approved of, and so sent
to this work; but that I plead for, is, that men subjecting themselves to what
examination you please, and having full testimony for learning and godliness,
may not be not laid aside from preaching merely because they have not that
Ordination that is now appointed for such as shall enjoy Livings and
Ecclesiastical preferment in the Kingdom.

Yea farther, I humbly desire to present this to your Honors, that when men
come to be examined for places, the judgment of such who are willing to
conceal them, that they might not make disturbance, may not be drawn forth by
having questions put to them, What they think of that Presbyterial Government
that is now set up? and if they yet are not satisfied in their consciences
about it, then to be dismissed. I am not now disputing about what you have
determined, God and your Lordships have called me to another place, where I
have spoke my conscience about it: But this is all I say here, Is not this way
of Government presented to your Lordships only, that it may be? is it
established by you, as that which ought to be Jure Divino? are you then so
certain of this or that way of Ordination appointed, that you can take it upon
your consciences it is of such necessity, that it is fitter millions of souls
should never come to know Jesus Christ, then this way of Ordination and
Government should not be observed and submitted to? If Congregations should
make their moanes to God, Oh Lord, we here sit in darkness and the shadow of
death, we have none sent to us to show us thy ways, to reveal Jesus Christ,
to break the bread of life to us; such able and godly men are willing to come
amongst us out of pity to our souls, but there are questions about Ordination
and Presbyteries that men who are in power do so much stand upon and stick to
(which ye^ are very controversall among godly and learned men, and many of
themselves have but of late looked into) that because they are scrupled, we
must still continue in our darkness; these men who would bring us the light of
the Gospel, must not come amongst us: would not such a moan as this made to
Christ from poor souls who are ready to receive the Gospel break your hearts?
I am persuaded it would.

I have no more to say, but to express my desires to heaven, that God would
crown the enjoyment of your Honors, your power, your estates here, with his
grace, and your souls and bodies with glory before his Saints and blessed
Angels in the day of Jesus Christ.

FINIS.

