THE POWER OF KINGS DISCVSSED: OR, An Examen of the Fundamental Constitution
of the Freeborn People of ENGLAND: In Answer to several Tenants of M. David
Jenkins.

By Will: Ball of Barkham, Esquire

Sat Patriae Priamoque datum -- LONDON, Printed for JOHN HARRIS, 1649.

THE POWER OF KINGS DISCUSSED, etc.
THe Freeborn people of England live or ought to live by or under a Law of
common consent, the Supreme Ruler or highest Magistrate whereof is the KING,
whose Oath is to conserve and maintain justas leges and consuetudines quas
vulgus elegerit, etc. the just Laws and Customs which the Common People shall
choose, (as many do expound it.) Others will have the Verb elegerit to
signify has chosen, according to the French Aur^n choisy: and Mr. Jenkins
alleges this reason for it, Jenk. Resp. ad Prin.
Customs cannot refer to future time, and both are coupled together, Laws
and customs; so that Elegerit must be taken in the Preterperfect Tense: But by
the favor of Mr. Jenkins albeit Customs are not properly alterable as are
Laws, and though Laws and Customs are coupled together, yea alterable Laws
are nominated and placed before Customs; yet may the verb Elegerit be taken
in the future Tense; for the Reason why Laws are inserted in the Kings Oath,
or propounded to the King in his Oath before Customs, is, first, because Laws
are more worthy and noble then Customs, for that Laws are Rules or
Regulations of the whole or entire People, but Customs are Rules only of some
or of a part of the People, and that in some things only.

Secondly, Laws are more ancient, to speak generally, then Customs, for it is
very probable that the Saxons coming out of Germany into Britain brought the
Common Law with them, as a Rule agreeable to the Law of Nature and Reason,
which they had learned or had delivered unto them from their fathers; yet
Customs they could not bring with them, for Customs have Relation to Place as
well as to Persons, but neither the Saxons, nor any other People could have
Relation to a Land or Country before they possessed it: so that the coupling of
Laws and Customs together, or Nominating or Placing Laws before Customs in
the Kings Oath, is no amiable Reason, From whence a direct consequence may be
deduced, that the Verb Elegerit must or ought to be taken in the Preterperfect
Tense, or that it may not be taken in the Future-Tense, and consequently that
the King may not be strictly tied and obliged in foro conscientiae, to conserve
and maintain such just Laws as the Common People shall at any time make
choice of: but admitting the Verb Elegerit to be taken and expounded in the
Preterperfect Tense, albeit there be difference in Grammar, yet is there no
great difference in Logic or Reason; for the King taking his Oath to maintain
the just Laws and Custome^ which the People or Common People have chosen,
takes his Oath by an Implicit or Tacit condition to conserve and maintain
the just Laws which the People shall choose; for at the first making of that
Oath, and at our Kings their taking of it ever since, the Common People had
then chosen, and have ever since conserved such choice, that not only there
should be no Laws de futuro, for the time to come, without their Consent, but
also that upon their Request or Petition our Kings should Redress such
Agrievances as they should complain of, and likewise propagate such just Laws
as they should propound conducing to their general good or welfare: and that
was the Reason why heretofore it was inserted in many Statutes, Be it therefore
enacted by the Kings Majesty, with Assent of the Lords, etc. and at the Request
of the Commons, etc. wherein two things are to be noted, first, that the
Commons did Request, not command or enforce our Kings to pass such Acts;
secondly, that our Kings did upon such Requests usually pass them. And albeit
the King have a Negative voice, or rather a voice for advise, or to advise, as
the words Le Roy s'avisera import, yet I conceive that he is strictly tied in
Foro conscientiae according to his Oath, and the end of his Government (which
is the good of the People) to pass such Acts for Civil Government as the
Commons shall Request him to pass. Jenk. Resp. ad Prin.
But Mr. Jenkins and others make a Quaere and ask, who shall be Judges?
whether such Laws as the Commons shall Request be just or no, the King is tied
or obliged by Oath only to propagate and maintain the just Laws which the
Common People choose or Request. In Mr. Jenkins his opinion, the judges and the
Masters of Chancery, with the Lords or Peers assisting the King ought to be
judges of the Common People, or of their Representatives, or Trustees their
Requests, rather then two, or three, or a few Commoners, who sometimes are not
learned in the Laws of the Land. To this Quaere, and the Allegations, I
answer, that the Commons Primario, or in the first Place are, and ought to be
the judges, even as Customary Tenants are, and ought to be their own
Evidences; although one man ought not to be judge in his own Case, yet all in
a Kingdom, or Commonwealth, can have no judges of their Common Interest but
themselves, or some amongst themselves, at leastwise no Competent judges: and
where the Common Interest is controverted, there they, who have the greatest
Interests, or whom it most concerns, ought to be judges Primario or in the
first place; and surely the Common People in general have the greatest
Interest in their Common Interest, and the Laws of the Land most concern
them, wherefore they, or their Representatives, or Trustees, ought to be judges
Primario, or in the first place. And as touching that, many in the House of
Commons are not sometimes learned in the Laws, nor have any great knowledge in
State affairs; it may be so; and it may be wished, that none but such as have
sound judgments, might sit in that Honorable House, and I believe that the
words habiles homines, in the writ of Burgesses intend such men, and not men of
great Estates, who are sometimes men of mean understandings, and yet by
feasting (I will not say Bribing) or by flattering, or by an over-awing Power,
attain to be Parliament men; howsoever, for as much as such men being chosen,
are capable to consult and advise with others wiser then themselves, and are in
matters of great Concernment, guided by the Discretion of others, their votes
going along with the votes of others, they may be accounted competent judges,
of what may be beneficial, or prejudicial, to the Commonwealth. Howsoever I
do not exclude the Lords, or the House of Peers from being judges secundario
of such matters, as generally concern the Kingdom: for although Mr. Jenkins
conceive them not to be Vulgus, Jenk Resp. ad Prin.
truly I conceive the Lords in England to be but vulgus superlatum, even as
Bishops are but clerici Prelati, and Aldermen but cives elati; in England the
Nobles have no distinct or different Laws, as in Germany, Poland, and some
other countries; these here inherit by the Common Law, or Laws Common to
others; they also contract Bargain and sale by the same Laws, and are subject
to the same Laws; some Priveledges they have which make rather a Titulary, or
circumstantiall, then an Essential or specificall difference, between them and
the inferior Common People. But it may be some will say, why should not the
Lords being dignified, or Noble, be Judges Primario, or in the first place,
rather then the Commons? I answer, that the Lords are not entrusted by the
People, as are the Commons, and therefore in matters of General concernment,
the Commons ought to precede them; notwithstanding de se and suis in things
that merely concern the Lords, as also concerning matters of Fact, And for
this causo, as also to advise the King, are the Judges, and Masters of Chancery
called to the House of Peers. Jenkins in his [ Cordial. etc.]
or controversy which shall happen by writs of Error, or otherwise to come
into that most Honorable House, therein the Lords De Jure precede the Commons.
But Mr. Jenkins will have the House of Peers to be Judges of the Laws, rather
then the House of Commons, because the King by his writ says, that he will
consult and treat with the Peers, and Prelates of the Kingdom, for, and
touching the great Concernments of the Commonwealth (for the King never sits
in the House of Commons) the Peers do consulere and consequently (as says
Mr. Jenkins) judge of the concernments of the Commonwealth, the Commons do
but Facere et consentire, according to such Consultation or judgment; which
Power ad faciendum and consentiendum Mr. Jenkins says the King gives them by
his writ; and to strengthen his Opinion he quoteth a great Lawyer: But by the
favor of Mr. Jenkins, and such as adhere to his opinion, albeit the King say
in his writ, that he will consult and treat with the Prelates and Peers,
touching the great concernments of the Commonwealth, for that they are
properly his Assistants, he sitting with them, does he therefore say that he
will not treat with the Commons? nay, does not the King treat with the
Commons, by Messengers, when he desires Aides and Subsidies, and have not the
Commons a Negative voice therein? can the King and the Peers make an Act of
Law without the Commons? are the Commons tied or obliged necessarily to do and
consent to what the King and the Lords shall determine, as Mr. Jenkins seems
to intimate? surely no, our Laws and customs speak them absolutely free in
these things. And whereas Mr. Jenkins says that the King by his writ gives
Power to the Commons, ad faciendum and consentiendum, therein he is greatly
mistaken; the King by his writ only appoints the place and time, and instances
the words, ad faciendum and consentiendum, to show the cause or End of their
Convention or assembling together,
but the People give them their Power, who elect or nominate them, and also
transact their Power unto them, by their Parole at their Elections, and by
their Indentures wherein they insert the words, ad faciendum and consentiendum,
as from themselves to the Part^es, whom in the said Indentures they Nominate
and entrust: and indeed, were the Power of the Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses, derived to them by the Kings writ, such Indentures were needless
and frivolous, the Sheriffs might only make their Return, se fecisse Electionem
secundum Breve receptum, and such like. Moreover, it is against Reason that a
People shall have Power to nominate and entrust some about their Affairs, and
shall, for that end, allow them wages, (as do the Counties, Cities, and Towns
Corporate, to the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses) and yet that such Trustees
or Stewards should derive no Power from the People their Trustors, neither as
their Judges Delegate, nor Allegate; that is to say, neither as Judges for them
according to Law, nor as Judges for them according to Reason and Conscience.
But M. Jenkins conceives, the House of Commons to be no fit Judges of Laws,
or Acts for the Peoples good, because they are not called ad consiliandum, but
the House of Peers. And furthermore, Jenkins in his [Lex Terrae.] and his
[Cordiall.]
that the House of Commons are no Court, at leastwise no Court of Record, nor
can give an Oath, or examine upon Oath; And that House which cannot do the
less, cannot do the greater. By M. Jenkins, and other his adherents favor,
is it not of greater moment and concernment to be called ad faciendum and
consentiendum, then ad consiliandum, or consilium dandum? He, or they, who are
called to Council, are called only to advise with; but he, or they, who are
called ad faciendum and consentiendum, are called to Act with, or to be
Co-enactors.

Therefore the King, by his Writ, invites the People to do and consent, (by
their Representatives) touching such difficult and urgent affairs as concern
Himself, the State, and defense of the Kingdom of England, and Church of
England, of which He intends to Consult with His Peers: And great Reason it is
that the Commonwealth should, at the least, have free Power in her self to
acknowledge her own, Finalem Concordantiam, her own, Facere and consentire,
albeit she were in nature of Femine Covert Baron (as M. Jenkins would have
her) the King being sponsus Regni, Jenkins in his [ Lex Ter. p, 41.]
qui per annulum is espoused to his Realm at His Coronation: And certainly the
King conceives such Power inherent in the Commonwealth, when He declares in
His Writ, Ita quod pro defectu Potestatis hujusmodi, seu propter improvidam
Electionem Militum Civium, and Burgensium, etc. Moreover, I could tell M.
Jenkins that Commonwealth has greater Power^ The KING receives the Ring at
His Coronation, as does Femme Covert Baron, and consequently the Commonwealth
rather espouses the King, then the King the Commonwealth: So that the
Commonwealth is Regina sui ipsius,
the King, Rex Rege^s, as was Philip the second of Spain in England, albeit
modo difference, for he was King merely of Courtesy, but our Kings are Kings
by Descent: And whereas M. Jenkins does in several places except against the
Power of the House of Commons, affirming that they are not fit to be Judges of
the Laws of the Land, for that they cannot punish Felony, or Treason, nor give
an Oath, nor are a Court of Record, etc. It makes no matter whether they can
do these things, or whether they are a Court of Record or no, in relation of
their being Judges of the Laws of the Land, so far forth as they are to
judge of them; for the Commons are not called and chosen chiefly to judge of
matters de facto, according to the Laws in Being, (for that the Courts of
Justice may determine of) but to judge of the Laws themselves,
De Facto and de Fieri, whether they be convenient or inconvenient, fit to be
continued, or repealed; or whether new Laws ought to be made for the good of
the Commonwealth or no; and these things they may do as Judges Allegate, or
Vmpeeres for the People, although the House of Commons were no Court of Record.
Moreover, I conceive that he, or they, who covenant with others to do any Act,
or Acts, which shall be reasonably advised, or devised by the Covenantees, or
their Council, or the like, does make such Covenantees their Council, or
Arbitrators, Judges Primario, or in the first place of such Act or Acts, and
such Covenantors make themselves, or become Passive to the end, and Active to
the means of such Covenant, that is to say, they are to do, or Act what the
Covenantees will (with Reason) have them do or Act, albeit the Acts which they
do are their own Acts; even so that Potentate, who Covenanteth by Oath (for his
Oath is Vice contractus vel compacti) to conserve and maintain the Just Laws
and Customs which the People shall choose;
or otherwise the Just Laws and Customs which the People have chosen, (it
being one of their Chosen Laws, that their Potentates shall de futuro upon
their Request, redress their Agrievances, be it by repealing Acts
inconvenient, or enacting some de Novo) such Potentate does surely make the
People their Representatives or Trustees, Judges Pirmario, or in the first
place of such Act, and makes himself, or becomes Passive to the end, and Active
to the means of such his contract by Oath; that is to say, He is to do what
the People will (with Justice and Reason) have him to do or Act, albeit the
Acts which he does are his own Acts. But M. Jenkins says, that both Houses
have many times tendered unto our Kings, unjust and unreasonable Bills, which it
had been better for our Kings to have denied, or not have passed, then to have
consented to, and have passed; and Master Jenkins instanceth touching Religion,
Bills tendered to Henry the 8. and to Queen Mary; Bills tendered unto Richard the
3. and also to the aforesaid Henry the 8. Jenkins in his [Lex Terrae.]
concerning Civil Government, etc. I conceive M. Jenkins might have instanced
enough, and to many such Bills, but what of all this? Is there not Bonum Reale,
and Bonum apparens, secundum tendentiam vellietatis, Real Good, and seeming
Good, which may be in it self evil? and is there not verum Reale, and verum
Formalt, secundum quod ad se fert Intellectus; a Real Truth, or a true Real
Being, and an apprehended Truth, or a true apprehended Being, which may be no
true Real Being; even so there is justum Reale, and justum appaerens, or
formale, an Act, or Being Really just, and seemingly or formally Just, as it is
apprehended by understanding, and embraced by the will, which may be in it self
unjust: wherefore, if the People (to whom the King is tied by Oath) or their
Representatives or Trustees, so long and so far as they entrust them, shall
on behalf of the People tender to the King, a Bill of Civil Government to
them, seeming Just and Reasonable; but to the King seeming unjust and
unreasonable, and it may be so in it self, the King notwithstanding, is by an
Implicit Condition of his Oath, tied or obliged to pass such a Bill if it
deprive not himself, of his own Just Rights, for Id juris est quod Nationis
est, if a Nation or People, will induce themselves into an inconvenience,
conceiving it convenience, the King cannot help it; he may use the best means
he can, by advise, Arguments, and the like, to prevent it; but if the People,
and their Representatives, will persevere in their Desire or Request, the KING
(as aforesaid) is obliged to pass it, The KING is the supreme Ruler, or
highest Magistrate for the People, or over the People ad agendum, to put the
Laws in Execution; but the KING is not chief Judge of the Rules, or Laws, by
which the People will be Governed; the People themselves, and those whom they
entrust so far as they entrust them, are, or ought to be Judges thereof Jure
Primitive: moreover, if a Covenantee will desire, or require of a Covenantor an
Act, (of which the Covenantee is Judge Primario, or in the first Place) no way
beneficial, but rather detrimentall to him the Covenantee, the Covenantor is
obliged to grant, or perform such an Act tending to the end of his Covenant,
not otherwise to endamage himself; even so it is between the KING who is
Covenantor by Oath, and the People who are Covenantees concerning Laws and
Statutes touching Civil Government to be enacted, or repealed, and abolished.

But some it may be will say, suppose the Commons or both Houses of Parliament
should tender unto the KING a Bill, or Bills, destructive to His own Just
Rights, is he bound to pass such? truly no! He may justly refuse them, for the
End of His Oath is to conserve and maintain the Just Laws which the People
have chosen, or shall choose, for their Good; not the unjust Laws which they
shall choose to destroy or deprive Him of His Royal Right: Jus Regnandi is the
Kings by descent, even as Jus Regni (to speak properly) is the Peoples by
birthright, (no way excluding the King from any benefit thereof) The People
promise or Covenant by Oath to obey the King as their supreme Governor or
highest Magistrate, and to maintain Him, His Heirs, and lawful Successors,
in His, and their just Rights and Dignities; and as the Kings Oath tieth and
obliges Him to the People, certainly the Peoples Oath tieth and obliges them
to the King: although our King in England be not a Personal Monarch to make
Laws, and Govern at His pleasure, as some affirm that the Great Turk, the
King of Persia, and such like Tyrannical Princes do; (albeit, I conceive, that
even those Potentates are in some things limited) yet out King is a Legal
Monarch to Reign and Govern by Laws made and consented unto by the People;
so that although the King have not an absolute Power to make Laws,
He has an absolute Power to administer the Laws; and I hope there are none
that will think or attempt otherwise.

Having said, that the King is tied by an implicit Condition of His Oath
(admitting the Verb Elegerit to be understood in the Preterperfect tense) to
pass such Bills concerning Civil Government as the Commons or both Houses
shall tender unto Him, (not destructive to Himself) and having said,
notwithstanding, that the King has a Negative Voice, or a Voice to advise, and
consequently not to pass such Bills until he have advised; some it may be
will say, that there is a contradiction or opposition in these Assertions; but
there is none, for even every Covenantor may be the courtesy of the Law advise
with Himself and His own Council, as well as with the Council of His
Covenantee, before He make or do Acts tending to the End of His Covenant, and
great Reason it is, that the King should have as great, or rather greater
Freedom in that He is the supreme Ruler, or highest Magistrate of the
Commonwealth; a freedom to advise, or to deny until advise be taken does not
Null nec in foro conscientiae, nec in foro Juris,
the tie or obligation of Oath or Covenant so far forth as such Oath or
Covenant tieth or obliges.

Furthermore, concerning the Kings Oath aforesaid, although He be tied and
obliged by virtue thereof to pass Bills touching Civil Government, (as
aforesaid) yet I conceive that He is not tied and obliged by virtue of His said
Oath, to pass Bills touching Religion, tendered unto Him by the Commons, or
both Houses of Parliament; for, at the making of that Oath, neither the
Commons, nor their Representatives, or Trustees; nor the King, or His Lords, or
Peers, had any thing to do, or did meddle with matters touching Religion, to
define, frame, or alter any thing therein; such things were then altogether
performed by Ecclesiastical Councels and Assemblies; nor would the People, nor
did they tie or oblige the King by Oath to do that which (as then) they
conceived He had no Power to do: and the Kings, who have successively taken
that Oath since the first making thereof, have taken their Oaths according to
the intent and meaning of that Oath when first compiled, and no otherwise; so
that I do not conceive the King to be obliged by virtue of His said Oath to
pass Bills touching Religion tendered unto Him by the Commons, or both Houses
of Parliament.

But some (it may be) will say, that the King is tied otherwise Ex Officio, to
pass such Bills touching Religion, as the Commons, or both Houses shall tender
unto Him; it may be so, but if so, yet both the King, and both the Houses,
ought to be very cautelous and conscientious how they make Acts touching
Religion, in which they may err themselves, and by which they may ensnare and
molest other men's Consciences: however, the Kirk-men having borrowed (I
suppose) some infallible Night-caps from the Roman Bishops, dream exceedingly,
that they interpret the holy Scriptures without error of the least Iota.

Master Jenkins says, that the King is Principium Caput, Jenkins in his [Lex
Terrae.]
and finis Parlamenti; the King is Principium, I grant Him, for that the King
by His Writ appoints the time, and place, of Parliamentary Conventions, and
that the King is Caput, I also grant it Him in that the King is the supreme
Ruler, or highest Magistrate of the Commonwealth; but that the King is Finis,
at leastwise, Finis integer aut tetalis Parlamenti, I deny it; for Finis, or
causa finaelis, is causa propter quod, the cause for which a thing is ordained;
and certainly, salus Populi, which is suprema Lex, the safety of the People,
their general good and welfare is the end; at leastwise, the principal end of
Parliamentary Conventions: and Master Jenkins seems in his [Cordiall to the
good People of London] to acknowledge as much, for whereas Master H. P.
Barrister of Lincolns Inn affirms, that the safety of the People is the
supreme Law, (as indeed it is:) Master Jenkins replying to him, Jenkins in his
[Cordiall.]
faith, Neither do we swear, but His Majesty and we will swear to the
contrary, and have sworn and have made good, and will by Gods grace make good
our Oath to the World, that the KING is not above the Law, nor above the safety
of His People, the Law and the safety of His People, are His safety, His
Honor, and His strength: these are Master Jenkins his words, whereby he
acknowledges, That the safety of the People are the Kings safety, honor, and
strength; so that if the King be the end, or a partial end of the Parliament,
according to his Assertion, the Peoples safety must needs be the principal or
ultimate end.

Master Jenkins says, That it cannot be said the King does wrong, and that it
was declared by all the Judges, and Sergeants at Law, [Tempore.] The Reason is,
(says Master Jenkins) Nothing can be done in this Commonwealth by the Kings
Grant, or any other Act of His, as to the Persons, Goods, Lands, Liberties of
the Subjects, but must be according to the established Laws, which the Judges
are sworn to ebserve and deliver between the King and His People, impartially
to rich and poor, high and low; and therefore the Justices and the Ministers
of Juctice are to be questioned and punished if the Laws be violated, and no
Reflection to be made on the King.

By Master Jenkins favor, if it be granted, that the King does not wrong in
ministering the Laws, but that the Ministers of the Laws whom the King
intrusteth do the wrong, will it therefore follow, that it cannot be said that
the King does the wrong, otherwise both in His natural and politic capacity?
surely no! The King may usurp (and yet be a King de Facto) as did Henry the
first, his Brother Robert being alive; and William the second also,
notwithstanding his Fathers Will; Stephen; Richard the first, and John his
Brother, (for Arthur Son of Geoffry Duke of Britain, third Son of Henry
the second was right Heir to the Crown, Richard being the fourth Son, and
John the fifth Son of the said King Henry) Edward the third, while his Father
lived (for though his Father were a dissolute Prince, yet the Son ought not to
have usurped his Right; and albeit a People may (as did the petty Kings and
People of Sodom and Gomorrah, the Jews, Athenians, Romans, and diverse other
Nations) free themselves from tyranny and slavery, yet they ought not Depose
their King for vice) Henry the fourth that subtle Usurper, Richard the third
that politic Tyrant.

The King may break his faith and promise with his own People, and others, as
did the Norman, and some of his Successors very constantly, as if it had
descended to them with the Crown.

The King may break his Oath, as did Henry the third, and some others.

The King may, through his own covetous and ambitious desire, impose illegal
Taxes upon the People, he may also engage himself and his People in unnecessary
Wars and Broiles, as Kings have done either; and if it be said, that Kings are
in such things many times misled by their Councels, and therefore they
themselves ought to be excused; I answer, no ^ for, Kings ought not to be
misled by their Councels, Privatio Rectitudinis in debito esse Actus Peccatum
est; Kings have the means not to be misled in such matters if they will make
use of it; but many times Kings will be led by Cabinet Counselors, Creatures
of their own making, who depend upon them, and endeavor to humor and please
their Princes for their own Ends, and not to counsel them according to
prudence and justice: and sometimes Kings have done what likes themselves
without counsel.

The King may by an over-awing Power, or by a kind of menacing, or high
carriage, enforce, or cause the Representatives of the Kingdom to do, or
agree to that, to which (if such unjust and indirect means were not used) they
would not agree unto; as did Henry the eight, in obtaining the Lands of Abbeys
and Monasteries; for admit the Abbeys and Monasteries deserved to be dissolved,
yet for as much as their Lands were Terrae Regni non Regis, they ought to have
been applied, and employed to the good of the Kingdom, not of the King, there
being then neither Law, Reason, not President for it: but K. Henry partly by
frowns, mutterings, and threatenings, and partly by promising that he would
with those Lands maintain an Army for the defense of the Kingdom, and ease
the People from other Taxes, and Payments, (which how well he performed, all
men know) obtained and got into his hands those Lands by consent of both the
Houses of Parliament: wherein how justly, or unjustly, both Houses dealt, I
will not dispute it at this time.

But to go on, Jenkins in his [Lex Terrae.]
M. Jenkins himself instanceth, that in King John's time the Nobles and Commons
of the Realm conceiving that the Ancient Customs and Rights were violated,
etc. Et paulo post, after the subjects had obtained their Rights and Liberties,
which were no other then their Ancient Customs, etc. by which two instances of
his, He in some sort acknowledges that the People were wronged in their
Customs and Rights, from the time of the Norman Conquest, to the Reign of
Hen. 3. and who did the wrong? Surely the Norman and his Successors, who
severally violated them, not such Judges and Justices of the Laws who then
were, for they did but as they were commanded: To conclude, the King may in
these and the like things, both according to his natural and politic
capacity, Peccare contra Deum, contra Proximum, and seipsum, and if it be said,
notwithstanding, He can do no wrong, certainly that tenet if it be Ens Legis,
it is scarce Ens rationis Ratiocinatae.

That the King can do no wrong [in Curia,] nor the Pope err [in Cathedra,] I
take them to be Axioms much alike: for my part I pretend not to the knowledge
of the Laws, but honor the knowledge thereof: thus much I know, non jurari in
verba magistri, I have heard say, that the greatest Clerks are not sometimes
the wisest men; and I must tell M. Jenkins, and others, that sometimes also the
greatest Lawyers are not the soundest Schoolmen, for if they were, some of
them would not have said, and written, what they have: M. Jenkins says,
Jenkins in his [Cordiall.]
The Law and Custom of this Land, is, that a Parliament has Power over my
life, liberty, lands, and goods, and over every other subject, etc. Pax cum
pedibus, good Master Jenkins, not so fast; what does Master Jenkins mean by
the word, Power? if he mean by the word, Power, that the Parliament has power
to protect the lives, liberties, etc. of the People, I grant it him; or if he
mean by the word, Power, that the Parliament has power applicare in
necessitatum Regni, the Proprieties of the People, I also grant it him; but if
Master Jenkins mean by the word, Power, that the Parliament (including the
King) has an absolute Power to dispose of the Peoples Estates mere ad
Placitum, I absolutely deny it; and touching this, I have formerly inserted
Reasons in two Printed Books: Moreover, the Parliament cannot Tradere Populum
Angliae aliene Juri, deliver over the Free People of England to a foraine
Government, or to Laws imposed by Forainers, or composed and continued in
relation to Forainers; nor can the Parliament by any Ordinance, or Act
whatsoever, deprive the Free people of England of their innate Right of
electing Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses for Parliament; in these things, and
things of the nature of these tending to the fundamental Rights and Laws of
the People, the Parliament cannot, nor ought not any way to violate the People,
or Nation; if they do it, they do not only fall and fail from the
Protection of the People, but they become Preditores and Hosts Patriae: The
King is to consider that although he have his Jus Regnandi, his Crown by
descent, and holds a Deo ordinaria per successionem, God himself being the
Efficient Cause primarily, yet he holds it in ordine ad Populum, in relation to
the People, who tie him by Oath, etc. in England, salus Populi, not Majestas
Imperii, is the chief object and end of Government: The Representatives or
Trustees of the People are also to consider that they are creati in Ordine ad
Populum, not Nati in Ordine ad se, as are the Venetian Senators; that they are
entrusted by the People according to the Kings Writ, Pro quibusdam arduis and
urgentibus Negotiis, not made unlimited or absolute in all things; so that the
King and both the Houses of Parliament ought to endeavor for the general good
of the Commonwealth.

I am of Master Jenkins his Opinion in this, That the safety of the People is
the safety of the King, and that the honor of the King is supported by the
honor of the People, or Nation.

WILLIAM BALL.

FINIS.

