The LIFE and DEATH of Sir Matthew Hale, Knt.

Late Lord Chief Justice of England.

Containing many Pious and Moral Rules for humane Conversation. Also, many
Remarkable Sayings and Worthy Actions of the said Lord Chief Justice. And many
other Things worth the Readers perusal.

Written Originally by Dr. Gilbert Burnet, now Bishop of Salisbury.

portrait of Matthew Hale

London: Printed and Sold by J. Bradford at the Bible in Fetter-Lane.

The Life and Death of Sir Matthew Hale, Knight, late Lord Chief Justice of
England.
MATTHEW HALE, was Born at Alderly in Gloucestershire, the first of November,
1609. His Grandfather was Robert Hale, an Eminent Clothier in
Wotton-under-edge, in that County, where he and his Ancesters had lived for
many Descents; and they had given several parcels of Land for the use of the
Poor, which were enjoyed by them to this day. Thus he was descended rather from
a good, than a Noble Family, and yet what was wanting in the insignificant
Titles of High Birth, and Noble Blood, was more than made up in the true worth
of his Ancestors. But he was soon deprived of the Happiness of his Fathers Care
and Instruction, for as he lost his Mother before he was three years old, so
his Father died before he was five; so early was he cast on the Providence of
God. But that unhappiness was in a great measure made up to him: For after some
opposition made by Mr. Thomas Poyntz, his Uncle by his Mother, he was committed
to the care of Anthony Kingscot, of Kingscot Esquire, who was his next Kinsman,
after his Uncles, by his Mother. Great care was taken of his Education, and his
Guardian intended to breed him to be a Divine, and being inclined to the way of
those then called Puritans, put him to some Schools that were Taught by those
of that party, and in the 17th year of his Age, sent him to Magdalen-Hall in
Oxford, where Obadiah Sedgwick was his Tutor. He was an extraordinary
Proficient at School, and for some time at Oxford. But the Stage Players coming
thither, he was so much corrupted by seeing many Plays, that he almost wholly
forsook his Studies. By this he not only lost much time, but found that his
Head came to be thereby filled with such vain Images of things, that they were
at best Improfitable, if not hurtful to him; and being afterward sensible of
the Mischief of this, he resolved upon his coming to London, (where he knew the
opportunities of such Sights would be more frequent and Inviting) never to see
a Play again, to which ho constantly adhered. He was now so taken up with
Martial matters, that instead of going on in his design of being a Scholar, or
a Divine, he resolved to be a Soldier: and his Tutor Sedwick going into the
Low Countries, Chaplain to the Renowned Lord Vere, and he resolved to go along
with him, and to trail a Pike in the Prince of Orange's Army; but a happy stop
was put to this Resolution, which might have proved so fatal to himself, and
have deprived the Age of the great Example he gave, and the useful Services he
afterward did his Country. He was engaged in a Suite of Law with Sir William
Whitmore, who laid claim to some part of his Estate, and his Guardian being a
Man of a retired temper, and not made for Business, he was forced to leave the
University, after he had been three Years in it, and go to London to solicit
his own Business. Being recommended to Sergeant Glanvill for his Counselor,
and he observing in him a clear apprehension of things, and a solid Judgment,
and a great fitness for the study of the Law, took pains upon him to persuade
him to forsake his thoughts of being a Soldier, and to apply himself to the
study of the Law: and this had so good an effect on him, that on the 8th of
November, 1629. when he was past the 20th Year of his Age, he was admitted into
Lincoln's Inn: and being then deeply sensible how much time he had lost, and
that Idle and Vain things had overrun and almost corrupted his mind, he
resolved to Redeem the time he had lost, and followed his Studies with a
diligence that could scarce be believed, if the signal effects of it did not
gain it Credit. He studied for many years at the rate of 16 Hours a day: he
threw aside all fine Clothes, and betook himself to a plain fashion, which he
continued to use in many points to his dying day.

Yet he did not at first break off from keeping too much Company with some vain
People, till a sad Accident drove him from it, for he with some other young
Students, being invited to be merry out of Town, one of the Company called for
so much Wine, that notwithstanding all that Mr. Hale could do to prevent it, he
went on in his Excess till he fell down as dead before them, so that all that
were present, were not a little affrighted at it, who did what they could to
bring him to himself again: This did particularly affect Mr. Hale, who
thereupon went into another Room, and shutting the Door, fell on his Knees, and
prayed earnestly to God, both for his Friend, that he might be restored to Life
again; and that himself might be forgiven for giving such Countenance to so
much Excess; and he vowed to God, that he would never again keep Company in
that manner, nor drink a Health while he lived: His Friend recovered, and he
most Religiously observed his Vow, till his Dying day. And though he was
afterward pressed to drink Healths, particularly the Kings, which was set up by
too many as a distinguishing mark of Loyalty, and drew many into great Excess
after his Majesty's happy Restoration; but he would never dispense with his
Vow, though he was sometimes roughly treated for this, which some hot and
indiscreet Men called Obstinacy.

This wrought an entire change on him: now he forsook all vain Company, and
divided himself between the Duties of Religion, and the Studies of his
Profession; in the former he was so regular, that for 36 Years time, he never
once failed going to Church on the Lord's day; this observation he made when an
Ague first interrupted that constant Course, and he reflected on it, as an
Acknowledgement of God's great Goodness to him, in so long a Continuance of his
health. He took a strict account of his time, of which the Reader will best
judge, by the Scheme he drew for a Diary, which I shall insert Copied from the
Original, but I am not certain when he made it; it is set down in the same
Simplicity in which he writ it for his own private use.

Morning. I. To lift up the heart to God in thankfulness for renewing my Life.
II. To renew my Covenant with God in Christ. 1. By renewing Acts of Faith
receiving Christ, and rejoyoing in the height of that Relation. 2. Resolution
of being one of his People doing him Allegiance. III. Adoration and Prayer. IV.
Setting a Watch over my own Infirmities and Passions, over the Snares laid in
our way. Perimus licitis. Day Employment. There must be an Employment, two
kinds. I. Our ordinary calling, to serve God in it. It is a Service to Christ
though never so mean. Col. 3. Here Faithfulness, Diligence, Cheerfulness. Not
to overlay my self with more Business than I can bear. II. Our Spiritual
Employments: Mingle somewhat of God's Immediate Service in this day.
Retrestments. I. Meat and Drink, Moderation seasoned with somewhat of God. II.
Recreations. 1. Not our Business. 2. Suitable. No Games, if given to
Covetousness or Passion. If alone. I. Beware of wandering vain lustful thoughts,
fly from thy self rather than entertain these. II. Let thy Solitary thoughts be
profitable, view the Evidences of thy Salvation, the state of thy Soul, the
Coming of Christ, thy own Mortality, it will make thee humble and Watchful.
Company. Do good to them. Use God's Name reverently. Beware of leaving an ill
Impression of ill Example. Receive good from them, if more knowing. Evening.
Cast up the Accounts of the Day. If ought amiss, Beg pardon. Gather resolution
of more Vigilance. If well, Bless the Mercy and Grace of God that has
supported thee.
These Notes have an Imperfection in the Wording of them, which shows they were
only intended for his Privacies. No wonder a Man who set such Rul s to himself,
became quickly very Eminent and remarkable. Noy the Attorney General, being
then one of the greatest Men of the Profession, took early notice of him, and
called often for him, and directed him in his Study, and grew to have such
Friendship for him, that he came to be called young Noy. He passing from the
extreme of Vanity in his Apparel, to that of neglecting himself too much, was
once taken when there was a Press for the King's Service, as a fit Person for
it; for he was a strong and well built Man: But some that knew him coming by,
and giving notice who he was, the Press-Men let him go. This made him return to
more decency in his Clothes, but never to any Superflulty or Vanity in them.
Once as he was Buying some Cloth for a new Suit, the Draper with whom he
differed about the Price, told him he should have it for nothing, if he would
promise him a Hundred Pound when he came to be Lord Chief Justice of England;
to which he answered, That he could not with a good Conscience wear any Man's
Cloth, unless he paid for it; so he satisfied the Draper, and carried away
the Cloth. Yet that same Draper lived to see him advanced to that same dignity.

While he was thus improving himself in the Study of the Law, he not only kept
the Hours of the Hall constantly in Term-time, and continued then to follow his
Studies with an unwearied diligence; and not being satisfied with the Books
writ about it, or to take things upon trust, was very diligent in searching all
Records: Then did he make diverse Collections out of the Books he had Read, and
mixing them with his own Observations, digected them into Commonplace Book;
which he did with so much Industry and Judgment, that an Eminent Judge of the
King's Bench, borrowed it of when he was Lord Chief Baron: He unwillingly lent
it, because it had been Writ by him before he was called to the Bar, and had
never been thoroughly revised by him since that Time, only what Alterations had
been made in the Law by subsequent Statutes, and Judgments, were added by him
as they happened: but the Judge having perused it, said, That though it was
Composed by him so early, he did not think any Lawyer in England could do it
better, except he himself would again set about it. He set himself much to the
Study of the Roman Law, and though he liked the way of Judicature in England by
Juries, much better than that of the Civil Law, where so much was trusted to
the Judge; yet he often said, that the true Grounds and Reasons of Law were so
well delivered in the Digests, that a man could never understand Law as a
Science so well as by seeking it there, and therefore lamented much that it was
so little Studied in England. When he was called to the Bar, and began to make
a Figure in the World, the late unhappy Wars broke out, in which it was no
easy thing, for a Man to preserve his Integrity, and to live Securely, free
from great danger and trouble. He had read the Life of Pompenious Atticus, writ
by Nepos, and having observed, that he had passed through a time of much
Distraction, as ever was in any Age or State, from the Wars of Marius and
Scilla, to the beginnings of Augustus his Reign, without the least blemish on
his Reputation, and free from any Considerable Danger, being held in great
Esteem by all Parties, and courted and favored by them: He set him as a
Pattern to himself, and observing that besides those Virtues which are
necessary to all Men, and at all times, there were two things that chiefly
preseroed Atticus, the one was his engaging in no Faction, and meddling in no
public Business, the other was his constant favoring and relieving those that
were lowest, which was ascribed by such as prevailed to the Generosity of his
Temper, and procured him much Kindness from those on whom he had exercised his
Bounty, when it came to their turn to Govern: He resolved to guide himself by
those Rules as much as possible for him to do. He not only avoided all public
Employment, but the very talking of News, and was always both Favorable and
Charitable to those who were deprest, and was sure never to provoke any in
particular, by censuring or reflecting on their Actions; for many that have
Conversed much with him, have told me they never heard him speak ill of any
Person. He was employed in his practice by all the King's party: He was
assigned Council to the Earl of Strafford, and Archbishop Laud, and afterward
to the Blessed King himself, when brought to the infamous Pageantry of a
Mock-Tryal, and offered to plead for him with all the Courage that so Glorious
a Cause ought to have inspired him with, but was not suffered to appear,
because the King refusing, as he had good reason, to submit to the Court, it
was pretended none could be admitted to speak for him. He was also Council for
the Duke of Hamilton, the Earl of Holland, and the Lord Capel: His Plea for the
former of these I have published in the Memories of the Duke's Life. Afterward
also being Council to the Lord Craven, he pleaded with that force of Argument,
that the then Attorney General, threatened him for appearing against the
Government; to whom he answered, he was Pleading in defense of those Laws,
which they declared they would maintain and preserve, and he was doing his duty
to his Client, so that he was not to be daunted with Threatenings.

Cromwell seeing him possessed of so much Practice, and he being one of the
Eminentest Men of the Law, who was not at all afraid of doing his Duty in
those Critical Times, resolved to take him off from it, and raise him to the
Bench.

To these were added the Importunities of all his Friends, who thought that in
time of so much Danger and Oppression, it might be no small Security to the
Nation, to have a Man of his Integrity and Abilities on the Bench: and the
Usurpers themselves held him in that Estimation, that they were glad to have
him give a Countenance to their Courts, and by promoting one that was known to
have different Principles from them; affected the Reputation of Honoring and
trusting Men of Eminent Virtues, of what persuasion soever they might be, in
relation to public Matters. Not long after he was made a Judge, which was in
the year 1653. when he went the Circuit, a Trial was brought before him at
Lincoln, concerning the Murder of one of the Townsmen, who had been of the
King's Party, and was killed by a Soldier of the Garrison there. He was in the
Fields with a Fowling-piece on his Shoulder, which the Soldier seeing, he came
to him and said, it was contrary to an Order which the Protector had made, That
none who had been of the King's Party shall carry Arms; and so he would have
forced it from him; But as the other did not regard the Order, so being
stronger than the Soldier, he threw him down, and having beat him, he left him:
The Soldier went into the Town, and told one of his fellow Soldiers how he had
been used, and got him to go with him, and lie in wait for the Man that he
might be revenged on him. They both watched his coming to Town, and one of them
went to demand his Gun, which he refusing, the Soldier struck at him, and as
they were struggling, the other came behind and ran his Sword into his Body, of
which he presently died. It was in the time of the Assizes, so they were both
tried: against the one there was no Evidence of forethought Felony, so he was
only found guilty of Manslaughter, and Burnt on the Hand; but the other was
found guilty of Murder: And though Colonel Whaley that commanded the Garrison,
came into the Court and urged, That the Man was Killed only for disobeying the
Protector's Orders, and that the Soldier was but doing his Duty; yet the Judge
regarded both his Reasonings and Threatenings very little, and therefore he not
only gave Sentence against him, but ordered the Execution to be so suddenly
done, that it might not be possible to procure a Reprieve, which he believed
would have been obtained, if there had been time enough granted for it. Another
occasion was given him of showing both his Justice and Courage, when he was in
another Circuit; he understood that the Protector had ordered a Jury to be
returned for a Trial, in which he was more than ordinarily concerned: Upon this
Information, he Examined the Sheriff about it, who knew nothing of it, for he
said he referred all such things to the Undersheriff, and having next asked
the Undersheriff concerning it, he found the Jury had been returned by order
from Cromwell; upon which he showed the State, that all Juries ought to be
returned by the Sheriff or his lawful Officer; And this not being done
according to Law, he dismissed the Jury, and would not try the Cause: Upon
which the Protector was highly displeased with him, and at his return from the
Circuit, he told him in Anger he was not fit to be a Judge; to which all the
Answer he made was, That it was very True.

Another thing met him in the Circuit, upon which he resolved to have proceeded
severely: Some Anabaptists had rushed into a Church, and had disturbed a
Congregation, while they received the Sacrament, not without some Violence; At
this he was highly offended, for he said it was intolerable for Men, who
pretended so highly to Liberty of Conscience, to go and disturb others;
especially those who had the Encouragement of the Law on their side: But these
were so supported by some great Magistrates and Officers, that a stop was put
to his proceedings; upon which he declared, he would meddle no more with the
Trials on the Crown-site. When Penruddocks Trial was brought on, there was a
special Messenger sent to him requiring him to assist at it. It was in
Vacation-time, and he was at his Country House at Alderly: he plainly refused
to go, and said, the four Terms and two Circuits were enough, and the little
Interval that was between, was little enough for their private Affairs; and so
he excused himself; he thought it was not necessary to speak more clearly, but
if he had been urged to it, he would not have been afraid of doing it. He was
at that time chosen a Parliament Man, (for there being then no House of Lords,
Judges might have been chosen to sit in the House of Commons) and he went to
it, on design to obstruct the Mad and Wicked Projects then on foot, by two
parties, that had very different Principles and ends. Thus he continued
administering Justice till the Protector dyed, but then he both refused the
Mournings that were sent to him and his Servants for the Funeral, and likewise
to accept of the New Commission that was offered him by Richard; and when the
rest of the Judges urged it upon him, and employed others to press him to
accept of it, he rejected all their Importunities, and said he could act no
longer under such Authority. He lived a private man till the Parliament met
that called home the King, to which he was returned Knight of the Shire from
the County of Gloucester. In that Parliament he bore his share, in the happy
period then put to the Confusions that threatened the utter Ruin of the Nation.
Soon after this, when the Courts in Westminster Hall came to be settled, he was
made Lord Chief Baron; and when the Earl of Clarendon (then Lord Chancellor)
delivered him his Commission, in the Speech he made according to the Custom on
such Occasions, he expressed his Esteem of him in a very singular manner,
telling him among other things, That if the King could have found out an
honester and fitter Man for that Employment, he would not have advanced him to
it; and that he had therefore preferred him, because he knew none that deserved
it so well. It is ordinary for Persons so promoted to be Knighted, but he
desired to avoid having that Honor done him, and therefore for a considerable
time declined all Opportunities of waiting on the King, which the Lord
Chancellor observing, sent for him upon Business one day, when the King was at
his House, and told his Majesty there was his modest Chief Baron; upon which he
was unexpectly Knighted. He continued eleven Years in that Place, managing the
Court and all Procedings in it with singular Justice. It was observed by the
whole Nation, how much he raised the Reputation and Practice of it: And those
who held Places and Offices in it, can all declare, not only the Impartiality
of his Justice, for that is but a common Virtue, but his Generosity, his vast
Diligence, and his great Exactness in Trials. This gave occasion to the only
Complaint that ever was made of him, That he did not dispatch Matters quick
enough; but the great care he used to put Suits to an End, as it made him
slower in deciding them; so it had this good Effect, that Causes tried before
him, were seldom if ever tried again. Nor did his Administration of Justice lie
only in that Court: He was one of the principal Judges that sat in
Cliffords-Inn, about settling the difference between Landlord and Tenant, after
the Dreadful Fire of London: He being the first that offered his Service to the
City, for accommodating all the Differences that might have arisen about the
Rebuilding it, in which he behaved himself to the satisfaction of all Persons
concerned; so that the sudden and quiet Building ofthe City, which is justly
to be Reckoned one of the Wonders of the Age, is in no small measure due to the
great Care which heand Sir Orlando Bridgeman (then Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, afterward Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England) used, and to
the Judgment they showed in that Affair: since without the Rules then laid
down, there might have otherwise followed such an endless train of vexatious
Suits, as might have been little less chargeable than the Fire it self had
been. But without detracting from the Labors of the other Judges, it must be
acknowledged that he was the most Instrumental in that great Work; for he first
by way of Scheme, contrived the Rules upon which he and the rest proceeded
afterward; in which his readiness in Arithmetic and his skill in Architecture
were of use to him.

But it will not seem strange that a Judge behaved himself as he did, who at
the Entry into his Employment, set such excellent Rules to himself, which will
appear in the following Paper Copied from the Original under his own Hand.

Things Necessary to be Continually had in Remembrance.
I. That in the Alministration of Justice, I am entrusted for God, the King and
Country; and therefore, II. That it be done, 1. Uprightly, 2. Deliberately, 3.
Resolutely. III. That I rest not upon my own Understanding or Strength, but
Implore and rest upon the Direction and Strength of God. IV. That in the
Execution of Justice, I carefully lay aside my own Passions, and not give way
to them, however provoked. V. That I be wholly intent upon the Business I am
about, remitting all other Cares and Thoughts, as unseasonable and
Interruptions. VI. That I suffer not myself to be prepossessed with any
Judgment at all, till the whole Business and both Parties be beard. VII. That I
never engage my self in the beginning of any Cause, but reserve my self
unprejudiced till the whole be heard. VIII. That in Business Capital, though my
Nature prompt me to Pity; yet to consider, that there is also a Pity due to the
Country. IX. That I be not too Riged in Matters purely Conscientious, where all
the barm is Diversity of Judgment. X. That I be not biased with Compassion to
the Poor, or favor to the Rich, in point of Justice. XI. That Popular, or
Court-Applause, or Distaste, have no Influence into any thing I do in point of
Distribution of Justice. XII. Not to be sollicitous what Men will say or think,
so long as I keep my self exactly according to the Rule of Justice. XIII. If in
criminals it be a measuring cast, to incline to Mercy and Acquittal. XIV. In
Criminals that consist merely in Words, when no more ensues, Moderation is no
Injustice. XV. In Criminals of Blood, if the Fact be Evident, Severity is
Justice. XVI. To abhor all private Solicitations, of what kind soever, and by
whom soever, in matters Depending. XVII. To charge my Servants, 1. Not to
interpose in any Business whatsoever, 2. Not to take more than their known
F^es, 3. Not to give any undue precedence to Causes, 4. Not to recommend
Council. XVIII. To be short and sparing at Meals, that I may be the fitter for
Business.
He would neve receive private Addresses or Recommendations from the greatest
Persons in any matter, in which Justice was concerned. One of the first Peers
of England went once to his Chamber and told him, That having a Suit in Law to
be tried before him, he was then to acquaint him with it, that he might the
better understand it, when it should come to be heard in Court. Upon which the
Lord Chief Baron interrupted him, and said, He did not deal fairly to come to
his Chamber about such Affairs, for he never received any Information of Causes
but in open Court, where both Parties were to be heard alike; so he would not
suffer him to go on: Whereupon his Grace (for he was a Duke) went away not a
little dissatisfied, and complained of it to the King, as a Rudeness that was
not to be endured. But his Majesty bid him content himself that he was no worse
used; and said, he verily believed he would have used himself no better, if he
had gone to solicit him in any of his own Causes.

Another passage fell out in one of his Circuits, which was somewhat censured
as an affectation of an unreasonable strictness, but it flowed from his
Exactness, to the Rules he had set himself: A Gentleman had sent him a Buck for
his Table, that had a Trial at the Assizes; so when he heard his Name, he asked
if he was not the same Person that sent him Venison; and finding he was the
same, he told him, He could not suffer the Trial to go on, till he had paid him
for his Buck; to which the Gentleman answered, That he never sold his Venison,
and that he had done nothing to him, which he did not do to every Judge that
had gone that Circuit; which was confirmed by several Gentlemen then present:
but all would not do, for the Lord Chief Baron had learned from Solomon, that A
Gift perverteth the ways of Judgment, and therefore he would not suffer the
Trial to go on, till he had paid for the Present; upon which the Gentleman
withdrew the Record; And at Salisbury the Dean and Chapter having according to
Custom, presented him with six Sugar-Loaves in his Circuit, he made his
Servants pay for the Sugar before he would try their Cause.

He looked with great Sorrow on the Impiety and Atheism of the Age, and so set
himself to oppose it, not only by the shining Example of his own Life, but by
engaging in a Cause that indeed could hardly fall into better hands: And as he
could not find a subject more worthy of himself, so there were few in the Age
that understood it so well, and could manage it more skilfully. The occasion
that first led him to Write about it was this. He was a strict observer of the
Lord's Day, in which, besides his constancy in the public Worship of God, he
used to call all his Family together, and repeat to them the Heads of the
Sermons, with some Additions of his own, which he fitted for their Capacities,
and Circumstances; and that being done, he had a Custom of shutting himself up
for two or three Hours, which he either spent in his secret Devotions, or on
such profitable Meditations as did then occur to his thoughts.

While the Judge was thus employing his time, the Lord Chief Justice Keyling
dying, he was on the 18th of May, 1671. promoted to be Lord Chief Justice of
England. He had made the Pleas of the Crown one of the Chief Studies, and by
much search, and long Observation, had composed that Great Work concerning
them, formerly mentioned: He that holds the high Office of Justiciary in that
Court, being the Chief Trustee, and Assertor of the Liberties of his Country;
all People applauded this Choice, and thought their Liberties could not be
better deposited than in the hands of one, that as he understood them well, so
he had all the Justice and Courage that so sacred a Trust required. One thing
was much observed and commended in him, that when there was great Inequality in
the Ability and Learning in the Counselors that were to Plead one against
another: He thought it became him, as the Judge, to supply that; so he would
enforce what the weaker Council managed but indifferently, and not suffer the
more Learned to carry the Business by the Advantage they had over the others in
their quickness and skill in Law, and readiness in Pleading, till all things
were cleared in which the Merits and Strength of the ill defended Cause lay. He
was not satisfied barely to give his Judgment in Causes, but did especially in
all Intricate ones, give such an Account of the Reasons that prevailed with
him, that the Council did not only acquiesce in his Authority, but were so
convinced by his Reasons, that I have heard many profess that he brought them
often to change their Opinions; so that his giving of judgment was really a
learned Lecture upon that point of Law; and which was yet more, the Parties
themselves, though Interest does too commonly corrupt the Judgment, were
generally satisfied with the Justice of his decisions, even when they were made
against them. His Impartial Justice, and great Diligence, drew the Chief
Practice after him, into whatsoever Court he came: Since, though the Courts of
Common Pleas, the Exchequer and the King's Bench, are appointed for the Trial of
Causes of different Natures, yet it is easy to bring most Causes into any of
them, as the Council of Attorneys please; so as he had drawn the Business much
after him. both into the Common Pleas, and the Exchequer, it now followed him
into the King's Bench, and many Causes that were depending in the Exchequer and
not determined, were let fall there, and brought again before him in the Court
to which he was now removed. And here did he spend the rest of his public Life
and Employment: But about four Years and a half after this Advancement, he who
had hitherto enjoyed a firm and vigorous Health, to which his great Temperance,
and the Equality of his Mind, did not a little conduce, was on a sudden brought
very low by on Inflammation in his Midriff, which in two days time broke the
Constitution of his Health to such a degree, that he never recovered it; He
became so Asthmatical, that with great difficulty he could fetch his Breath,
that determined in a Dropsy, of which he afterward Died. He understood
Physic so well, that considering his Age, he concluded his Distemper must
carry him off in a little time; and therefore he resolved to have some of the
last Mouths of his Life reserved to himself, that being freed of all Worldly
Cares, he might be preparing for his Change: He was also much disabled in his
Body, that he could hardly, though supported by his Servants, walk through
Westminster Hall, or endure the Toil of Business; he had been a long time
wearied with the distractions that his Employment had brought on him, and his
Profession was become ungrateful to him; he loved to apply himself wholly to
better Purposes, as will appear by a Paper that he writ on this subject, which
I shall here Insert.

First; If I consider the Business of my Profession, whether as an Advocate, or
as a Judge, it is true I do acknowledge by the Institution of Almighty God, and
the Dispensation of his Providence, I am bound to Industry and Fidelity in it:
And as it is an act of Obedience unto his Will, it carries with it some things
of Religious Duty, and I may and do take Comfort in it, and expect a Reward of
my Obedience to him, and the good that I do to Mankind therein, from the
bounty, and beneficence, and providence of Almighty God; and it is true also
that without such Employments, civil Societies cannot be supported, and great
Good redounds to Mankind from them; and in these respects the Conscience of my
own Industry, Fidelity and Integrity in them, is a great Comfort and
Satisfaction to me. But yet this I must say concerning these Employments,
confidered simply in themselves, that they are very full of Cares, Anxieties
and Perturbations.

Secondly; That though they are beneficial to others, yet they are of the least
Benefit to him that is employed in them.

Thirdly; That they do necessarily involve the party, whose Office it is, in
great Dangers, Difficulties, and Calumnies.

Fourthly; That they only serve for the Meridian of this Life, which is short
and uncertain.

Fifthly; That though it be my Duty, faithfully to serve in them, while I am
called to them, and till I am duly called from them, yet they are great
Consumers of that little Time we have here, which as it seems to me, might be
better spent in a pious contemplative Life, and a due provision for Eternity: I
do not know a better temporal Employment than Martha had, in testifying her
Love and Duty to our Savior, by making provision for hm, yet our Lord tells
her, That though she was troubled about many things, there was only one thing
necessary, and Mary had chosen the better part.

By this the Reader will see that he continued in his Station upon no other
Consideration, but that being set in it by the Providence of God, he judged he
could not abandon that Post which was assigned him, without perferring his own
private Inclination to the Choice God had made for him; but now that same
Providence having by this great Distemper disengaged him from the Obligation of
holding a Place, which he was no longer able to discharge, he resolved to
resign it.

At last having wearied himself, and all his Friends, with his importunate
Desires, and growing sensibly weaker in Body, he did upon the 21st day of
February, 28 Car. 2. Anno Dom. 167.56. go before a Master of the Chancery, with
a little Parchment-Deed, drawn by Himself, and Written all with his own Hand,
and there sealed and delivered it, and acknowledged it to be Enrolled, and
afterward he brought the Original Deed to the Lord Chancellor, and did
formally surrender his Office. As soon as he was discharged from his great
Place, he returned home with as much Cheerfulness as his want of Health could
admit of, being now eased of a Burden he had been of late groaning under, and
so made more capable of Enjoying that which he had much wished for, according
to his Elegant Translation of, or rather Paraphrase upon, those excellent Lines
in Seneca's Thyestes. Act. 2.

Let him that will ascend, the tottering Sect
Of courtly Grandeur, and become as great
As are his mounting Wishes: As for me,
Let sweet repose and rest my Portion be;
Give me some mean obscure Recess, a Sphere
Out of the Road of Business, or the fear
Of falling lower; where I sweetly may
My self and dear retirement still enjoy:
Let not my Life or Name be known unto
The Grandees of the Time, tossed too and fro
By Censures or Applause; but let my Age
Slide gently by, not ^erthwart the Stage
Of public Action, unheard, unseen,
And unconcerned, as if I near had been.
And thus, while I shall pass my silent days
In shady privacy, free from the Noise
And bustles of the mad World, than shall I
A good old Innocent Plebeian Dye.
Death is a mere Surprise, a very Snare
To him, that makes it his Life's greatest Care
To be a public Pageant, known to all,
But unacquainted with himself, does fall.
He could not lie down in Bed above a Year before his Death, by reason of the
Asthma, but sat, rather than lay in it. He was attended on in his Sickness, by
a Pious and Worthy Divine, Mr. Evan Griffith, Minister of the Parish; and it
was observed, that in all the Extremities of his Pain, when ever he prayed by
him, he forbore all Complaints, or Groans, but with his Hands and Eyes lifted
up, was fixed in his Devotions: Not long before his Death, the Minister told
him, There was to be a Sacrament next Sunday at Church, but he believed he
could not come and partake with the rest; therefore he would give it to him in
his own House: But he answered* No; his Heavenly Father had prepared a Feast
for him, and he would go to his Father's House to partake of it: So he made
himself be carried thither in his Chair, where he received the Sacrament on his
Knees, with great Devotion, which it may be supposed was the greater, because
he apprehended it was to be his Last, and so took it as his Viaticum and
Provision for his Journey. He had some secret unaccountable Presages of his
Death; for he said, that if he did not die on such a Day, (which fell to be the
25th of November,) he believed he should live a Month longer, and he died that
very day Month. He continued to enjoy the free use of his Reason and Sense to
the last Moment, which he had often and earnestly prayed for during his
Sickness: And when his Voice was so sunk that he could not ^e heard, they
perceived by the almost constant lifting up of his Eyes and Hands, that he was
still Aspiring toward that Blessed State, of which he was now speedily to be
possessed. He had for many Years a particular Devotion for Christmas Day, and
after he had received the Sacrament, and been in the performance of the public
Worship of that Day, he commonly wrote a Copy of Verses on the Honor of his
Savior, as a fit Expression of the Joy he felt in his Soul, at the return of
that Glorious Anniversary. There are 17 of those Copies printed, which he writ
on 17 several Christmas-Days, by which the World* has a Taste of his Poetical
Genius, in which, if he had thought it worth his time to have Excelled, he
might have been Eminent as well as in other things; but he writ them rather to
entertain himself, than to merit the Laurel. I shall here add one which has not
been yet printed, and it is not unlikely it was the last he writ; it is a
Paraphrase on Simeon*s Song; I take it from his blotted Copy not at all
finished, so the Reader is to make Allowance for any Imperfection he may find
in it.

Blessed Creator, who before the Birth
Of Time, or e're the Pillars of the Earth
Were fixed or formed, did lay that great Design
Of Man's Redemption, and did define
In thine Eternal Councels all the Scene
Of that stupendous Business, and when
It should appear, and though the very Day
Of its Epiphany, concealed lay
Within thy Mind, yet thou were pleased to show
Some glimpses of it, unto Men below,
In Visions, Types, and Prophesies, as we
Things at a distance in Perspective see:
But thou were pleased to let thy Servant know,
That that blessed Hour, that seemed to move so slow
Through former Ages, should at last attain
Its time, e're my few Sands, that yet remain
Are spent; and that these Aged Eyes
Should see the Day, when Jacob's Star should rise.
And now thou have fulfilled it, blessed Lord
Dismiss me now, according to thy Word;
And let my Aged Body now return
To Rest, and Dust, and drop into an Urn;
For I have lived enough, mine Eyes have seen
Thy much desired Salvation, that has been
So long, so dearly wished, the Joy; the Hope
Of all the Ancient Patriarchs, the Scope
Of all the Prophesies, and Mysteries,
Of all the Types unvailed, the Histories
Of Jewish Church unridl'd, and the bright
And Orient Sun arisen to give Light
To Gentiles, and the Joy of Israel,
The Worlds Redeemer, blessed Emanuel.
Let this Sight close mine Eyes, it is loss to see,
After this Vision, any Sight but Thee.
Thus he used to Sing on the former Christmas-Days, but now he was to be
admitted to bear his part in the new Songs above; so that Day which he had
spent in so much Spiritual Joy, proved to be indeed the Day of his Jubilee and
Deliverance; for, between two and three in the Afternoon, he breathed out his
Righteous and Pious Soul. His End was Peace, he had no Struglings, nor seemed
to be in any Pangs in his last Moments. He was Buried on the 4th of January,
Mr. Griffith Preaching the Funeral Sermon, his Text was the 57th of Isa. verse
1. The Righteous perishes, and no Man lays it to Heart; and Merciful Men are
taken away, none considering that the Right eous is taken away from the Evil to
come. Which how fitly it was applicable upon this occasion, all that consider
the course of his Life, will easily conclude.

It has appeared in the Account of his various Learning, how great his
Capacities were, and how much they were improved by constant Study: He rose
always early in the Morning, he loved to walk much abroad, not only for his
Health, but he thought it opened his Mind, and enlarged his Thoughts to have
the Creation of God before his Eyes. When he set himself to any Study, he used
to cast his Design in a Scheme, which he did with a great exactness of Method;
he took nothing on Trust, but pursued his Enquiries as far as they could go;
and as he was humble enough to confess his Ignorance, and submit to Mysteries
which he could not comprehend, so he was not easily imposed on, by any shows of
Reason, or the Bugbears of vulgar Opinions: He brought all his Knowledge as
much to Scientifical Principles, as he possibly could, which made him neglect
the Study of Tongues, for the bent of his Mind lay another way. Discoursing
once of this to some, they said, They looked on the Common Law, as a Study that
could not be brought into a Scheme, nor formed into a Rational Science, by
reason of the Indigestedness of it, and the Multipliciry of the Cases in it,
which rendered it very hard to be understood, or reduced into a Method; But he
said, He was not of their Mind: and so quickly after, he drew with his own
Hand, a Scheme of the whole Order, and Parts of it, in a large Sheet of Paper,
to the great Satisfaction of those to whom he sent it. Upon this Hint, some
pressed him to Compile a Body of the English Law; It could hardly ever be done
by a Man who knew it better, and would with more Judgment and Industry have put
it into Method: But he said, As it was a Great and Noble Design, which would be
of vast Advantage to the Nation; so it was too much for a private Man to
undertake: It was not to be Entered upon, but by the Command of a Prince, and
with the Communicated Endeavors of some of the most Eminent of the Profession.
He had great vivacity in his Fancy, as may appear by his Inclination to Poetry,
and the lively Illustrations, and many tender Strains in his Contemplations;
but he looked on Eloquence and Wit, as things to be used very chastely, in
serious Matters, which should come under a severer Inquiry: Therefore he was
both, when at the Bar, and on the Bench, a great Enemy to all Eloquence or
Rhetoric in Pleading: He said, If the Judge or Jury had a right Understanding,
it signified nothing, but a waste of Time, and loss of Words; and if they were
weak, and easily wrought on, it was a more decent way of corrupting them, by
bribing their Fancies, and biassing their Affections; and wondered much at that
affectation of the French Lawyers, in imitating the Roman Orators in their
Pleadings. For the Oratory of the Romans was occasioned by their popular
Government, and the Factions of the City, so that those who intended to excel
in the Pleading of Causes, were trained up in the Schools of the Rhetors, till
they became ready and expert in that luscious way of Discourse. It is true, the
Composures of such a Man as Tully was, who mixed an extraordinary Quickness, an
exact Judgment, and a just Decorum with his skill in Rhetoric, do still
entertain the Readers of them with great Pleasure: But at the same time, it
must be acknowledged, that there is not that chastity of Style, that closeness
of Reasoning, nor that justness of Figures in his Orations, that is in his
other Writings; so that a great deal was said by him, rather because he knew it
would be acceptable to hsi Auditors, than that it was approved of by himself;
and all who read them, will acknowledge, they are better pleased with them, as
Essays of Wit and Style, than as Pleadings, by which such a Judge as ours was,
would not be much wrought on. And if there are such Grounds to censure the
performances of the greatest Master in Eloquence, we may easily infer what
nauseous Discourses the other Orators made, since in Oratory as well as in
Poetry, none can do Indifferently. So our Judge wondered to find the French,
that live under a Monarchy, so fond of imitating that which, was an ill Effect
of the Popular Government of Rome: He therefore pleaded himself always in few
Words, and home to the Point: And when he was a Judge, he held those that
Pleaded before him, to be the main Hinge of the Business, and cut them short
when they made Excursions about Circumstances of no Moment, by which he saved
much time, and made the chief Difficulties be well Stated and Cleared.

He had a Soul enlarged and raised above that mean Appetite of loving Money,
which is generally the Root of all Evil. He did not take the Profits that he
might have had by his Practice; for in common Cases, when those who came to ask
this Council gave him a Piece, he used to give back the half, and so made Ten
Shillings his Fee, in ordinary Matters that did not require much Time or Study:
If he saw a Cause was Unjust, he for a great while would not meddle further in
it, but to give his Advice that it was so: If the Parties after that, would go
on, they were to seek another Councellor, for he would assist none in Acts of
Injustice: If he found the Cause doubtful, or weak in point of Law, he always
advised his Clients to agree their Business: Yet afterward he abated much of
the Scrupulosity he had about Causes that appeared at first view Injust, upon
this occasion: There were two Causes brought to him, which by the ignorance of
the Party or their Attorney, were so ill represented to him, that they seemed
to be very bad: but he enquiring more narrowly into them, found they were
really very good and just; so after this he slackned much of his former
Strictness, of refusing to meddle in Causes upon the ill Circumstances that
appeared in them at first. In his pleading he abhorred those too common Faults
of misreciting Evidences, quoting Presidents, or Books falsty, or asserting
things Confidently; by which ignorant Juries, or weak Judges, are too often
wrought on. He pleaded with the same Sincerity that he used in the other parts
of his Life, and used to say, it was as great a Dishonor as a Man was capable
of, that for a little Money he was to be hired to sav or do otherwise than as
he thought: All this he ascribed to the unmeasurable Desire of heaping up
Wealth, which corrupted the Souls of some that seemed to be otherwise born and
made for great Things. When he was a Practitioner, Differences were often
referred to him, which he settled, but would accept of no Reward for his Pains,
though offered by both Parties together, after the Agreement was made; for he
said in those Cases he was made a Judge, and a Judge ought to take no Money. If
they told him, he lost much of his Time in considering their Business, and so
ought to be acknowledged for it; his answer was (as one that heard it, told me)
Can I spend my Time better, than to make People friends, must I have no time
allowed me to do Good in. He laid aside the Tenth Fenny of all he got for the
Poor, and took great care to be well informed of proper Objects for his
Charities: And after he was a Judge, many of the Perquisites of his Place, as
his Dividend of the Rule and Box-moneys, was sent by him to the Jayls to
discharge poor Prisoners, who never knew from whose hands their Relief came. It
is also a Custom for the Marshal of the King's Bench, to present the Judges of
that Court with a piece of Plate for a New-years-gift, that for the Chief
Justice being larger than the rest: This he intended to have refused, but the
other Judges told him it belonged to his Office, and the refusing it would be a
prejudice to his Successors; so he was persuaded to take it, but he sent word
to the Marshal, That instead of Plate, he would bring him the value of it in
Money: And when he received it, he immediately sent it to the Prisons, for the
Relief and discharge of the Poor there. He usually invited his poor Neighbors
to Dine with him, and made them sit at a Table with himself: And if any of them
were Sick, so that they could not come, he would send Meat warm to them from
his Table: And he did not only relieve the Poor in his own Parish, but sent
Supplies to the Neighboring Parishes, as there was occasion for it: And he
treated them all with the tenderness and familiarity that became one, who
considered they were of the same Nature with himself, and were reduced to no
other Necessities but such as he himself might be brought to: But for common
Beggars, if any of these came to him, as he was in his Walks, when he lived in
the Country, he would ask such as were capable of Working, Why they went about
so idly? If they answered, It was because they could not find Work; he often
sent them to some Field, to gather all the Stones in it, and lay them on a
Heap, and then would pay them liberally for their Pains: This being done, he
used to send his Carts, and caused them to be carried to such places of the
Highway as needed mending. But when he was in Town, he dealt his Charities very
liberally, even among the Street-Beggars, and when some told him, That he
thereby encouraged Idleness, and that most of these were notorious Cheats: He
used to answer, That he believed most of them were such, but among them there
were some that were great Objects of Charity, and pressed with grievous
Necessities; and that he had rather give his Alms to twenty who might be
perhaps Rogues, than that one of the other sort should perish for want of that
small Relief which he gave them.

The Judge was of a most tender and compassionate Nature; this did eminently
appear in his Trying and giving Sentence upon Criminals, in which he was
strictly careful, that not a Circumstance should be neglected, which might any
way clear the Fact: He behaved himself with that regard to the Prisoners, which
became both the gravity of a Judge, and the pity that was due to Men, whose
Lives lay at Stake, so that nothing of Jearing or unreasonable Severity ever
fell from him. He also examined the Witnesses in the softest manner, taking
care that they should be put under no Confusion, which might disorder their
Memory: and he Summed all the Evidence so equally when he charged the Jury,
that the Criminals never complained of him. When it came to him to give
Sentence, he did it with that Composedness and Decency, and his Speeches to the
Prisoners, directing them to prepare for Death, were so Weighty, and so free of
all Affectation, and so Serious and Devout, that many loved to go to the Trials
when he sat Judge, to be edified by his Speches, and behavior in them, and
used to say, they heard very few such Sermons.

But though the pronouncing the Sentence of Death, was the piece of his
Employment, that went most against the Grain with him; yet in that, he could
never be molified to any tenderness which hindered Justice. When he was pressed
to recommend some (whom he had Condemned) to his Majesty's Mercy and Pardon; he
answered, He could not think they deserved a Pardon, whom he himself had
Adjudged to Dye. So that all he would do in that kind, was to give the King a
true Account of the Circumstances of the Fact, after which his Majesty was to
Consider whether he would interpose his Mercy, or let Justice take place. His
Mercifulness extended even to his Beasts, for when the Horses that he had kept
long, grew Old, he would not suffer them to be Sold, or much Wrought, but
ordered his Men to turn them loose on his Grounds, and put them only to easy
Work, such as going to Market, and the like; he used old Dogs also with the
same care: His Shepherd having one that was become blind with Age, he intended
to have killed or lost him, but the Judge coming to hear of it, made one of his
Servants bring him home and fed him till he Dyed. And he was scarce ever seen
more Angry than with one of his Servants for neglecting a Bird, that he kept,
so that it Dyed for want of Food.

He had a generous and noble Idea of GOD in his Mind, and this he found did
above all other Considerations preserve his quiet: And indeed that was so well
Estalished in him, that no Accidents, how sudden soever, were observed to
discompose him; of which an Eminent Man of that Profession, gave me this
instance: In the year 1666. an opinion did run through the Nation, That the End
of the World would come that Year. This, whether set on by Astrologers, or
advanced by those who thought it might have some relation to the number of the
Beast in the Revelation, or prompted by Men of ill Designs, to disturb the
public Peace, had spread mightily among the People; and Judge Hale going that
Year the Western-Circuit, it happened that as he was on the Bench at the
Assizes, a most terrible Storm fell out unexpectedly, accompanied with such
flashes of Lightning, and claps of Thunder, that the like will hardly fall out
in an Age; upon which a whisper or a rumor run through the Crowd, That now was
the World to end, and the Day of Judgment to begin; and at this there followed
a general Consternation in the whole Assembly, and all Men forgot the Business
they were met about, and betook themselves to their Prayers: This added to the
horror raised by the Storm looked very dismally; insomuch that my Author, a Man
of no ordinary Resolution, and firmness of Mind, confessed, It made a great
Impression on himself. But he told me, That he did observe the Judge was not a
whit affected, and was going on with the Business of the Court; From which he
made this conclusion, That his Thoughts were so well fixed, that he believed if
the World had been really to end, it would have given him no considerable
disturbance.

But I shall now conclude all that I shall say concerning him, with what one of
the greatest Men of the Profession of the Law, sent me an abstract of the
Character he had made of him, upon long observation, and much converse with
him: It was sent me, that from thence with other Materials, I might make such a
Representation of him to the World, as he indeed deserved, but I resolved not
to shred it out in parcels, but set it down entirely as it was sent me, hoping
that as the Reader will be much delighted with it, so the Noble Person that
sent it, will not be offended with me for keeping it entire, and setting it in
the best light I could; It begins abruptly, being designed to supply the
defects of others, from whom I had dealier and more copious Informations.

He would never be brought to discourse of public Matters in private
Conversation, but in Questions of Law, when any young Lawyer put a Case to him
he was very communicative, especially while he was at the Bar: But when he came
to the Bench, he grew more reserved, and would never suffer his Opinion in any
case to be known, till he was obliged to declare it Judically; And he concealed
his Opinion in great Cases so carefully, that the rest of the Judges in the
same Court could never perceive it: His reason was, because every Judge ought
to give Senten^e according to his own Persuasion and Conscience, and not to be
swayed by any respect or defense to another Man's Opinion: And by this means it
has happened some times, that when all the Barons of the Exchequer had
delivered their Opinions, and agreed in their Reasons and Arguments; yet he
coming to speak last, and differing in Judgment from them, has expressed himself
with so much Weight and Solidity, that the Barons have immediately retracted
their Votes and concurred with him. He has sat as a Judge in all the Courts of
Law, and in two of them as Chief, but still where ever he sat, all Business of
Consequence followed him, and no Man was content to sit down by the Judgment of
any other Court, till the Case were brought before him, to see whether he were
of the same mind: And his Opinion being once known, Men did readily acquiesce
in it; and it was very rarely seen, that any Man attempted to bring it about
again, and he that did so, did it upon great Disadvantages, and was always
looked upon as a very contentious Person: So that what Cicero says of Brutus,
did very often happen to him, Etiam quos contra Statuit Aequos placatosque
Dimisit. Nor did Men reverence his Judgment and Opinion in Courts of Law only:
But his Authority was as great in Courts of Equity, and the same respect and
submission was paid to him there too: And this appeared not only in his own
Court of Equity in the Exchequer Chamber, but in the Chancery too, for thither
he was often called to advise and assist the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper
for the time being; and if the Cause were of difficult Examination, or
intricated and entangled with variety of Settlements, no man ever showed a more
clear and discerning Judgment: If it were of great Value, and great Persons
interested in it, no Man ever showed greater Courage and Integrity in laying
aside all respect of Persons: When he came to deliver his Opinion, he always
put his Discourse into such a Method, that one part of it gave light to the
other, and where the proceedings of Chancery might prove Inconvenient to the
Subject, he never spared to observe and reprove them: And from his Observations
and Discourses, the Chancery has taken occasion to Establish many of these
Rules by which it Governs it self at this Day. He did look upon Equity as a
part of the Common Law, and one of the Grounds of it; and therefore as near as
he could, he did always reduce it to certain Rules and Principles, that men
might Study it as a Science, and not think the Administration of it had any
thing Arbitrary in it. Thus eminent was this Man in every Station, and into
what Court soever he was called, he quickly made it appear, that he deserved
the chief Seat there. As great a Lawyer as he was, he would never suffer the
strictness of Law to prevail against Conscience, as great a Chancellor as he
was, he would make use of all the Nicities and Subtilties in Law, when it
tended to support Right and Equity. But nothing was more Admirable in him, than
his Patience: He did not affect the Reputation of Quickness and Dispatch, by a
hasty and Captious hearing of the Council: He would bear with the meanest, and
gave every man his sull Scope, thinking it much better to loose Time than
Patience: In summing up of an Evidence to a Jury, he would always require the
Bar to interrupt him if he did mistake, and to put him in mind of it, if he did
forget the least Circumstance; some Judges have been disturbed at this as a
Rudeness, which he always looked upon as a Service and Respect due to him.

His whole Life was nothing else but a continual course of Labor and Industry,
and when he could borrow any time from the Public Service, it was wholly
employed either in Philosophical or Divine Meditations, and even that was a
Public Service too as it has proved: For they have occasioned his Writing of
such Treatises, as are become the Choicest entertainment of wise and good Men,
and the World has reason to Wish that more of them were^ printed: He that
considers the active part of his Life, and with what unwearied Diligence and
Application of Mind, he dispatched all Men's Business which came under his Care,
will wonder how he could find any time for Contemplation: He that considers
again the various Studies he past through, and the many Collections and
Observations he has made, may as justly wonder how he could find any time for
Action: But no man can wonder at the exemplary Piety and Innocence of such a
Life so spent as this was, wherein as he was careful to avoid every idle word,
so it is manifest he never spent an idle day. They who come far short of this
Great Man, will be apt enough to think that this is a Panegyric, which indeed
is a History, and but a little part of that History which was with great Truth
to be related of him: Men who despair of attaining such perfection, are not
willing to believe that any Man else did ever arrive at such a height. He was
the greatest Lawyer of the Age, and might have had what Practicec he pleased,
but though he did most Conscientiously affect the labors of his Profession,
yet at the same time, he despised the Gain of it, and of those profits which he
would allow himself to receive, he always set apart a tenth Penny for the Poor,
which he ever dispensed with that secrecy, that they who were relieved seldom
or never knew their Banefactor: He took more pains to avoid the Honors and
Preferments of the Gown, than others do to compass them. His Modesty was beyond
all Example, for where some Men who never attained to half his Knowledge, have
been pufft up with a high conceit of themselves, and have affected all
occasions of raising their own Esteem by depreciating other Men: He on the
contrary was the most obliging Man that ever Practiced: If a young Gentleman
happened to be retained to argue a point in Law, where he was on the contrary
side, he would very often mend the Objections when he came to repeat them, and
always Commend the Gentleman if there were room for it, and one good word of
his was of more advantage to a young Man, than all the favor of the Court
could be.

Having thus far pursued his History and Character, in the public and
Exemplary parts of his Life, without interrupting the thread of the Relation,
with what was private and Domestic, I shall conclude with a short account of
these.

He was twice Married, his first Wife was Anne Daughter of Sir Henry Moore, of
Faly in Berkshire, Grandchild to Sir Francis Moore, Sergeant at Law; by her he
had Ten Children, the four first Died young, the other six lived to be all
Married; And he out lived them oll, except his eldest Daughter, and his
youngest Son, who are yet alive.

The Conclusion.
THus lived and died Sir Matthew Hale, the renounced Lord Chief Justice of
England: He had one of the blessings of Virtue in the highest measure of any of
the Age, that does not always follow it, which was, that he was universally,
much valued and admired by Men of all sides and persuasions. For as none could
hate him but for his Justice and Virtues, so the great estimation he was
generally in, made, that few durst undertake to defend so ungrateful a Paradox,
as any thing said to Lessen him would have appeared to be. His Name is scarce
ever mentioned since his Death, without particular accents of singular respect.
His oppinion in points of Law generally passes as an uncontrollable authority,
and is often pleaded in all the Courts of Justice: And all that knew him well,
do still speak of him as one of the perfectest Patterns of Religion and Virtue
they ever saw.

The Commendations given him by all sorts of People are such, that I can hardly
come under the Censures of this Age, for any thing I have said concerning him;
yet if this Book lives to aftertimes, it will be looked on perhaps as a
Picture, drawn more according to Fancy and Invention than after the Life; if it
were not those who knew him well, establishing it Credits in the present Age,
will make it pass down to the next with a clearer Authority.

As he was honored while he lived, so he was much lamented when he died: And
this will still be acknowledged as as a just Inscription of his Memory, though
his Modesty forbid any such to be put on his Tombstone.

That he was one of the Greatest Patterns this Age has Afforded, whether in his
Private Deportment as a Christian, or in his Public Employments, either at the
Bar or on the Bench.
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THe Best and most Experienced Remedy for Sore or Weak Eyes, that ever yet was
made known to the World, being of that wonderful Efficacy, that it infallibly
dispels any Humor or Salt Rheum distilling from the Head; and takes all
Soreness, or Redness, or Swellings: It also strengthens weak Eyes (sometimes
occasioned by the Smallpox) and will disperse any Film or Cataract growing
over the Eye, whereby the Sight oftentimes becomes dim: In a few times using
this Excellent Remedy, to those that will be persuaded to use it often, it will
preserve the Sight to an incredible Age, and read the smallest of Prints. It
being a Secret acquainted by a Gentleman in his long Study, whereby he has
wrought wonderful Cures among his Relations and Aquaintance; and now made
Public for the Benefit of all People that will make trial of it.

For those that are really Poor they shall have it for nothing; to Others for 6
d. the Bottle. Only to he sold at the Bible in Fetter-Lane, near Fleet Street.


