JACOBS SEED: Or The Generation of Seekers. And DAVID'S DELIGHT: Or The
excellent on earth.

By The late reverend preacher of the Gospel JEREMIAH BOROUGH.

Psalm. 27.8. When thou said, Seek ye my face: my heart said unto thee, Thy
face, Lord, will I seek. Prove. 12.26. The righteous is more excellent then his
neighbor. Printed by Roger Daniel Printer to the Universitie of Cambridge.
1643.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
THou art presented here with a small Treatise of this reverend author,
deceased; who by his worthy works (as Abel by his faith) being dead yet
speaks, Heb. 11.4. The work is but of small bulk, yet has many excellent
truths contained in it, concerning two of as necessary duties as fall within
the compass of a Christians course. The seeking of Gods face, a thing so
needful in these troublesome days, and yet so generally neglected. As also
concerning the excellency in, and the high esteem that true saints have of
their fellow-saints, which is so rare to find in these disjoynted and divided
times. The work had come abroad ere this, had not the private ends of some been
an obstacle in the way. I am confident that of all the works of this worthy
author that have been published since his death, there is none can so justly
challenge him for the father as this, both for matter, and form, as any one
that used to hear him may perceive. The former part of this work was delivered
by him in two several Sermons (though now thought convenient to be joined as
one) The former before the Right Honorable the Earl of Warwick, in his own
house. The latter at Cree-church in London, upon November. 5. the annual
commemoration of our deliverance from the Gunpowder-plot, it happening also to
be a day of public humiliation. The last was preached in another church in
London. Accept the work then with the same candor as it is intended there, and
that thou may be furthered in holy walking by it is the desire of

Thy Christian friend.

The contents of the ensuing Treatise.
The first part on ISAIAH 65.19.
THe scope of the words page 1 Why the people of God are called the seed of
Jacob page 2 The words opened page 5 Doctrine. When God requires a people to
seek him, he will make it good to them, that it shall not be in vain page 7 I.
Evidences that it is not in vain to seek God. 1. The great things recorded of
prayer page 10 2. What the Saints have gotten by prayer page 11 3. No faithful
seeker of God will leave off ibid. 4. Wicked men seek him not in vain page 12
5. Godly men have given up themselves to it page 14 6. Godly men prize the
prayers of others page 15 7. God is found of them that sought him not ibid. 8.
God forbids prayer when he will show no mercy page 16 9. Else a praying heart
were not always a mercy ibid.
II What great things prayer does. 1. It is the right exercise of our faculties
and graces page 17 2. It is the performance of our duty is creatures page 17 3.
It is a tendering of homage and worship to God page 18 4. It shows we are on
Gods side ibid. 5. God accepts every faithful prayer ibid. 6. God grants every
faithful petition page 21
III. Wherein the efficacy of prayer lies. 1. God takes pleasure in doing good
page 25 2. God has made a covenant with his page 26 3. Prayer is Gods own work
page 32 4. Right prayer seeks God for God page 33 5. It is part of Christ's
purchase page 34 6. Christ tenders them up to his Father page 35 7. God is a
God hearing prayer page 36 8. It is a pouring out the spirit to God ibid. 9.
The seed of Jacob are dear to God page 37 10. It is for Gods honor to hear
his people page 38
IV. Objections against prayer answered. Object. 1. We have prayed, and find
not the issue page 39 Answ. 1. Remember the times of old ibid. 2. God makes
good his promise on believing page 43 3. God is great, and we must wait page 44
4. We must seek God in prayer page 46 5. God answers not vain prayers page 47

What makes prayers vain page 50 Object. 2. It is in vain to pray page 54 Ans.
God hears the seed of Jacob ibid. 1. Jacob was mighty in prayer page 56 2. He
feared God ibid. 3. His heart was loose from the creature page 57 4. He was of
a tender spirit page 58 5. He repaired to the covenant in his streights page 59
6. He was of an humble spirit page 60 7. He looked to his former condition
ibid. 8. He was content with God alone page 61 9. Jacobs posterity were all of
the Church page 63 10. Those of Jacobs seed have his inheritance page 68 11.
Those of Jacobs seed are faithful in their place page 70 12. They are taught
of God page 71 13. They are careful of their families ibid. 14. They are
careful of the Churches good when they be gone page 72
Object. 3. I am a poor wretched creature page 73 Ans. God hears the prayer of
the destitute ibid. Object. 4. The things we need are great page 74 Ans. Not to
great for God to give ibid. Object. 5. But I pray in the time of affliction
page 75 Ans. Yet God will hear prayer ibid. Object. 6. But my afflictions are
for sin page 76 Ans. Yet God will hear prayer ibid. Object. 7. But God has
determined what he will do page 77 Ans. Yet God must be sought by prayer ibid.
It is not in vain to pray; 1. Because we have had many mercies already page 79
2. God denies in granting, and grants in denying page 80 3. God delights in a
praying as a praising voice page 81 4. God stays to bring a great deal
together page 82 5. Our vessels are not sometimes capable page 83

Application. 1. There are great things that God will do for the Church in
these latter days page 84 2. The honor of those that are the seed of Jacob
ib. 3. It is a great privilege to have a praying friend page 86 4. To set the
crown on prayers head in the mercies we have from God page 88 5. Reproof to
those that begin to seek God, and continue not page 92 What God has done of
late, and the use of it page 93 1. To be humbled page 95 1. For our unbelief
ibid. 2. For our murmuring ibid. 3. For being discouraged in Gods ways page 96
2. To love prayer page 97 3. To be resolute in Gods cause page 99 4. To give
God real praise page 100 5. Not to let God call on us in vain. page 102
The second part on PSALM. 16.3.
The scope and dependence of the words page 105 Doctrine 1. The saints of God
are the excellent in earth page 108 The doctrine opened page 109 They are
excellent, 1. Because they have holiness, the image of God page 111 Grace
expressed in Scripture by four things. The image of God page 114 The life of
God page 114 The glory of God page 114 The divine nature page 114

2. In regard of separating them for God page 118 3. In regard of their near
relation to God page 121 4. In regard of their great privileges page 122 5. In
regard of the actions that come from them page 126 6. In regard of their
usefulness in the world page 129
Use. 1. To show the vast difference between the godly and the wicked page 131
There will be a time when God will appear for his saints page 132 Doctrine 2. A
gracious heart takes great delight in the saints on earth. page 142 1. Jointly
page 143 Because their communion is most comfortable page 144 1. In regard of
the beauty of grace ibid. 2. In regard of the fragrancy of grace page 145 3. In
regard of their nearness one to another page 146

2. When the saints are jointly together God has the solemnest worship page
149 3. God delights in the saints jointly page 152 God present with his people
1. Because he makes himself known to them page 158 2. He communicates himself
among them ibid. 1. He communicates more choice mercies to them page 159. 2. He
communicates his mercies more fully page 160 3. More powerfully page 161 4.
More universally ibid.
4. There is cause to delight in them jointly in regard of their privileges
page 162 5. They are those we shall live with for ever page 165 Use. To have a
high esteem of the saints page 164 What delight there will be in the saints in
heaven page 173
FINIS.
Febr. 27. 1646.
I have perused these excellent Sermons on Isa. 45.19. and Psalm. 16.3. and
judging them to be very pious and profitable, I approve them well worthy to be
printed and published.

John Downame.

JACOBS SEED, OR, The Generation of Seekers
Isaiah lxv. 19. I said not unto the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me, in vain.
AS Christ formerly having the book of this Prophecy given him when he came
into the congregation, read a part of it, then shut the book, and began his
sermon unto the people; This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears, Luke
4.21. So may I say of this that we have in this prophecy read unto you.
Behold, this day has the Lord fulfilled this word of his in our ears, before
our eyes. And therefore is it that we are all here met this day before the
Lord, that we may witness unto this good word o^ h^s, that he has not said to
the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me, in vain.

In this Chapter the Lord promises to raise up a great deliverer for his
people, and tells them, that they shall find him o^herwise then those that
worshipped Idols, found their gods toward them. That which he says to his
people, he speaks it plainly and openly, I have not spoken in secret, in a dark
place of the earth. The heathen gods did speak darkly and ambiguously to their
worshippers, that they knew not what to make of their words; but I have not
done so to you, says God. They would have you worship them, but they cannot
help you when you have so done; it is not so with me, I said not to the seed of
Jacob, Seek ye me, in vain. To the seed of Jacob, that is, to the Church of
God, to the Saints.

You will say, Why are the people of God called the seed of Jacob, rather then
the seed of Abraham, or the seed of Isaac? Abraham is our father; he is the
father of the faithful; but here it is, the seed of Jacob, not, of Abraham,
nor Isaac. The reasons may be these two. First, because that all Jacobs
posterity were the Church of God; all Jacobs children the Patriarchs, were
every one of the Church; All that came from Abraham were not so, Ishmael was
not so; All that came from Isaac were not so, Esau was not; But all Jacobs
children were: therefore speaking of the people of God, of the Church that
should be to the end of the world, they are said here to be the seed of Jacob,
rather then the seed of Abraham, or of Isaac, Then secondly, the seed of Jacob,
because the Lord is here speaking of the blessing of his seed, namely in the
hearing of their prayers. Now because Jacob was the most eminent in prayer,
(though Abraham and Isaac no question were mighty with God in prayer yet,) the
Scripture does not put such an eminency either upon Abraham or Isaac for prayer
as upon Jacob. You have the most eminent expression for prayer that ever was
spoken of any man, never the like, Genesis 32.28. And he said, thy name shall be
called no more Jacob, but Israel: for as a Prince have thou power with God and
with men, and have prevailed. O how eminent was he in prayer. Therefore it is
rather said, the seed of Jacob, then of Abraham or Isaac.

But you will say, then they should rather have been called the seed of Israel:
for his name of Israel was given him upon his prevailing with God.

We must not be too inquisitive. These names are used promiscuously. But, this
is one reason that is given, and it seems to have probability: In Scripture
when God speaks of the Church in a low condition, he puts the name of Jacob on
them rather then Israel: Fear not, thou worm Jacob: and it follows, ye men of
Israel, Isa. 41.14. He puts them in mind of their low condition by this name
rather then Israel; Fear not thou worm Jacob: For before Jacobs name was
changed, ye know what a low condition, and what streights he was in. So here,
the Lord speaking of his Churches deliverance out of distress, he calls them the
seed of Jacob, that they might see how by their prayers they were brought from
their streights, as Jacob was brought from his streights by prayer. When he was
Jacob before he was Israel, he was in great streights: so shall the Church be
till they seek God.

I said not to the Seed of Jacob, seek ye me, in vain.

That is, first, (as some would carry it) I did require is of them, and my
requiring did prevail with them: I did not exhort them to it, or require it,
and my words fell to the ground and they did not seek me; but what I required
of them was effected in them. When God speaks to a people, and they do not what
he requires, his word may seem to be in vain, there being no efficacy in his
words to prevail. But says God, I did not say unto them seek ye me in vain.
that is, I called not on my people to seek me and they went their own way; but
what I spoke to them prevailed with them, and in them, and they did that which
I required. This is a blessed thing when that which God says is not in vain,
but we do that which the Lord requires of us. That is the first.

Secondly, I said not to them, Seek ye me, in vain: that is, I did not only
tell them that they should seek me, but I showed by what way and means they
ought to seek me in a right manner, that my speaking to them might not be in
vain. For if a Minister come in Gods name to put you upon any duty, and exhort
you to do such and such a thing, and barely tell you what you should do without
showing how you should do it, where you shall have strength, and in what manner
you should do it, he shall speak in vain. There are abundance of Sermons in
vain, when only good things are commended to people, and they are taught what
they should do, but not the way how, and the manner, and where they should have
strength to do it: then the word is in vain. But says God, I said not unto you
in vain, that is, I did not only bid you seek me, but I taught you the way
how, and in what manner you should seek me.

Thirdly and lastly, I suppose that the principal scope of the holy Ghost is
that which the words plainly present to our view; I required not the seed of
Jacob to seek me to no purpose, that nothing should come of it; but I required
that they should seek me, and they have found abundance of good by seeking of
me.

So then this point arises plainly out of the words, When God requires a
people to seek him, he will make it good to them that it shall not be in vain.

Before I open this point I will give you a Scripture or two, one in the old
Testament, and another in the new, Deuteronomy. 4.7. For what Nation is there so
great, who has God so nigh unto them as the Lord our God is in all things that
we call upon him for? Here is an experiment of the fruit of seeking God; and it
is spoken to show the honor of Gods people, the privilege of the seed of
Jacob, and the eminent condition they were in. God is nigh to them in all
things they call upon him for: therefore they are not required to seek God in
vain. So Matthew. 21.22. And all things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer,
believing, ye shall receive. A very strange expression: Here might seem to be a
tautologie. One would think that it had been large enough to have said,
Whatsoever ye shall ask, ye shall receive: but here is, all things, whatsoever.
We would not speak so in ordinary language. I will give you all things
whatsoever. Yet it may be this may be intended, and I believe it is; And all
things, here is the general promise, that all things that ye ask ye shall
receive: and whatsoever, may refer to particulars, every particular thing
that ye ask ye shall receive. You will say, Any one that understands reason or
Logic knows that particulars are included in the general. But there is this
illogicall reasoning of unbelief; that though we agree to the premises in
general, yet when we come to particulars, we think they will not be made good
to us. I suppose you find your unbelieving hearts so irrational, that though
they believe the general promise, yet when it comes to particulars, and you
cannot but say that such a particular is in the general, yet your hearts will
not come up to it. Therefore our Savior says not only, all things in
general, but also, whatsoever, in particular. So, Jam. 5.16. The effectual
fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much. There is but one word in the
original, (...), the working prayer; but it is translated by two, effectual,
fervent. Surely then prayer and seeking of God is the ordinance which he has
appointed for the turning about of the great affairs of the world. This is the
engine that does it inwardly: There are indeed a great many outward wheels
used, but the spring of all is within, prayer turns all about. God never made
use of any created power so much as of this. He never did such great things by
any created power as by the ordinance of prayer. The Word is appointed for the
converting of souls, but a great part of the blessing of the Word depends on
prayer.

In the opening of this point I will First give you some evidences of it;
Secondly, show you what great things prayer will do. Thirdly, wherein the
efficacy and power of it lies. Fourthly, the objections of troubled
unbelieving spirits against it. And then come to apply all. The evidences
hereof are first the many famous records in Scripture of the noble and glorious
exploits of prayer. If any of you should come to me to ask, as that King did of
the prophets servant, 2. Kings 8.4. What great things has thy master done? so
what great things has prayer done in the world? truly we might spend hours
and days in returning you an answer, a great part of holy Scripture being
spent in this very argument. And it is a very good exercise for you in the
night, when you cannot sleep, or at other times when you are troubled, to do as
that King did, Esther 6.1. call for the book of the Records of prayer. You that
read the Scriptures, mark what you read. The word of God will tell you how
prayer has stopped the Sun in the firmament, opened heaven, and shut it
again, raised from death to life, opened the prison doors, and what not?

Secondly, all Gods people are able to tell you great stories of what they have
gotten by prayer. This poor man cried, says David of himself, Psalm 34.6. and
the Lord heard him. Who is it that cannot tell histories of Gods gracious
dealing with him upon his seeking of him? To be sure, our Nation has many
things to say this way; and every particular godly soul has many things to
say: they would not lose their income of prayer for all the world.

Thirdly, surely it is not in vain to seek God: for there was never any
faithful seeker of him that ever would leave off, but would continue as long
as he lived seeking him: he would seek his face evermore; if it had been in
vain, he would have left off. When we see a Be stick on a Flower, and will not
be driven off, or if she be driven off, she will come again, we conclude
certainly it finds honey there. So all the Saints of God that have ever sought
God truly, they would never be beaten off this way. Let the world do what it
will, persecute them, set spies to watch them in their meetings of prayer, let
it punish and imprison them, let all the malice and rage of men be against
them, yet they cannot hinder them either from praying in their closets, or from
enjoying the benefit of the communion of Saints in prayer. Daniel had rather
lose his life then be kept from his prayers, though but for a day: but pray he
would, and that openly, yea three times a day, as he was wont; he would not
forbear one time. He did stick to prayer finding honey and sweetness in it. Oh
how unlike are we to Daniel, though the performance of this duty was exceeding
hazzardable to Daniel, yet he would not be deterred from it; but every light
trifle takes off our hearts.

Again, it is not in vain for the seed of Jacob to seek the Lord, for it is not
in vain for wicked men to seek him, though they are not able to seek God as
they ough^. The prayer of the wicked is abominable, Prove. 15.8. That is not to
be understood of the prayer of every man that is unregenerate, wickedness is
not so to be taken in that place. For we know that God has regarded the
prayers of men unregenerate. The prayers and fasting of Niniveh were regarded
of God: the prayer and fasting of Ahab was regarded of God. God has granted
the wicked some mercies, he has looked on them as his creatures. Though God
sees enough in their prayers to cast them off, yet God has manifested his
regard to them. Therefore if it be not in vain for the wicked to seek the Lord,
much less is it in vain for the seed of Jacob to seek him.

Yea, the Lord hears the cry of the very Ravens and the beasts, Psalm 147.9.
and Psalm 104.21, 27, 28. Therefore the people of Niniveh would have the
beasts eat nothing, that they might cry unto God, Jonah 3.7, 8. Surely if the
brute beasts and the fouls be heard when they cry, it is not in vain for the
Seed of Jacob to seek God.

Again, it is evident that it is not in vain, because the people of God that
have been wise and have conversed with God, and have known much of the mind of
God, have given up themselves and all their strength to this duty. Now it were
a weak part and an idle thing for any one to give up his strength and all his
might to that which were vanity, and whereby there is no great thing to be
obtained. It is said of Jehoshaphat 2. Chron. 20.3. that he feared, and set
himself to seek the Lord. It is translated composuit faciem suam, he set his
face, he gave himself up fully to seek the Lord. They know what they do that
give up themselves wholly to seek God.

Indeed carnal hearts condemn the people of God because they see them so
earnest in those things that they think to be vain: For it argues weakness in
any man to give up himself with all his strength to things that are vanity, and
have no strength in them. Therefore because carnal men look upon the way of
Religion, as a thing that has no end, they think it foolish for men to be so
earnest to give up their strength and their whole souls for it: But the Saints
of God know what they do when they give themselves up to seek the Lord, they
know it is not in vain.

Again, this is an evidence that there is much advantage by prayer, because men
that were wise and holy have so prized the prayers of the Saints, and made such
high account of them. Mark the expression of the Apostle, writing to the Saints
for their prayers. Romans 15.30. Now I beseech you, brethren, for the Lord Jesus
Christ's sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that you strive together in
prayer with me in your hearts to God for me. The Apostle Paul, so great a man,
and one that had a mighty spirit in prayer, writing to private Christians in
the Church of Rome, he beseeches them for the Lords sake, and for the love of
the Spirit, that they strive in prayer for him: He knew that there was much to
be had this way.

Yea further, God is found of them that sought him not, Isaiah 65.1. then
surely it is not in vain for the seed of Jacob to seek him.

yea yet further, God when he intends to show no mercy, gives a straight
charge to his people not to pray, or he shuts up their hearts that they are
not able to pray. This is an argument that prayer is prevalent, because when
God will not show mercy, he would not have such a precious thing lost and spent
in vain.

Lastly, it is not in vain, because if it should, then a praying heart were not
always a mercy from God: but certainly it is. Therefore though perhaps you
cannot find the thing granted that you pray for, yet to have a continual
praying heart, know that it is a great mercy from God. And those that are
spiritual prize more the continuance of a praying heart many times, then the
granting of the thing they pray for. All these put together are full evidences,
that it is not in vain to seek the Lord.

There be many other evidences which I pass by on purpose, that I may have as
much time as may be for application.

But now, wherein does it appear that it is not in vain to seek the Lord? what
does prayer do?

First, it is not in vain to seek God, if there were nothing else in prayer but
the right exercise of the faculties of our souls and of our graces; this alone
were worth our time. The graces of our souls must be exercised about somewhat:
Now prayer serves for the exercise of all graces.

Secondly, it is not in vain if it were nothing but the performance of our duty
as creatures to God. There are many people that are weary of prayer, because
they have not that by it that they expect: But know that there are two
arguments to prayer; the performance of duty, and the obtaining of mercy: If
there were but only the former, that alone should suffice to keep thee praying
as long as thou live.

Thirdly, it were not in vain if it were nothing but the tendering that homage
and worship that we ow to God. Prayer is not only a duty, but a great part of
the worship that God has in the world. While we are worshipping of God it is
worth the time.

Again, it is not in vain, if there were nothing but this, that we come and
show what side we are of, that we join and side with God against his
adversaries and for his people. But these are not the things here intended.

Further, it is not in vain, because there is no faithful prayer that ever was
made but God accepts of it in heaven. There was never one of the seed of Jacob,
that ever put up a faithful petition to God, but God took it in his hand and
read it. A King or any superior, when you come with a petition may refuse to
take it, but God never refuses to take any petition from a faithful soul.
Therefore says the Psalmist, Psalm. 6.9. The Lord has heard my supplication,
the Lord will receive my prayer. He will take it, and look on it, and read it;
and not only so, but he will also accept it, and take pleasure in it: A Prince
may take a petition, and look on it, and after frown and show anger in his
countenance; but God does not so with the prayers of his people: The prayer of
the upright is his delight, Prove. 15.8. he never reads a petition that his
people ^enders, but with a smiling countenance. If it be a faithful petition,
he accepts it of them and receives it graciously. It is an expression of Luther
speaking of the prayer of a contrite heart, The least sigh of a contrite heart
so fills heaven with noise, that there is no noise of any thing in heaven or
earth heard at that time, but only the noise of prayer. Certainly a faithful
prayer takes the heart of God very much, yea every faithful prayer is
recorded in heaven. You keep your letters upon the file, that you may readily
find them, when you have occasion to look on such a letter sent from such a
country; so God has his file in heaven where all faithful prayers are kept
upon record. As Princes have their paper offices, where transactions between
one State and another are kept, so the Lord has his prayer-office, where he
keeps all the prayers of his Saints that ever were put up to him. Revel. 8.3.
Another Angel came and stood at the Altar, having a golden censer, and there
was given him much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all
Saints. Where were those prayers of all the Saints that he must take a censer
and offer incense with? God had them recorded with him, and now they were to be
offered to him. And see what great things follow upon the offering of the
prayers of the Saints, verse. 4. The smoke of the incense which came with the
prayers of the Saints, ascended up before God out of the Angels hand. And the
Angel took the censer, etc. and there were voices, and thunderings, and
lightnings, and an earthquake. These followed upon the prayers of the Saints.
It signified the time wherein all should come in remembrance before the Lord*
as if an Angel were offering, yea, Christ the Angel of the Covenant, has a
time to take the prayers presented long ago, and to offer them to God with his
own incense. They are all recorded in heaven, therefore they are not in vain.
When a petition is taken and put upon record, the petitioner petitioneth not in
vain, his petitionis not thrown out. If a petition be presented to the
Parliament, and they take it, and tell you it shall be kept on record, and
charge the Clerk to keep it there, and say they will take due time to consider
of it, you will not say such a petition is in vain. God does so to all his
people; he takes their petitions and records them; they are all filed in
heaven.

Yet further, there is no faithful petition but God puts his fiat to the
bottom of it, at the instant that it is put up to him. There is a decree in
heaven issued out for mercy, at the very instant that the petition is put up,
God deals not with us in this kind, as men do who are counted very gracious,
if they please to tell us they will consider of our petition: no; but your
petition is presently gtanted. A petitioner when there is time taken to
consider of his petition, trembles and shakes for fear it should not be
granted: but the petitions of the seed of Jacob are granted presently. When
Daniel had been seeking God at the evening sacrifice, an Angel comes to him,
and tells him, that at the beginning of his prayer there was a decree to grant
it, and that he was sent to him at the beginning of his prayer, Dan. 9.23. and
Psa. 56.9. When I cry unto thee, then shall mine enemies turn back: this I
know, for God is for me. Did not David cry often, and yet his enemies did not
turn their backs when he cried? He cried often when his enemies prevailed: yet he
says, When I cried, then mine enemies turned back: and This I know, why? for
God is for me. The meaning must be this, that at that instant that he cried,
there was a decree in heaven; the thing was done. He looked on it as done, even
as certainly as if he had seen it with his eyes.

This is the reason that the Saints after they have prayed, though the thing be
not actually done, fall to praising and blessing of God. We have a notable
example in Jehoshaphat, of whom we read 2. Chron. 20.3. that being in a great
fear had set himself to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a fast throughout all
Judah. He did not seek God slightly, but set himself to seek the Lord. And what
his prayer was, ye may see from verse. 6. to 12. And Jehoshaphat said, O Lord
God of our fathers, art not thou God in heaven, and rulest over all Kingdoms?
Mark how he pleads with God for the Covenant he had made, verse. 8. Speaking
of the Sanctuary they had built for his names sake; If when evil comes upon
us, as the sword, judgment, or pestilence, or famine, we stand before this
house, and in thy presence, (for thy name is in this house) and cry unto thee
in our affliction, then thou will hear and help. He urges the promise made to
Solomon at the dedication of the Temple. For that prayer of Faith which Solomon
made, and God accepted, has the strength of a promise in it. O our God, says
he, will thou not judge them? for we have no might against this great company
that comes against us, neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon
thee. Though he professed that his enemies were so many, that he knew not what to
do, and that they had no might to resist them, yet after his prayer was done,
and before the battle began, when he had consulted with the people, he
appointed singers unto the Lord, and that should praise for the beauty of
holiness, as they went out before the Army, and to say, Praise the Lord, for
his mercy indureth for ever, verse. 21. Mark: he had not yet gotten the
victory, the battle was not fought, yet as soon as he had ended his prayer, he
praised the Lord, for his mercy indureth for ever. He made account that the
thing was done: It was decreed in heaven. Therefore surely the people of God do
not seek him in vain.

Nay, it is not only decreed, but ere long God will satisfy his people, and
fill their longing souls with goodness, Psalm. 107.9. A time shall come when
they shall say their prayers are heard, and that they have enough. Yea the Lord
gives more sometimes then his people mention in their prayer, they ask
temporal blessings, and he bestows spiritual; yea he gives them himself,
and that is all in all. Surely then the prayers of the Saints are not in vain.

But wherein lies the efficacy of prayer? What makes prayer so powerful and
present with God?

One thing is, because God delights in mercy, and in communicating himself to
the children of men. He takes more pleasure in doing good, then any can in
seeking it; yea, then any can in enjoying it from him. Our hearts cannot be so
strongly set to seek for any mercy from God, as he is to communicate mercy to
us. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the
transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retains not his anger for
ever, because he delights in mercy, Mic. 7.18.

Another thing that renders prayer so effectual, is Gods Covenant and promise
to his people. It was the speech of Archimedes, Give me a place te set my
Engine in, and I will shake the whole earth. Let prayer have a sure foundation
to set foot on, and it will do mighty things. Now the promises are the
foundation of prayer, whereof we have great abundance, Numb. 23. you shall find
abundance of promises to the seed of Jacob, under the name of Jacob, when
Balaam was brought to curse the people. But in Deuteronomy. 33.26. etc. there are
admirable promises to Jacob. There is none like unto the God of Jeshurun, who
rides upon the heaven in thy help, and on the sky in his excellency. The
eternal God is his refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms: and he
shall thrust out the enemy from before thee, and shall say, Destroy them.
Israel then shall dwell in safety alone, the fountain of Jacob shall be upon a
land of Corn and Wine, also his heavens shall drop down dew. Happy art thou O
Israel, who is like unto thee, O people saved by the Lord, the shield of thy
help, and who is that sword of thy excellency, and thine enemies shall be found
liars unto thee, and thou shall tread upon their high places. Here is the
promise to the seed of Jacob the fountain of Israel, so he is called, he shall
have all things that are good, and God will manifest himself, especially
against his enemies, Let any of the seed of Jacob go and plead this with God,
and it cannot be in vain, there must be a mighty efficacy in such a plea, when
there are such large promises. So in Isaiah 14.1. there are diverse promises to
the seed of Jacob. For the Lord will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet choose
Israel and set them in their own land, and the stranger shall be joined with
them, and they shall cleave to the house of Jacob, And the people shall take
them and bring them to their place: and the house of Israel shall possess them
in the Land of the Lord for servants and handmaids: and they shall take them
captives, whose captives they were, and they shall rule over their oppressors.
And it shall come to pass that in the day that the Lord shall give thee rest
from thy sorrow and from thy fear, and from the hard bondage wherein thou wast
made to serve, etc. I make no question but some of the seed of Jacob, have been
pleading this promise in prayer where the Lord has promised to have mercy on
Israel, and to give him rescue from his sorrows, and fears, and hard bondage.
It was hard bondage that we were made to serve in not long ago; here is a
promise that God will give us rest from it; and upon the pleading of this
promise God has made it good to the seed of Jacob.

And in Isa, 41.8. there are large promises in that Chapter to the seed of
Jacob. But thou Israel my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, the seed of
Abraham my friend, Thou whom I have taken from the ends of the earth. It is no
matter though they be a poor despicable people of themselves: it is but a few
of the poor people do thus, the Gentry and Nobility go another way. Verse. 10. I
have called thee from the chief men of the earth, I left them, and called thee,
and said unto thee, thou art my servant. I have chosen thee and not cast thee
away. Verse. 10. Fear thou not, for I am with thee: be not dismayed, for I am
thy God: I will strengthen thee, yea I will help thee, yea I will uphold thee
with the right hand of my righteousness. Here are five things five times, I, I
will strengthen thee, I will uphold thee, I, I, I, I, I, look up to those five
l's together, and there are several expressions of help, and strength, and
upholding. How with my hand; with my right hand; that is, with my right hand I
am engaged; I have given thee my hand to help thee; and that shall be the hand
of my righteousness. Some men give their hand to their friends when they make
promises; but the hand that they give it does not always prove a hand of
righteousness, but many times a hand of deceit: but when God gives his hand to
his people it is a hand of righteousness. I will uphold thee with the hand of
my righteousness. And what follows Verse. 11. Behold, all they that were
incensed against thee shall be ashamed, and confounded. O God make this good
this day; our enemies are incensed, they are mad, and rage, and swear, and
blaspheme, and stamp, and fret, and would have their will, and they would do
such things, All that are incensed against thee shall be confounded. Some of
the seed of Jacob have been with God, and have pleaded this promise, and that
is the efficacy of their prayer, that the enemy is confounded. They shall be as
nothing, and they that strive with thee shall perish. Thou think they are a
great army, and have great strength: they shall be as nothing. v. 12 Thou shall
seek them, and shall not find them. Where is the army now? it is so scattered
that you cannot tell, if you seek it you cannot find it, even them that contend
with thee, they that war against thee shall be as nothing, and as a thing of
nothing. Enquire where the Army is now, you shall not find them. For I the Lord
thy God will hold thy right hand saying unto thee, Fear not I will help thee,
v. 13. O, but we are weak and poor: Fear not thou worm Jacob, and ye men of
Israel, I will help thee, says the Lord, v. 14. and thy redeemer the holy one
of Israel. v. 15. Behold I will make thee a new sharp threshing instrument
having teeth, thou shall thresh the mountains and beat them small, and shall
make the hills as chaff, v. 16. Thou shall fan them, and the wind shall carry
them away, and the wherlwind shall scatter them, and this we should labor to
make good. Thou shall rejoice in the Lord, and glory in the holy one of Israel,
when I have done all this, here is the fruit, not to rejoice in our Armies, or
in outward strength, but to rejoice in the Lord and to glory in the holy one of
Israel. Here are promises for prayer to set foot upon, no marvel it has so
much power and efficacy.

There are diverse others, and many things behind of the efficacy of prayer, as
it depends upon the promise and covenant that God has made with his people:
for every promise is but a several branch and expression of the covenant of
God: therefore we are to refer them all to the Covenant. I will give you but
one Scripture, Jer. 30.10, 11. Therefore fear thou not, O my servant Jaoob,
neither be dismayed O Israel: for lo, I will save thee from a far, and thy seed
from the land of their captivity, and Jacob shall return and be in rest and
quiet, and none shall make him, afraid. For I am with thee says the Lord, to
save thee: though I make a full end of all nations, whither I have scattered
thee, yet will I not make a full end of thee: but I will correct thee in
measure, and will not leave thee altogether unpunished. There is somewhat that
God does, but yet still he remembers his promise in the midst of affliction,
that he will leave nothing of that undone: therefore though his people be under
great afflictions, the Lord will be good to them according to his promise.

Now again the Lord will regard the prayers of the seed of Jacob; the efficacy
of their prayers depends upon this, because it is Gods own work. That which is
the work of God is not in vain: God made none of his works in vain. Now all
their seeking of God, It is from God; it is Gods own work, and a most glorious
piece of the work of God. Every prayer that comes from the poorest of the seed
of Jacob; every gracious, and faithful prayer it is a glorious piece Gods
work; It is a work of the holy Ghost, and therefore it is not in vain.

Again, as their prayers come from God, they seek God from God; so they seek
God for God, they seek the Lord for himself. If the seed of Jacob did seek God
only for Corn, and Wine, and Oil; if they did seek him only for their own
ease, and outward liberties, and accommodations, and for the lives of their
enemies, perhaps they might seek in vain. No, but when they seek God, they seek
God for God, and thence they prevail so much with God, Ye ask amiss, that ye
may spend it on your lusts. James 4.3. You pray to God often to be delivered from
enemies, and you think your prayers (if it be in such a time as this) they come
in vain: No marvel if so you pray that you may have liberty to trade, and
deliverance from taxations; (these may be sought, but) the house of Jacob seeks
God for his name, that that may not be dishonored, and for his Gospel, that
that be not taken away, and the power of godliness trodden as dirt in the
street, when they seek God for God, no marvel if it be not in vain.

But the great efficacy of prayer is this, it is part of the purchase of the
blood of Christ: that God might hear the prayers of the Saints, it comes from
the merits of Christ, it is a part of his purchase that God should regard them,
it is in his name that we pray, so we are taught. It is by Christ that we have
access to the throne of grace our privilege of seeking God is that which
Christ has purchased by his blood. So that our seeking of God is not only a
duty, and beneficial to us, but it is a high privilege purchased by the blood
of Christ; by him we have access with boldness, the word is, with liberty of
speech: liberty of speech is by the blood of Christ, that we may come before
the Lord, and open our minds fully, certainly there is a great deal of efficacy
in prayer. Whatsoever our prayers are, as they are from us, though they be
vain, as they are from us, yet take them as Christ's purchase, here lies the
great efficacy of prayer.

Think not that the efficacy of prayer lies in earnestness, or enlargement:
though it be a comfort, and an evidence that God enlarges us by his Spirit,
(it is not parts that enlarge, but the Spirit) but the virtue of prayer lies
not here: the strength whereby prayer does great things, it lies in the engine
lower in secret, in the purchase of Christ.

Again, Christ takes all the prayers of the seed of Jacob, and renders them up
to his Father for acceptance. We have a more glorious way of coming to God then
Adam had in innocence, yea in some respects then the Angels themselves, by
having such an Intercessor that takes all our prayers and carries them to his
father.

Yea, not only so, but he joins with us to the Father. There is a place in
the Hebrews quoted out of the Psalms, that shows that Christ praises God in
the congregation; it is not only the Saints that praise God but Christ
himself. Heb. 2.12. I will declare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of
the Church will I sing praises unto thee. Christ in the midst of the Church
sings praise to God. When people meet to praise God, Christ praises him. It is
a mighty encouragement in praising God. So in prayer, when we meet to seek God
Christ seeks him: for he is at the right hand of the Father, making continual
intercession for the Saints; Christ himself joins with them in the work that
they seek not in vain.

Again, it is the style and title that God glories in, to be a God hearing
prayer, therefore he will not let it be in vain,

Again, prayer is the pouring forth of the spirit to God, the spirit that is so
beautified with the graces of his own spirit; now the pouring forth of such a
precious spirit to God so beautified, and principled with the graces of the
holy Ghost, certainly this cannot be in vain. Indeed, the Scripture says, of
the heart of the wicked that it is little worth: Let their heart be poured
fourth God does little mind, or regard it: but the heart of the righteous is
much worth, it is very precious before God: therefore when their hearts are
poured out, and God sees the beauty and glory of his graces on them, it is
exceeding delightful to him, and such pouring out of their hearts, cannot be
in vain. If God have a bottle for all their tears, he has a bottle also for
all their expressions, and pouring out of their hearts in prayer.

Further, the exceeding delight that God has in the seed of Jacob, must needs
cause God to regard their seeking that it be not in vain. They are his
darlings: now there is no man that loves to deny a suit to any that he delights
in. We have a notable expression concerning the seed of Jacob when they pray,
Thou art my King, O God, command deliverance for Jacob. Psalm. 44. There comes a
commanding power from God for the deliverance of Jacob, when Jacob comes to sue
to God.

Lastly, it were not for the honor of God to send away his people empty, that
they should seek him in vain. It is reported of Titus, though he were a heathen
Emperor, yet he would not that any man should go sad out of the presence of the
Prince. God accounts it an honor that none should go sad out of his presence.
Therefore those are called on to rejoice that seek the Lord. Let the hearts of
them rejoice that seek the Lord, Psalm. 105.3. not only let the heart of them
rejoice that find the Lord, that obtain that they seek, but those that seek the
Lord, while they are seeking should rejoice in seeking him.

Well, because I would sain get to the application of the point, I pass by
other things, and will only take away that great objection, and reasoning,
that is in the hearts of men against this point.

You tell us that the prayers of Gods people are not in vain, and by Gods mercy
now and then, we have found some comfortable hearing from heaven: but
ordinarily we find it otherwise. How many prayers have we put up to God, and
find not the issue? we pray, and pray, and the enemies prevail, though now and
then God give us help.

Now for the taking away of all unbelieving reasonings against the point, I
will not go from the text at this time.

Therefore the first answer is this: You say you have sought God, and have not
what you would have, and therefore it is in vain: (though perhaps this that you
now say is vain) yet it makes not the text void. Remember what has been
before: heretofore you have sought God, and that was not in vain, remember the
times of old, let that for the present a little stay you. It was that that
stayed the Psalmist, he began to reason as you do, that he had sought God in
vain, Will the Lord cast off for ever? and will he be favorable no more? is
his mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore? etc. Psalm
7, 8. here seems to be as much unbelief as is in your reasoning: but mark what
follows. v. 10. And I said this is my death: but I will remember the years of
the right hand of the most high. O, it is my sin, and weakness that I should
reason thus, I consider not what I do when I reason thus: but I will remember
the years of the right hand of the most high, verse. 11. I will remember the
works of the Lord: surely I will remember the wonders of old. v. 12. I will
meditate also of all thy works, and talk of thy doings. Thy way O God is in the
sanctuary: who is so great a God as our God? Thou art the God that do
wonders, thou have declared thy strength among the people, v. 14. Thou have
with thine arm redeemed thy people, the sons of Jacob and Joseph. v. 15. Mark,
at length he recovers himself with this, though present things seem to go hard,
yet he remembered what God had done, so do thou in this case. In Isaiah, you
have a complaint of unbelieving hearts, as if God had been sought in vain. Isa.
40.27. Why say thou O Jacob, and speak O Israel, my way is hid from the
Lord, and my judgment is passed over from my God Art thou one of the seed of
Jacob, and have sought God, and say it is in vain? God reasons the case, and
will confute their unbelief. Have thou not known? have thou not heard, that the
everlasting God, the Lord, the creator of the ends of the earth, faints not,
neither is weary? there is no searching of his understanding. He gives power
to the faint, and to them that have no might he increases strength. Even the
youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall utterly fall. v. 28,
29, 30, 31. But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength; they
shall mount up with wings as Eagles; they shall run and not be weary and they
shall walk and not faint. Has not God done great things heretofore, in 88. and
in the powder plot and at other times? and though we be in some streights,
remember what God did before.

This should appease your hearts, what though thou have not present audience
for the thing thou seek: yet think, I deal with a God that has an
understanding that I cannot search. God it may be lets the adversary prevail
sometimes, I cannot tell what glory God may get by it, I cannot conceive how
God can bring his own glory about when Israel flees before the Philistines, But
why say thou so O Jacob? there is no searching of Gods understanding, God
sees further then thou can see: that thing that thou think will make
against his name may make for it: therefore lay thine hand upon thine heart. He
gives power to the faint, and to them that have no might. God stays till men
have no might, till they faint, and are ready to sail, and then he comes and
helps them. That is the meaning of that Scripture in Luke, where Christ says,
God will avenge his elect that cry night and day to him, though he tarry, he
will avenge them, he will hear their prayers: it is not in vain: But it follows
upon it, notwithstanding when the Son of man comes shall he find faith on
earrh? I verily think that that want of faith, has reference to that very
promise specially, that God will hear his elect that cry: but God may stay so
long, as that the very time when God shall come to perform it, and shall intend
to do it, it may be a time when their faith is overcome, and fails in the
promise, that they begin to give over, and think they have sought in vain. And
usually the time when God comes to fulfill his promise, and to answer the
prayers of his people, it is that very time when they fail and are ready to
sink. Therefore that may be another argument, it may be thou have not believed
this promise. Thou say thou have prayed, and thou think it is in vain:
have thou believed this promise in the text? have thou relied on it? God has
not said to the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain.

The word of God shall be made good, but how? upon our faith: it shall be made
good to us upon our believing: though we be never so godly, and pray never so
well, yet if we will have the promises made good, it must be upon believing. If
thou have not laid the weight of thy soul on the promise, thou have no cause to
say that God has not made his word good; it may be thou have not faith: learn
to believe the word, and then thou shall have it fulfilled. Thou would have
it made good, and then thou would believe it; no, thou must first believe
the word and then expect that God should fulfill his promise.

Again, God is a great God that we seek to, and it is fit for us to wait, and
to wait long. He is great, and we seek great things, and we are poor, mean,
vile wretches. God has his prerogative sometimes to answer presently,
sometimes not so. Elias was a great praying man, he is set for an example of
prayer; he prays at one time for fire to come on the sacrifice, and fire came
down presently; another time he prayed for rain, and then he prayed 7. times,
and bowed his head between his knees, and sent his servant, and sent him again
and again. At one time God comes in at the first, at another time, not till
seven times: it is Gods prerogative.

And take this note; it is a true sign of a gracious spirit, though God defer,
yet still for the soul to cling to God, to think well of God, and of the ways
of God, and of the duty of prayer; it is an excellent sign, and the ready way
to find favor with God. You have sometimes two beggars follow you for alms;
one perhaps has true need, pure need, and is of a soft tender spirit, the
other is a sturdy rugged beggar, you deny them both; he that has pure need,
and has a soft tender spirit, he thinks he is unworthy that the other man
should be bountiful to him and he falls a weeping: yet he thinks well of the
man, and will be ready to beg of him upon another occasion, he has good
thoughts of him. But the sturdy beggar rails, and breaks into an angry
passionate mood, and he will ask no more; who of them is like to prevail, the
soft spirit that has an ingenious disposition, or the sturdy spirit that soon
breaks off? Thus there are many passionate hearts, that are not froward with
men, but with God, they come, and ask mercy of God, but their hearts are stiff,
and froward and sturdy, if they have not that they would, they presently break
off, and say, why should we wait on God, and cry, it is in vain to seek the
Lord. But now a gracious, tender, ingenious disposition, though the thing come
not that he prays for, he justifies God in all, and speaks well of God, and
well of prayer, and loves that still, and waits on God in that way: this is the
soul that is likely to prevail.

But further, (to answer from the text) it may be thou have not sought God,
Seek ye me, says God. It may be it is somewhat else that thou have sought in
prayer then God: though thou name God in thy prayer, it may be thy heart has
been after creature-helps, and thou have made more account of the help of the
creature, of Armies, and strength, thou have made account that they would do it
rather then prayer; and if there be no help but prayer, thou think it but a
dry business.

A carnal hearted man when he hears of an army of twenty thousand men well
clothed and the like, he thinks much may be done, but for the prayers of Gods
people they think they be nothing. Now if thou have sought help by creatures,
rather then by God, thou have not sought God all the while, Or if it have been
but outward safety, that thou have sought and not the face of God, thou have
not sought God, Seek my face, says God, Psalm 27. This is the generation of
them that seek thy face, O Jacob. Psalm 24. Thou seek not God, without thou
seek Gods face, without thou seek God for himself. And ordinarily, God is not
sought, but thy estate is sought; and thou cryest out for the danger thou art
in. Therefore thou have no cause to say, it is in vain, look to thy prayers,
take up thy prayers again. Do as the fishermen do; if they find that there
comes nothing up, that they do not catch, they take up their net, it may be
there is a hole, a rent in the net. And so the Angler, if the fish do not bite
he takes up the bait, it may be there is somewhat wanting on the hook. So look
to thy prayers, it may be it is not God that thou have sought, take them up and
see what is amiss in them.

Another answer is this, it may be thy prayers (...) fore no marvel if nothing
but vain come of them. Surely, God will not hear vanity, Job 35.13. If there be
nothing but vanity, how can thou expect that God should hear them? The word
here, in vain, it is the same word in Genesis 1. At the first all was without
form and void; a confused chaos. So ordinarily our prayers are without form,
and void, that is, there is nothing but vanity, a confused lump, a chaos. Not
that God regards so much the setting of a man's words in form handsomely: for
the groans and sighs of the spirit of God are accepted, though they be not
methodicall, as the making of a speech to men; God looks not to that. But they
are without form, and void, that is, that is a vain thing that has no end or
not a good end. Many pray, and they know not why, but because others do; but
they propound not the true end of prayer.

I appeal to thy conscience; when thou have gone to pray to God, have thou
propounded this end? I am going to tender up that worship and homage, that I a
poor creature, ow to the infinite glorious first being of all things, you call
your families sometimes to come to prayer, and never think what you do, what
you aim at. I and my family are now going to seek the great God in prayer, I am
now going to join with my father or my master, now that we are altogether in
this family to tender up that worship and homage that we poor creatures ow to
that infinite glorious first being of all things whereby to testify our high
respect, and esteem of him. Now if thy prayer be a customary way of prayer it
is vanity, it has not a right end.

It may be thou go to prayer merely to satisfy conscience. Or some have
this by end in prayer, a wicked end, that is, they think to satisfy God for
their former sinful wicked ways. They take liberty in company to drink and
please the flesh, and as they served themselves then, so now they will serve
God, and set one against another. Sometimes they will give liberty to the flesh
to take contentment that way, but they will not always do so, sometime they will
be devout and serve God. There is no man so wicked as to be always in the acts
of wickedness, but they think God must have his turn, and they must have their
turn sometimes. And this is the prayer of many people, to put their sins in
one scale, and so many devout prayers in the other scale, and the one shall
poize the other. This is vanity, this is not the end of prayer.

Then a thing is vain, when it is empty, when there is not substance in it: Now
when the heart is empty in prayer, there are words, and they are wind, the Lord
sees not the strength of thy spirit, thou do not set thy self before the Lord
in prayer, thy expressions are merely empty: God does not see thy expressions
filled with the graces of the Spirit: this is vanity: Take heed of vain
expressions, when there is nothing but nature in prayer; though there be never
so much earnestness in prayer, if there be but a natural spirit it is vanity,
we must pray in the spirit as the Scripture speaks.

And take heed of sluggishnesse in prayer, that makes it vanity. The breath
that comes from life in man's body is warm, but the breath that comes from
bellows is artificial and cold, some men's breath in prayer is artificial and
cold, but the prayer that comes from life, is warm breath that comes up to God.

Again, vanity is this, when all is eaten out with vain thoughts, thy heart
roves in prayer, thou know not where thou art, thou can not call that
which thou make a prayer. A prayer with vain thoughts is like bear, or wine
that is dead, and has lost the spirits. Vain thoughts are worms that eat out
the strength of a duty: would you present a dish to your superior that were
worm-eaten, or that were gnawn on before? when we let out our thoughts in
duties, and present them to God, they are worm-eaten, and torn, the strength of
them is quite gone.

And after you have prayed, take heed that you make not your prayers vain, by
not looking after them, for the accomplishment of them; or by being proud of
your prayers and gifts, by resting in them.

And it is vanity when thou undoest all as soon as thou have done, by going
contrary to thy prayer in thy life, not adding watchfulness to prayer. If a
man take pains to weave a web, and spend so many hours in it, and then ravell
it out, this man spends his time in vain. So do most people with their prayers,
they pray for mercy, and grace, and as soon as they have done they go quite
contrary and ravell and undo all; is not this vanity? No marvel if thou think
it in vain, when there is nothing but vanity in thy prayers.

And take heed that you make not the prayers of others vain. Luther writes to
Melancthon angerly, in regard of his fear of the power of his adversaries,
says he, You make our prayers void. So it may be said of many that are cold,
and lukewarm, and dead-hearted, and do not take to heart the cause of God; that
fear the displeasure of this body, and that body; you make our prayers void.
You that have praying friends, it may be fathers, and mothers that are dead
whose prayers are put up in heaven, take heed that you make not their prayers
void; that you give them not cause if they should come to live again from the
dead to weep and cry out, O how are our prayers made void by the prayers of
such and such.

But you will say, Lord, what will become of us? we have abundance of vanity in
our prayers.

Therefore, that you may not be discouraged, know, that though there be many
vain thoughts in prayer, yet if there be sighing and mourning, and humbling of
the soul, and panting of the heart after God in groaning, and sighing, and
though there be a mixture of vanity, yet there is a working of the Spirit of
God, and of grace in the heart after God; know that the Lord will not charge
this vanity on thee, the Lord will do away thy sin, therefore let not that
discourage thee. The efficacy lies not in the excellency of thy prayer, but in
the merits of Christ, and his mediation: Only Christ will have somewhat of thy
self in thy prayer, he will have thy heart pant, and work after him: but there
may be abundance of vanity, thou drawest a line, and make a blot, and another
line. and another blot, Christ draws all fair again, and presents it to his
Father.

But another question is this, you say it is in vain to pray. Can you make good
that you are one of the seed of Jacob? this privilege belongs to them, it may
be you are of the seed of Esau.

The seed of Esau, what is that?

The Apostle speaks of Esau what his guise was. Heb. 12.6. and says, Take heed
that none of you be such as Esau, lest there be any fornicatour or profane
person as Esau, who for one morsel of meat sold his birthright. Now if thou
prove a fornicatour thou art of the seed of Esau, or a profane person; what is
that? for one morsel of meat he sold his birthright, that is, to please, and
satisfy and consent the flesh he sold his birthright, that was the land of
Canaan, and so typified the privileges of the Church of Gods, and even a type
of heaven it was. His birthright had a spiritual meaning, is had reference to
the spiritual privileges, that the Saints of God have to this day in all the
ordinances of God.

That man or woman that prizeth any carnal contentment before spiritual
privileges, they are of the seed of Esau, and not of Jacob. Thou think
there is some favor in money, and in a good trade, and in good cheer, and such
a day as this November 5. is better then a fast day, because of the good cheer:
but for the spiritual duties of this day, to come and magnify God, and to
attend upon his word, thou think they are circumstances, and by-matters, and
thou art troubled if the Sermon be too long to hinder thee of thy dinner; thou
art a profane Esau, all that I have said belongs not to thee, thou do not
belong to Jacob but to Esau, that preferrest carnal things for the flesh
before the spiritual privileges of the Saints.

But how shall I know that I am one of the seed of Jacob?

How do you know such an ones child, but by his likeness to his father? One
that has the spirit of Jacob is of the seed of Jacob. There are many things
that the Scripture speaks concerning Jacob, and see if you do answer them.

First, Jacob was a mighty man in prayer, he was a wrestler with God, and he
wrestled till the day broke, and was as strong at the last as at the first:
have thou the spirit of thy father Jacob? art thou not discouraged in prayer?
though mercy come, not presently yet do thou wrestle all night, and resolve
whatsoever come if thou die, thou will die wrestling; here is a child like the
father, therefore thou art of the seed of Jacob.

Secondly, Jacob was one that feared God, when God appeared to him he looked on
the presence of God as dreadful, How dreadful is this place? Genesis 28.
because God was there. So do thou look on the presence of God as dreadful,
that thou can say the fear of the great God is on thy soul: when thou come
into his presence? mark, for this is that expression in the Psalm, Ye that fear
the Lord praise him, all the seed of Jacob glorify him, and fear him all ye
seed of Israel, Psalm. 22.23. If you will be sure not to seek God in vain, but
that you may praise him in seeking him, fear the Lord all the seed of Jacob.

Hence we read that when there was an oath between Laban and him, the oath
that he took was, he swore by the fear of his father Isaac. God was the fear of
Isaac, and Isaac so feared God, that he had his denomination from his fear: Now
Jacob swearing by the fear of his father Isaac, that notes that the fear of God
was upon Jacob, as it was upon his father. And do thou walk in the fear of
God? Have thou not a bold spirit that goes in slight, presumptuous, bold base
ways? This is not like Jacob, he looked on Gods presence as terrible.

Thirdly, Jacobs heart was disingaged from the creature, a little of the
creature would serve his turn, Ge. 28. Lord, says he, if thou will give me
meat to eat and raiment to put on. He looked no further, he minded no great
matters. Therefore in Psalm. 24. there the generation of Jacob is set out, and
one thing is, he that has not lift up his soul to vanity. The men of the world
have great things in their eyes, they are vanity in Gods eye, though they be
great in theirs, and they lift up their hearts to them. Now the sons of Jacob
do not lift up their hearts to vanity, though the things of the world be
present, their hearts stir not, they rise not; but if God and Christ, and
heavenly things be presented, their hearts are lifted up. If thy heart be
lifted up to vanity, if thy heart be as iron and the vanities of the world come
and draw it up, thou art not a son of Jacob: a little would serve Jacob
though he were a great heir, He was a plain man and dwelt in tents, Genesis 25.
and had a plain spirit, he did not look after great things; whereas Esau looked
after great things abroad.

Again, he was one of a tender spirit: therefore where it is said he prevailed
with the Angel, it is said he wept, and made supplication unto him, he found
him in Bethel, and there he spoke with us. That story of Jacob concerns us how
God dealt with our Father. If now thou have a tender spirit as he had; if when
thou go into the presence of God thou find thy spirit yield and melt, and
relent, thou art one like thy father Jacob.

Again further, Jacob did in the time of his streights repair to the covenant,
that was a great satisfaction to his heart; he looked to the covenant, he
fastened on that, and there he held as the main support of his spirit. Genesis
32.9. And Jacob said, O God of my father Abraham, and God of my father Isaac,
the Lord which said unto me return unto thy country, and to thy kindred,
and I will deal well with thee etc. He heard that Esau was coming against him
with a great many; and what does Jacob? he gets him to God, O God of my father
Abraham, and of my father Isaac, the Lord which said unto me return into thy
country, etc. He repairs to the Covenant: Remember thy Covenant with Abraham
and Isaac, and with me too, I went on thy word. Here was the guise of Jacob:
can thou in a straight get thee too a word, and a promise, and brood thy soul
over it, and clasp it close, and say this is the promise that must, and will do
me good?

Again, Jacob was of an humble spirit, I am not worthy of the least of thy
mercies. He admired at the mercy of God that he had any thing, and Gods mercies
made him more humble; this is an excellent disposition, we are many times
humble and lowly when we are under the hand of God in affliction: but when
mercies make us humble, that the more God is gracious the more vile we are in
our own eyes, this is excellent.

And he looked back to his former condition, he looked upon his poor beginning
and gives God the glory: I passed over this Jordan with my staff; Many of you
came with your staff, and God has given you two bands, you are grown great,
are you willing to think of it, and to acknowledge the poor estate that once
you were in, and to give God the glory, I was thus, and thus, of poor
parentage, and see how God has dealt with me.

Another thing remarkable is, that Jacob contented himself with God alone, he
accounted that he had enough in God alone, though all were taken from him, he
did not look upon himself as undone, but he had that that might make him for
ever. In Genesis 33. compare the 9. and 11. verses, you shall find a notable
difference between Esau and Jacob, yet the word in our books is the same, but
this Scripture is much wronged by the translation. In v. 8. Esau when he comes
to Jacob, when Jacob would have given him his present, says he, what meanest
thou by all these droves which I met? he said, these are to find grace in the
sight of my lord: and Esau said, I have enough my brother, It was a strange
speech of Esau: A covetous wretch that is always pyning and murmuring for having
no more, and thinks he shall want before he dye, he does not come so far as
Esau, and Esau could say, I have enough, are there not many of you that never
say you have enough? I pray thee take my present says Jacob, for I have all
things, nay says Esau, I have enough. The one says I have enough, the other
says I have all things, for so the word is Col; Esau had enough, he did not
want, he had meat and drink, and he saw none to interrupt him, he was satisfied
with his estate, as his portion; he had enough, he cared for nothing more, they
might talk of other things, but that was enough to him. Jacob comes, and says
I have enough; but this was another manner of enough: Esaus enough is his
estate, but Jacobs enough is God, for he says, I have all, Jacob was meaner
for his outward condition then Esau, for he had nothing but what he had gotten
in hard servitude. Now Esau says, I have enough, Jacob says, I have all: that
is, God is enough in the want of all, if Esau should strip him of all he had,
yet he had all in God. Now one that is of the seed of Jacob, in the time of
want (as some of you may be plundered, and then all is gone you say; no, if
thou be of the seed of Jacob) if thou have God thou have all. There is such a
promise, He that overcomes, shall inherit all things. How is that? and I will
be his God. Revel. 21.7. Therefore whatsoever thou want if God be thine, if
thou be Gods child, thou have all.

Further, one of the seed of Jacob is one of the Church of God: for all Jacobs
posterity was so: therefore the blessing in Ruth is, The Lord bless thee like
Rachel and Leah, which two did build up the house of Israel. Why is it not, the
Lord bless thee as Rebeccah, or Sarah, but as Rachel and Leah. (It was a
blessing upon a marriage condition) the reason is, because from Rachel and
Leah, came only those that were of the Church, that were members of the Church
of God; but there came others from Rebeccah, and of Sarah came only Isaac, but
Abraham's posterity was otherwise. And that Church that was then was but a type
of that which should be after; that is of a company of people elected, and
called out from the world to be partakers of the Privileges of Jesus Christ.
The people of the Jews, the seed of Jacob were the Church of God, as the seed
of such an one. And this typified the Church that should be after; a company
that are taken out of the world, to partake of the privileges of Jesus Christ.
Can thou say that thou art of the Church? The word that we translate Church
is a company that is called out from the world. Can thou ever tell of a work
of God separating thee from the world, that when thou wentest according to the
world, God gave thee a mighty call that made a separation between thee and the
world? For it is said so of the seed of Jacob, Numb. 23.9. From the tops of the
rocks I saw him, and beheld him, lo, the people shall dwell alone, they shall
not be reckoned among the Nations, they shall be separated from the nations.
All the seed of Jacob are called out of the world, they are separated from them
by a mighty work of God to partake of Christ, and be a member of him.

And upon this, such an one mightily longs after all the outward privileges of
the Church, to enjoy all the outward ordinances of Christ after his way, those
that are of the seed of Jacob, they prize the excellency of Jacob as the
greatest excellency, their hearts are toward it, and they rejoice in that
above all the excellency in the world. If you ask what this excellency of Jacob
is? It is the joining of Gods people in the way of ordinances, and duties of
Gods worship in the purity of them. This in Scripture is called the excellency
of Jacob, Psalm. 47.4. He shall choose our inheritance for us, the excellency of
Jacob whom he loved. It is an excellent Scripture. O, it is a blessed thing to
give all to God, to let God choose our inheritance. What is our inheritance? The
excellency of Jacob whom he loved. What was that? The worship of God, and his
ordinances, joining with the people of God in the way of his ordinances, in his
temple, those were the things that were the ordinances of God in those times;
those are called the excellency of Jacob; and so it is now the excellency of a
people to enjoy Gods ordinancies.

You have another expression to the same purpose. And I will bring forth a seed
out of Jacob, and out of Judah an inheritour of my mountain, and mine elect
shall inherit it, and my servants shall dwell there. Isaiah 65.9. What is the
mountain of God? Gods Ordinances in his Church, I will bring a seed out of
Jacob, and Judah, and they shall inherit my moantain. So that the greatest
inheritance of the seed of Jacob is the mountain of the Lord: communion with
the Church of God, and his ordinances: if you be of the seed of Jacob, your
hearts prize, and rejoice in this, and that you have in Psalm. 24. verse. 3, 4,
5. you shall find how the seed of Jacob prize the enjoyment of God in his
Ordinances, Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? who shall stand in his
holy place? He that has clean hands, and a pure heart; who has not lift up
his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. He shall receive the blessing from
the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation. This is the
generation of them that seek him: that seek thy face O Jacob. It is so in the
book: but the particle O, is not in the original: and therefore it may be read
thus, That seek the face of Jacob; it may be read in the Genitive case, as well
as in the Vocative. This is the generation of them that seek him, even of
Jacob, and then he turns to God, that seek thy face: but because his heart was
full of this, of seeking Gods face, (though he intend to mention what
generation it was, the generation of Jacob) he puts in that before, the
generation of Jacob that seek thy face: that is, this is the generation that so
prize God in his ordinances, and account it such a blessing of God; that join
themselves to the Church of God, and set up his ordinances and ways; this is
the blessed generation, these are those that seek God truly. We seek not God
truly unless we seek him in his own ways, unless we seek him in all his
ordinances, we cannot comfort our souls that we seek him in truth. For as in
the way of obedience, we cannot have comfort in our obedience that it is true,
except it be universal to all Gods commandments, so we cannot have comfort in
our seeking that it is true, except it be in all his ordinances, and ways:
therefore we must be of the generation of them that seek the face of the
Church, that seek thy face O Jacob. So it follows in that place, lift up your
heads O ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, that the King of
glory may come in. Where should the King of glory come but into his Church? Who
is the King of glory? The Lord, strong and almighty: still the Church is called
on to entertain Christ in his glory, so this is spoken of the Church. Thus you
may know, whether you be of the seed of Jacob.

Again, if you be the seed of Jacob you have the inheritance of Jacob, and
account it your inheritance. What was Jacobs inheritance? Deuter. 33.2. The
Lord came from Sinai and from his right hand came a fiery law. The law of God
is a fiery law; yet in verse 4. Moses commanded us a law, even the inheritance
of the congregation of Jacob. So that though the law be a fiery law, a strict
law, a severe law, yet it is the inheritance of the congregation of Jacob. If
you be of the congregation of Jacob you account the law of God to be part of
your inheritance: not only to be that which you are bound to, that you must
obey whether you will or no, but you rejoice in the law of God as your
inheritance. For my part I know not a more sure note of a gracious heart then
this; one that rejoices in Gods law as his inheritance: as you know what
expressions David has, he rejoiced in it more then in Gold and Silver, more
then in the honey, and the honeycomb. It is one thing to obey Gods Law, and
another to rejoice in it as an inheritance. If thou be of the seed of Jacob,
thou have the inheritance of the seed of Jacob.

Another is, he that is of the seed of Jacob is faithful in the place that God
has set him. Jacob in serving of Laban, Genesis 31.6. though he were churlish, he
professes that withal his power he served his father. It is an excellent text
for servants; you would fain have time to seek God, and God forbid but there
should be some time allowed the poorest and meanest servant to seek God alone.
But art thou of the seed of Jacob? then be like him in this, to serve with all
thy power, though thou have a froward master or mistress, as Laban was, though
they use you hardly, yet show godliness in that relation. And for servants to
seem godly, he must go hear, this Sermon, this man, and the other man, and be
very earnest: (I blame them not for loving the word and desiring it: but for
servants to be earnest in hearing the word, and enjoying the ordinances, and
crying out against superstition, and Antichristianisme, and yet be sluggish,
and unfaithful in their service, and so as to give just offense to their
governors, it is a dishonor. Show your godliness in your relation: certainly
there is no man or woman godly, but those that are so in the relations and
places that they are set in: therefore manifest your selves thus to be the seed
of Jacob.

Again, the seed of Jacob is a taught seed. God teaches them, Psalm, 147.19. He
has not dealt so with other nations, he gave his law to Jacob, and his word to
Israel. So in Deuteronomy. 33.10 Levi is appointed to teach Jacob. There is never a
one of the seed of Jacob that is ignorant, that is a fool in matters of
religion, he is taught.

And then, one of the seed of Jacob, is one that has a care of his family: so
we read of Jacob, Genesis 35.1. God said to Jacob, Arise, go up to Bethel, and
dwell there, and make there an altar unto God that appeared unto thee when thou
fleddest from the face of Esau thy brother. Then said Jacob to his household and
to all that were with him, put away the strange gods that are among you, and be
clean, etc. When he was to go into Gods presence, he labored to reform his
family. When God calls you to fast days, and to the Sacrament, do you cleanse
your families, do you look what evils are in your families, and put out your
power to cleanse them?

But there is one more that I may not omit, that is, Jacob, when he was to die,
though he himself was to go the way of all flesh, yet this was his great
comfort and the comfort of those that he left behind, that God would make good
his word to his Church and people, Genesis 48.21. and Israel said to Joseph,
Behold, I die, but God will visit you, and bring you again to the land of your
fathers. Behold I die, but I die in faith of the promise: because I am taken
away shall I think the promise shall be of no effect? no; God shall bring you
to the land of your fathers. Now when God shall cast you on your sick beds can
you say, Behold I die; but go you on, God will make good his word, I die in
faith that it shall go well with the Churches of God: there will be a time when
they shall get the victory, when Christ shall reign, and the Saints shall be
delivered from their oppressors? Here was the spirit of Jacob: if you be such
a seed of Jacob you shall not seek Gods face in vain.

But you will say, it is not in vain for some men to seek God, but I am a poor
wretched creature, and it may be in vain for me to seek the Lord.

That place in the Psalm fully answers any objection against our poverty, or
the poverty of our prayers, Psalm. 102.17. He will regard the prayer of the
destitute, and will not despise their prayers. The prayer of the destitute, the
word signifies a poor shrub in the wilderness, a contemptible shrub, that is
trodden on by the feet of beasts, and none regards it; God regards such prayers.

If I could make an excellent prayer it were somewhat: No, he does not despise
thy prayer. It may be thy prayer is such as thou despisest, and that others
would despise, but God will not despise it.

But this was spoken perhaps to some in those times.

Mark what follows; This shall be written for the generations to come. This
Scripture, this promise of God, it is written for the generations to come. And
the people that shall he created shall praise the Lord. We that were not made
them, but were created since, let us praise the Lord for this Scripture, that
God will regard the prayers of poor shrubs, and not despise them.

But they are great things that I stand in need of, and it may be in vain for
me to seek such great things at Gods hands; perhaps if I did seek for ordinary
things there might be hope, but I am to seek great things, mercies for the
Church and for the Kingdom, and people of God; is it not in vain for such a
poor wretch as I to seek such great things?

We may think that the things we seek at Gods hands are too great for us to
beg, but they are not too great for God to give. It is observed of Perilla,
when Alexander would have him ask a dowry for his daughter; Alexander
presently promised him 50. tallents; it is too much says he, 10. tallents are
sufficient; Alexander answered him, if it be too great for you to ask, it is
not too great for me to give. God loves that his people should ask great things
of him: yea he loves that the poorest, and meanest of his people should ask him
great things; and there is a gracious promise for that, Jer. 33.3. Call unto me
and I will answer thee, and show thee great and mighty things that thou know
not. This is a promise to every one of the seed of Jacob.

But when I pray in the time of affliction, and Gods hand is on me, will it not
be in vain to seek him then?

It is true; to neglect God in former times, and then to pray only in
affliction, it is a dangerous condition: but this temptation comes upon such as
have sought God before. I now you seek God, but this is in your affliction, and
will God regard you now? I speak it only to comfort such as are careful to
seek God in the time of their health: yet if thou have been negligent, it is
possible that God should regard thee in the time of affliction. Jonah prayed,
and said, I prayed and cried by reason of mine affliction to the Lord, and he
heard me, Jonah 2.2.

But suppose it be affliction for sin: for so the objection may arise. It is
true, if I did seek God in the time of affliction that God did send for trial,
it may be God would hear me: but suppose Gods hand be on me for sin, will God
hear my prayers?

That one notable example of David may help the people of God against such a
temptation: Gods hand was on him for his sin, when he fled before Absalom, God
threatened that war should not depart from his house: yet David then prayed
against that wicked politition, and counselor, that the Lord would turn his
counsel to folly; and God heard David's prayer in his affliction that was for
sin, And the Lord turned the counsel of Achitophel to folly. Let us not be
discouraged though politicians work never so craftily; though Gods hand be on
us, and we have conscience accusing us, and say, I this is for your sins that
God leaves you thus in the hands of your enemies, that God gives them such
power; that they find such favor with the Prince as they do, though this be
for our sins, yet let us seek to God to turn the counsel of Achitophel to
folly. It shall not be, nor has not been in vain, we have found it so, that in
our affliction, and affliction for sin, yet crying to God to turn the counsel
of Achitophel to folly, God has done so graciously, and has encouraged us
more and more to cry unto him for that end.

But what need I seek to God, God has decreed and determined what he will do,
what God intends to do, he has decreed from eternity, therefore whether we
pray or not it shall come to pass, if we do not pray it shall come to pass.
If God have intended to deliver me out of a sickness, it shall be done whether
I pray or no; and when any ones time is come they shall die; and so when the
time of a Kingdom is come it shall be destroyed, and not till then; therefore
what good can prayer do?

Though I suppose you cannot but be satisfied, and think that this objection
has little weight, yet for answer, I will give you a Scripture or two, Psalm.
2. I will declare the decree, The decree of God concerning the advancement of
Christ in his resurrection, and so of the success of the work of Christ's
mediation. I will declare the decree, the Lord has said thou art my son this
day have I begotten thee: Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine
inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for thy possession. Gods giving
of Christ the heathen for his inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth
for his possession; it was decreed of God, yet Christ must ask it of his Father
notwithstanding Gods decree. And another text remarkable is in the prophecy of
Daniel, where the text says Dan. 9.2. In the first year of his reign, I
Daniel understood by books, the number of the years whereof the word of the
Lord came to Jeremiah the Prophet, that he would accomplish 70. years in the
desolation of Jerusalem. And I set my face unto the Lord God to seek by prayer
and supplications. Mark, Daniel understood by books what God had determined,
concerning Jerusalem; what need Daniel go further, he knew Gods mind what he
would do whether he did pray or no? but mark, verse. 3. I set my face to seek
the Lord. After he knew what God had decreed, and what he would do, and what he
had promised. Now we know not Gods decree: but if we did certainly know the
decree of God in showing mercy to the Land, yet it could no way hinder us but
encourage us to set our faces to seek the Lord, and to seek him more earnestly:
therefore that is a vain objection.

Again, it is not in vain to seek the Lord, if we examine all we have had
already: though we have not all we would have, yet if we consider the
supporting mercies, the preventing mercies, and the guiding mercies that God
has granted us, we shall find that it is not in vain that we have sought him.
There are abundance of mercies that thou have had already. It is an evil thing
to complain of Gods grace, when God has bestowed such mercies. thou think
thou have nothing, because thou have not all thou would have; as a froward
child because it has not every thing to its mind casts away all. God has been
exceeding gracious to us; other souls would have adored God, and have blessed
him with their faces to the ground, if they had had but the hundredth part of
those mercies that we have; yet because we have not all we desire we are ready
to think it is in vain. O let us take heed of dishonouring the grace of God.

Again, further thou think it is in vain, because God sometimes denies in
granting, and grants in denying. Many times God grants that we pray for in
denying it, and denies that we pray for in granting it: our denyals are grants
to us. Woe to us, if all were granted to us that we pray for. Much good may be
gotten out of Gods denyalls: and God denies us to do us good, and to prepare us
for mercies: therefore it is not in vain that thou have sought God, because it
is not in vain that thou art denied.

But further, it may be God delights more in thy praying, then in thy praising
voice, therefore though thou have not that thou have sought for, give leave to
God to delight in thee which way he pleases. There is the praying, and the
praising voice of Gods people, thou delightest that God should hear thy
praising voice, it may be God delights to hear thy praying voice, and is may he
should not if thou had what thou would have. Says God to the Church,
Let me hear thy voice, for it is sweet. There is no man that will think the
King denies his petition, as long as the King loves to read it. If one present
a petition to the King, he does not say he will presently do it: but if he
read it, and when he has read it, calls for it again, and again, will any man
think it in vain that he has put up that petition? as long as the King hears
it, and delights to read it, it is not in vain. So, as long as God loves to
hear thy voice, and to read thy petition it is not in vain. As for thy
praising voice, God shall have enough of that in heaven, but he shall have none
of thy praying voice: therefore why should thou not be willing that God
should have more of thy praying voice here? All that ever God shall have of thy
praying voice it is in this world, and after a little time God shall never
hear us pray more. Therefore let us be willing to go on, and continue in
prayer, and not to wonder why God keeps us on in a way of praying, because all
the time that ever God shall have to delight himself in the praying voice of
his people it is in this world: and for our praising voice, we would fain spend
all our days in praising God for his mercies, but that is reserved for another
world.

Further, it may be Gods way to stay till he bring a great deal of mercy
together, and not by bitts, and drops. As when men deal with great merchants,
they expect not to have payments, by six pences or shillings or Crowns at once:
but though there be two or three or ten pounds due, they stand not on that but
stay for a greater sum. Now little traders that deal by retail, they take it
in by pence, and little sums, Christians that are to deal with God, they deal
for great things, and there are great transactions between God and a gracious
heart: therefore think not much that God stays with a greater sum. For as
God deals with the wicked in the way of justice, so he deals with godly men in
a way of mercy. He lets wicked men go on a great while, he comes not to
judgment for sin, but stays till all come together, till a great sum of
wrath and judgment come together. So he deals with the saints he comes not
with less mercies, but he stays till abundance come, and when Gods time is
come mercies will come to the full indeed.

Further, it may be God has so much mercy that thou have not a vessel capable
of it. Only know that heaven, and earth and all are working for thee. Is the
plowing, and the sowing of the husbandman, and all the showers in vain; because
the corn is not in the barn? we account it not so: so we must not account our
prayers in vain, because the thing is not attained we pray for.

There are many other answers: but the time is so much gone, I come briefly to
the application.

First, if it be so, that God says not to the feed of Jacob seek my face in
vain: certainly there are great things for the Church, that we may build on God
is to do in these latter days, Why? because all the seed of Jacob ever since
Jacobs time, have been seeking God, not only for their own times but for the
Church, to the end of the world; all their prayers are upon the fyle, and must
be answered one day. O what a glorious harvest will it be! blessed are they
that shall live to partake of it. We have a little, but certainly, there are
glorious things for the Church; because every prayer shall be answered.

Secondly, you that are of the seed of Jacob know your honor, though you be
never so poor otherwise, God has given you that which makes you rich: you
have the key of heaven, you may open the treasures in heaven, and it shall
never be in vain. Gods people are such as are exceeding honorable in the eyes
of God, and in this regard that they have credit in heaven, that they shall
never seek God in vain. Bathsheba says to Solomon, 1 King. 2.20. I desire one
petition of thee, I pray thee, say me not nay, It is translated by some, Ne
confundas faciam, confound not my face. Indeed, the denying of a petition, it
is a dishonor, and a confounding of the face: but God will not confound the
faces of his people, he never says to them, seek ye me in vain: they are
honorable ones.

Now as it is said of their father Jacob, he prevailed as a prince with God: so
it may be said of the seed of Jacob, they prevail as Princes with God, they
can do great things with God; it may be they cannot do other things that vain
spirits can do, but they can do much with God in prevailing.

O, here see your privilege, and your riches, all the prayers that you have
made in your life time they are all trading in heaven, they are not lost. If a
man have ventured a stock abroad to the Indies, and do not hear of it in a
great while, he thinks it is lost and gone: but if he hear certain news that
all his stock is safe, and in the place where he would have it, and those that
are there faithfully improve his stock, he is revived by this, it rejoices his
spirit, and he can say blessed be God, I hope to be a rich man for all this. I
say to thee be of good comfort thy stock is not lost, it is trading in heaven,
and every prayer that thou have put up is there. We should account our prayers
as riches, as adventures sent to heaven, and not as children that shoot arrows
and do not mind them.

And then learn this, it is a great privilege to have a praying friend, a
praying companion. Many of you love friends that are delightful, of a cheerly
nature, and merry; but are they praying ones: praying friends are the special
friends: because prayer can prevail with God. To have a friend in the Court,
that can obtain any petition, we think it a privilege; to have one great
friend in heaven is a great privilege. Many people when they lie on their sick
beds, they send to such and such to pray for them: why do they not send to
their companions, that they did drink with, and swear with, to pray for them?
O, they dare not. Here is enough to convince any man's conscience, who are the
best men, whatsoever they say.

Suppose thy condition were thus, that thou did lie on thy deathbed, and
thy life did depend upon the prayers of four or five men. If God should speak
thus from heaven, thou art at the brink of destruction, only this favor thou
shall find; thou shall have leave to choose where thou will four or five men
to pray for thee, and according as they pray so it shall be with thee; thou
have liberty to choose through the world whom thou will. I appeal, would a
drunkard choose four or five drunkards, or a swearer choose swearers, or
unclean ones that they most delighted in all their life time? If all should
depend upon it thou would not choose such; therefore thou art convinced in
thy consc^ence, tho^ know that those are not precious in Gods eyes, (however
thy lust have prevailed) but that the other are better men, that are gracious
and have more credit in heaven. Learn to prize praying friends, that can
prevail with God.

And let us set the crown upon prayers head, in the mercies we have from God,
in public mercies, and private deliverances of friends; attribute it not to
second means, to fortune and chance, take heed of denying God his glory.

It is a sign of a carnal spirit, when God has glorified himself in answering
the prayers of his people, to attribute it to any other means.

As I remember, I read of the Porphirian atheists, that followed the atheism
of Porphirie, they darkened the work of God in delivering the children of Israel
out of Egypt thorough the red sea. They say that Moses had learned of the
Egyptians, and they were great Astronomers: and Moses knew when it would be a
low tide, and what constellations there would be at that time, and that the
tide would prove low then, more then ever in the age of man, and Moses took the
nick of time, and lead them through the sea. Thus atheists would darken the
works of God, and put them of to natural causes. So I find it related of the
old Prophet in Jeroboams time; Josephus has it related of him, he sent to
Jeroboam to stretch out his hand he tells us that this was by accident, he was
wearied all the day long, and now he had the Palsy, and after it was restored
again; that which was done by prayer, he would have it by natural means.

Just thus it is, when God has so magnified his mercy to England, and wrought
such wonders yet many carnal atheistical spirits, say this was an accidental
thing, and the policy of such men brought it to pass, they attribute all to
natural causes, it is a sign of a wretched profane heart: For if God ever
magnified prayer he has done it in these days. There are 2 or 3 Scriptures
that since the world began were never more magnified, then by Gods working at
this day.

One is in Exodus 13. In the thing wherein they dealt proudly, God was above
them. Never since the world began was that more fulfilled. A second is that in
the 10. Psalm, The wicked are snared in the work of their own hands. If ever
there were a fulfilling of that Scripture since the beginning of the world, it
is at this day. A third is this in the text. I said not to the seed of Jacob;
seek ye my face in vain. God (as I said) has raised a spirit of prayer among
the seed of Jacob more then ever any in the world knew; there was never the
like spirit of prayer raised, nor never the like things done for prayer.

And the Lord the rather honored the ordinance of prayer now, because men so
dishonored it before and persecuted it, that the people of God could not meet
and assemble to fast and pray, but presently it was a conventicle, and they
were persecuted as factious people. Because God saw this way despised, he has
honored it, and the former, and the latter mercies that we have received, we
are to attribute to the goodness of God by prayer, they were obtained by
prayer. Let us still be encouraged to seek God for what we would have: for God
has said, it is not in vain to seek his face.

There are many of us now that can do little else: if God have delivered you
from sickness, and other evils, know that God has delivered you to pray, the
less you can do otherwise, the more you should do in prayer. I have read of a
heathen, Numa Pompylius, that he would never go about any thing but he would go
to the temple and pray: you that are instruments entrusted with our lives, and
liberties, you had need to pray much, go into your closets and sanctify all
your thoughts and resolutions by prayer, that your help and assistance may not
be in vain to us. And all others had nee^ to assist you in seeking God in
prayer. This encouragement we have, that there is not any of us that seek God
alone, but we join with thousands: why should our place be found empty? why
should not our prayers join with the rest? We shall meet many prayers in
heaven; the prayers of our forefathers; the prayers of those that are dead and
gone that did not live to enjoy the fruit of their prayers, yet when we pray
for mercies our prayers meet with theirs in heaven: therefore let us be
encouraged to seek the Lord.

And if mercies should come, what a daunting would this be to our hearts, that
mercies are come, but we have not sought them? and if mercies come not,
conscience will fly in our face that we have been sensual, carnal creatures,
and it is for our neglect of seeking God, that God has denied us the mercies
that we expected.

And then it should be a use of rebuke to those that begin to seek God, and
continue not. O wretch, why have thou left? whether will thou go? Is it in vain
to seeve the Lord? certainly thou were never acquainted with God and his ways;
thou will find it a dreadful change, when it shall appear that thou have left
God the fountain of living water, and have sought after vanity, and forsaken
thine own mercy.

But the main of all should have been for the applying of it to the present
occasion. The Lord has made good his word this day, that he has not said,
seek ye me in vain. This day testifies it to be true that they are great things
that prayer has done. I have heard many years ago by credible testimony, that
on this fifth of November, when we had such a great mercy so many years ago,
that very day it was known, that a great many godly people in the city kept it
in fasting and prayer, so as it was eminently known and delivered from hand to
hand of them in the city at that time, and you know what God did.

But what has he done of late? If our fathers should rise out of their graves,
and we should tell them that now the high commission (that they were so
troubled with) is down; that there shall be no more star chamber, that cutting
off of ears is gone, they would wonder how this should come to pass. And
whereas Parliaments were wont to be snapped in sunder, that this Parliament is
to continue by as firm an Act as any thing in the land is made by. And for
oppressors, all the Courts and Bishops Chanceries, they are down, and gone,
God has extirpated them: they were first cast out of the house, and now out of
the kingdom. And though an army did rise and seek to bring us into slavery,
yet God has given us victory (though some have suffered hardly) and brought
the adversaries very low to surrender their towns, and castles and arms. And
here we are to rejoice in God, and to bless him for all.

If many of our ancestors should rise, and hear what we speak, how we hold up
our hands and bless God, with what hearts would they join in the praising of
God, and wonder that ever such things should be done! Let not the grace of God
be in vain, as God has not said to us, seek my face in vain.

What use shall we make of it?

Let us give him real praise, and not only come to repeat it, and tell God of
it, but make his praise glorious, put a glory on it; and then we do it, when we
make a right use of his mercies, when we receive not his mercies in vain.

What is it to make use of the memorial we celebrate?

First, the remembrance of these mercies must humble us; that is a sweet
humbling; it is better to be melted by the beams of the Sun, then by the
scorching of the fire.

You will say, humbled, for what?

There are three things that we have cause to be humbled for, upon the
consideration of the mercy of God toward us,

First, the sin of unbelief, consider, when we were straightened at any time,
when we heard ill news, that our armies fled, and came to danger, how our
spirits were down as if all were gone. Let us check our hearts, God rebuked us
in a kindly manner, we might have had a furious rebuke.

Secondly, be humbled for all our murmuring and repining, and discontent, O we
did not think that the wars would have held so long, and O what taxations are
upon us, and all our estates are rent away! And how many are there that had
rather that all the good that God has done for his people since these times
should never have been done, then that they should suffer in their outward
estates. Be rebuked for all your murmuring and repyning at such difficulties as
you have met with in the great cause of God.

The third thing that this mercy should make us humbled for, and look back to,
is that if ever there have risen this thought in any of our hearts, that it had
been better for me if I had never appeared so much. I see how things are like
to be, the enemy prevails and is like to overrun all: had it not been better
that I had not engaged my self so much? that I had not appeared so much? are
they not wiser men that have kept themselves quiet and silent, and done as
little as they could, nothing but what they have been forced to? And when the
Kings party come, if they tax us, they can do no more then force us. If thou
have such a thought, pray to God to forgive that thought: Let this that God
has done rebuke thee. Art thou sorry for what thou have done? thou see God
will do it without thee. If thou have been a public instrument, and have done
good and yet if in fear of success thou have repented; God rebukes thee this
day.

Then labor to love prayer as long as you live, as David says, I will call
upon God as long as ever I live. Prayer casts the scals, and has the advantage.

First, the other side they feared not to suffer much if they were overcome;
they think they have a head and they would be where he was, and he would
countenance them, and make good their condition for them, but this side if they
had been overcome, they had been men utterly undone: what a mighty advantage
was there one way more then another?

Then the Kings side if he had prevailed he had places of dignity to bestow; if
the Parliaments side prevail, we are but where we were, we do but maintain our
own, we cannot expect to raise our condition. But how many broken Gentry
expected to raise their condition on the other side? As it is said concerning
the Pope, and the general Counsel; the Pope prevailed, notwithstanding the
general Council, though that were above him, why? the Pope had
Cardinallships, and Deaneries to bestow but the Council had none; they had the
advantage that way.

Again, those that appeared on the one side how were they discouraged
extraordinarily? on the other side they were encouraged to the utmost. On the
one side how unfaithful have they been? on the other side they have kept to
their principles, because their principles are suitable to the flesh: but there
are many on this side that have not gracious principles and had a public
cause, therefore they have been unfaithful. We have use of men that have not
principles to act by, but all the other go according to their own principles.
The one part acts that they may gratify men's lusts; now the generality of the
world love it; they know if the one party prevail they shall have liberty, and
live lycensciously, but if the other prevail they shall live under laws. Now
men would have their lusts; therefore when they see on the one side they shall
have their lusts, and on the other side they shall be more curbed, they strive
hard for their lusts.

At the first I wondered that men should be so vile to fight to make themselves
slaves: but when I considered, they shall have slaves under them, and have
their lusts, and the other side be more curbed, then I was satisfied, and
wondered that God should cast the scales the other way, they having all the
advantages in a carnal way more then the other. Only here it is, we have
people that have prayed, and this has cast the scale. Love prayer, and praying
people, and join with them, be on their side, for God is with them, and will
not suffer them to pray in vain: a praying Christian is a useful Christian in
the world.

Again, make this use of all that has been done. Look how far thou think
the adversaries would have been hardened if they had prevailed against the cause
of God, be thou so much the more resolute in the cause of God. If they had
prevailed how would they have blasphemed? and many thousands of Atheists would
have been made more then there was before: what a mighty offense, and stumbling
block would this have been? Now since God has turned it the other way,
justify God and his cause; settle your hearts in the love of God, and his
cause, and settle your selves more strongly in the reformation in hand.

Further, let us give him real praise, that we may not receive the grace of
God in vain. By this grace we hope that he has given us our estates that we
were afraid would have been rent from us; we have the continuance of our
liberties, and of the Gospel. Let our hearts be engaged to God to give up our
estates this day; let us renew our engagements to God in secret, between God
and our souls. Lord thou might have taken away my estate by the spoylers, it
was near it; and thou have done it to other of my brethren, and is mine
continued! that estate that should have been spent for their lusts, I am
resolved to spend it in thy service that have preserved it; and I account it a
great mercy that I have an estate to honor thy name, I feared I should not.

God expects, that ever henceforward you make a more holy use of your estates
then before. And call your hearts to question, what do I do with my estate for
God? what honor has God from my estate more then before? God expects more, or
else God may justly say, in vain have I preserved this wretches estate: there
are many of my servants, if I had preserved their estates, they would have
improved them in the towns and places they lived in, and here is a wretch I
have preserved his estate, and he is more greedy and scrapes up for himself,
and all his thought is, how to repair what he has lost by taxations, etc. The
Lord may repent of what he has done, and the curse of God may follow such a
man's estate. Take heed, know that there is an engagement after this time.

And so for the liberty of the Gospel, God expects that you should prize the
Gospel more then ever. Lord, we were afraid the Gospel would have been gone if
thou had given us up into the hands of our enemies, and our eyes should not
have seen their teachers; we should not have heard things that refresh our
hearts; shall we have the Gospel, and hope that our posterity shall have it? we
hope that we shall never provoke thee as we have done heretofore to take it
away. A man that has been in danger to loose his estate, and has recovered it
will be careful after. Our slighting of the Gospel because we had it so
ordinary might have caused God to take it from us; and has God restored it?
let us take heed we provoke not God now, but attend upon the word more then
ever we did.

Lastly, does God say to us we shall not seek him in vain? Let not God call to
us in vain. If when we seek God, our seeking is not in vain, then when God
seeks us, let it not be in vain. There is all the reason for it in the world.
If God be so gracious to poor base worms, sinful creatures, that if we do but
chatter, our prayers are not in vain: is it not reason when God calls, that he
should not call in vain? When God calls out of his word to perform such, and
such duties, God seeks thee, then make use of this text, I have called upon
God, and I never called in vain; and now I go to hear the word, and out of the
word he calls me, and seeks me, let him not seek in vain, but say, Lord what
say thou to thy servant? The Lord is ready to hear your cry, be you ready
to hear his, and go on, go on with encouragement, the Lord has encouraged us
this day. And let all your prayers and endeavors break through all
difficulties, and the Lords mercy shall break through all oppositions: for he
has not said to the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain.

Psalm 16.3. But to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent in
whom is all my delight.
IN the beginning of this Psalm David prays to God for preservation, and for
deliverancc out of some great evil, that it seems was upon him, or that he was
in danger of. The argument that he uses, is, First his trust in God, In thee
do I put my trust. And it was not an ungrounded and unwarranted trust, but that
which proceeded from his interest he had in God, O my soul, thou have said unto
the Lord, thou art my Lord: thou art mine. But what if David should now perish
in his distress, should God be any looser by it? David seems to acknowledge
this, that though he should not be preserved, yet God was bound to preserve his
own name, and his own cause; my goodness extends not to thee. Though I
should live, yet it is little that I could do for thee. But to the saints that
are in the earth. Though my goodness extend not to thee, yet I may be useful
to thy people, unto thy Saints while I live, it extends to them, and they are
they that my soul closes with. O, I desire to live, and to be preserved that I
may be of use to them.

It is a great argument to prevail with God, when any of you are in danger, and
seek for preservation, if your hearts work thus to God, that the desire you
have to be preserved is, that whatever you are, and what ever you can do may
extend to the Saints, that you may live to be of use and service in the world
to Gods people. Many of you when you apprehend your selves to be in danger, you
cry to God to be preserved: but to what end? wherefore would you be preserved?
wherefore would you live? If we may judge of your ends according to your
practice you would live that you may have more time to satisfy your lusts,
that you may have more time to dishonor God, that you may have more time to do
mischief in the places where you live. There is this in the heart, and God sees
it: God sees whatsoever will be after in your lives; God sees before what was
in your hearts when you cried to be preserved. But now one that is gracious he
desires therefore to be preserved, O that I might live to be of use in the
place where God has set me. If God should take me away now my conscience tells
me that it is little service that I have done for him. I have been of little
use in the place where God has set me, O that I might be preserved for this
end, that what I am, or have, might extend to the Saints in earth, even the
excellent in whom is all my delight. Thus you have the scope of the words, and
the dependence of them. And in them there are these two things.

First, the high esteem of the Saints, they are the excellent of the earth.

And secondly, the sweet delight that David's heart had in them, in whom is all
my delight.

For the first, the high esteem that David had of the Saints, and that Saints
that were on earth, the excellent. The point is this, that The Saints of God,
those that are godly, are the excellent in the earth.

Then secondly, from this that he says, in whom is all my delight. Observe
this that, A gracious heart takes the most contentment in the Saints of God; he
is much delighted in them.

The first is but a preparation to the second: therefore I shall pass it over
briefly. They are the excellent in the earth* therefore my delight is in them.

They are the excellent in the earth. Let them be what they will in regard of
their outward meanness, yet there is an excellency in them. Job scraping upon
the dunghill; and Jeremy sticking in the mire in the dungeon, yet they had more
glory and beauty upon them, then the great ones of the earth when they sat
upon their thrones. Though they lie among the pots (as the Psalmist says) yet
are they as Doves, their wings are the wings of Doves, whose feathers are of
gold, and silver; Psalm. 77.13. beautiful and glorious. You know the judgment
that the holy Ghost passes upon the Saints in old time, that were outwardly
mean enough* there was as much meanness on them as the malice of the world
could put: the text says, they had trials of mockings, of scourgings, of
bonds, and imprisonments, they were sawen assunder, they were tempted, they
wandered in sheepskin, and goats skins: destitute, aflicted, tormented. What
kind of creatures were these, surely they were some wretched men, and women
that were thus hunted up and down to wander in sheeps-skins and goats-skins,
destitute afflicted and tormented? No such matter, they were such of whom the
world was not worthy: v. 38. that is the judgment of the holy Ghost upon such,
the world was not worthy of them.

The men of the world would have thought, and did think that they were such as
were not worthy to live in the world: but the judgment of the holy Ghost was
such, that the world was not worthy of them. I remember Chrysostom has this
interpretation of the phrase, they are such as are worth more then all the
world, more then many thousands of the world; one of them is worth more then
all the men of the world besides. It is a truth so; one Saint of God, though
never so mean, one poor youth, one servant that is truly gracious, is worth
more then all the men of the world besides that are not so. All the Monarchs
and Princes on earth, have not that excellency in them that one poor child or
servant has that is gracious.

But the ordinary interpretation is thus, they are such as have that
excellency, as that the world is not worthy to enjoy them, they are not worthy
of their presence, that they should so much as live among them; they are rather
fit to be set as stars in heaven, and be before the Lord in his glory: the
world is not worthy of them.

But what is there in the Saints that makes them the excellent in the earth?
The Saints that are the excellent. The word in the original signifies the
magnificent ones; those that have magnificent spirits, and are exceeding
glorious.

There is this in them (that I may briefly pass over this first.)

They have the image of God upon, them, and therefore they must needs be the
excellent on earth. The image of God makes them to resemble God in that which
the creature is able to conceive of; That which is the height of Gods
excellency: though it be true, whatsoever is in God is God himself: yet we
conceiving of God according to our manner, there is something of God that
appears most excellent, and glorious. And it must needs be in regard of that
expression, because grace is called the image of God. Now when we draw the
image of a thing, we draw it as near as we can according to that which is the
most proper excellency of that thing. If I would draw the image of a man I do
not draw the likeness of a piece of flesh, a beast has that as well as a man,
or I do not draw feet or legs or the back parts of a man: but when the image
of a man is drawn, there is his face drawn that is the excellentest part, and
there we endeavor to express his life, and spirit as much as can be: that is
the most excellent part; and though the spirit cannot be drawn, there can be no
picture of it; yet because it is shown most in the face, that is as near as we
can go that is drawn there.

So the image of God, is that wherein the creature resembles God in height of
excellency, and glory. It is not every resemblance of God that is Gods image:
there are some things that set out some of the glory of God, and they are but
called Gods footsteps, or his backparts. All the resemblance of God in his
creatures; and the expressions of the power, and wisdom; the invisible things
of God that we see in the creature, they are all but his footsteps, and
backparts; they are not his image, Why? because they do not resemble God in
that which he has set out to us to be the height of his glory. What is that?
The holiness of God that is the height of his excellency. Therefore it is said
of God himself, holy and reverend is his name. Gods name comes to be reverend,
by holiness: were it not for his holiness, notwithstanding all the rest, (if
it were possible to separate them) his name would not be reverend. Therefore
when the saints in heaven glorify God for his chiefest excellency it is thus
holy, holy, holy. We find not in Scripture any of Gods Attributes thrice
repeated, Wise, Wise, Wise, or Almighty, Almighty, Almighty, but holy, holy,
holy, because the excellency of God consists chiefly in that.

Now because where grace is in the creature, resembling this holiness of God,
there is that principle whereby the creature is able to act as God himself
acts: for that is holiness, the working of God to his own end in all things
suitable to his nature: so when the creature works to God as his last end, and
in some measure is suitable to that God with which the creature has to do,
here is the Image of God.

Therefore the scripture expresses grace by these 4. things, as The image of
God, The life of God, The glory of God, and The Divine nature.


There are these 4. expressions for the work of grace.

The image of God, it resembles God in his excellency. The life of God himself,
Ephesians. 4: alienated from the life of God, that notes acting like God himself.
And then it is the glory of God himself; and the divine nature, Romans 3.23. 2.
Pet. 1.3. So that there must needs be excellency in the Saints that have grace
that is of this nature.

Certainly, there is more of God in the meanest Saint, in the meanest gracious
man or woman; there is more of the glory of God then in all the world besides*
then in heaven and earth. Take all the creatures* all the glory of God in the
heavens in the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and put all into one. Take all the
glory of God the seas, those vast oceans, and put that into one; take all the
glory of God that appears in the earth, all the riches of the earth, and all
arts and sciences, and what you will; put all into one and the meanest youth or
servant that has the least degree of grace, has more of the glory of God then
all this is. There is more of the shining of God in the least degree of grace
in the poorest Christian in the world, then there is in all these creatures. If
there were a quintessence of all the excellency, and glory, extracted, and
drawn, and put into one, yet there were not so much of God, God could not see
so much of himself in that one creature that should have the excellency of all
creatures put together, as he sees in the meanest Saint that has the work of
grace. And surely then they are the are the excellent of the earth if there be
so much of God in them.

The work of grace it is that which has most of God; and wheresoever it is, it
is that which is the proper work of Gods eternal love, it is a beam of it,
therefore there is a great deal of excellency in it. Take all other creatures,
and it is possible to enjoy all the good that is in all the creatures in heaven
and earth (excepting this only, the grace of God) through the bounty of God,
and the pleasure of God. There is nothing that the creature has, but may be
communicated as a fruit of Gods general bounty except spiritual blessings in
Christ: but where ever this is, though in the least degree, it is of that
nature, that it cannot come but only from the eternal election of God. It is
that which is the principle of Eternal life, wheresoever it is, it is that
which will grow up to eternal glory.

All common gifts will never grow up to glory, though they grow up to the
height of glory, but the grace of God, true grace, it is of the same nature
with eternal glory. Therefore for the kind of it, it is the greatest good that
ever God did, or that ever he will communicate to any creature for all
eternity. I say, wherever God has municated any dram of grace, that is the
greatest good that ever God did, or ever will communicate to all eternity, to
any of his creatures, therefore it is exceeding excellent.

Only excepting the work of God in the hypostaticall union of the two natures,
wherein he joined the humane, and the divine nature together in one person;
excepting that, the work of grace in any soul is the greatest work that ever
God did from all eternity, or that ever he will do, for the kind of it.

Now that which has so much of God in it, and comes from the eternal election
and love of God; and is the greatest work that ever was done, or ever shall be
done; and the greatest good that ever was, or shall be communicated to any
creature for ever, truly this must needs be the greatest excellency. For God
made the world for that end, that he might communicate his excellency, and
glory to the world, to the creature. Now that which was the greatest thing that
God intended from all eternity; for the communicating of all his glory, it must
needs make the creature excellent. That is the first thing, they are the
excellent on earth in regard of the image of God upon them, the work of grace.

But secondly, tkey are the excellent of the earth, in regard of the seperating
of them for God: they are those that God set his thoughts upon from all
eternity, that they might enjoy him. The great counsels that God wrought from
all eternity, especially were set on work upon this great thing of separating
of certain creatures for himself from the rest of the world. Now when God shall
set as it were (to speak after the manner of men) his thoughts and counsels on
work from all eternity to set apart a few creatures for himself; if there can
be known who they are certainly, we cannot but look on them as the excellent on
earth: Now wheresoever we see the work of grace in any, we may by that know
that these God has separated for himself, as setting his infinite wisdom on
work from all eternity above that. That was the thing he was most excercised in
before the world, about the work of separating such and such for himself. The
Psalmist says, Psalm. 4.3. that God has set apart the godly for himself, they
are those that are dedicated, and consecrated to God; therefore there is a
wonderful excellency put upon them.

As you know any thing that is dedicated and consecrated, though it be never so
mean in it self, yet being once dedicated, being once made a consecrated thing,
there is a great deal of excellency put upon that thing. As in the law, if it
were but a piece of wood in the Tabernacle, if it were but a Badgers skin; if
it were but brass or Goats hair or any such thing that were meant in it self,
yet if it were once consecrated and made holy to God, they looked upon it as
having a great deal of excellency on it. Now I reason thus; if a piece of wood,
or a little hair, or leather consecrated to God had an excellency: what then
has an immortal soul that has the graces of the spirit, as so many pearls in
it, when that is consecrated and set apart to God to the glory and praise of
his grace to all eternity; here must needs be much excellency.

When a thing is consecrated we look on it no more according to the quality of
the thing, but to the consecration. As I remember I read of some people in
India, that when they have but lost an Apes tooth that was consecrated to their
god, they will give an unspeakable sum of money for the redemption of it
again, because it was a thing that was consecrated to their god. So I read of
another that being raised from a mean birth, he took this way to make himself
to be highly esteemed of the people, he had a golden basin that he used to wash
his feet in, he took that and made an idol of it, and consecrated it, and then
every one fell down, and worshipped it when it was consecrated. Nay, says he,
if this which was mean before it was set apart to this use, comes so to be
honored, then I that am mean by birth, being set apart to the government, may
as well be honored by you. Thus then if the superstition, and will of man
having consecrated a thing, thinks he puts so much excellency on it, how much
more when God himself, and the great and special work of the holy Ghost that
he is designed to, it is a special work of his office to consecrate souls to
God, and to set them apart to himself, what an excellency must this needs be
that is put upon them? They are the excellent of the earth. That is the second.

Thirdly, if we consider that relation that the saints have to God; they are
the nearest relations that can be expressed. Of children to parents, they are the
children of God. Of a spouse to her husband, they are the spouse of Jesus
Christ, the second person in Trinity; and in that regard they are more nearly
united to God then the Angels themselves are, in being the spouse of the Son of
God; yea the very members of his body, they have a nearer relation in that
respect to the divine nature, to the second person in Trinity then the Angels
themselves: for they have not such a relation as this, therefore they are the
excellent of the earth.

Again, fourthly, if we consider the great privileges that the saints have, we
shall see them the excellent of the earth. Not to speak of their deliverance
from sin and guiltiness, and those immunities that they have from others. But
consider they have this privilege, that God in all his attributes and works,
he is continually working for their good. There is this excellent prerogative
of the saints, there is no attribute of God but it is continually working good
to every saint of God. There is no work of Gods providence, but it works always,
continually for their good. It would be a mighty excellent honor put upon any
man, if but such an honorable assembly as the Parliament, should take thought
for such an one, and all their purposes and plots, and councels all the time
they are sitting should tend to the good of such an one in particular, taking
notice in particular of him. It is that which I said, all your wisdom, and
power and mercy, and faithfulness, and the infinite alsufficiency of God is
continually every moment working, not only for the good of those that love God
in general, but for every particular saint of God. God takes special notice
of them, and sets all his attributes continually on work for their good.

And the heavens continually work for them. They have this privilege, that the
whole world is made for them, God has given them the world, they are the heirs
of the world; as it is said of Abraham, he was the heir of the world, Romans
4.14. Abraham had little himself, yet he had the world. Now the children
inherit their fathers estate; if the world were Abraham's inheritance, then it
is the inheritance of every child of Abraham: for so the children of Abraham
are heirs to all that Abraham had, that is, as far as concerns them, therefore
they that are his heirs are heirs likewise of the world, So the Apostle says,
2 Cor. 3.18. All are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. So that
God, and the creatures are theirs, here is a mighty privilege.

Again, the privileges that they have in all the good of the Covenant of
grace. Whatsoever good there is in the Covenant of grace, all the rich promises
in the Covenant of grace are the privileges of the godly. It is admirable
privileges that the precious promises in Scripture speak of to have interest
in them all.

Besides, not only the promises, btu the immunities that come from the
Covenant of grace, as this; that they are not to stand or fall for their
eternal estate, by any thing that they are able to do themselves, they are
freed from this, their eternal estate hangs not on that which they can do.
Whereas others, that are not saints, that are not in the Covenant of grace,
their eternal estate hangs on their endeavors, and actions, God dealing with
them according to the Covenant of works, being in that condition: though they
may be such as may after come to be saints, and as God has elected, and in
love may look on them as he intends toward them: but for the present they are
in such a condition, as that they know not, but that their eternal estate
depends on that which they do themselves. Now to be delivered from this, to
have this immunity that such a thing of such a consequence, as our eternal
estate should depend upon a sure foundation, upon that which is done by Christ,
and done already; it is an infinite privilege. Others cannot challenge to
themselves this privilege, that God will accept of their endeavors; do what
they can, yet not being in the Covenant of grace, those endeavors are not
accepted. That it pleases God to accept the will for the deed; it is one of
the privileges of the saints, that comes by the Covenant of grace: but it
belongs not to others, they have not to do with this immunity and privilege.
So I might name diverse others, but then I should go out too far.

Again, this is a glorious privilege of access to the throne of grace, to
come to God in prayer. God gives them the key of all his treasures to come, and
open them, and take what they will; it is a glorious privilege that belongs to
the saints in any condition. God gives them a gracious praying heart, and that
is the key of all the treasures of God, of all the excellencies of God, that
they have liberty to come and take out what they will, be it unto thee as thou will. These are the excellent of the earth, that have these privileges.

Again, they are the excellent in earth in regard of that which comes from
them. As the work of grace is so excellent as has been spoken of: so every
gracious action that comes from a gracious heart there is a wondrous excellency
in it. There is not any one gracious action, but it has more excellency then
heaven and earth. Not only grace it self, but any action that comes from
grace, has more of God in it, and God more delights in it then in all other
things in heaven or earth.

It is an expression of Luther, (though he were a great advancer of faith, yet
he was also of holiness as well as of faith, therefore) speaking of any
gracious work of a godly man or woman, says he, preciosa etc. it is more
precious then heaven and earth. And then he goes on with another expression I
had rather be able to perform any one gracious act, of the poorest woman, or
maid; of the poorest Christian that is, then to be able to do all that ever
Alexander, or Julius Caesar had done. The least act that comes from faith, from
a sanctified heart, he had rather be able to do it, then to get all the
victories of Julius Caesar and Alexander: all their triumphs and trophies were
nothing to the least breathing of the work of grace in those that are godly,
that which comes from them are exceeding excellent. Now I reason they must
needs be excellent, that have such excellent things come from them. As when
there were such excellent things came from the body of Paul, that had such
virtue in them, that noted that there was a great deal of excellency that God
conferred upon that Apostle, and a gread deal of honor that was put upon him:
So when there comes flowing such precious liquor, such precious things from the
saints, as any holy action is, it shows that there is a great deal of
excellency in them.

Which (by the way) should teach us to abound in holy duties; though our
actions as they are from us corrupted, we look on them as despicable, yet know
that God looks on them as the most glorious things in the world, any breathing
of a gracious heart, therefore he despises not the broken heart, nor the
sighing of a contrite spirit. Psalm. 51. God can despise Monarchs, and Princes
of the world: but God cannot despise a broken heart, nor any breathings from
ti. Though thou may despise it thy self, and look on it as despicable, the
Lord cannot despise it: he sees so much excellency in it, though it be mixed
with thy corruptions; yet there is that remainder of excellency in it, if there
be but so much as may denominate it a gracious act, it is a glorious thing in
the eye of God.

Lastly, (to name no more) the excellency of the saints appears in this, the
great use that they are of in the world. As especially this is one thing that
God attains in them his great aim and end in creating the whole world. Were it
not for a few gracious men, and women, what glory should God have in all the
world? They are those that hold up the glory of God in the world, by which God
has his glory actively; for that is it that God aims at. It is true God can
force glory in spite of men's hearts, he will be glorified in spite of Devils:
but God has no active glory, but from gracious, godly people (I speak of the
inferior world) it is only the godly that God has glory from. Therefore were
it not for them God (in some kind) had made all the world for nothing. Now
those that are employed in such a great work, and are of this great use in the
world, as to bring to God that which he made the world for, the main, and great
end that he made heaven and earth for; certainly these are principal in Gods
esteem, and excellent. God can say I have my end in these: Take any town where
there are but two or three that are godly, what glory has God but of these? So
for other places where has God glory but for a few contemptible ones? They are
these that God glorifies in high and great services: these are the lights of
the world, the salt of the earth: they are these that are the blessings of the
world wheresoever they are; they are these for whom the world continues so as
it does. There is a notable expression in Isaiah, In that day shall Israel be
the third with Egypt, and with Assyria, even a blessing in the midst of the
Land, Isaiah 19.24. Wheresoever they are in a Kingdom, or a family, or a town,
they are a blessing in that Kingdom, in that town, and in that family, Israel
shall be a blessing in the midst of the Land. These are they that are the
excellent of the earth.

I would now willingly be over this that I may come to the other, but only
there is a word or two of application. And that is

First, to show what a vast difference there is between those that are godly,
and those that are wicked. Many things I might show that the Scripture
expresses of wicked ones in all their glory: let all the glory of the world be
put upon them, yet the Scripture speaks exceedingly contemptuously of them. I
must not not spend time in those expressions, only one, and that is in Daniel.
In that day a vile person shall arise. Daniel 11.21. It is spoken (as most
Interpreters carry it) of Antiochus Epiphanes, yet he is called a vile person,
as the Psalmist says, In whose eyes a vile person is contemned, Psalm. 15.
Antiochus, there are three things observed of him, yet he is called a vile
person. First, he was a great enemy to many sins. Secondly, when the Jews
wrote to him, because they feared his wrath, he being a persecutor of the Jews;
there were some that lived in Samaria that were Samaritans that wrote to him to
desire his favor, that were not their own selves Jews, but Samaritans: and
Josephus says, they wrote to him, Antiochus the mighty God; they gave him this
title of honor. He was a great man on earth accounted where he lived; among
the Samaritans, a mighty god; yet the Scripture calls him a vile person. And
then his name Epiphanes, which is as much as illustrious or glorious. He had
that title of almighty God, and illustrious, and glorious, and yet he was a
vile person. Thus it is, where God sees not the work of grace.

The consideration of this might give us some hope that there will be a time
wherein God will appear for his saints. It is not probable that God will always
suffer his Jewels to be trodden under feet in the world; that God will always
look upon such as are excellent on earth, and see them so abused in the world,
and so contemptible as they are; surely this will not be always. God has his
time to make it manifest to the world, that they are the excellent of the
earth. They are now Jewels, yet they are such as are in the dirt, and so are
despised and contemned: but there is a promise that they shall be as the stones
of a crown, lifted up, as an ensign upon the Land. Zach. 9.16. As the stones of
a Crown, God will lift them up and make them honorable. And there is another
text which is very observable; for every one to take notice of Gods intention
to make these excellent ones famous on earth. The governors of Judah shall say
in their heart, The inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be my strength. Zach. 12.5.
There was a time when the governors of Judah despised those that were gracious
and godly; but God has promised that the governors of Judah shall be
convinced of their error, and shall say in their hearts the inhabitants of
Jerusalem shall be my strength in the Lord of hosts their God. However now
through the calumnies of the world; however now through the reproaches that are
cast upon the saints of God, it falls out many time, that even the governors
of Judah despise and contemn them, and say they are seduced people, that they
are factious and turbulent, and so their hearts are against them, and hate, and
abhor them, and look upon them with such an evil eye, as those that they name
puritans: yet there is a time promised when the governors of Judah shall say
in their hearts the inhabitants of Jerusalem are my strength in the Lord of
hosts. O ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, Gods Church and people, his sanctified
ones (for Jerusalem typified the estate of Gods people under the Gospel; Gods
sanctified ones under the Gospel) shall be such as the governors of Judah in
their hearts shall say, My streng^h is in them. I see they are my best subjects
my chief strength is in them, and they are of principal use for me, and my
kingdom is upheld in peace for them, and there is the blessing of God on them,
they shall be my strength in the Lord of hosts their God. Now I see God is
their God, God hears their prayers, and has done much for them, we are
convinced of it. O this will be a blessed time, when it shall be that the
governors of Judah shall say so. Blessed be God that they do say so in any
measure, that the governors of Judah say at all of the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, of the godly, that their strength is in them: that they may see
those that are the excellent of the earth, in any measure to be truly the
excellent of the earth.

It were a ruefull spectacle, and would draw tears of blood, to see the
excellent ones to have that usage that they have had. But now to see those
excellent ones countenanced in a public way, especially in public courts of
Justice, it is glorious, when the governors of Judah shall do it: and thus we
are to pray for that it may be more and more.

And to say no more, let us learn to honor them that God has honored: since
they are excellent ones, and God has put excellency upon them, do you so too,
look on them according as God esteems them. It is observed, that God in the
time of the law did not require them to offer in sacrifice, Lions and Eagles,
those brave creatures; but Lambs and Doves, mean creatures, he would have
offered in sacrifice. So God does not regard the brave spirits of the world
that strut it out, but if there be any that be gracious and godly though they
be never so poor, and mean, as Lambs and Doves, God honors, and respects
them, they are a sacrifice to him; the broken heart is a sacrifice to God.
Therefore when God would lift up himself in glory, he says, He that dwells in
the high and lofty place. What of him? he looks to those that are of humble,
and contrite hearts, As if there were no other object in the world worth
looking upon, he looks only to them. As a thing that is before ones eye that
he prizeth, his eye is fastened on that: so God looks on them as if they were
the only object to be looked at; therefore let them be looked at by us with
reverence in our hearts: it is fit that we should honor those that God honors.

Therefore it is observed in the message of the king of Babylon to Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 32.31. When Hezekiah was sick, and God had given him a sign of his
recovery that the sun did go backward: It was a wondrous honor that God put
on him that the sun should go backward. The ambassadors of the king of Babylon
came to congratulate with Hezekiah after his recovery: but what was the
business? not only to congratulate with him for his recovery; but to enquire
of the great miracle, so the text says, the ambassadors of the prince of
Babylon were sent unto him to enquire of the wonder that was done in the land;
Why did they enquire of this wonder? there were many wonders done, but they
were not sent to enquire of others but of this. Because they worshipped the sun
for their god and because their god had put such an honor upon Hezekiah; they
perceived the altering of the sun that it went backward, and they enquired of
the matter, concerning the alteration in the sun, and after enquiry there was
news that it was for the sake of Hezekiah. Now because they worshipped, the
Sun as their god, and so apprehended that their god had put such an honor
upon Hezekiah, they honored him too. Though Hezekiah were king of the Jews,
and they were enemies one to another, Jerusalem, and Babylon, yet when God had
honored him, they sent to congratulate one another, then they put hohour and
respect one upon another upon that occasion.

That should teach us, if the heathens when they see their God put honor on
any, they honor such as God honors, then when you see or hear that God
honors gracious and godly men, and women do you so too; prize them, let them
have high esteem in your hearts. You have heard this day what honor God puts
upon his saints, therefore learn you to honor them. And much might be said, to
draw the hearts of all people to the love of the people of God. Somewhat for
the people of God; to walk as excellent ones, not to defile one another. And
for others, if they would be those here in the world that be excellent and
glorious; it is the outward things that you hang on you, clothes, and riches
that make you excellent ones in the eye of God, but it is grace, and
godliness, by faith the fathers obtained good report. Some think there is no
way to get esteem but outward bravery, great livings, fine clothes and the
like, and men esteem that the way to be accounted eminent more then others. So
there are many ministers that think to get esteem if they be honored before
great ones, and go brave. But you know by experience, that a faithful godly
minister, that walks faithfully, and conscionably, he gets more esteem in the
hearts and consciences not only of those that are godly, but of those that
have enlightened consciences then a hundred of those; and they vex at it that
they should do so; Why? they go a way to work to get more esteem, but they are
deceived; they look at excellency where it is not. It is not such things, but
in the work of grace, that prevails with the consciences of men. Boniface the
martyr when he was asked the question, if he might have the sacrament, if he
would drink it in a wooden challice? says he, the time was that there were
wooden cups and golden priests, but now there are golden cups and wooden
priests. There was a time in the primitive times, they were very mean, they
were content with wooden vessels; but the men were gold in regard of grace, and
godliness, and so they were highly esteemed; but now they have golden cups,
that is a great deal of bravery and glory; but they have wooden priests, those
that have no true excellency in them. The heart of the wicked is little worth.
It may be his estate, his houses, his lands may be somewhat worth, but what is
his heart worth? he has nothing in himself to commend himself. But now the
excellency of Gods people is in that, it is in the soul and heart.

It were an uncomfortable thing to any of you, if suppose you have a servant
along with you where you go, and all the respect you have is for your servants
sake; if any entertain you into their house, it is not out of respect to you,
but respect to your man; they love your man, and for his sake they entertain
you; this would deject your hearts if you should know that you have no respect
for any good in your selves, but for your servants sake. So the men of the
world, they have respect, but what is it for? for their riches, for their
honor, for their brave clothes, for their money; all servants under them, they
have no respect for any thing in themselves, they have no spiritual
excellency; especially when they are to deal with God, and the consciences of
men they have no respect. But godly men have not so many servants to gain
respect by outward things: but that respect they have of Gods saints, and in
the consciences of men they have it from an internal excellency. But we let
this go.

It follows the second point, The excellent of the earth.

In whom is all my delight.

It is but little that can be done I see, though it were the point I intended
most. That that has been said already makes way abundantly into the heart,
that if they be the excellent of the earth, there is cause that we should
delight in them. That is the point, that A gracious heart takes great delight
in the saints on earth. First in their persons,

Or else in their society, and communion with them.

Or rather thus; they take delight in them, severally or jointly.

If they look upon any one saint of God, they have delight in him, but they
have more to look on all together jointly; so they can say their souls delight
in them there is a sweet complacency take them jointly. And that is that which
I shall speak to at this time, the delight that is to be taken in the saints,
took jointly together. The delight in the saints in regard of the sweetness of
their society and communion with them: for so this delight of David is to be
taken in a large sense, not only in one particular, because of the good that
he saw in their persons: but in regard of all the good he saw in them, and by
them in joining with them take them altogether jointly. All the good that came
from them, so he delighted in them. There is a great deal of delight and
contentment to be had in the saints of God, especially jointly.

If you look at one sometimes (though in never so mean a condition) there is a
great deal of delight there. As Doctor Tailor the Martyr, that we read of in
the book of Martyrs coming to Bradford, he professed that it countervailed all
his trouble in prison, that he was acquainted with that Angel of God John
Bradford meaning him in particular. And another that professed that he had
rather be with Cato, (a heathen) for his moral excellencies, in prison then
with Caesar in the Senate in all his pomp. To be shut up with one godly man is a
great deal of delight and contentment what a great deal of delight is there
then in their being together, and in that way wherein most of their
excellencies appear? such delight is in them jointly.

First, because the most comfortable communion that possible can be is enjoyed
with them, and in them: for

First, is it not a most delightful thing to see a company of godly people
together to behold the resplendent beauty, and glory of the graces of Gods
spirit? If there were nothing else, what a delightful thing is it says the
heart? The very sight of good men it is pleasing and delightful, to those that
look upon their faces, wisdom makes their faces shine. The seeing of the
resplendent grace of God in them is very delightful. What is the delight of
God, but the seeing of the shining of his glory in his works? especially when
God sees that which is the shining of his highest glory, as his own grace and
holiness, that God delights in most. So when a gracious heart sees his own
image, and that grace that God has wrought in him, he sees it resplendently in
others, it is a delightful object.

Again, there is a comfortable communion with them in regard of the fragrancie
of grace. The beauty of grace is delightful, but the fragrancie, the
breathings of grace, are sweet in the heart. The beholding of it is delightful
to the eye, but the workings of their grace is exceeding sweet, and comfortable
to the heart: Therefore says the Church, Let my beloved go down into the
gardens, among the beds of spices. Cant. 6.2. All the Churches of God in the
world are as the garden of Christ; and every particular Church in that garden
is as a bed of spices; and every particular saint is as the several parts of
that bed especially the fragrant smell is very sweet. It is said of Alexander,
his very body was of such a constitution, that where ever he went there was a
sweet savor came from his body. Certainly, where there is but one of Gods
Children, there it sweetness from him; but where there is a company jointly,
there is a wonderful unspeakaable sweetness comes from them; it is exceeding
comfortable to a gracious hear.

Again, their communion is comfortable and delightful jointly, in regard of
the nearness, there being no communion under heaven wherein there is that
nearness one to another, as of the saints. Observe, (that you may see how near
they come together, and are made one, and so are exceeding delightful one to
another) any thing the more spiritual they are, the more they are united; the
more corporal they are, the less union. A heap of stones are not united, as
the several beams of the sun, a thousand of them are united in one point,
because they are of a spiritual nature. So it is with the spirits of men, the
more carnal any men, and any society is, the less union: therefore the reason
why the people of God many times are divided, and not united is, because they
are carnal. Are ye not carnal, says the Apostle, when there were divisions?
were you spiritual you would be more united one to another.

It is with spiritual society in regard of spirtuall union, as it is with the
soci^ty of wickedness. There is bodily, fleshly wickedness, and there is
spiritual wickedness. Now those that joys together in gross, bodily
wickedness, they are not so closely united as those that join in spiritual
wickedness. A companion of drunkards or whoremongers, they take delight in one
another, and join in wickedness, but it is corporal, therefore they soon fall
out, and fly in the faces one of another: but those that join in spiritual
wickedness as politic ambitious men men that join in mischief in a spiritual
way, they keep mighty close, and you cannot break their bond of union; they
will suffer much before they will discover one another, and break union one
with another, because their union is in a way of spiritual wickedness. So on
the contrary, when any are united in the spirit of holiness, they are mightily
united, there is no such union under heaven is that.

We read of the curtains of the Tabernacle, Exodus 26. there were some of them
that were made of purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and their taches that
held them together were pure gold. There were others of goats hair, and their
buckles were brass. So it may set our the different condition of men in the
Church. There are some in the Church that are truly gracious and godly, that
excel in grace, and they are united by tacks of gold, their union is mighty
strong and glorious in their hearts. There are others in the Church, outward
professors that are carnal, that are goats hair goats in the Church; and they
maintain a union too, but it is but brass, the ground and bottom of the union
is but mean, it is not such a golden union, as the union of the hearts of Gods
people; there are no people under heaven so united as they.

It is true, through their corruption there is a great deal of dissension (as
there is corruption in the best) but that is as far as they are carnal; the
more spiritual they grow, the more near is their union one to another, and the
more entire is their love, My beloved is one, says Christ to his Church, and
the daughters saw her and blessed her. There is an oneness, and entireness in
the hearts of the saints, and this makes them to be blessed by those that
behold them, and makes their communion very delightful: That is the first
particular, their communion is most delightful of all other communions:
therefore David says, all my delight is in them, taking them together.

But then in the second place, a gracious heart must needs delight in the
saints, if you take them jointly; because that when they are together, there
God is worshipped: the solemnest worship that God has is from the faints joined
together. As I told you before that the glory that God had in the world was
from them all: but the solemnity of Gods worship cannot be but from them
jointly together. Therefore the great delight of a gracious heart is to be with
the saints when they are jointly together: because there the name of God is
honored, and they worship God in a solemn way; God is honored among them.

Christ himself much delights in the Saints when they are joined together in in
the duties of holy worship, do but compare two texts of Scripture, that will
both make us in love with the saints, and delight in joint communion with them*
Compare Psalm, 22.22. with Heb. 2.12. The Psalm is a prophecy of Christ; and
generally all interpreters go this way, that it is so, it appears by the Psalm
that Christ especially is meant: the text says I will declare thy name unto my
brethren in the midst of the congregation will I praise thee. It is the
promise of Christ to declare the name of his father to his Church and people,
and in the midst of the congregation he shall praise God. Mark it, in Heb.
2.12. the Apostle applies it to the saints joined together, saying, I will
declare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the Church, will I sing
praise unto thee. This was after Christ had been in the flesh, yet the Apostle
applies this to the Church, in the midst of the Church, will I sing praise
unto thee. This they gather hence, that Christ he delights in being with his
people when they are jointly together, because of the solemn worship of God,
that is tendered to God by them, and he joins with them in it as a delightful
work: as they are together to praise God, Christ is praising him; as they
worship, Christ is worshipping. Now every saint of God has the spirit of Christ
in him, and so he delights in the society of the saints on this ground, because
there is worshipping of God, and God is praised solemnly among them. If there be
any in the world, wherein God has solemn worship, it cannot but grieve a
gracious heart, that he is not with them, his heart is with them, he delights
to be with them, especially in such a work as that, it grieves him that he
cannot be there.

It is a note of an Interpreter that I have met with upon Isaiah 6. where the
Angles cry Holy, holy, holy, Lord of Hosts, the Prophet cries, Woe unto me for
I am undone, etc. says he, upon this ground, because he could not join with
those blessed creatures, and so magnify, and praise, and worship God; that he
through his sinfulness was not able to join with them, he cries, Woe is me, I
am undone. So when any gracious heart does but hear, that there is a people in
the world that are precious ones, the excellent on earth, that join in the
worship of God, and honor God in his own way, and enjoy communion with God,
and I cannot join with them, woe to me that there should be any let or
hinderance that I cannot come and join with them: for my heart is there, my
delight is in the saints when they are jointly together: because Gods solemn
worship is there.

But thirdly, my delight is in the saints jointly, in regard of the wonderful
delight God has in them. A gracious heart must needs delight in them, because
God himself takes so much delight in them: but especially when they are jointly
together. There are special expressions in Scripture of Gods taking delight in
the sains jointly, as in Zephany, Zeph. 3.17. the Lord thy God in the midst
of thee is mighty: he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy: he will
rest in his love, he will joy over thee with singing. What expressions are here
of Gods delighting in his people! The Lord thy God will rejoice, he will
rejoice over thee with joy; he will love, he will rest in his love, and joy,
and joy over thee with singing. And in Isaiah, you shall find that the Church
is called Hephzebah, Gods delight: it is a wondrous delight that God has in
his saints.

There are wonderful expressions in Scripture for the manifesting of Gods
delight, even to admiration, especially in the Church jointly together. They
are such expressions as we could not think or invent: as namely, that he calls
his people his portion, his pleasant portion, Deuteronomy. 32.9. God calls them his
inheritance, the lot of his inheritance: Jer. 12.7. he calls them the dearly
beloved of his soul; Exodus 19.5. he calls them his peculiar treasure: God has
treasures in the world; the creatures that are called the good treasures of the
Lord: Deuteronomy. 28. but this people are called his peculiar treasure, there is a
particularity: There is another kind of excellency in the people of Gods
delight, then in all other creatures; they are his common treasure, but his
people are his peculiar treasure. God calls them his glory, The house of his
glory, Isa. 46.13. The crown of his glory, Isa. 60.7. he calls them the Throne
of his glory, Isa. 62.3. in several places that I cannot stand on. His glory,
the House of his glory, the Crown of his glory, the Throne of his glory. He
calls them the royal Diadem, he calls them his ornament, an ornament set in
Majesty and glory. There are these expressions, and more I might name of Gods
delighting in his people. Therefore if God delight in them and find
satisfaction, much more' should we.

Christ speaks of his Church, O my sister, my spouse, my heart is ravished with
thee. It is a strange expression, for Christ himself to be ravished with his
people. It is an expression beseeming the Church, to have said so to Christ,
but for Christ to say so to the Church, it is wonderful. And again, My love,
my dove, my undefiled one, Cant. 2. and at that very time when the Church was
in a state of security, that Christ should call her his love, his dove, his
undefiled; all to express the abundance of delight in his people. Well, if God
have such delight in them, much more should the saints.

Again, if we consider further, the presence of God among his people, it is
another argument why the saints of God should take so much delight in other
saints, especially when they are joined together, because God is present there.
The Lord is here, is the name of all their assemblies, The Lord dwells, and
has his tabernacle in Sion. It is a strange expression concerning the presence
of God, in that he makes his people his habitation. As the people of God call
God their habitation: so God calls his Church his habitation. God dwells in
Sion. Ps. 90. Would you not delight to keep house with God? Where Gods people
are, God keeps house; and we should long to have it our own house, and not come
as strangers. A man may come as a stranger, and take a bit, and be refreshed in
a family; but it is not his house. But now Gods people when they go tootthers
of the saints they see God there, and they have that house for their house. It
is called (as I told you) the house of his glory; that house that God desires
to dwell in; he has a mighty love to that house, to dwell among his people. In
Psalm. 132. there are many great and excellent expressions. For the Lord has
chosen Zion, he has desired it for his habitation, Psalm. 132.13, 14. God
desires Zion; what is Zion, but only his saints and people joined together?
Zion was a type of the Church: so now all the saints of God together are Zion.
Now God has a desire to this habitation. God dwells in the high and holy place,
the highest heaven is Gods habitation; but though God have such a house in
heaven, yet he is not (as it were) contented with that house, but he desires
another house; he has a desire to Zion to be his habitation, and the house
where his honor dwells. You know a Prince may have some houses of meaner
regard, when he goes to his sport, he may have a mean house to lodge in for a
while: but his palace where he shows his Majesty, and honor, that is more
glorious. So the people of God, and the Church, is called the house of Gods
honor, it is not a mean house, but a house of honor.

Further, it is that house that he means to dwell in for ever, he loves it so
well. This is my house, I will dwell in it for ever. I am so well pleased with
it, I will rest in it for ever. Surely, we have cause to rest our hearts in
Gods people, when God finds rest there, and for ever.

It may be some of you are sometimes acquainted with the people of God, and at
the first delight in them: but your hearts being carnal you soon grow weary of
them. It is not so with God, he delights in his people, and rests there, and
rests there for ever,

But you will say, how is God present with his saints more then in other
places; why is God said to dwell among his people, his Saints?

I answer, in two regards God is said to dwell among his people in a special
manner.

First, because he makes himself known to his people, more then to all the
world besides. There are none that know the counsel and mind of God, so as his
saints do. God is known in Judah. Psalm. 29.9. There God opens himself, In his
Temple every man speaks of his glory.

Secondly, because God communicates himself most among his people. God is said
to be in heaven. Why? but because there he manifests his glory more then in
other places; therefore heaven is his habitation. If that be his habitation
where he manifests himself more, then his people are his habitation, because he
manifests himself most there.

Secondly, heaven is the place of Gods residence* because he communicates
himself most there: then also Gods people are his residence, he communicates
himself there. And he communicates himself to them in a special manner in
four regards.

1. He communicates more choice mercies.

2. He communicates mercies more fully.

3, He communicates mercies more powerfully.

4. More universally, then to others.

1. He communicates goodness among his people and saints more choisely, more
choice mercies of God. There is a remarkable place in the Psalms, The Lord
that made heaven and earth bless thee out of Zion. Psalm. 143. ult. He says
not the Lord that made heaven and earth bless thee, either out of heaven or
earth, but out of Zion, as noting that the choice mercies that God has to
communicate are out of Zion; among his people joined together in the way of
worship. Would you desire that God should bless you with the chief mercies
that he has? look upon God as blessing out of Zion; out of Zion God
communicates his choicest mercies: therefore it concerns all to be in Zion,
that they may have God to bless them out of Zion; there runs the sweetest of
Gods mercies indeed in Zion.

Again, God communicates his mercies more fully among his people then any other
way. Psalm. 36.7, 8. How excellent is thy loving kindness, O God! therefore
the children of men put their trust under the shadow of thy wings. They shall
be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and thou shall make
them drink of the rivers of thy pleasures. They shall be abundantly satisfied;
how? not with the creatures, but with the fatness of thy house. Neither with
thy communication to them alone. God has abundance of mercies for his saints
alone: but when they are among the saints jointly together, then they shall be
abundantly satisfied with the fatness of his house, and he shall make them
drink of his rivers of pleasures. While they are alone in corners, they may
have many sweet drops of pleasure from God, but when they are joined with the
saints, there are rivers of pleasure, and delight that come to their hearts:
therefore there is great delight to be had in the saints of God when they are
joined together.

Thirdly, he communicates them more powerfully, mark, in Psalm. 13^.3. As the
dew that descended upon the mountain of Zion; for there the Lord commanded a
blessing, even life for evermore. There was blessing, and the Lord commanded
it* there went a powerful work of Gods grace upon the hearts of people there*
when they were joined together in Zion: there God commanded the blessing. If
you would have God speaking powerfully to command a blessing on your souls you
must be among his people, you must join in a holy fellowship with his people;
there God commands it.

In the last place, more universally all the goodness of God is communicated
among his people, therefore the Church is called the perfection of beauty;
Psalm. 50. that some translate, the universality of excellency and beauty.
There is a universality of all among the Church and people of God. And in
another place, All my springs are in thee. Psa. 87. speaking of joining with
the people of God, that is, all my springs of truth that are revealed to me;
all the springs of comfort that I have communicated to my soul, all the springs
of grace that I have, to quicken me, they are all in thee in the joint society
and communion with Gods people, I find all. Thus we see the presence of God
among his people in regard of the communication of himself to them, and
therefore what a great deal of cause there is to joy, and delight in the saints
jointly together.

Again further, there is abundance of cause to delight in them joined together,
in regard of their admirable privileges as they are joined together. They have
privileges as they are alone, but as they are joined they have committed to
them the oracles of God, Romans 3.2. all the ordinances by which God conveyes
himself. To them are committed the seal of the covenant, you cannot singly have
the seal of the covenant, but joined with the people of God, closing with them.
To them is committed the very power of Jesus Christ: says the Apostle, When ye
are together with the power of Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 5.4. a glorious privilege.
Yea, further, take this one thing they are inheritours to all the promises that
ever God made to the Church from the beginning of the world. There is no
society of saints that join in Christian fellowship, but they are so. See a
remarkable place for that in Isa. 54.17. No weapon that is formed against thee
shall prosper, and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou
shall condemn: this is the inheritance of the servants of the Lord. That
promise that God made to the Churches before, this is their heritage. And
conceive of this one now that is of great use, that all that is said in
Scripture concerning Gods delight to be among his people, and in Zion, all were
but to type out the excellent condition of Gods Church in the times of the
Gospel. The most of the expressions are of Gods delight among his people in the
time of he law: but know that all those expressions were but mere types, and
there is a great deal more in the Antitype there in the type: therefore the
saints of God joined under the Gospel have abundance more of the glory of God,
of the presence of God, and of privileges, then Zion had, or Jerusalem could
have; because that was but a type of their happy condition under the time of
the Gospel.

It is an observable place that we have in the Hebrews, it is said concerning
the state of the Church, that the law had but a shadow of good things to come.
Heb. 10.1 and not the very image of the things. It was not so much as an image:
observe, a shadow is not so much as an image; but an image is not so much as
the thing it self: but that was not an image, but a shadow. As a Painter that
takes an image, he draws first the dark shadow with a cole, there is a great
deal of difference between that shadow, and the image in beauty: so much
difference there is between all the glory of God in the Church in the time of
the law, and that glory of God that is among his people in the time of the
Gospel. We may safely say, there is the like difference between Gods
manifesting of himself to his people then, and now; as between a dark shadow
drawn with a cole in comparison of an image. But mark, it was but a shadow of
the image; that which we have now is but an image. As there is not so much in a
shadow as in the image, so there is not so much in the image as in the thing it
self. The presence of God and all his goodness to his people, and his glory to
his people now, it is but an image to that which shall be; there shall be
another presence of God, another communication, and revelation of God
hereafter, in another kind then there is now; all that we have now is but an
image of that which shall be; all that was in the law was but a shadow of that
image: therefore we should have a great deal of delight in the saints.

Much might be said further, for delighting in them now, because they are those
that we shall live for ever with in heaven. Look to the saints especially
together, they are those that we shall live eternally together with in heaven,
therefore they are those that we should deligh in. They are those that we shall
be joined with for ever in everlasting halelujahs, before him that sits upon
the throne, and the Lamb. Look upon any saint, though he be never so mean in
gifts and abilities, thou and he shall always joy in the presence of God in
glory.

Yea to be among Gods people is heaven it self; they are not only those that
we shall be with in heaven, but it is heaven. Behold, says the Lord, I create
a new heaven and a new earth. Isa. 65.17. The state of the Church is called
heaven, For what is there in heaven but is here? I might show the resemblance
of heaven, and that which that is in heaven is here among us, and therefore if
heaven be a place to be delighted in, the saints are.

Therefore have a high esteem of the saints, close with them, and come into as
near communion as is possible. If they be so excellent, and to be delighted in
then especially when they are joined together labor all to come in, and join
with the saints in the nearest union that is possible, in that fellowship
wherein you may (as near as can be) have fellowship only with them, especially
that have the appearance of such.

The mixture of our communion does much hinder our delight. Cast dirt into the
fire, and it will damp it: so the mixture of ungodly ones, their spots and
blemishes hinder the delight of Gods people one in another. But now to come
among those that your hearts may close with, that you have comfortable
evidence, that they are not mere talkers of religion and professors at large,
but that the image of God is on them, O what closing is there with their
hearts, and what admirable good might we enjoy in the communion and society of
them. Therefore know that it is one of the greatest blessings that you are
capable of in this world to have the nearest communion with the saints next to
your immediate communion with God himself, it is that which you should so
^steem; and your hearts should work after. Mark that text Psalm 36. what is
said dour joining with the people of God, how excellent is thy loving
kindness, wherein appears the excellency? They shall be satisfied with the
fatness of thy house. It is a fruit of the excellency of the loving kindness
of God for people to be of Gods house, and to partake of the fatness of it. To
have abundance of Gods creatures, and to have an estate, and friends, it is a
fruit of Gods kindness, but to join with Gods people in a way of worship and
in the nearest union it is a fruit of the excellent loving kindness of God to
admiration. How excellent is thy loving kindness? it was so excellent that he
was not able to express the excellency of it.

It is made in Scripture to be the proper inheritance even of the elect of God;
to enjoy communion with the people of God, in the type, it is a fruit of the
very inheritance of the elect of God; so as it is opposed to all the vanities
of the world. Mark what God says by Isaiah, Vanity shall take them away, but
he that puts his trust in me shall possess the land, and shall inherit my
holy mountain. Now the mountain of God was but a type of Gods Church under the
Gospel, and what God intended to do to the Church. Now says he, vanity shall
take them away, they seek vain things, and they must have estates, and houses
and trading, and they will suffer nothing for the enjoying of such privileges:
but for those that be my own people, they shall be in my holy mountain. So in
diverse places the holy mountain of God is called the inheritance of the saints;
as the proper enjoying of it is the benefit of them; those that enjoy it are
the right heirs of God.

That was a special part of wisdom of the wise merchant, when he had found
the pearl, to go and buy the field, he was not content with the pearl, but he
buys the field: now the field is the communion of saints, the Church of God:
the saints joined content themselves merely with the knowing of Christ, and
hope you have part in Christ, but buy the field, and labor to enjoy Christ
with his people. Think it not enough to go up and down, and now and then get a
good sermon, and snatch in one place, and in another: but you dishonor God,
and are unthankful to the grace of God, if you do not what you can to join
with the saints of God in the nearest communion you can: so that you may not
only come to be partakers of the gifts of men; but to look on men as the
officers of God set over by Christ to watch over your souls. This was the
intent of Christ when he ascended, he gave gifts, some Prophets, some Apostles,
some teachers. The gifts of Christ in his Church to show his magnificence to
appoint ordinances to build up the body that there might be relation between
people and pastor. So you are bound to look, not only to hear now and then,
but to join with the saints in a way of ordinances in the strictest communion,
that the worship of God may be set in a solemn way according to all his
ordinances; that you may look on men as pastors set over you by Christ to
watch over your souls; and herein the body of Christ must be built up.

The exercise of gifts this way or that way, though they be useful to do good,
it is not the special ordinance; the benefit that chiefly you have is to
receive good by men deputed as officers, and appointed by Christ though they be
men of meaner gifts, then you may expect to be built up. Therefore let it be
your care to come to the people of God in the nearest relation that may be. It
is an expression of Calvin concerning that text seek my face, Psalm. 27. he
interprets seeking of Gods face to seek God among his people in his ordinances,
there is Gods face, says he, though there were no way for me to get my living
but by scratching in the ground with my nails, I would seek to get my living
that way, rather then not be where the face of God is; I would be among the
people of God in the way of worship, in the way of his ordinances.

Therefore plead not, it is difficult, and hard. You must be willing to suffer
for this: the people of God formerly were willing to suffer. It is observable
concerning those godly people among the Jews, when the ten Tribes were divided
from the rest: there were many of the godly whose hearts the Lord stirred, and
they would not be content to be at Samaria, or where J^reboams false worship of
the Calves was set up but they would needs go to Jerusalem, they would obey
there, though they suffered much before they came thither. You shall find an
expression in Hosea, that shows, that there was watching of those that did go
to Jerusalem to entrap them, and catch them, and inflict punishments upon them.
Hear ye this O Priests and hearken ye house of Israel; and give ye ear, O
house of the King; for judgment is toward you, because ye have been a snare in
Mizpah, and a net spread upon Tabor. Hos. 5.1. Mizpah and Tabor were two
places, between the places of Idolatry and Jerusalem, that as they went from
Samaria, they were fain to go that way, now they were a snare on Mizpah, that
is, they watched who did go from Samaria to worship at Jerusalem; yet many went
as the story says, though it were as much as their lives was worth, yet they
would go the way to Zion through the valley of tears; and they were contented
though they suffered much to go through the valley of Bacah that they might
come at length to Zion.

There were many difficulties in the way, and many objections against them: but
certainly those whose hearts the Lord has touched, they will not be quiet, if
there be any nearer union to be enjoyed in the world with the saints they will
never rest till they come to it. And God will make the way plain to those that
have upright hearts, he will take the stumbling blocks out of their way and
show them the way that meets God in uprightness. And though there be many
stumbling blocks, yet God will be at the same time in the way, and will take
the stumbling blocks out of the way. Psalm. 84. Blessed is he (says the
Psalmist) in whose heart are thy ways. If there be any man or woman, though
they have not gotten to Gods people in the nearest communion, yet if the way to
Zion be in their hearts, blessed are they. And there is a promise too of
strength for them; though you find difficulties, God will grant his strength,
as Moses says, that God in his strength would lead them to his holy
habitation. Exodus 15.13. Indeed it requires the strength of God to lead men to
his holy habitation, there are so many troubles that lie in their way.

There is a prophecy that men should bring to Zion men and women, in Chariots,
and Litters. Now Litters are instruments to convey weak ones in; so that there
is no excuse for those that are old and weak; what shall we do? Where God stirs
the heart, though they be carried in Litters, though they be never so weak if
it be possible, they will go through. That which we delight in we are never
quiet till we enjoy it; and every one of Gods people can say, those that are
excellent in earth are all my delight. I find sweetness, when I find but one
or two of them; O if there were more of them, what delight should I have!

To conclude, if there be so much delight in the saints, in this world, what
will there be in the saints in heaven! If it be worth the greatest labor and
pains to join with them here, what will it be worth to have everlasting
communion with them! For then we shall not only have communion with a few, but
with all the Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles and Martyrs, and all the
worthies of God. If there be delight in one; what will there be when there
shall be all, and we shall delight in all, when they shall be spotless! Now it
damps our joy the weakness that we see in the saints that are sincere; we see
many froward passions in them, many passionate fits that makes their communion
uncomfortable many times: but then there shall be no more sullenness, or
passion, there shall be no more indiscretion or weoknesse as there is now. Now
to come to join with any, if there be a little grace to sanctify them, there
is abundance of weakness: but then we shall come to have communion with saints
that shall be all filled with God; there shall be nothing but God in them. Men
now have excellent gifts, but their corruptions so darken the communion, that
it is not delightful. But then all shall be in holiness, there shall be
nothing but God in them.

And they shall be always exercised in praising God: it is comfortable to be
with the saints in civil affairs, in eating and drinking, but it is more
delightful to pray, and to have the Sacrament, and to confer graciously with
them: But then hereafter we shall be in heaven with them, and shall never do
any thing but always worship, and praise God night and day together. One day
with Gods people what is it worth? when it is graciously spent in holy
exercises, how delightful is it, if it were not for the weariness of the
flesh: but then we shall never depart, nor never be weary. Now when we come to
Gods people, to be with them an hour, or a day or two, it is delightful, but
this does not last long: but we shall be so with them then as never to part how
delightful will that be?

And all this in our fathers house, in the presence of God, where there shall
be no enemy to hurt us, and before our fathers children and friends delight in
one another in a strange place: but in their fathers house, in the presence of
their father they have more delight, we shall then all come before God our
father.

To be the children of God in a dungeon, as the Saints and Martyrs, they found
it delightful: but then we shall be ever in the palace of our Father, before
the King even in his Majesty and glory. It were worth our labor to get heaven,
if it were but for this, to be with Paul that gracious spirit: if it were but
to be with one or two of the worthies of God; but then we shall come to heaven
to all the Saints, Says Sizillanum, speaking of death, O famous day, I shall
be delivered from this world, to Cato, and to such wise men, my soul shall go
to them, and shall converse no more with these people in the world, a heathen
had so much in his moral virtues. But now the children (...) of God how
comfortable may they die, how famous a day will it be to them? Here through
Gods mercy I had much sweetness in the saints of God, I delighted in them in
the world, now I go to change my place but not my company, it was the dying
speech of Doctor Preston, I go where I shall converse with those that I lived
with here. He meant especially, God and Christ. We change our place and our
individual company for a while, but we go to a place where we shall meet with
them again. As it is a commendation of the Church, we are come to an
innumerable number of the souls of saints made perfect, etc. It shall be
fullfilled in heaven, we are to go to an innumerable company of angels, and to
all the souls of the excellent on earth, that are made perfect.

Therefore, as ever you would have communion with them hereafter, delight your
selves in their communion here, the more comfortable delight you have in them
here, the more comfortable assurance you shall have of communion with them
hereafter.

FINIS.

