TRUTH DEFENDED.

OR, Certain Accusations answered, cast upon us who are called Quakers; by the
Teachers of the World, and the People of this Generation.

With a clear discovery, who are the false Prophets, and when they came in.

And who they are that deny Christ, and that Preach another Gospel.

And who deny the Scriptures, Churches, Ministers, and Magistrates, whereby the
Magistrates and People of this Nation may see they justify that which the
Scripture condemns, and condemn that which the holy Men of God justified.

By a Servant of the Lord, whose Name in the Flesh is, Edward Borough.

The Epistle.
To all you who call your selves Ministers of the Gospel, and all People in all
relations under what form of Worship soever in England, or in all the World,
who profess your selves Christians.
THe mighty day of the Lord is come, according as he promised of old, and this
day is witnessed, wherein he is establishing his Mountain, and exalting it
above all Mountains, and is gathering his people which have been scattered in
the dark and long night of Apostasy, which Christ and his Apostles saw coming
into the Churches then, and has had dominion long over the World, and has
reigned till now, and reigns now in all the Professors in all Forms every
where. But now the time is come wherein the Kingdoms of the World are become
the Kingdom of the Lord and of his Christ, and thousands witness it, to the
praise of his everlasting name. And therefore the Nations are angry, and the
Princes of the Earth, because Michael our Prince is arisen to plead with all
who make war against him. And now Herod and Pilate* and all Jerusalem are in
an uproare, and Ammon* and Amaleck* and the Egyptians, and the Philistines are
joined now against him. And all you who live in Forms, and know not the power*
do now persecute and join your selves together, being in the same nature as
the persecuters of old, which* were borne after the flesh. And now you sons
of Bondage* and of Hagar are to be cast out* and now you are all made manifest
that you are in the flesh, for all your Bows are bent, and all your Arrows
are shot at a people which are counted by you as the filth of the World, and as
the offscouring of all things, whom the World calls Quakers, in whose
Foreheads is Written the name of the living God; and unto you I say that make
War against them, and now take part with the Dragon against the Lamb, you
shall all drink of the cup of fury and indignation of the Lord. And unto the
living God, who is holy and jealous for his own glory and his name, which has
manifested his mind and will by his Eternal Spirit unto us, shall you all bow
and stoop. For now the Lord has rent the veil of the covering which has
been spread over all the Nations in all Professions, and you are all seen by
the Eternal Eye which is opened in thousands, even all, from the highest to
the lowest, who have stolen and painted your selves with other men's Words. And
all your Images which you have set up, and all your traditions from men in
which you have walked, are all seen to be stubble, and will not abide in the
day of the Lord* And all your Churches which you have gathered together by
imitation from the letter, shall all be scattered; and there you all are, for
you all deny revelation, and say it is ceased; and so you call the letter, the
light, and the Word; but with that which was before the Scripture, you are seen
and judged, even with that which shall endure for ever. And seeing you have
cast reproach upon the name of the God of Heaven and Earth, whom we worship,
and which you call delusion. For the truths sake are we moved to lay open your
nakedness, that you may be judged by that which you say is your Rule: Here in
this little Book, thou who have any honesty in thee, or any desire of truth*
and wilt search the Scripture, thou will see, that all the Teachers of the
World in all Forms, and all professors ever cried out (who had but the Form)
against them who had the life and power, as you all do now against them who
Worship God in the Spirit, and have no confidence in the flesh. And therefore,
in this following Discourse, which is Wretten by the same spirit that gave
forth the Scripture, thou shall see who are the false Prophets, and who they
are that Preach another Gospel, and who they are that deny the Scriptures. And
thou may see when the false Prophets came in, and who they are clearly proved
to be, by their own Rules. And all you who call your selves Magistrates and
Christians, you may see your selves to hold up that which Christ, the Prophets
and Apostles cried out against, and persecute them who stand in the counsel of
God, and them that declare against all the deceit as the holy men of God did.
And so you are the Beast, which holds up the false prophets, and th^se whom the
Scripture declares against. God is arisen, to dash to pieces all them who
withstand him: And therefore come out of Babylon, and out of all your painted
Forms, and come to own the first principle* which will change your minds,
even the light of Christ, which he has enlightened every one withal; and by
it you shall see what you are doing. Now if you deny this, you deny the corner
stone, and you stumble, and shall be broken; and by that which you call
natural, shall all your Image of Gold and silver, and all your mixed invented
Worship be dashed to pieces* and be for the pit: Therefore all be silent, and
speak not evil of th^se things you know not; for now you are all seen, you
who say you are Jews, and are not, but are of the Synagogue of Satan, and your
voice is known, for none is turned from the evil of his way; and therefore is
wrath coming upon you to the utmost,

A lover of your Souls, but am a Witness against all your deceit. Francis
Howgill.


WHereas we are accused by the Teachers and People of this generation* That we
are false Prophets, and deceivers, and that we deny the Christ which dyed at
Jerusalem; and that we Preach another Gospel then the Apostles Preached; and
that we deny the Scriptures, and the Ordinances of Jesus Christ; and that we
hold Free Will, and establish selferighteousnesse, and teach people to act in
their own strength to obtain life; and that we deny Churches, Ministers, and
Magistracy.

To these false accusations, I answer* It is no new thing nor no strange thing
to the children of light, who are separated from the World, and Worldly
Worships, and from the Works of darkness, to be accused falsely, and to be
slandered, by being called deceivers, and seducers, by the generation of chief
Priests and Pharisees; in which generation are the Teachers and Professors of
this age, who have a Form of godliness, but deny the power. Christ was called
a deceiver, and a blasphemer; and the Apostles were called, Movers of Sedition,
Heretics, and turners of the World upside down, by them who professed in
word what Christ was in substance, and what the Apostles witnessed, and so it
is now. We who are scornefully called Quakers, do live in, and declare forth
no other thing but the substance of what the Priests have Preached upon, and
the Professors have talked upon in their carnal minds by their imaginations.
He is a false Prophet, and a deceiver, which has not the Word from the mouth
of the Lord, but takes that which the Lord spoke to another, and calls it his,
and uses his Tongue, and says, The Lord says it, when the Lord never spoke
to him. And here are the Teachers of the World themselves, guilty of that,
whereof they falsely accuse us; for they take the Prophets words* Christ's* and
the Apostles Words to talk upon, but have not received the Word from the mouth
of the Lord; and their Prophecy and Preaching would soon be ended, if they had
not the Scripture, which is other men's Words, and that which was spoken to
others, to speak their imaginations from. And these are the false Prophets,
and Deceivers, which run, and are not sent, which speak to others,
pretending to be sent of God, but walking contrary to all that ever God sent to
declare his Name in former generations, and so are known to us by their
fruits, having no example from the Prophets, Christ, nor his Apostles for their
practice; but do walk in the example of the false Prophets of Israel, of the
Scribes and Pharisces, and of the false brethren. O foolish people, which have
eyes and see not, which have hearts, and do not understand: Is the Lord
changed from what he was? Were they false Prophets and deceivers in Isayahs
time* which he was sent to cry out against, which sought for their gain from
their quarter? and are not your Teachers false Prophets now which act the same
things? Were they false Prophets and deceivers in Ezekiels time, which he was
sent to cry against, that Fed themselves with the Fat, and clothed themselves
with the wool, and made a prey upon the people? and are not your Teachers
false Prophets and deceivers now, which act the same thing? Were they false
Prophets in Michas time, which he was sent to cry out against, which Preached
for hire, and devined for money, and cried peace to them that put into their
mouths, but prepared war against them that did not? and are not your Priests
false Priests and Prophets which act the same things? Were they deceivers of
the people in Christ's time which he cried woe against which were called of men
Masters, and which had the chief place in the Assemblyes, and which stood
Praying in the Synagogues, and which went in long robes, and which loved
greetings in the Markets? and are not your Teachers deceivers of the people
now, which are found acting the same things? Were they false Teachers* and
false Brethren in the Apostles time, which they declared against, which through
covetousness, with fained words made merchandise of the people, and went in
the way of Balaam for gifts and rewards, and Preached for filthy lucre, and
which Paul saw come and coming in his days, which were proud men* coveteous
men, selfewilled, and fierce men, heady, high minded men, having a Form of
godliness, but denying the power* which always taught people, but none were
able to come to the knowledge of the truth under their teaching? and are not
your Teachers false Teachers now, which are walking in the same steps? To the
light in all consciences I do speak, which will witness the truth. A sottish
and ignorant people, which cannot discern who the false Prophets, and
deceivers, and false Teachers are; the Lord is the same as ever he was, and his
spirit is no whi^ changed: Was it once an abomination to the Lord in the false
Priests and Prophets of Israel to seek for their gain from their quarter, and
to Feed themselves with the Fat, and cloathe themselves with the wool, and
make a prey upon the people, and to Preach for hire, and to divine for money?
and are not these things, and they that uphold them abomination to him now? Did
the spirit of the Lord in his servants declare against these things then, and
against them that upheld them then? and must not the same spirit where it is
made manifest, declare against these things, and against them that uphold them
now? Was it once an abomination in the sight of Christ in them to be called of
men Master, and to have the chief places in the Assemblyes, and to stand
praying in the Synagogues, etc. and are not these things an abomination to him
now in whom they are upheld? Did Christ cry woe against such things, and
against them that upheld them then? and must not the spirit of Christ where it
is made manifest, cry woe against such things, and against them that uphold
them now? were these marks of false Teachers then, to make merchandise of the
people, and to go in the way of Balaam for gifts and rewards, and for filthy
lucre, and to be proud* coveteous heady, high-minded, selfe-willed, and fierce
men? and are not they false Teachers now which bear these marks. Did the
Apostles give warning to beware of such, and to turn away from such then? and
must not the same spirit, where it is made manifest, give warning to beware of
such, and to turn away from such now? We witness to have received according to
measure, the spirit of the Prophets from which they spoke* and the spirit of
the Apostles from which they spoke, which is Christ made manifest in us, and
happy are all they that receive our testimony. For by the same spirit of Christ
do we declare against these abominations now, as the holy men of God did then:
For God and his spirit is the same as ever was, and what he once hated, he
hates for ever; and no other Christ do we declare forth which we witness to be
made manifest within, but that Christ which dyed at Jerusalem, which suffered
by the Chief Priests and Elders of the people; he was, and is the true Christ,
which said, He was the light of the world, and was the light which had
enlightened every one that comes into the world; and which said, Except a man
would deny the world and take up his daily Cross, and follow him, he could not
be his Disciple; and which cried woe against them which were called of men
Masters, and that had the chief places in the Assemblyes, and that stood
praying in the Synagogues, etc. and they who denied him to be the light of the
world and which took not up the Cross, and which were called of men Masters*
and had the chiefest places in the Assemblyes, and stood praying in the
Synagogues, and went in long robes these were Antichrists* and were acted by a
contrary spirit then the true Christ And here again, I charge all the Teachers
and people (in the presence of the Lord God, who do deny Christ to be the
light in every one which reproves for sin) and who are called of men Masters,
and stand Praying in the Synagogues, and go in long robes* and who uphold such
things, and who take not up the daily Cross of Christ, but live at liberty in
their wills and desires, that they are Antichrists, and that their spirit is
not the spirit of the true Christ which dyed at Jerusalem, but the spirit of a
false Christ, and so they are guilty of that themselves, whereof they falsely
accuse us; and the same Christ do we witness which the saints of old witnessed*
whose blood cleansed them from all sin* and in whose power, they had power over
sin, death, and hell: And here again I charge the Teachers and people, who say
that the saints must not be cleansed from sin, nor cease to commit sin while
they are on the Earth, that the Christ which they possess, is not the Christ
which dyed at Jerusalem, but a spirit contrary, and not the Christ which the
saints witnessed; and all the people are blind which cannot see these things
Did the true Christ once say. He was the light of the World, of every man that
comes into the World? and is that his spirit in the Teachers and Professors
now, which says Every man has not the light of Christ in them? Was that the
true Christ which said, Except you take up my Cross daily you cannot be my
Disciple? and is that his spirit in the Teachers and people, that has its
liberty, and live in pride, in lust, and in vanity, and their own wills? Was
that the true Christ which cried woe against them that were called of men
Master, and that had the chief place in the Assemblyes, and stood praying in
the Synagogues, etc. and is that his spirit in the Teachers and people which
act and uphold those things? Was that the true Christ which the saints
witnessed, by whose blood they were cleansed from sin, and had power over sin?
and is that his spirit in the Teachers and people, which says, the saints must
not be cleansed from sin, nor cease to commit sin while they are on Earth? Oh
blind and ignorant people, who cannot discern between the true Christ, and
Antichrist, which is contrary to Christ, and which leads now to act, and
speak contrary to what the true Christ once acted and spoake. And no other
Gospel do we Preach, but that which the Apostle Preached, which they received
not from, nor by man, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ, which was contrary
to man, and which suffered by man for the Preaching of it, who Preached to the
spirit in prison, to redeem the captives, and by which the fleshly man was
judged in the flesh, that man might live according to God in spirit. And this
Gospel we witness to have received not from man, but by the revelation of Jesus
Christ, which is contrary to man; for which we are persecuted and suffer by
man: neither do we speak to the wisdom and reason, but we preach to the
spirits in prison, that the fleshly man may be judged in the flesh, that man
may live according to God in the spirit* this will many witness with us, that by
the preaching of our Gospel, liberty is brought to the captives, and the
fleshly man is judged, and the spirit which was in prison is set free. And here
again I charge the teachers of this generation, that their Gospel which they
Preach is not the Gospel which the saints preached, but another Gospel, and
they are guilty of that themselves, whereof they falsely accuse us; for they
have received their Gospel from man, and by man from the Printers and
Stationers; and are made Ministers of it by the will of man at Schools and
Universities; and their Preaching is in the will of man* a limited time and
place; neither do they suffer by man, but are set up with man, and seed the
wisdom and reason of man; and the fleshly man is not judged, nor the captives
redeemed by their Gospel which they Preach; here they are accursed which Preach
another Gospel according to the Scripture. And ye are a blind and ignorant
people, which cannot see these things. Did they that Preached the true Gospel
receive it contrary to the will of man? and can it now be received by the will
of man? Did they which Preached it, suffer for it by man? and can they now who
Preach it be set up by man, who lives in the same persecuting nature? Did the
true Gospel once judge the fleshly man, and lead to live according to God in
the spirit? and does it now give liberty to the fleshly man to live after the
Flesh in the lusts of it, as the Teachers and professors of this generation
do, who profes the Gospel, but are discovered not to be come to the Law? And
the Scriptures we own to be a true Declaration of the life which they lived in
which spoke them forth, and by the same spirit from which they were spoken
(which we have received) do we set to our Seals that they are true, and the
Scripture is ours, who walk in the life of it; proud men spoke it not forth,
nor they that sought for their gain from their quarter; nor they that Preached
for hire; nor they that were called of men Master; but persecuted them that
spoke it forth, and denied it. And here again I charge it upon the Teachers
and professors of this generation, that they deny the Scripture, and are guilty
of that themselves, whereof they falsely accuse us. For they say, None must be
perfect upon the Earth; when as the Scripture declares of such as were perfect.
And they say, None must be free from sin, when as the Scripture declares of
such, as were free from sin, and were the servants of righteousness. They
say, Christ has not enlightened every one; The Scripture says, He is the
light of the World, and has lightened every one etc. Can they now who live in
the same persecuting nature, and walk in the same steps as they did which
persecuted them who spoke forth the Scripture (as the Teachers and people do)
own the Scriptures in truth? Their professing of the Scripture is as theirs
was, which made a great profession of it in the outward appearance, but put him
to death who had the life, and was the substance of it. They then, as the
Teachers of the world, do now, denied the spirit and life, which gave forth
the Scriptures.

And the Ordinances of Jesus Christ we own and witness, Preaching, Praying*
Baptism, Communion, Singing, and whatsoever was ordained for his Saints, to
practice in life and power; we witness these things in the Eternal substance,
having passed through the Earthly figures, which was but to stand for its time;
by the Eternal have we been led, by the command of it within us, and not by
tradition, from the Scripture without us. And we deny all such who have taken
up these things in their own wills, by conforming the outward man to the
outward letter, and have not entered in at the door. True Preaching we own,
and do witness it, which is the Cross of Christ, and in the power of God,
and it is foolishness to the World, and its wisdom now, as ever it was; and
we deny all speaking of imaginations from Scripture* which is in the wisdom
of the World, and which stands in the will of man, limited to a set time, or
day* or place. Prayer by the spirit, and in the spirit we own and witness,
which is not limited to a time and place. And we deny all the worlds formal
customary Preaching, and Praying for a pretense. Baptism we own, and
witness, which is with one spirit, into one body, into the death of Christ. And
we deny all Baptismes which are imagined and immitated by conforming the
outward man to the outward letter, which is but a likeness of the true
Baptism Communion we live in, which is in the light by the spirit, which will
endure Eternally. And we deny the Worlds imitation, which is in word and
declaration* and visible carnal things which will pass away. Singing which is
with the spirit, and with understanding of the Redeemed of the Lord, we own
and Witness: but the Worlds singing in Rhyme and Meeter; proud men singing,
That they are not pufe in mind; and profane men singing* That the Law of God
is dear to them; this singing we deny, for it must be turned into howling, the
Lord has said it. And here again I charge it upon the Teachers of the World,
That they deny the substance and power of what Christ commands his saints to
practice by, upholding their own imitations, and so deceiving the simple: but
where the substance is witnessed, the figure is indeed, and the false
imitations are discovered, and denied. And man's free will we do deny, for the
will of man shall never enter to God, but leads out from God into the lust,
and into the Flesh, and keeps in the power of the Devil: And man has free
will unto that which is evil, but not to that which is good; and all who
follow Christ, the light of the World, must deny their own wills, and take up
the cross of Christ which is to the will, and walk in the light contrary to
the will, in the strait way which leads unto life, which is out of the will
of man in the will of God, which the will of man does resist and oppose. And I
charge it upon the Teachers and professors who do not witness the daily
Cross of Christ, that they live in their own free will, and holds it up, and
are led by it into pride and covetousness, and the lusts of the Flesh which
stand in the will. And here they are guilty of that themselves whereof they
falsely accuse us, living in their own free will, and walk not in the daily
Cross of Christ. And selfe-righteousnesse we have denied, and have seen it in
the same light which Isayah did to be as filthy rags; and we declare against
it* and against them which live in it; for self must not be saved* it is
accursed from God, it is wholly unrighteous (and makes the best of actions so)
and is* and must be cast out from God Christ Jesus made manifest and revealed
in us, is our righteousness, and self is judged and condemned by him who is
made unto us righteousness; neither do we teach people to labor in their
own strength to obtain life* but do direct people to the light of Christ
within them, which walking in* will be strength to them to lead them to life,
the light which is of Christ, to which we direct all to wait in to be taught
by; it will lead out of selfe-righteousnesse, and from under the power of
self, to witness the power of God, to lead, and to act, and to witness
Christ Jesus revealed the righteousness of God And the Church which is in God,
which is the body of Christ whereof Christ is head, we witness* and are
members of it, gathered and joined by the Eternal spirit, and not by tradition
in the wisdom of man. And we deny all the Worlds Churches whereof they were
made members by, by visible things without, and were gathered by tradition*
whereof the serpent is head, and not Christ, and which is the body of
Antichrist, some of whom commit Idolatry in an Idols Temple: And the Ministry
of this Church we deny, for it stands in the will of man* and the Ministers of
it are such as all the servants of the Lord witnessed against; the Churches the
Ministry, and the Ministers, are contrary to God; but the Ministry which is to
the seed* which is out of the will of man, we own and witness, which
ministers life unto life, and death unto death, and divides the word aright,
judgment to the fat, and to the strong; and feeds the hungry, and loses the
bands of wickedness, and breaks not the bruised reed, nor quenches the
smoking flax; this Ministry we deny not, but are friends unto it; and who are
Ministers here* we have union withal; but proud men and such as are called of
men Master, are cast out of this Ministry, and are Ministers to the body of
Antichrist, and know not the Ministry of the Ministry of Jesus Christ as this
to the spirit in prison.

Magistrates and Magistracy we deny not, but do give respect unto for
conscience sake; for who bears the sword of justice* who use their power to be
a terror to the wicked, and for the praise of them that do well, are Ministers
of God, and we desire that there were more Magistracy here, and that the
Magistrate would more use his power to be a terror to liars, to swearers, to
drunkards, to raylers, to false accusers, and to proud men and oppressors, this
we are friends unto: but to such as act by their own wills in corrupt Laws,
and do thereby violence to the Innocent, and strengthens the hands of evil
doers* we cannot be subject, but choose rather (then to transgress the Law of
God which is written in our hearts, by submitting to such men's wills and Laws)
to suffer by the corrupt wills of men* under corrupt Laws.

And thus I have answered those false accusations which are cast upon us, and
do declare it be the same spirit in the Teachers and people of this generation
which accuses us* as it was in the Scribes and Pharisees which accused Christ
and his Disciples. And this the Scripture witnesses unto, as they did unto
him, so would they do unto us.

A further Answer to that Accusation of being false Prophets and Deceivers.
JEsus Christ Prophesied and said, That in the last days should many false
Prophets arise, and should deceive many, if it were possible the very Elect.
Now the Teachers and people of this generation do say* That we (who by the
world are called Quakers) are those false Prophets and Deceivers, which Christ
Prophefied of. Of this their false accusation have they drunkards, liars,
swearers, and all the ungodly people in every profession to witness them. But
their accusation, and their witnesses we do deny, though they preach it among
the people for doctrine. And now in answer to this false accusation and slander
I am moved to write a little, and shall to that principle of God in every man's
conscience clear my conscience, and declare what I know from God concerning
those false Prophets, who they are* when they came in, and how they may be
known; and shall leave it to every honest heart to consider of. The Apostles*
and Ministers of Jesus Christ saw the same false Prophets which Christ
Prophesied of to be come, and coming in, in their days; John said, by that
they knew it was the last time; For* said he, Even now are there many
Antichrists and false Prophets gone out into the World; such were they, who
confessed not Christ to be come in the Flesh, and they were of the world and
spoke of the world and the world heard them. Now here I charge it upon the
Teachers of the world* that they are of that generetion which went out into the
world then; for as they then confessed not Christ to be come in the Flesh, so
these uphold those things which were under the Law* which was before Christ
came in the Flesh outwardly, and so confess him not to be come in the Flesh;
and so they are Antichrist. They uphold an outward Temple, and an outward
Worship, and take Tithes, as the Priests under the Law did, as a Type and
Figure of Christ; but when he was come, and sacrificed, these things (which
were to stand for a time) were put to an end. And none who witnessed Christ
come, and were sent by him to Preach the Gospel, did uphold those things, but
witnessed forth the substance, and denied the figure; they denied the outward
Temple, and witnessed they were the Temples of God, and that God dwelt in them,
and denied the outward worship and witnessed the worship of God in spirit, and
in truth within them, (for they who worshipped without, worshipped they knew
not what, as they do now) And they desired to take Tithes, and lived of the
Gospel, and said, they that Preached it, should live of it; but the Teachers of
this generation are of the world, living in its pride, lusts, and vanities; and
they who live in the same worldly nature, uphold them, and hear them. John
also said, Every spirit that confesses not Christ to be come in the Flesh, is
Antichrist. And here I charge it upon the Teachers of the world that their
spirit of pride, and covetousness, and envy, and hypocrysie which rules in
them, is the spirit of Antichrist, and confesses not Christ to be come in the
Flesh, for where he is made manifest, and come in the Flesh, this spirit is
destroyed; For (as says the Scripture) he was made manifest to destroy the
works of the Devil. Paul was also a witness of the false prophets and
deceivers which Christ Prophefied of in his time, For he gave warning, to
beware of such* and to turn away from such whom he saw then come, and coming
in, but came more fully in after his days; he said of this sort, They were
lovers of themselves, covetous, proud, heady, highminded, fierce men, and
despisers of those that were good given to filthy lucre, and to pleasure, and
were false accusers and blasphemers, and without natural affection, and
unthankefull, and unholy, and taught filly Women, who were led with diverse
lusts, but were not able to come to the knowledge of the truth by their
teaching: they were men of corrupt minds, and reprobate concering Faith. And
here again I charge it upon the Teachers of the world, that they are of that
generation which came in then, For they are lovers of themselves, they take
money of poor people to whom they are more able to give; and they are proud
and covetous men* they go in their Ribbons and Cuffes, and gaudy attire; and
they Preach to them where they can get most money; and some takes money of
them, and sues them at the Law, to whom they Preach not at all: they are heady
and high-minded men, for poor people bow to them in the streets, and call them
Masters: they are fierce men, and despise those that are good; if any speak
against them (of the truth) they are fierce against, and despise such; and they
are given to filthy lucre, and are lovers of pleasure, for where they can have
most money, there they will abide; and they live in pleasure* in idleness, and
lust, and vanity; they are false accusers, they will call them deceivers which
are not; and that blasphemy, which is not; and they are blasphemers, and
without natural affection. They say the Letter is the Word, and the Scripture
the light, which is blasphemy; for God is the Word, and Christ is the light;
and they will suffer the rude multitude, and some will set them upon it to
hail, beat, and strike out of their Assemblyes, which is without natural
affection; they are unthankefull, and unholy; they have great sums of money
from the people, and are not thankful, but compel them by a Law to pay them;
and herein they are unholy by their actions which are declared; and they Teach
always, but men and women are ignorant still, and none able to come to the
knowledge of the truth by them: and they have a Form of godliness: they
profess the Scriptures that the children of the Lord are taught of the Lord;
and that Christ said, Take no thought what to eat, nor what to drink, nor
wherewith to be clothed. But who witness themselves taught of God, and that
they need no man to teach them; and that take no care what to eat, nor what
to drink, nor what to put on, and so witness the promise of God, and abide
in the Doctrine of Christ, these you call deceivers, and idle, and careless
persons, and thus deny the power of what they have professed; and herein their
minds are corrupt and reprobate concerning Faith; for Faith is the substance,
and purifies the heart from these things which they are guilty of. And Peter
and jude also were vvitnesses of those deceivers and false Prophets which
Christ prophefied of in their time; for, they saw such were come, and coming
in, which should bring in damnable Heresies* and through covetousness, with
feigned words, make merchandise of the people; they walk after the flesh in
the lust* of uncleanness, and despise Government, and Dominion: Presumptuous
are they, self* willed, they are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities (...)
they speak evil of the things that they understand not; they have eyes full
of adultery, and that cannot cease from sin, begniling unstable souls; an
heart* they have exercised with covetous practices; cursed children, which
have* forsaken the right way, and are gone astray, following the way of Balaam,
who loved the wages of unrighteousness, they themselves are the servants of
corruption, ungodly men, turning the grace of God into laciviousnesse, and
defile the flesh: these are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own
lusts, and their mouths speaking great swelling words, having men's persons in
admiration because of advantage; there be they who separate themselves,
sensual, having not the spirit. And here again I charge it upon the Teachers
of this age, that they are of that generation which came into the world then;
for they have brought in, and do uphold damnable Heresies, telling people,
that sprinkling Infants with Water is the Baptism into the Faith; and that
singing David's experiences in Rhyme and Meeter, is singing to the glory of God;
and that a house of stone is the Temple and Church of God; these are damnable
Heresies: and they do through covetousness, make merchandise of the people;
if they can get more money at another place, thither they will go; and thus
people are their merchandise: they walk after the Flesh in the lusts of
uncleanness; they walk in pride and in lust, and some of them will be drunk,
and lie, and swear, and talk ^n^^^^ly* and they despise the Saints Government
and D(...) for they walk in the ways of the world, in the customs and
traditions of men, and follow their own wills) And whom the spirit of God
governes, and has dominion over, follows Christ for their example, whose
Government and Dominion they are under. But they live in pride, lust, and
vanity, and according to the Flesh, and herein they despise government and
dominion, and speak evil of this dignity, and of the mysteries of God
revealed in his saints, which they know not, nor understand not, calling it
error; they are presumptuous and selfe-willed; they have presumed to call
themselves Ministers of Christ, and all the Towns where they live must serve,
and be subject to their wills. And they are adulterated from God after honor
and riches, and the vanities of the World; and they cannot cease from sin
themselves; for they say, None must cease from it while they are on the Earth;
and herein they beguile many souls; for, till sin be ceased from the soul, it
is beguiled* they have a heart exercised with covetous practices, and they
follow the way of Balaam, and go for gifts and rewards* and love the wages of
unrighteousness: they take money of poor people for sprinkling Infants* and
for burying the dead, which are covetous practices: they take money for Henns
and Eggs, and for Smoke passing up the Chimney, which are unrighteous wages;
and thus they have forsaken the right way, the way of God, and of all the
saints which spoke forth the Scripture; and in these things, they are servants
of corruption, and are ^dgodly men, and turn the grace of God, (which shines
in their consciences, which shows them their ungodly ways) into
laciviousnesse; and through their lust they defile the Flesh: and many of them
will murmr, and complain for want of wages, even to spend upon their lusts;
and they speak great swelling words, speaking of the Fame of Christ, of his
Life, and Death, and Resurrection, but cannot witness by the spirit of Christ
within them what they speak of him: and they have men's persons in admiration,
because of advantage: some of them had the Bishops in admiration, and some the
King in admiration* and now they have others who bear rule in admiration; and
thus they deceitfully have twined to admire men's persons only because of
advantage, many of them have separated themselves, none who are not of their
judgment, must join with them in their worship, but neither they, nor their
seperates have the spirit of the living God, but do deny an infallible spirit:
and they are sensual in their wisdom, and ways, and practices, and these
have deceived many, even whole Nations. And here you see plainly when the
deceivers and false Prophets came in; they were come, and coming in, in the
Apostles days, and then was the Prophecy of Christ fulfilling and fulfilled:
and the Apostles suffered under Tyrants, and were put to cruel deaths, and
then they came in more fully; for since the Apostles days has been a great
Apostasy, and many Forms of worship and ways of Religion have been imitated
from the letter through imaginations, and but one generation of Teachers*
though one above another, in the comprehension and sensual wisdom, and at
enmity one against another, though all in one birth and nature. But they are
all discovered by the light, Praises (from all that know God) unto him for ever
Since the Apostles days has darkness been spread over all, though the Lord
had some which he preserved for himself in the midst of Apostasy and
darkness; who the false Prophets are which Christ Prophesied of to every
honest heart and single eye may be known; Christ said* By their fruits should
they be known; And the fruits of the Teachers of the world are plainly made
appear to be the fruits of deceivers, and not of the Ministers of Christ; none
have gathered Grapes nor Figgs from them. And thus I have cleared my conscience
in the presence of God concerning the false slander and accusation which the
Teachers and people of the World do cast upon us; and to that in every ones
conscience it is made appear who they are to whom this accusation justly
belongs.

Woe unto all you who strive against the Lord, and justify that which the holy
men of God which spoke forth the Scripture in the Scripture, declared against;
and which condemn that which the holy men of God in the Scripture justified*
and witnessed for: you who live in pride, in covetousness, in double-dealing,
and in hypocrysie, and in the lusts of the Flesh,* you strive against the Lord
God, and against the light of God which is in your consciences, which shows
you these things to be sin; you resist the drawings of the Father, which
would draw you by the light to follow the sound: Woe and desolation is to come
upon all you who will not be taught by the light of Christ which he has
lightened you withal; which light all the holy men of God were taught by, who
gave forth the Scriptures, but do set up Teachers without you, such as all the
holy men of God, the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles declared against. Oh
blinded, stiffenecked people, which are not ashamed to call such Ministers of
Christ* and of the Gospel (and by your corrupt wills and Laws to* defend them)
which seek for their gain from their Quarter, and which feed themselves with
the Fat, and cloathe themselves with the Wool; and which Preach for hire, and
divine for money, and prepare War against them that put not into their
mouths: here you justify such as the Prophets of the Lord were sent to cry
against, and deny Isayah, Ezechiel, and Micha to be true Prophets; for if you
did believe that they spoke from the mouth of the Lord, the word of the Lord,
then would you not uphold them which act those things which they declared
against; for that which was abomination to the Lord then, is abomination to him
now; and that spirit which declared against these things then, cannot uphold
them now. And here the Teachers and people are tried, not to have the same
spirit which was in the holy Prophets of the Lord, but the spirit of the false
Prophets* acting by it that which they acted, which the true Prophets cried
against; and thus by upholding that which the Lord sent his servants to declare
against. you strive against the Lord ye Magistrates and People. And you are not
ashamed to call such Ministers of Christ which (walk in the same steps, and act
those things that they did, which Christ cried woe against) are called of men
Masters, and have the chief places in the Assemblyes, and stand Praying in the
Synagogues, and go in long Robes, and love greetings in the Markets, as they
did; here you justify such as Christ cried woe against, and deny that Christ
spoke the truth what was the mind of his Father; for if you did believe that
he spoke the will of his Father, then would ye not uphold these that act the
same things which he cried woe against. And he changes not, that which he once
cried against, the same spirit where it is witnessed, cries against the same
things. And here again the Teachers of the world are tried not to have the
spirit of Christ, but the spirit of the Scribes and Pharisces, who act that
which they acted, which he cried woe against. And herein Magistrates and people
strive against the Lord God, by upholding that which Christ cried woe against.
And such who are Ministers of Christ, and walk in his Doctrine, and in the
same steps, which he and his Apostles walked in, witnessing for that which they
witnessed, for and against that which they witnessed against them you call
deceivers, and false Prophets, and accuse them for vagabonds, and wandering
Beggars, and Idle, and careless Persons; and that they have left their
Families, and carelessely wander up and down. And herein you Magistrates and
people strive against the Lord, by persecuting, and slandering* and falsely
accusing* and condemning such as the Scripture justifies, and the servants of
the Lord which spoke forth the Scripture do witness of to be true. What would
you have called Christ, who had no where to lay his head? he was no vagabond,
nor Idle, not careless Person. And what would you have called the Apostles and
Ministers of Christ, who had lost their Families and Callings, and went up and
down, and had no certain dwelling place, but went from City to City, and
cared not for the World; not what to eat, nor what to drink, nor wherewith to
be clothed? this they did, and yet were no vagabonds, nor Idle, nor careless
Persons, but abode in the Doctrine of Christ; they were hated by your
generation, as we are now by you: And they were called pestilent fellows, and
movers of Sedition, and Haretiques, and men of erroneous judgments: And they
said, they were troublers of their Cities, as you do now call us false
Prophets and Deceivers I do declare this generation to be the same which
persecuted the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles, as it does persecute us; for
by the same power we stand, as they did; and by the same power we are commanded
and acted, as they were: And to the power by which we stand, and are commanded,
shall all the powers of men, and of the Earth bow, and be subject. O all you
magistrates and people consider of your blindness, and Ignorance, who do
absolutely justify and uphold such as the Scripture declares and witnesses
against; and do condemn and persecute such as the Scripture justifies, and
witnesses of; and do put them out of your Synagogues and Villages; search the
Prophets, and Christ's, and the Apostles Writings, in them you may read your
example, and our example. The vengeance of God you cannot fly, his fierce wrath
will come upon you, and weeping, and bowling, and lamentation, and misery will
be your portion. O tremble to think upon your Ignorance, to what purpose have
you made a profession of the Scriptures, who justify those things, and those
men, which it plainly Declares against; and condemn those practices and those
men, which it plainly witnesses of. Repent, and take warning betime, before
the Decree of the Lord of Hosts be sealed against you, for I have cleared my
conscience, in letting you see your own Ignorance, and blindness, ye
magistrates and people: And thus you are left without excuse, whether you will
hear, or forbear.

FINIS.

