ANSWERS TO SEVERAL QUERIES Put forth to the despised people called QUAKERS,
by Philip Bennett, who calls himself a Minister of Christ, but is found a
Deceiver; Answered by them to whom they were directed.

ALSO, ANSWERS To Several other subtle QVERIES Put forth by one John Reeve,
who lives in the City of LONDON, who calls himself the last Messenger and
witness unto the true God, but is found a false witness, and a liar, and a
perverter of the right way of God.

Answered by Edward Borough, and Francis Howgill, who are Witnesses unto the
Truth against this subtle serpentlike generation.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the black-spread-Eagle, at (...)

ANSWERS to several QUERIES put forth to the diepised People called Quakers.
We having received a Paper which was directed to Rich. Roper, and to his
quaking friend, which words comes from the dark carnal mind, quaking and
trembling, which the Saints and holy men of God witnessed, we own and witness;
therefore do we deny thee and all thy dark Divinations.

WHereas thou Philip Benett, in thy Note which thou have written to Roper, in
Answer to a Letter which he wrote to thee, wherein he charges thee to be a
Liar, and a false accuser, and charges thee to bring any man to witness what
thou have spoken by them, whom, thou says, denied that Christ that dyed at
Jerusalem, and who they were that denied that Christ that suffered at
Jerusalem, or else acknowledge thy self to be a slanderer, and in thy Paper,
thou gives no Answer at all to these words, but says, thou called the
Congregation to witness, but does not mention one in all the Congregation that
will witness it, whereupon the lie rests upon thy head, and thou found to be
the liar, and the slanderer, and the false accuser.

And whereas thou says, thou have sent Queries concerning that matter, thy
Queries makes thee manifest what thou art, many of thy own Tribe and
generation, if they saw thy Queries, would be ashamed both of thee and of thy
Queries; for hundereds there are in the world that knows nothing of the true
and living God, and yet would see thee and thy Queries not to be worth
answering, yet lest thou should boast in thy filthy ignorance and darkness,
and for clearing of the Truth to the simple: Something in answer to them.

1 Quer. Whether was the Word made flesh, or the Son of God made of a Woman
more or oftener then once?

Answ. In this first Querie thou have manifested what thou art to all the
children of Light, and where thou art, and what Spirit thou art of, a
reprobate, a child of darkness thou art; thou might have spared the other
nineteen Queries, for in this Querie thy spirit is tried, and in the eternal
Light seen and known: Thou asks whether the Word was made flesh any more or
oftener then once, which makes it plainly manifest, that thou knows not what
thou asks, and that thou do not know nor cannot witness the Word to be made
flesh once, but art one of the Antichrists and deceivers which John speaks of,
that are entered into the world, which cannot confess Jesus Christ come in the
flesh, and therefore thou queries whether the Word was made flesh any more or
oftener than once, which Querie comes from thy dark polluted mind, who is out
of the Light, and a stranger to the life, and without God in the world, amongst
the false Prophets, Antichrists and deceivers which are in the world, and in
the Light of Christ, which condemns the world, yea, are all seen, known, and
made manifest, and are turned away from by these who dwell in the Light, which
Light condemns thee and all thy generation eternally; and the Word made flesh
we witness which dwells amongst us, and we behold his glory as the glory of
the only begotten of the Father, according to the Scripture, whereby we
witness thee and all thy generation to be in the sorcery, and in the
witchcraft, deceiving and betraying the souls of the simple, the Light of
Christ in thy conscience will tell thee so, for that thou must be obedient to,
and witness before thou witness the Word to be made flesh once, for thou art
darkness it self, and the light in thy conscience, if thou would let it rise,
will be thy condemnation, and when thou can witness the Word to be made flesh
once, then thou will know whether the Son of God was made of a Woman any more
or oftener than once: But thou art the Dragon that would devour the Manchild
which the Woman has brought forth, who shall rule all Nations with a rod of
iron, and her child is caught up to God and to his Throne, thou, the Dragon,
and thy Angels is cast out into the earth; and therefore do thou persecute
the Woman which has brought forth the Manchild, but thou art overcome by the
blood of the Lamb, and the word of his Testimony; and for thy other nineteen
Queries, thou have conjured them up in thy black Art out of the bottomless
pit, which is to be turned into perdition, if thou had an ear thou might hear,
or an eye thou might read, but thou art blind.

2 Quer. Whether did the Man Christ Jesus the Son of God, slain, (in respect of
Gods Decree and Efficacy of his death) from the foundation of the world really
and indeed suffer death or dissolution of soul and body, as upon the Cross at
Jerusalem, more or oftener than once.

Answ. Here in this Querie thou Diviner is found adding to the Scripture thy
divinations of thy own brain, whereupon the plagues of God is to be added unto
thee, and poured upon thee, for as thou says, the Man Christ Jesus the Lamb of
God, slain (in respect of Gods Decree and efficacy of his Death) from the
foundation of the world. Oh thou liar, let all people see where there is such a
Scripture that speaks as thou speaks here, but in the sight of Christ thou
art seen, and in the life comprehended, and art for condemnation. The man
Christ Jesus we own and witness, and the Lambs book of life, which was slain
from the foundation of the world we witness, the Lamb of God, which takes away
the sins of the world, we witness according to the Scripture; praises,
praises, eternal praises, be to the Lord God for ever, and thee to be the beast
that makes war with the Lamb we witness, and thou Antichrist which looks at
Christ's death at Jerusalem alone, and cannot confess him no otherwise but
without thee, here thou art but equal with the Pope of Rome, for he confesses
Christ dyed at Jerusalem as well as thou; so let all thy Congregation see what
they hold up that follows thee.

3 Querie Whether did the man Christ ever really and indeed suffer in his own
person, for that end and after that manner which he did once upon the Cross at
Jerusalem, before the time, or since the time?

Answ. Here thou full of all subtilty has made manifest thy Poison and enmity,
but with the Light of Christ thou art seen, and known, and with it condemned
for ever; Christ Jesus in his own Person does, and ever did, suffer by thee,
and such as thou art, and by thy Generation he did suffer at Jerusalem, and
does suffer where he is made manifest by you, after the same manner, and thou
blind Pharisee and blasphemer, would thou have Christ to have more ends in
suffering than one?

4 Quer. Whether was not that death which the man Christ suffered once, and but
once, upon the Cross at Jerusalem so satisfactory for all the sins of the
Elect, as that the Justice of God, did not, does not since require any
suffering or working upon that account, either from sinner or from Saint.

Ans. Here thou Jesuit art pleading again for a Christ far off thee,
according as thy father does at Rome, That Christ that dyed at Jerusalem did
not satisfy for thee who art an enemy to him, and does not abide in his
Doctrine, but acts contrary to his Commands, and art under the woe, which he
cried against them that were in the same stops where thou art, and from that woe
thou shall never fly; The death of the man Christ Jesus which suffered at
Jerusalem we own and witness; the same Christ that suffered at Jerusalem we
witness made manifest, and the one God and the one Mediator we witness and
know; betwixt God and man, the Man Christ Jesus, according to the Scripture:
And here thou liar art made manifest to all thy Congregation to be a liar, who
said amongst them, that we denied that Christ that died at Jerusalem, so let
them all be witnesses of thy lies, and let thy mouth be stopped thou liar, who
art for the lake; and whereas thou queries whether the justice of God be not
satisfied for the sins of the Elect, here let 2 Timothy 2. 10. Tit. 1. 1. 1 Pet.
1. 2. 1 Pet. 2. 6. 1 Pet. 5. 13.
shame strike thee in the face, that ever thou should take upon thee to speak
to any people, and knows not the Scripture; where do thou read in all the
Scripture, that God does require satisfaction for the sins of the Elect, or
laid any thing to their charge, let all people try thee here by the Scripture,
and see whether thou be not a blind ignorant Sott, who does not know what the
justice of God requires, neither from sinner nor from Saint, Isa. 42. 1. Isa.
65. 9. 22. Luke 18. 7. Romans 8. 33.

5 Quer. Whether you be reconciled to God by any other obedience, than that
particular obedience which Christ performed in his own Person, and is mentioned
in the Scripture, or by any other suffering or death, than that which Christ
once suffered upon the Cross at Jerusalem?

Ans. Silence flesh: would thou, (who art an enemy to God, and a child of
disobedience, in whom the Prince of the air rules) know how we are reconciled
to God, and by what obedience, first own the Light in thy conscience which
condemns thee, and be obedient to that, and then thou shall know by what
obedience it is that reconciles to God, for yet thou knows no obedience, nor
the death which Christ suffered upon the Cross, thou do not know, but art an
enemy to the Cross of Christ, and in the mystery of iniquity, and in the dark
power and man of sin; what have thou to do to talk of obedience, who art
reconciled to thy lust, and sin reigns in thee, and thou art blind in the broad
way that leads to death, as thy fruits makes it manifest, who lives in strife
and envy.

6 Quer. Whether did not the Man Christ suffer as a public Person in the
Elects stead, or in their behalf, and for that end that none who believed in
him might dye eternally?

Ans. There thou blind guide makes many replies, but still one and the same
thing, but thou makes it manifest, that thou do not know the man Christ at
all, nor his sufferings, for death reigns in thee yet, that has passed over
all men that asks this Querie; for a public Person Christ is not to ^^ee, but
a mystery which thou knows nothing of, and for the redeeming of the Elect from
under such mouths as thine, did and does Christ suffer; and those that are
brought to believe denies such dumb Idol shepherds as thee, who as yet does
not believe, and therefore shall dye eternally.

7 Quer. Whether the sufferings of Christ now in his Saints, be all the
satisfaction that is made to, or which the justice of God looks for, for sins
past, present and to come?

Ans. There thou blasphemer asks thou knows not wha^; is not Christ the same
now as ever, and is not the sufferings of Christ satisfactory where ever? What
will thou have to satisfy, if the sufferings of Christ do not satisfy, let
all people take notice what a blasphemer thou art, or what they can learn of
such a one as thee, who knows neither the justice of God, nor the sufferings
of Christ in his Saints.

8 Quer. Whether was not that body of Jesus which consisted of flesh, blood and
bone, and which was offered upon the Cross at Jerusalem, the one and only
sacrifice for sin God accepted, and to which alone exclusively the Saints
before under the Law, and the Saints since under the Gospel, did and do look to
be justified by, without any other works.

Answ. Here again thou art replying thy former sottish Queries, which rises out
of thy dark mind, concerning the body of Jesus, as the devil did about the
body of Moses; let thy mouth be stopped here, for the body of Jesus thou knows
not, nor what it consists on; and the offering of it up thou knows nothing of,
but what thou knows and hears by the outward Letter, that it was offered up
at Jerusalem; and the sacrifice for sin thou knows not, and thou art none of
the Saints, neither under the Law, nor under the Gospel, but art without in
the world, in the broad way, blind leading the blind into the ditch; and for
thee the body of Christ is no satisfaction; and thou Reprobate, what have thou
to do to talk of believing, for that is the condition of the Saints, they do
believe and are justified, and their works thou knows not, thou disobedient
one, upon whom God will render vengeance in flaming fire.

9 Quer. Whether there be not another righteousness by which the Saints are
justified in the sight of God, than that which Christ works in them and by them?

Answ. There thou accursed art made manifest, who preaches another Gospel, and
would have another righteousness than that of Christ, here thou beast to whom
the plagues of God is due, and upon whom his wrath must be accomplished, here
thou have made thy self manifest, thou who would have another righteousness
than the righteousness of Christ, which he works in the Saints and by them,
and so thou would be justified and live in thy sin, but thou art shut out from
God for ever; and we witness justification by faith, and the just shall live
by his Faith.

10 Quer. Whether does sanctification or justification in order antecede
holiness of life or justification by faith go before, or whether does not God
love man, ere man loved God?

Answ. Here thou dark blind hypocrite has shut thy self out from the
knowledge of God in any measure, oh that ever people should be so blind as to
look for to learn any thing at such a one as thee but sin and filthiness; and
what have thou been teaching them all this while, that neither knows
sanctification nor justification yet, but art querying whether goes before, let
all people judge if thou be not a teacher of lasciviousness, sin and
uncleanness, and how dare thou mention a holy life, or justification by
faith? which knows neither justification nor sanctification. And thee, man,
which art Cain, God does not love nor accept thee nor thy sacrifice, and for
justification by faith thou knows nothing of it, which we own and witness,
(...) does not love God*

11 Quer. Whether the justice of God be not fully satisfied for all the sins of
the Elect, ^re Christ appear to their souls, or holiness appear in their lives?

Ans. Here ^hou full of all subtil^y a^t comprehended, and with the Light of
Christ thou art seen, and with the life judged and condemned, who would say sin
to the charge of the Elect, when the Scripture says, Who shall ^ay any thing
to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that justifies, who shall condemn? The
soul that sins shall die. Thou sorcerer, does the Elect of God ^in? Shall
the Elect dye? To that in thy conscience I speak?

12 Quer. Whether the holy lives, or holy works of the Saints be not excluded
from the Act of justification, from the guilt of sin?

Ans. Thou dead beast has made it manifest, that thou art a stranger from the
life of God, and is excluded from the holy life of the Saints and their works,
who art que^ying whether this be not excluded from justification: Oh that ever
thou should open thy mouth, or take upon thee to speak of the Scripture; does
not the Apostle say, 1 Pet. 1. 18. For as much as ye know that ye were not
redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain
conversation, but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without
blemish and without spot, who verily was ordained before the foundation of the
world was, but was manifest in these last times for you, who by him do believe
in God, that raised him up from the dead? Now let all people read this Chapter,
and try thee, who knows nothing of Jesus Christ, but as thou have heard of
him, that he was crucified at Jerusalem, and so thou art unredeemed from thy
vain conversation, and so art not justified before God, nor never shall be, but
those that can witness Redemption by the precious blood of Jesus Christ, as
all the Saints of God do, are justified; and by the same that they are
justified thou art condemned into the lake for ever.

13 Quer. Whether is that righteousness which is wrought by the Saints every
way answerable to the justice of God?

Ans. There again thy blindness is made manifest; is there any righteousness
but that of Jesus Christ, and is not that every way answerable to the justice
of God* but such polluted filthy beasts as thou would have another
righteousness, as thou* speaks plainly in thy ninth Querie, but all thy
righteousness we deny, and the righteousness of Jesus Christ we own and
witness, whose righteousness shall be revealed upon thee in flames of fire.

14 Quer. Whether none be accounted righteous in Gods sight, in whom there is
any corruption, or failing, or who do not fulfill the Law, and answer every
demand of justice?

Ans. Here thou polluted beast has made it manifest what thou have been
driving at all this while in thy queries, which is, that thou would have
corruption and filthiness to be accounted righteous in Gods sight, that so thou
might lie and wallow in thy sins and filthiness, but John says, that he that
commits sin is of the devil: for the devil sins from the beginning, and
for this purpose the Son of God was made manifest, that he might destroy the
works of the devil, and thou man of sin would have it to stand, but those that
loves God keeps his Commandments, and they are not grievous; and God does not
accept any where there is any failing, or who do not fulfill the Law, and
answer every demand of justice, and he does reserve the unjust unto the day of
judgment to be punished, 2 Pet. 2 9. and chiefly them that walk after the
flesh in the lust of uncleanness, and there thou art.

15 Quer. Whether a soul be justified before God by the non-imputation of sin,
and the imputation of the righteousness of the Person of Christ to his Faith,
or by a righteousness wrought by Christ in the Person justified or to be
justified.

Ans. Here stop thy mouth thou sorcerer, which art gathering up here a heap of
confusion, which is fit for nothing but to be turned with thee into the
bottomless pit, from whence it comes, wherein thou talks of imputation and
non-imputation, and of a person justified, and to be justified; thy language is
of Aegyt, and in the mystery of iniquity, thou speaks it, which is condemned
into the lake of perdition by the Light of Christ, and in the light thou and it
art seen and comprehended; and as I told thee before, I own no righteousness
but what is of Christ, and wrought by thee, which Righteousness shall confound
thee and all thy unrighteousness and conjuration, and the same that justifies
us shall condemn thee eternally.

16 Quer. Whether Christ be in his Saints in respect of that nature wherein he
suffered at Jerusalem?

Ans. Here thou enemy of Christ would know how the Saints enjoy Christ here,
the Scripture is fulfilled upon thee, the light shines in darkness, and
darkness comprehends it not, when thou comes to own thy condemnation, the
light in thy conscience it will let thee see thy evil deeds, it will lead thee
up to Christ from whence it comes, and then thou will know that nature that he
suffered in; but now thou art in that nature that Judas was in that betrayed
him, and that they were in that crucified him.

17 Quer. How, and after what manner Christ, who in respect of his Divine
nature is infinite and in all places, may be said to be in a Saint, and not in
Reprobate?

Ans. What have thou to do to Qu^rie after the Divine Nature, who art the
natural man, that knows nothing of God, but what thou knows naturally as a
brute beast, and knows not the things that be of God, because they are
spiritually discerned* and the manner of Christ's Divine nature, which is
infinite, is hid from thy eyes, for of that eye that thou should see that with
thou art blind, and the manner of his being in a Saint thou knows not, who
art a Reprobate, and thou shall find him to be thine eternal condemnation.

18 Quer. Whether does Christ now in these days assume or take upon him the
form of a servant, and the seed of Abraham, that is our flesh: And whether does
not this assumption cause such a perfection of the Godhead and the Manhood, as
that both of them are united together into one person?

Ans. O thou dark beast and conjurer, who art querying with thy conjured words,
that which thou knows nothing of, and which is out of thy reach and
comprehension; thou blasphemer, do thou limit Christ to days, in taking upon
him the form of a Servant, and the seed of Abraham? Is not he the same now as
ever he was? And for the union of the Godhead and Manhood, as thou calls it,
let thy mouth be stopped, for with thee God nor none of his children has any
union, for God ha^h put an utter enmity, betwixt thy seed, thou serpent, and
the seed of the woman, and the perfect union with Christ we witness, who is
the same to day, yesterday and for ever, and therefore are we separate from
thee and thy generation.

19 Quer. Whether is Christ now conversant upon earth, amongst men, since his
ascension, as he was before, and in those times wherein the Apostles lived?

Ans. In thy Queries thy speech bewrayes thee, thy language is the language of
Egypt, for in it thou makes it clearly manifest, that thou knows not Christ
at all, not in the least measure, for where the first Principle of Truth is
made manifest, it is the same that ever was, and never changes; and thou asks
whether Christ be now conversant upon earth amongst men since his Ascension, as
he was in the Apostles time* Do thou know what thou asks? Did he not appear
to the Apostles since his Ascension, in the most glorious manner that ever thou
read; and is he not the same now as he was then? What would thou make of him,
thou dark sottish beast) such a one as thy self, who would be pleading for
darkness and ignorance of God, but praise and glory to him who has discovered
thee and all such deceivvers as thou art.

20 Quer. Whether did not Christ dwell among his Saints, after another and
more visible manner than now he dwells in his Saints?

Ans. There again thou have showed thy ignorance of the Scripture, and for thy
word visible, he is not, nor never was visible to thee, nor to thy generation,
for those that did profess the Scriptures, as thou and thy Generation does,
crucified him, and said he was of the devil, as thou, and such as thou art
does now; thou blasphemer, where have thou a Scripture that says, that Christ
would dwell in his Saints after another manner? Did he not say, It is expedient
for you that I go away, and I go and prepare a place for you, and I will come
again and receive you unto my self, that where I am there you may be also; and
ye have heard how I have said I go away and come again unto you, and if ye
loved me, ye would rejoice, because I go unto the Father; and Christ Jesus
says in the 14. John 12. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that believes on
me, the works that I do, he shall do also, and greater works than these,
because I go to the Father: But all these Scriptures is hid from thy eyes, and
thou art one of those that Isaiah Prophesied on; and that Scripture is
fulfilled on thee which says, He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their
heart, that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their
hearts: Now blessed be the Lord that has discovered thee, and such blind
guides as thou art. So we have Answered thy Queries in the eternal Light and
life of God, and we have given judgment upon thee and them, which thou shall
eternally witness, without roving or wandering, but thou who art out of the
Light art roving, and wandering and stumbling in darkness, who has put forth
these stumbling* Queries, which we have Answered lovingly and plainly, and in
the Scripture Language and Terms, and with the eternal Light and Life of God,
set thee in thy own place, which thou shall eternally witness.

These are matters of great concernment, and if you refuse to answer them in
writing, spare your tongues and spare your Papers, for I will henceforth
neither hear the one, nor read the other.

Ans. Thou says, these are matters of great concernment; We see that that
which makes thee manifest, and such as thou art, and which lays thee open to
poor ignorant people, which is deceived by thee and led into the ditch, and
their souls kept in death by thee, to make this manifest is of great
concernment, as these dark black stumbling Queries, and thy conjured words has
done* which thou have no Scripture for, as ambiguity, efficacy, exclusively,
antecede, and non-imputation, assume, and assumption: Now let all people read
and consider what they do that holds such as thee up, who is shut out from God,
and shut out from the Saints life and language, and art shut out of the
Scriptures, though thou makes a trade of them for money, and deceives poor
people, but thou knows nothing of the life and power that gave them forth; So
thou art to be condemned with the Light, and with the Life which gave forth the
Scripture. Let all people read Deuteronomie 18. from the 9. verse to the 15.
There the Priests and the Levites which was ordained of God; was to have no
inheritance among the people, but the Lord was their Inheritance, and they were
to have it of that which was offered up to the Lord, and this is a figure of
the everlasting Priesthood, which ministers out of the everlasting Treasure;
and the Lord God commanded Israel, that not to do as they did when they came
into the land, nor to go after their abominations, as you may see, but gave
Israel their land to possess, that did hearken unto such as the Lord had not
sent, which was abomination to him, and the Lord says to Israel, Thou shall be
perfect with the Lord thy God, and in the 15. verse the Lord thy God will raise
unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy Brethren like unto me, unto
him shall ye hearken; And so to the end of the Chapter, he that has an eye may
see, and the Lord is the same that he was, and he will not suffer the
abominations that is committed in this Land, but is discovering the abomination
of it; A horrible and a filthy thing is committed, which Jeremiah cried
against, covetous men preach, drunkards preach, swearers preach, liars preach,
strikers preach, and proud men preach: Oh, wonderful, where is your eyes? Try
your Priests by the Scriptures, see if they be not found in the same Generation
that all the false Prophets and the deceivers were in which the true Prophets
of God cried against, and discovered, and in the steps of the Scribes and
Pharisees, that Christ cried w^ against; and see if they be not the Antichrists
and the Deceivers which are entered into the world, which John speaks of, which
cannot confess Christ come in the flesh; but transgresses, and abides not in
the doctrine of Christ, so has not God, neither knows him; but preaches for
sin, and against perfection, and denies the Light which enlightens every one
that comes into the world, and so keeps people in blindness and ignorance, and
out of the knowledge of God, and never any that follows them shall ever come
to the knowledge of the true and living God, therefore all people see where you
are, and mind the light in your consciences, which is pure, and which
testifies against all sin, and it will let you see all your blind guides
which deceives you, to be in sin, and ignorant of God; for they deny that which
should make him manifest, therefore beware what you hold up, and give over
going after them, to that in your consciences I speak, which shall witness me
eternally to speak the truth, if you obey it, and shall condemn you eternally,
if you disobey it.

These blind guides that are in this Land, denies the Prophets which Moses
wrote of, which is the substance of the Priesthood, which was before, and here
they are found in the same generation, in the sorcery and in the witchcraft,
which the Lord commanded should be put out of the land, where the children of
Israel went to possess.

Answers to several other subtle Queries put forth by one John Reeve who lives
in the City of LONDON, who calls himself the last Messenger and Witness unto
the true God, but is found a liar, and a perverter of the right way of GOD.
A Certain Writing is come to our hand, called an Epistle from the Mighty
JEHOVAH, or Jesus the only LORD, and God of the Elect Israelites, from one,
whose name is subscribed John Reeve Pilgrim, who calls himself the last
Messenger, and Witness unto the true God, unto which, for the sake of the
simple, we, (as one Spirit) are moved of the Lord of heaven and earth to write
something in answer, that so his folly may be made manifest, and his ignorance
and blasphemy laid open, unto the simple hearted, who have been long deceived
by such through their false voice, lo here, and lo there; Friend, to thee, who
has subscribed this Writing, who calls thy self the last Messenger, and
witness unto the true God, I Answer, The Lord of hosts, and God of the Elect
Israelites, does not accept thy testimony and witness; for thy spirit is made
manifest not to be the Spirit which came from God, and which dwells with God,
which bears true witness unto God, but the spirit which is driven out from the
presence of God into the creation, and into the visible world, and that is the
living spirit, and bears not true witness unto the true God, but is a spirit
which bears witness to the imaginations of thy own heart, which looks upon,
and declares the living God, as if he were carnal, and a creature-like
substance; and here the Scripture is fulfilled upon thee, thou thinks he is
altogether such a one as thy self; and for the true God thou art no Messenger,
nor have received any Message from him, for thy spirit is known, and he never
delivered his Message unto it in any generation, but kept his secret sealed up
from it; and friend, here I charge thee in the presence of the true spiritual
God, that thou be-lies the Lord of hosts, who says thy Epistle is from him,
thou uses thy tongue, and says, the Lord says, When, says the Lord? I have
not spoken unto thee; and of that generation thou art which Jeremiah cried
against; and therefore let all flesh be silent before the Lord, and call not
thy own imaginations his Word, but thou who have a dream, tell thy dream for a
dream, and he that has the Word of the Lord, let him speak it faithfully; and
though thou call thy self the last Messenger, and witness unto the true God,
yet I say unto thee, verily the Lord has a Witness which was before thee,
which has been slain in the streets of the great City, which the Lord will
bring forth after thee, which will bear true witness of the true God, and
against thee, and thou who have been alive, shall be judged by him which has
laid slain, and he will eternally condemn thy testimony and message; Friend in
the light of Christ, which has lightened every one that comes into the world,
thou art comprehended, and seen, thy beginning, thy time, and thy end, and with
it thy testimony and Message is denied, for thy testimony is such, and if thou
swear the Lord lives, thou swore falsely, and further, thou says, by
inspiration of the holy Spirit thou was moved to present this Epistle: I
answer, the language of the holy Spirit is like it self, pure and spiritual,
but thy language is carnal and sensual, and so is thy spirit; the Saints
which spoke by the inspiration and moving of the Spirit, cursed not that which
God had blessed, as thou do, neither did they say the Elect was defiled as
thou do, neither did they speak of God as a carnal substance, as thou do,
but said that God was a Spirit, and here be thou a witness against thy self,
that thou speaks not by the inspiration and moving of the holy Spirit, but
speaks thy imaginations, and lies in the Name of the Lord; and whereas thou
say in this confused age, there has appeared variety of Spirits pretending
to be sent by the everlasting God, yet they are at war with all their power to
overthrow one another, that their own opinions may bear rule; I answer, Among
the many pretenders thou speaks of, thou art one; and it is true, you are at
war with all your power endeavoring to overthrow one another, that your own
opinions may bear rule, and though there be among you variety of opinions, yet
by one Spirit you act, for the kingdom of the Devil is but one, and yet
divided, and it is at war with it self, and therefore it cannot stand, and you
cannot overthrow one another, but one is appearing to overthrow you all, and
all your opinions, for all you pretenders are made manifest by your fruits, and
thereby men may try you, for nothing is to be gathered from you but opinions
and ayery imaginations, some of you speaking of a God, and Christ afar off,
to believe in, others of you speaking of a God and of a Christ within, and
afar off to believe in, thus you feed people by your own imaginations, and
some of you pretends Revelation, others of you denying Revelation, and thus you
strive to set up your own opinion, but you live all in one nature, and are of
one generation, and he that walks in the light sees you all, and comprehends
you all, and judges all your opinions, and are redeemed out of all your vain
im^dgination into the life of God, acting and speaking as the Spirit acts and
speaks, and seeks to exalt Christ, and him to bear rule, that all opinions may
be by him thrown down, and that by him people may be brought out of a confused
age, into the land of r^st, and peace, and righteousness to serve the true
Spiritual God, in the Spirit, and by the Spirit of his own Son; and further,
thou says, some there are takes upon them to speak of a God, and of a Christ
in the invisible heavens, above the stars; but are incapable to demonstrate
how Christ by his spiritual Word lives in men's hearts, and how he reigns
visibly in glory with his Elect Angels: I answer, there are not some but many,
which lives in, and speaks forth their own imaginations, upon God and Christ,
and one of them thou art, thy spirit is tried, God who is a Spirit, dwells in
the Spirit of his Son, even in the high and holy place, and with him also who
is of a contrite Spirit, and trembles at his Word; but this by thy vulterous
eye is not seen, neither can any demonstrate how Christ dwells in the heart* but
he who witnesses it through death, and where he reigns his glory is with him,
and his Elect Angels, this I witness, but to thy carnal eye it is invisible,
and by thy carnal wisdom he can never be known, Christ and his spiritual
word is not to be divided, though thy sensual spirit would divide them, but by
the flaming sword thou that speaks art divided from both, and shall know
neither but to thy condemnation; and further thou say, others there are
which speaks of an eternal Spirit, or Christ only in the consciences of men,
as if there were no Creator ^^ Christ at all visibly reigning upon his Throne
of immortal glory; I answer, They who talk of an eternal Spirit, or Christ in
the conscience by hear say, o^ ^^ other men's words, without (as thou do) and
does not in life and power witness it, from the Father within, made manifest,
such are denied by them who witness the eternal Spirit dwelling with the
contrite heart, which Spirit is the Creator which dwells also in the high and
holy place, and reigns upon his Throne for ever, and who do in power witness
this, sees and judges all your carnal imaginations, and conceptions of the
living God in your carnal minds, where he dwells shall no unclean thing enter,
but is without to be trodden in the wine press of his wrath for ever and ever,
and by him shall thy carnal conceptions be consumed, even by the breath of his
mouth, for he is eternal, and his Throne is eternal, and by the carnal eye
shall never be seen; and further thou say, there are, who through unbelief
that ever any living creature had a beginning, they affirm there is no God or
Christ at all, but perishing nature, of this sort are innumerable, witness the
lives and conversations of people every where; I answer, All who do witness
the eternal Spirit made manifest, to rule and guide all such, does deny and
declare aagainst, for nothing was without beginning but the eternal Word,
which was the beginning of all things, and which will be the end of all things,
even the destruction of the wicked, and the salvation of them that believe, who
are born of the immortal seed, and redeemed out of the perishing nature into
the image of God, and such do set to seal there is a God, who will reward every
one according to his works, and bears witness against them, who in their
lives and conversations denies God, as all do who do not witness the eternal
Spirit of Christ ruling in the consciences, but talks of a God in imagination
at a distance, and such are innumerable, and says in their heart, there is no
God, and such are the fools the Scripture speaks of, and whereas thou beseeches
to consider of these ensuing particulars; I answer, They are considered, and by
them thy ignorance is made manifest, and thy folly disclosed, and thy
blasphemy, who calls thy self the last witness.

1 Quer. In thy first particular thou queries, Whether these men were sort
forth by the eternal Spirit to preach, which in the least cannot demonstrate
what the only true God is in himself; and how he is a distinct being from all
living creatures, and how he reigns in the Elect by a created Word, voice of
spiritual motion only.

Answ. Those men were not sent forth by the eternal Spirit to preach, who have
not received it, and such knows not God, what he is, no^ where he is, but in
their imaginations imagines him to be like a creature, by being i^ a creature
by place or habitation, God is a Spirit, and he is not distinct from living
creatures, for in him living creatures lives, moves, and has their beings, and
he is not far from them, nor distinct from them as he spoke, who was sent by
the eternal Spirit to preach, he reigns in the Elect not by a created word,
voice, or a created spiritual motion, for the Word which lives in the Elect,
from which voice and motion proceeds, is not created, but is uncreated, even as
God is uncreated, for God is that Word, and here thy ignorance appears, by
calling the Word which lives in the Elect a created Word, or voice, or motions,
and here be a witness against thy self that thou speaks from darkness, and
not from light, which darkness cannot comprehend the shining of the light, and
this discovers thee more to be a false witness, and not the true witness of
God, and therefore thy portion must be portion of false witnesses, read what it
is.

2. Quer. In thy second particular thou queries, Is not this an infallible
demonstration to men, that a man is sent forth by the eternal Spirit, if he
have received a gift from the holy Ghost, to demonstrate what the true Creator
was in his own distinct Essences, Nature and glory, from all eternity in time,
and to all eternity, and wherein Elect men and Angels differ in their natures,
and glory, distinct from their Creator in their Persons.

Answ. He that has not received a gift from the holy Ghost in some measure, is
not sent forth by the eternal Spirit, or God of all truth, this is infallible,
and such knows not what the Creator is, but by imagination, and carnal
conceptions of him, and such in the Light of Christ is seen, and by it judged,
and among such thou art, to that in thy conscience I speak, which will witness
me, he that has received the holy Ghost, turns people from the power of Satan
to the power of God, and knows the Creator, and the dwelling of him in the
heart, for as the Scripture says, the word is nigh, but let all flesh be
silent, he who is in time, knows not him which was before time, and shall be
when time shall be no more; he who knows the Creator which inhabiteth eternity,
is redeemed out of time, into the Habitation of the Almighty, but this to thy
dark mind and spirit is unknown, if ever thou know it, it must be through
death, the nature and glory of the Elect differs not from the Nature and glory
of the Creator, for the Elect are one with the Creator, in his nature enjoying
his glory, which was from eternity unto eternity, he that reads let him
understand, thy word distinct Essence, I deny, for the Elect is not distinct
from the Creator, but lives by the dwelling of the Son in him, and with the Son
the Father dwells also, if thou have an ear, thou may hear.

3 Quer. In thy third particular thou queries, What that angelical serpent was
in his creation, which the Scripture speaks of, and how he came to be cast out
of his glory, and how he overcame innocent Eve, and how he entered into her
womb, and changed her pure seed into his nature of unclean reason? And thou
asks, What think you, Was not that man Cain the first murdering, lying devil
that ever was? And is there any devil but proud, vain-glorions, unmercifull
men and women?

Ans. That same which speaks in thee is that same serpent which the Scripture
speaks of, and if thou have the spirit of Moses, thou knows what he was in the
creation; for Moses saw his creation by that spirit which was before he was,
and if thou know his creation in thy self, then thou may know him without thee,
but yet he lies under his vail deceiving thee, and is not deceived by thee; and
by the same which thou lives in he was cast out of his glory, even
disobedience, and he overcame inocent Eve even as he overcomes thee, by
promising what he fulfilled not, and by presenting that which was visible, and
so her mind was led out, as thine is, and by her consenting, he entered and
got power, and set up his habitation, which is now standing in thee, and so she
became the likeness of himself, her mind and lust st^ayed into the visibles,
out from the Creator who is invisible, and spiritual, and she now lives under
the curse, and brings forth cursed children, such as thou art who puts forth
these queries, and this child was begotten by him who deceived her, and he is
the father and prince of all you, who are wells without water, clouds without
rain, and wandering stars having no habitations in the heavens, the blackness
of darkness is reserved unto you for ever, ye who speaks great swelling words
of vanity (that ye are the last witnesses and Messengers, etc.) but you your
selves are servants of corruption, and to the last part of thy querie: I
answer, before Cain who is a lying devil was a child, he was a father, and if
thou have an ear, thou may hear, the proud, vainglorious, unmercifull men
and women, who bears his image must with him be tormented in the lake which
burns (by the kindling of the breath of the Almighty) for ever and ever; and
here thou art answered, though not to the feeding of thy wisdom, but in the
light by which thou art comprehended, which light will eternally condemn thee
who hates it.

4 Quer. Thou queries What condition Adam was formed in, and how he came to
fall from his estate, and what sin it was they committed (Adam and Eve) and
whereby the Elect and Reprobate are defiled.

Ans. Adam was created in the image of God, and God breathed into him the
breath of life, and he became a living soul, but eating of the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil, therein he turned from the Command of God and did
dye, if thou have an ear thou may hear, and thou that queries have eaten of
that tree, and thou shall never know in what condition he was created in, but
through the death: for a sword is set at Edens gate to keep the tree of life,
which will cut thee down, before ever thou know or can witness his estate, and
as for the Elect being defiled, here thou make thy self manifest, that thou
never knew what the Elect was, for the Elect is born of God, and he that is
born of God sins not, and the promises of God are to the Elect, and election
obtains it, and the Elect was never defiled: if thou have an ear thou may
hear, that which is defiled shall not enter into the holy City, and here thou
have manifest thy ignorance, and art that reprobate thou speaks, which is
ordained of old for condemnation, which is the transgresser which is cast out,
thou have no communion with the Elect, for thou art defiled and art without the
gate, to be trodden in the wine press.

5 Quer. What that heavenly glory is, and where it is that the Elect wheat of
Christ shall eternally enjoy, who are the seed of Adam, and not of Cain?

Answ. What that glory which the Elect which thou spoke of in thy fourth querie
shall inherit which was and is defiled, it is to be in hell, in utter darkness
for ever and ever, where all the unclean are, and thou would know where it is,
it is without the gate of the City, among the dogs and whoremongers, and liars,
and deceivers, and whatsoever is defiled shall be trodden in the wine press of
the wrath of God for ever and ever, where is weeping, wailing, and gnashing of
teeth. But as for the Elect wheat of Christ, which thou say is the children
of Adam, thou speak thou knows not what, the first man is of the earth
earthly, and he begat his image, and that which is earthly shall never
inherit, but are to have their portion with Cain, where thou art that has
uncovered thy nakedness, but the Elect and the wheat shall be gathered into
the barn, and they are not, nor ever were they defiled, but shall reign with
the Lamb in the new Jerusalem for ever and ever, where no unclean thing can
enter, nor nothing that destroys or defiles in that holy mountain of the Lord,
if thou have an ear thou may hear.

6 Quer. What that painful and shameful death in utter darkness, and where
it is, that is reserved for the reprobate, who are the seed of Cain, and not of
Adam, or blessed Abr^ham.

Answ. Thou that queries shall surely know, it is Tophet, prepared of old even
for the King, the burning of it is as fire, the breath of the Lord does kindle
it, it shall be destruction for ever and ever, to that which has given forth
these queries, and it is to be separated from God for ever among all idolaters,
and adulterers, and liars, the unbelieving, the abominable, and the fearful, in
the lake of fire* where the worm dies not, nor the fire goes not out; as for
Adam thou knows nothing of him; the first birth that he begat was Cain, who
slew his brother, who has his portion with Cain, and not with Abraham, the
promise was not to the transgresser, nor to Adam who eat of the tree of
knowledge, the promise came upon; in the day thou eatest thou shall dye, he was
driven from the presence of the Lord into the earth in the curse, the promise
was to Abraham, in Isaac is the blessing, not in Ishmael; and here thou sh^ws
thy ignorance, but it is but like the former, when thou joins the Elect and
reprobate together, light and darkness, and in Babylon thou art, but in that
which was before Babylon was, thou art seen, and as for those dark spirits thou
^peaks of, who mind nothing but their lusts, condemning the glorious things of
eternity, because their carnal reason cannot comprehend them: see at home, for
in the light of Christ thou art seen, that thou knows nothing of eternity, but
by thy dark imaginations, and naturally as a brute, to the light of Christ in
thy conscience I speak, which will let thee see it is so.

7 Quer. Are there not deceived persons, and utterly ignorant of the true God,
who judge men and women in darkness, if they a^k them Questions about the
needful things of eternity: is it not because they went before they were sent,
and so are of a bitter spirit for want of spiritual light to satisfy the
^ender Christian querier.

Ans. All who dwell not in this light, which is pure and eternal, are ignorant
of God, and never knew God, such judging shall be judged, and by the light
which sees and comprehends all darkness thou art seen, but the spiritual man
judges all things, and he is judged of none, and all judgment is committed to
the Son, and where he i^made manifest he speaks, and judges righteously, and
those men and women who would be asking questions of eternity, and never came
to the first principle to be guided by it, the light which leads to eternity,
all such men and women are in darkness, and that mind which is in the earth
and in the naturals shall never know; and therefore they are judged to be in
darkness, and darkness cannot comprehend the light, Christ and his Disciples
answered and judged that spirit which would have had a sign; and called them
adulterers, and which spirit we witness to the praise of God; and to thee that
put forth the queries, I speak to thee in the presence of God, whether thou put
them forth in simplicity and art ignorant, or would know, or in the pride of
thy heart, and subtilty to tempt, the light of Christ will let thee see, but
thou art rich and full, therefore thou must be sent empty away, all who queries
from that nature that would know, but never come to obedience, that is to be
judged, and judgment must thou witness, and for a bitter spirit of envy that
shall stand for thy self, and that thou wants spiritual light is made manifest,
which curses that which God has blessed, as I have seen under thy own hand,
far remote from this City, and that thou have cursed them soul and body to all
eternity, which thou never heard nor saw, let shame strike thee in the face,
and stop thy mouth, for thou cannot put a difference betwixt the precious and
the vile, but curses thou knows not what, and speaks to that thou knows not:
But as for them who have a desire to know the way to the Father, we are ready
to give an answer, and to impart of the gift we have received, and does not
break a bruised reed, but the fat we f^ed with judgment, and there thou art
answered.

8 Quer. It is not an infallible demonstration unto them who have a discerning
spirit, that tha^ man has no commission from the true Spirit to preach or
speak to a people, when for fear of his ignorance being discovered, or for fear
of losing his hearers, he shall counsel them to strike close to the Word of
God, or to hearken to the light within them in their consciences, without what
that is in the conscience, or what will be the issue of it, if men be obedient
to it, or disobedient to it: and to beware of false Prophets, and not thinking
in the least himself to be that false prophet, and thus borrowing Scripture
language which we are the true Messengers of the Gospel, does he not in his
power hinder his hearers from reading the glorious things revealed unto, the
two last witnesses, and so thou says, it is clear that the Spirit is not in
them which was in Paul, who gave them leave to try all.

Ans. Here thy infallible demonstration is made manifest to be fallible and
lying, when thou lays that down to be a sign of them that have no commission
from the Spirit, and not to have the Spirit, because they exhort them to cleave
close to the Word of God, and to mind the light which shines into the
conscience of every man, which is the light of Christ; here thy Spirit is
tried, that thou have not the same commission as they had, who spoke forth the
Scripture, and so thou Preaches another Gospel, for the Word of God endures for
ever, and by the Word which is eternal, and which was in the beginning, who
tryes all things, who searches all things, comprehends all things, and judges
all things, he that cleaves not close unto, that builds upon another
foundation; and by the Word which endures for ever, thou art seen, not to have
that word, neither knows what, nor where it is, neither has cleaved to it,
and so art raced out from the life, from the foundation, and the Apostle who
had his Commission not from man, nor by man, he exhorted those he had preached
to and wrote to, to take heed to the sure word of Prophecy, as unto a light
that shined in a dark place, and to wait in it, till the day did dawn, and the
day Star did arise; and for distinguishing of that in the conscience what it
is, he that is not separate from the darkness knows not how to do it. But this
I say unto thee, as we declare unto all, the Light which shines into the
conscience is the light of Christ which he has enlightened every one withal,
and it is spiritual like himself, and eternal, and it leads out of sin, and
declares against all iniquity, and he that comes to own it, and to be guided by
it, it leads out of sin to know the Cross of Christ, which is a Mystery to
thee, and it leads to the eternal Word, which was in the beginning before sin
was, and it will judge all thy imaginations and vain conceivings, and it leads
to the inheritance incorruptible out of corruptible; if thou have an ear to
hear, thou may hear, it is that which will let thee see thy vain frothy
imaginations, which thou has of God, and will condemn all thy vain
imaginations, and hating it, it will be thy condemnation, and there is the
issue of it, and all such as steals other men's words, and the true Prophets
words, and never knew the life that was in them, all such we deny, and shut
them up within utter darkness, where they, thou and both are, and for the
glorious things that thou and thy partner, which call your selves the two last
witnesses, it is manifest that your mysteries are as in thy book, and thy
queries, where thou puts Elect and reprobate together, and as for trial of
spirits, we give liberty and exhort all that may try, and we direct them to
that to try by, which is is infallible and eternal, whereby they may see and
comprehend thee and all who have not the Spirit. But that they should try, who
has nothing to try with, let all such be silent for ever, for none understands
the Spirit but the Spirit with which we see thee, and all who stands in their
imaginations ignorant of, therefore stop thy mouth in the dust, and be silent.

9 Quer. Does not they that speak to a people that declares against all
appearances, which are contrary to his way, discover himself unto a true
discerning Spirit, not to be of the Lord, unless they can demonstrate a
spiritual Commission that he has received from heaven, by voice of words
through the glorious mouth of the Lord, so that no mortal man can disprove
him, though few for want of understanding receive him.

Ans. The way that leads to the Father is but one, which is Christ, and he that
declares from him, made manifest in him, declares against all Sects, and
Opinions, and that which thou calls appearances, and the way is one, and the
Truth one, where there is no rent nor division, and he that dwells in the life
has discerning, and he that witnesses the anointing discernes, he is able to
judge and discern, and in that thou art seen, who would sit on the throne, but
thou must come down and lick the dust, dust is the serpents meat, and they who
had their Commission from God, and has their Commission from God, now they
were made manifest to every man's conscience in the sight of God, and this we
witness, this the Scripture witnesses, and he that believes has the witness
in himself, and the father bears witness, and they witness the voice of the
Lord, which is spiritual speaking to them, and they declare from that which is
spiritual to the consciences of gainsayers, and this is witnessed; but thy
voice of words is carnal, and is denied, and who art thou made manifest unto,
that which is mortal cannot discern and disprove thee, but that which is
immortal can, and they who are guided by the immortal denies thee, and will
receive none of thy testimony, because it is not the same which the holy men of
God witnessed, and does now witness, which voice shakes the wilderness, and
rents the rocks, and makes the earth to reel to and fro, but to thee this is a
mystery and sealed.

10 Quer. Again he that speaks of an invisible spiritual God, or Christ
living in the consciences or spirit of men, thou says, he questions the truth
of all the Scripture records concerning the life, death, and resurrection, and
aseension of the blessed body of Christ into the throne of his immortal glory;
and does he not que^^ion whether the consciences of the Saints being sprinkled
with the blood of Jesus, which died without the g^^es of Jerusalem, are
purified from the pollution of the flesh and Spirit, does he not question the
resurrection of the souls and bodies out of the eat^h at the last day.

Ans. Here again, thou have made thy sha^e and thy ignorance manifest and knows
not so much as the Letter of he Scripture, Paul in Apostle of Jesus Christ,
notby the will of man, and Minister of the everlasting God, he witnessed the
Son of God revealed in him, and he ^^i^, kn^w ye (...) Christ ^s in you, or
else you are rep^^^ates, and ^h^i^t is no^ divided, and he tha^ is joined to
the Lord is ^^e Spirit, and (...) my Father are one, ^^d w^^^e Christ dwells
the Father dwells, and if thou have ^^ e^^ to hear ^hou may h^^^, and if the
^^^e Spirit be not in you that raised Christ (...) he ^^^d, you are (...), and
he that declared these things speak of a spi^i^ua^l Christ, and an invi(...)
God, and who ^^all ascend up to heaven, the word is nigh, in thy mo^t^^ and
(...) heart, and this is the same Christ that suffered without the ga^e at
Jerusalem, and no other wh^^h Paul traveled till he was born in them, if thou
have an ear thou may hear, and the Apost^^ did not question the Scripture
records, for they spoke it and recorded it, and they witnessed the life of
Christ, and his death, and resu^rection, and a^c^nsion, and witnessed him
ascended above thrones, and dominions, and to sit at the right hand of the
Father, and witness the same Christ made manifest in us, and his resurrection,
not because Paul said so, we have seen it, and are witnesses of it, the same
that ever was, the same that did ascend, the same did ascend; this is a riddle
unto thee, and seven seals is upon it, and thou that queries shall never see
them opened, and they who had Christ in them, and the Father, the Son supping
with them, they had their conscience sprinkled, and none else for his blood
thou knows not, and so I say unto thee, thou art not sprinkled, nor thy
conscience purified from dead works, and they who know Christ in them, and no
more after the flesh come to know his resurrection, he is the resurrection, he
is the first and the last, who knows him risen, and have seen him witness the
first day and the last, what speaks thou of a last day, that never came to the
beginning, and so thy soul lies in death, and in chains, and in utter darkness
and therefore lay thy hand upon thy mouth, and see where thou ^^t, and the
Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures thou cannot witness.

11 Quer. If after death there is no bodily resurrection, for the spirits of
men to possess an immortal glory to eternity, or to suffer an eternal devil
like shame, according to their deeds, whether good or evil. Is it not one of
the vainest things in the world* to discourse of God, righteousness, unless
it be for earthly gain amongst men.

Ans. There is a resurrection both of the just and of the unjust, the just into
everlasting life, and the unjust into everlasting shame and contempt, and every
one shall receive according to his works, whether they be good or evil, but
this a mystery hid, for none knows it, but through death, but what knows thou
who art yet alive in sin, what shall be in the resurrection which is after
death, which whoever comes to know the resurrection, knows the e^d of all
things; therefore it is not taking their words, nor thy own imaginations, that
is faith, nor if thou know Christ no nearer than Jerusalem, nor no nearer than
above the stars, thou knows not where, but through thy dark imaginations,
this is not to Christ risen from the dead, see therefore what have thou seen in
thy self: But thou art dead whiles thou lives in that nature, and at the
resurrection contempt and shame will be thy portion, and turn in thy mind to
that which shows thee sin, and witness the body and sin destroyed within, and
then, and not till then, shall thou know how it is in the resurrection.

12 Quer. Thou raises a question from Paul's words to the Athenians, thou was
before condemning them that stole other men's words, and here thou have stolen a
Query, and thou ask what think you did that spiritual Creator, dwell and
live in the Athenians consciences or did his glorious person visibly appear in
the highest heavens.

Ans. The Athenians to whom Paul spoke worshipped the work of their own hands,
as ^his generation does their own imaginations, and that God whom ignorantly
they worshipped at a distance, which God lived in Paul's conscience, Paul
declared unto them, and they looked as thou do carnally, thinking God to be
carnal and at a distance, but he said he, was not at a distance from every one
of them, for in him they lived, moved, and had their being, and this was the
God which Paul preached of, which Creator, we witness, lives in the high and
holy place, and with him also that is of a humble and a contri^e spirit, and
trembles at his Word.

13 Quer. And thou say, what think you, can there ^e any living Spirit
without a body, or person to display its life, in, or from, and must not the
Creator of necessity be a glorious personal substance, and thou say does
not these men that worship an in^inite Spirit without any bodily f^rm, living
in men's consciences, only gl^ry in a God of their own imaginations, instead of
honoring the only Lord of all life, the man Jesus, yesterday, to day, and for
ever?

Ans. That which is not possible with men is possible with God, which God is a
Spirit as Jesus Christ says, and a spirit has not flesh and bone, nor a
created body, but displays it self as it pleases, contrary to thy will, and the
will of all men; and thou who would by thy reason ^y the Creator with a
necessity to a personal being, are void of the knowledge of God, and led by thy
corrupt reason, which shall never know God, and all those who worships God in
spirit, worships an infinite Spirit, which Spirit inhabiteth eternity, and
lives in the consciences of the Saints, and this is not to glory in an
imagination, but a witnessing of the same eternal Truth, which he Saints
witnessed which spoke forth the Scripture, for they witnessed Christ dwel^ed in
them, and the same God they w^rshipped, whose temple they were, and not
another, and we the same witness, and this to the honor of the Man Jesus, who
was yesterday, to day, and for ever.

14 Quer. The eternal Spirit, Creator, and alone everlasting Father, which
dwells essentially in the glorified body, as our Lord Jesus his eternal Son,
and virtually reign^ in all the Saints, Elect men and Angels, be record between
me and you world without ^^d, whether this Epistle shall not be sent to you,
and all the chosen that shall peruse it, principally for the establishing of
your tender spirits upon that eternal spiritual Rock Jesus Christ God and Man
in one distinct body, or person glorified, and ^^^ly honored with all
spiritual praises from Elect men and Angels when this world is consumed into
ashes, and all time or times is swallowed up into eternity or eternities.

Ans. The eternal Spirit, which is the everlasting Father, which thou says is
essentially in the Son, thy word essentially I deny, and thy voice, yet Christ
and the Father is one, and the same Spirit that dwells in the Son dwells in the
Father which is one, I and my Father is one, the same dwells in the Saints, thy
word virtuall I deny, the same that dwells in the Father and in the Son, the
same dwells in the Saints, not distinct nor divided, for he that has seen the
Father has seen the Son, and he that has the Son has the Father also, and
Christ is divided, I in them, and thou in me, that they may be perfect in one,
and he that is joined to Christ is one spirit, and not distinct nor separate:
if thou have an ear thou may hear, and that eternal Spirit, which is the
Father and the Son, which dwells in the Saints, is judge of thee, and by that
Spirit I judge thee, that this Epistle came not from him to none of the chosen,
for they who are chosen deny thy voice, and what do thou speak of Elect and
Angels, with whom God dwells, when in thy fourth Querie thou said, they were
defiled, and the holy Ghost says, he dwells with no uncleanness, and so speaks
confusion and Babylons language, which is the land of thy nativity, from whence
all these things have been spoken by thee, and all that shall ever be
established with thy declaring, or thy Epistles, shall be thrown down, for the
Rock shall beat thy image to pieces, and therefore leave off thy speaking of
him, and of thy distinct body, and of his glory, for when he shall appear in
his glory, instead of thy praises, thou shall howl and lament, and wish the
mountains to cover thee, and he who is out of time shall consume thee to ashes,
who stands in time and in the airie philosophy and imagination, and thy great
words eternity and eternities shall stand thee in no stead; for that which is
eternal was before thou was, and shall be when thou art brought down to the
pit with all thy imaginations: And so that thou might not glory any more in thy
shame, we have answered thy Queries, and for the simple ones sake, that they
might not be stumbled by thy stumbling Queries, who dwells not in the Light.

FINIS.

