A CORDJALL FOR THE CALENTVRE AND Those other diseases which distempers the
Seamen. OR, A DECLARATION DISCOVERING AND ADVISING HOW ENGLANDS SEA HONOR May
be regained, and maintained as in the happy Reign of Queen ELIZABETH, Of
famous Memory.

WITH The saving of Two Hundred and Fifteen Thousand One Hundred twenty two
pounds a year, one year with the other.

This Myrrour shows you at how dear a Rate,
Self-love sells public danger to the State.
LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1648.

To that Conspicuous, and Right Trusty Pillar, which supports the South Aspect,
of Londons Royal Exchange.
The humble Petition, or Declaration, of Andrews Burrell, Gentleman, sometimes
a Servant; in Englands Navy.
Shows,
THat your Orator, being conscientious, of the National Covenant, In March
1643. presented diverse Parliament men, with papers entitled, Englands
Out-Guard, surveyed, and lamented, etc. A complaint then, and now very
seasonable; yet so distaistfull, to some in the Committee of the Admiralty,
that from that time to this day, your Orator has been extremely traduced, and
has not found, that freedom which is called, the Liberty of the Subject,
answerable to his affectionate desires, for the peace and Safety of Englands
Commonwealth.

The truth is, for speaking of the truth, your Orator has been extremely
scandalized, by those which seeking themselves, delay (and indeed betray,) the
Peace of Englands Commonwealth.

However, after many cavaling meetings, before that superlative Authority, your
Orator was forced to publish those expostulations that were agitated before
them, in a short Remonstance, to the Honorable House of Commons; which being
distasted, by the wise Officers of the Navy; occasioned the Commissioners of
the Navy, to publish a learned Legend, in opposition to those truths, which
your Orator had presented, to the Honorable House of Commons.

But since that time, to show the fullness of their integrity to the House, and
their weak sense, of Englands rotten Navy; The Officers of the Navy, not
knowing which Built is most serviceable; That is, which Ships are nimblest, I
say, since that time, the Officers of the Navy, have caused seven great
Frigots to be built, for the Service of the Parliament; which Frigots are so
heavy, in regard of the ordinary Built of Frigots. That they are indeed seven
Spanish Ships; But before your Orators survey, The Officers of the Navy, never
endeavored to build, or send forth any nimble Ships, Pinnaces, or Frigots; But
instead thereof, (at dear rates, for selfe-ends,) hired Collyers, and some that
were the worst of Gollyers; This Service, though slighted, is very Remarkable.
yet now, they are so taken with a Spanish Fancy, That like fantastical
Tailors, they endeavor, to change Englands sluggish Navy, into the Spanish
Fashion; which in the times that are past, would have been a fault, of a
Crimson Color, the truth is, they have betrayed the Kingdom, by that new
device.

For in Queen Elizabeth's days, the best of the Spannish Frigo^s, were not to
be compared with the worst Pinnace in Englands Royal Navy; And which is very
considerable, The Officers of the Navy, misleading the Master Shipright of the
Navy, have wilfully disabled those Spannish Ships, that have been lately
built, which mischief your Orator did foresee, and complained of it, in his
Survey of Englands Navy, etc. before they began to build them.

In the second Book, of Haklayths Book of voiages, Page 170. line 38. Captain
Middleton, in a very good Saylor, That is in a nimble Pinnace, waited thre^
days upon a Spannish Armada. Anno. 1591: To discover their Forces, and to give
the Lord Thomas Howard advice of their Approach; which service he performed
faithfully, but could not have effected it, if his Ship had not been nimbler,
then all those Spanish Ships and Frigots. In the 171. page, lines 52, and 53.
Captain Whiddon, in the Pilgrim, was hunted like a hare, by the same Armada; at
the 15. line, of the next page, you have the number of the Hounds; In plain
English, Captain Whiddon in the Pilgrim was hunted like a Hare by the same
Armada; At the 15. line of the next page, you have the number of the hounds in
plain English, Captain Whiddon in the Pilgrim was chaced, by the nimblest of
fifty three Spanish Ships, and Frigots; But being nimbler then the nimblest of
them, he escaped, and secured himself, by running from them.

When the French besieged Dunkerk, the Off cers of the Navy, were offered for
less then Five Thousand pounds; Seven of the best Frigots, that were then
belonging to Dunkerk; which if the Officers had accepted (at that time) they
had not only advanced, the Parliaments Service, in Treasure, and strength; but
they had thereby, so disabled the Malignant party, that the contemptable Irish,
could never have appeared in Englands Seas, formidable as now.

In the 13. line and 27. page, of the Legend which was published, by the
Commissioners of the Navy, they to excuse their not buying of those Dunkerk
Frigots, tell the Parliament, that they wanted money; but in the eight page, and
10. pages of Mr. Greenes Declaration, he confesses, that from August 1642. to
the beginning of 1647. They did spend, one Million, five Hundred Twenty five
Thousand six Hundred and tenn pounds.

And in the 12. page, that at the printing of his Declaration, in 1647. The
state was, (for the service of the Navy,) Two Hundred and Fifty Thousand
pounds, in debt, or thereabouts, which together is, Three Hundred Fifty five
Thousand, one Hundred Twenty pounds a year, one year with another, Before those
sluggish Ships which are complained of in this Petition, were sent to encounter
the Nolanders, Englands Navy thus maintained, and Englands Seas were better
guarded for Thirty Thousand pounds a year.
what ere they spent, they refused those Frigots, and since that time, have
caused seven others to be built, which instead of Five Thousand, have cost
Englands Commonwealth Thirty Thousand pounds, or more money, and which is very
remarkable. Those costly Frigots, which they have caused to be built, are so
ill built, and so ill contrived, that they dare not keep the several
weathers, and cannot sail so nimbly, as the contemptable Jrish; They have
plowed with my Heifer, but they have not found out my Riddle.

In a Manuscript, which your Orator dedicated to his Excellency, in February
1647. your Orators principle endeavor was, to demonstrate to his Excellency,
the sluggish condition, of Englands rotten Navy; It being an undeniable Maxim,
that if a Ship be not nimble, she cannot be serviceable. But the Ships of
Englands Navy, are not nimble, therefore the Ships of Englands Navy, are not
serviceable.

In the 19. page of their Legend, the Commissioners of the Navy, tell the
Parliament, that no Prince in Christendom, has so many brave Ships, as the
Kingdom of England; yet after your Orator had complained of the sluggish
condition, of Englands, despicable Navy; the Officers of the Navy, did
delusively cause Seven, great Frigots to be built, Carved, and Garnished with
Gold. Englands Gold is wasted, but if there were no greater wast then that on
the Frigots, there would not be so little left for honest men to relieve
themselves and those that do depend upon them.
But slighting all their fair shows, and specious pretenses; they abuse
Englands Commonwealth, by their counterfeit practices, and by many dangerous
misinformations, telling the Parliament, all is well when in truth all is
naught.

Your Orator has inquired with much diligence, but cannot here, that any one
of the Parliaments new Frigots, by chasing the inconsiderable Pirates, has
incountred, and taken any one of them, which is very seazeable, if those
Officers which are in Authority, did understand the misery of the Ship-weights
Art, as well as they know how by power, to defend the fallacies which your
Orator does complain of.

There belongs to Waterford and Wexford, (at this present) foureteen Sail of
able men of War, which have thriven so well of late in their wicked Designs;
that the Relator told Thirty three Prizes, lying by the Walls in one Harbor,
(as not valuable) besides all those that were otherwise trifled away, by this
loss your Readers may perceive, how unable the present Government is, with the
expense of Three hundred Fifty five Thousand, one hundred twenty two pounds a
year, to clear Englands Seas of Irelands Pirates.

The first page of your Orators Rem^nstrance, did tell the Parliament, that the
Guarding of the Seas, did cost Three hundred and Fifty Thousand pounds in one
year which Information was very offensive to the Chairman of the Navy. But
force that expostulation, his Worship has dec^ared that scandal to b pure
truth and has added five Thousand one Hundred twenty two pounds a year one
with another, unto my Report; besides all the odd^ shillings and pence, etc.
In the 19. page, of their Legend, the Commissioners of the Navy, in April
1646. tell the Parliament, That his Majesty, had then but half a dozen men of
War, and that the most of them, were of so small Force, that they were not
considerable. Since which time, by Mr. Greenes Declaration; with a
proportionable allowance, for this present year 1648. There has been one
Million, threescore and five Thousand, three hundred sixty six pounds, spent to
guard the Seas; that is, to reduce half a dozen inconsiderable Pirates; but
notwithstanding that vast and insupportable wast; those Pirates are not
reduced, neither are the Seas Guarded with strength equivolent, to half the
charge; or necessary to the safety and honor of the Land; The present
Government cannot reduce half a dozen inconsiderable Pirates; They have
suffered his Majesty's inconsiderable half dozen, to increase to more then a
whole dozen, they have suffered them, to increase to more then a whole dozen,
of uncontrollable Pirates, (some say to more then three dozen,) however, this
is most certain, one of them about the midst of February last, did in one day
take three small Ships, and one Pinnace; which together were worth, Nine
Thousand pounds, (or more money) and which has no Redemption; when those Ships
were lost, one of them endeavoring to defend themselves, lost their Master,
with one of his Mates, and five of the common men.

In which conflict, besides the loss of those seven, there were others
wounded; wherefore being much weakened, and wounded, the Ship to leeward, and
not able to save her self by running they were forced to yeald; in this place,
your Orator humbly moves this Query, if the present Government, with the
expense of ten hundred, threescore and five thousand three hundred sixty six
pounds, cannot reduce half a dozen inconsiderable Pirates; in three years
space. That famous service which was performed by Queen Elizabeth's Royal
Navy, in the year 1588. did not cost Englands Commonwealth, threescore and
tenn Thousand pounds.
How will Englands Commonwealth be wasted, if the French, the Danes, the
Dutch, or all of them, shall infest Englands Seas, or at once invade this
distracted Kingdom, I say, if the present Government, with that insupportable
sum of Treasure, which has been spent within these last three years, cannot
subdue and anihilate half a dozen inconsiderable Pirates; what strange
confusion and extreme beggary will those profuse wasters bring upon this
already too much impoverished Kingdom; if the neighboring Princes should invade
this Island, with powerful Armadoes, that is, with Fleetes of warlike Ships.

By this discourse, your Readers may perceive, how vainly the Kingdoms
Treasure, how carelessly Englands Commonwealth is wasted, it is shamefully
wasted, and which is most considerable in the times when Englands Treasure was
wasted as not valuable; even then, the honor of Englands Seas was lost, and
shamefully lost; And which adds to this complaint the Kingdoms sufferings, (as
now,) are not only insupportable but endless; for though the Commonwealth
has paid an unknown price of Treasure and blood, for a more then necessary
Reformation; no Reformation is, or can be expected, unless this or some other
Pillar which hereafter may be famous, promote this or the like complaint to
those Worthies, which unfainedly desire the Kingdoms Peace; For this is most
certain, some in authority do not see, and some in Authority will not see, and
when those that are in Authority will be blind, what can be expected but
confusion, and conclusively desolation.

These great and growing mischeifs your Orator does see, and therein does
perceive the perverse condition of Flesh and Blood; your Orator does plainly
see how desperately the present powers do slight Petitions, tending to the peace
and safety of this famous Kingdom. The Petitioner complained first to the Lord
high Admiral of England, to the Lord Say, to the Earl of Warwick, to the
Earl of Essex, to several members of the honorable house of Commons, to the
House of Commons, to Lieutennant Genesis Crumwell, and to his Excelency Englands
Victorious General,
For these Reasons, your Orator thinks it duty in him, to complain to thee O
Pillar, and would have thy Readers know, that he is so confident of his
experience in the misery of the Shipwrights Art, that he dares enter into any
engagement, to make the greatest half of those old, sluggish rotten ships,
which the Officers of the Navy call Englands Royal Navy sail as swiftly as
the lest of the Parliaments new Friggots.

Your Orator is likewise willing (because he knows how) to build a ship of
the fourth rank, that shall sail, about the nimblest of the Parliaments new
Friggots.

These services your Orator can, and is willing to undertake, upon the
striktest Obligations that can be invented. And if he fail to perform what he
does promise, your Orator shall most willingly, as deservedly, undergo the
highest Censure that may in justice be inflicted upon him.

These are the real thoughts and, earnest desires of your humble Orator, who
by his own Proposalls, expects no particular Emolument until he has
performed the intended Services; And then cast himself at the feet of those
Worthies, which shall effectually promote this humble Petition.

But passing these thoughts, give your Orator leave once more to tell your
Readers, the ships of Englands Navy are sluggish, and therefore unserviceable.

Se^ the 12. page of a Iornall published by John Denton Minister in the Admiral
of the Silly Fleet, Anno. 1637. being the best service that any part of
Englands Navy has performed this 46. years.
The Captains and Mariners are generally discouraged, and the Common Seamen so
disheartened, and discontented for want of their thirds, and full allowance of
wholesome diet, the lumps of fat which grow in the shouldiers and codds of the
Oxen, with many chines and choice pieces of the b^st Beef and Porke,
seruptitiously exposed to sale and trifled away in bribes, to the quantity of
three Oxen in every Twenty six Oxen, (little more or less) besides all that
which is stolen and fooled away in pretended fees.

By which extreme abuses, the Seamen are not only shortened of their just
allowance of Beef and Porke, but they are deprived of their Brewis; which to
many (especially to those that are ancient) was as good as their Beef,
(especially in a long voyage.)

When twenty shillings is due to each Seaman for his third, some ships
companies have received but ten shillings, others not half so much, some not
a penny for a pound. In Queen Elizabeth's days every Seaman was allowed one
pound of Beef for every Beef meal, and fat for his Brewis, but since this
blessed reformation four men are allowed but three pounds of beef and many
times not so much.
They are also much disheartened for want of due incouragment, when they perform
extraordinary services. I say and will aver it, the Seamen are so
discouraged, that no good service can be expected or performed though the
Ships Pinnisses, and Friggots were as serviceable, as they ought to be. And
these these are the true causes why the Seamen revolt, and oppose the present
Government.

In the Remonstrance which your Orator did present unto the Honorable House of
Commons, in May 1646. your Orator did compaire Englands slugish Navy to
Englands lazy horses, which in Englands peaceful days were wantonly fed in
the Mews near Charing Cross.

And hear without offense give me leave to ask you Readers, what good service
they can expect from the best troop of horse now in England, if the ryders be
unskilful, cowards, or unwilling to serve.

I say if the Ships, Pinnaces, and Frigots, which now spend three hundred fifty
five thousand, one hundred twenty pounds a year; were as nimble as Art and
Industry can make them, if they were as nimble as they ought to be: There is so
much discontent, wilfully, and perniciously, enforced upon the Seamen; that no
good service can be expected from them, until the faults which your Orator
has complained off, be mended. This Declaration has been extant in a
Manuscript above six months, and does now prove it self by the Seamens
Revolting from the Parliament.


It Is thus, and they that make it thus, in your Orators opinion, deserve to be
understood, and rewarded accordingly.

Your Orator, does wish that your Readers would seriously consider these
truths, these great and serious complaints, whicvh at this time, are obscured
by diverse malignant Petitions, lately exhibited to the Honorable House of
Commons; your Orator does wish, that by your care and providence, you would
occasion a Reformation, in Englands almost lost Navy; occasion it before it
fall into a more contemptable condition, before it fall into a lost condition
past recovery.

To stop this issue, which does wast a great part of Englands life blood; and
to recover Englands Sea honor, your Orator has prepared a design, which has
in it a full Sea, and fair Gayle of Honor and Renown, for those that shall
cherish and promote it, it is able to bear up and carry on, a real
Reformation, in Englands despicable Navy; by promoting it, your well-affected
friends may glad the hearts of all the honest Seamen in England, which at this
time, are not Revolted from the Parliament; (I am afraid I may say, from the
King and Parliament;) They will have the prayers of all the honest Land-men in
England, they may recover Englands Sea-honour; they may support and highly
advance their own Reputations, and they may save Englands Commonwealth two
hundred and fifteen thousand, one hundred twenty two pounds every year.

These Inducements, your humble Orator presents unto the view, and most serious
consideration of all your well-affected Merchants and Seamen; as most
considerable, and more then necessary.

Humbly desiring,
That in regard this Petition concerns not only the Trade of this Honorable
City by Sea; but the peace and safety of the whole Kingdom: This remarkable
Pillar, according to the Trust reposed on it, will be pleased to hold forth;
and present unto all the well-affected, this humble Petition or Declaration,
intended principally for their good, and for the good of Englands Common
wealth, timely moving them to consider, the many mischiefs which may suddenly
fall upon this Renowned City, and the whole Kingdom; If Englands Seas be no
better Guarded, and the Revolted Ships by force, reduced to the present
Government.

And as in Duty bound, etc.
How bold, how mad, how desperate is the Treason,
That sligts all faithful Council, Truth and Reason.

FINIS.

