A WARNING FROM THE LORD TO THE INHABITANTS OF UNDERBARROVV, and so to all the
Inhabitants in ENGLAND, Where it shall-meet with them, who holds up the false
Teachers, and false worship, and who beats, stone, stock, and persecute, and
hail out of their Assemblies, those who are sent by the Lord, to speak his word
freely; with an exhortation, that they have to meet the Lord by true
repentance, by putting off the works of darkness, lest the Lord cut them
assunder, by his sword, which is already drawn and put into the hand of his
servants.

Also, a word to my Brethren, and Companions in tribulation in the Kingdom and
patience of Jesus Christ, who is by the world scornfully called QUAKERS.

With the manner of my passage through the dark world, (wherein the simple ones
may see the deceits of the man of sin in his actings like the true spirit) to
warn all to follow the true light within, which leads unto God, and to beware
of the voice, lo here and lo there,

By one who is a labourer in the Vineyard, who is not known to the world;
(though named of the world) EDWARD BOROUGH.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at the
Black-spread-Eagle, at the West end of Paul's, 1654.

A warning from the Lord, to the Inhabitants of Vnderbarrow, and so to all the
Inhabitants in England.
TO all you the Inhabitants of Vnderbarrow (profane ones and Professors) you my
neighbors and Country men according to the flesh (but strangers as in the
spirit) to you all who are in the customary, formal, traditional worship of
heathen, and under the barren, dry and empty ministry of man, which stands in
the will of man, and have proceeded out of the carnal inventions and
imaginations of fallen man, and is not according to God, nor to the practice of
the Saints in former ages and generations. To you all do I clear my conscience
in the presence of God, by declaring to you in writing, being that I can not
have freedom (through the subtilty of the serpent, Act. 6. 58. from 51.
who does work always to prevent the living truth to be declared, and the
deceits of himself to be discovered and made manifest) to declare in word among
you: I have been sent by the Lord moved of him to come, and to declare to you
the word of the Lord, to the directing of your minds, where to wait to attain
the true knowledge of the Lord, and of that one thing needful, the eternal
welfare of your souls, and to lay open the deceits of the serpent, who does
work in the cursed deceitful Ministry, which is uphold by you, whereby your
souls are kept in the death, and only your dark minds fed and nourished by the
painted and serpent-like expressions and declarations, coming out of the carnal
wisdom and brain-knowledge of your hireling, Isa. 56. 10, 11.
who walks in the way of the false Prophets of Israel, which the true Prophet
called greedy dumb dogs, four several times has the Lord by his eternal spirit
working in me, moved me to come into the Congregation and Assembly, he himself
is the witness that I came not of man, nor by the will of man, but contrary to
the will and desires of man, Jer. 1. 6.
wherein stands the true Ministry of God, Jon. 1. 2, 3.
now as it was ever, the true Prophets, Gal. 1. 1
Jeremiah and Jonah witnessed the same, and the Apostle Paul, and as it is
known to you unto whom I speak, that I could not have liberty to declare to you
the truth from God, who came not to you with entising words, neither what I had
gathered out of the Scripture from without me, neither to speak my own
imaginations and conceivings, as your false hireling does, but to declare the
Word of the Lord, to the convincing of your dark understandings, that you might
see the deceits by which you are and have been led, that your souls might have
been redeemed up to God, out of the imagined worships of the world, to worship
in spirit and in truth, hear ye the Word of the Lord ye people, all your
carnal, traditional ordinances and observances is abomination to the Lord,
Isa. 66. 3.
all your praying and praising is odious in his sight, Joh. 9. 21.
for all your worship is an imitation and an imagination of the dark mind of
man, Prove. 15. 9.
and was never commanded by God, therefore consider all ye people what you are
doing, and reject not the Lord, nor his everlasting truth, but prize your time,
and now seek the Lord while he may be found, Isa. 55. 6.
and call upon his name while he is near, your souls are kept in the death
under your dead Minister, and under his dead doctrines, dead reasons, points
and uses, which he speaks from the Saints conditions and experiences, but is an
enemy to the substance, and to them in whom the same conditions are made
manifest in the power of truth, and he does make manifest himself to be in the
same generation of them, who had the form of Godliness, but denies the power;
having the Letter as the Pharisees had, but persecuting the substance as they
did: All people consider whether he be not in the generation professing God and
Truth in Word as the Scribes and Pharisees were, Mat. 2. 5.
but persecuting the Son of God, who is the substance of Truth, where he is
born and made manifest, he is in the generation of them who professed Abraham's
freedom, Joh. 8. 44.
and that God was their Father, Mat. 23. 3. 27.
but were of their father the Devil; for his works they did, they said, and did
not, as he does, as it is made manifest, he is a whited Wall, a painted
Sepulcher, which Christ the Son of God cried woe against, who was and is the
Light, by which all Deceivers, Hirelings, and false Teachers, are discovered,
and cried out against: The Light which is Christ, do I witness to be made
manifest in me from God the Father of Light, daily leading me up to him, to
live in purity and uprightness, praises be to him for ever, in which Light I
see your Teacher to be a hireling, a greedy dumb dog, seeking for his gain from
his Quarter, one that God never sent, but has run and was not sent, therefore
does he not profit you at all; and from this Light, which is Christ, do I
declare against him, as knowing him that he has not the Word of the Lord, but
the Letter: Freely do I Declare against him, as knowing him to be a Deceiver,
and an Antichrist, being once I was deceived by him, but now through the rich
Love of my Father, who has made himself known to me, and has shined by his
eternal Light in my heart, do I see him and all such to be Antichrist, and no
Minister of Christ: From the mouth of the Lord I do Declare it, That you are
led blindly by him; your blind guide and you are ever learning, and never able
to come to the knowledge of the living Truth by his Ministry; he lays heavy
Burdens upon you, Mat. 2. 5.
he is in the generation of them who had the Law and the Prophets, but
persecuted him who came to fulfill the Law, and who has the substance of the
Prophets; he has the Saints Conditions and Experierces in the Letter, but who
are brought to witness the same Conditions and the same strait way in which
they walked? He is an enemy to all people, to you from God I do Declare it; he
is one that God never sent to speak his Word to you, he calls good evil, and
evil good; and puts light for darkness, and darkness for light; Isa. 5. 20.
and therefore Woe is his Portion, Jer. 5. 31.
and Woe is the Portion of all that upholds him: What will ye do in the end
thereof? He does bewitch you to observe, That Calling is an Ordinance of God,
which he never commanded: Poor people! your souls lies in the death under the
power of darkness and corruption, under your dead Minister, and under his dead
carnal Observances; and your dark Minds, your Wit and Reason is only fed, Jer.
23. 14.
and so the enemies of the Lord are strengthened by him, Joh 14. 6.
and you remain in ignorance and in blindness, and cannot attain the true
Riches; for Christ only is the Way to the Father, the Light in every man which
leads to the Father; but this Light he denies as having enlightened every one
that comes into world, as several times he has done to me in Argument: Here he
makes Christ a liar, and does not know the first Principle of Religion, nor the
Light which leads unto God, but is a Heathen, and knows not God, for this is
the Light which all the Servants of God in all generations witnessed, and which
Light we do now witness, praised be the Lord for evermore, who has in his
Light led us to himself, and has showed the Deceits of him to us, and of all
such as he is; he is in the generation shutting the kingdom of Heaven against
men, Mat. 23. 13.
neither entering h^mself, nor suffers others to enter that are entering:
Through the power of the Lord made manifest, am I bold to Declare against him,
who walks not in the Doctrine of Christ, and therefore is an Antichrist and
does deceive you, professing himself to be sent of God, and walking contrary to
the Truth of God; a Hypocrite, saying, and not doing: Ye my Countrymen, be not
deceived by him, try him by the Scriptures, and see how he walks according to
the Declaration, as they did who were Ministers of Christ, not by the Will of
man; but his Ministry is by man, and according to man, and had his Call from
man as it is known to you all; but they who were true Ministers witnessed the
contrary, neither received they their Gospel from man, Gal. 1. 1. 12
but by the Revelation of Jesus. The true Ministers of Christ, sent forth by
Christ, witnesses now the same thing, for Christ, the same that ever he was,
which is now made manifest in the Saints, and his Ministry is the same, which
is not by man, but contrary to man; Gal. 6. 7.
be not deceived, God will not be mocked, Mal 4. 1.
for he is terrible, and his day is powerful and dreadful, that shall come upon
the Heathen, and upon the workers of iniquity, and upon all D^ssemblers and
Hypocrites, all your carnal Worship, and Ordinances, and Observances, is but
mocking of God, and dissembling with him, and is but an imitation and an
imagination of the Mind of fallen man, imitated by you and your Minister,
droven by the imaginations from the true Worship of God, which the Saints in
former generations was exercised in, who was led, not by imagination, as you
are, but by the Spirit of God, as all the Servants of God are: Now as ever was,
true Baptism ^own, Mat. 3. (...).
which is by the holy Ghost and with Fire, and the Baptism with one Spirit into
one Body do we witness; but that which your Chief Priest and false Hireling
hold up, I Deny it; it is not of God, but is an imitation, and is abomination
in the sight of God; and therefore from God do I Declare against it, and
against your Hireling that upholds it among you. True Communion of Saints I
own, for we have Union, and the Bread, 2 Cor. 10. 14.
which we break is the Body of Christ; and the Cup which we drink is the Blood
of Christ, by which we are nourished and fed up to eternal life; Joh. 6. 53.
for he that eats not Christ's Flesh and drinks his Blood, he has no life in
him, he among you that can receive it let him, but your Communion I Deny, for
it is Heathenish, and no more but an imitation, having proceeded out of the
imagination of the Proud: Your breaking of Bread, and drinking of the Cup is
abomination; and God never commanded it, and this does your Pharisee uphold,
sitting in the Seat of Christ and of the Saints, as the Pharisees did in Moses
seat, saying, and not doing: True singing I own with the Spirit and with
understanding, 1 Cor. 14. 15.
singing in the Spirit, making melody in the heart to the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 19.
this singing was and is among the Saints in the Church of Christ, Rev. 14. 3.
this is well pleasing to God, Isa. ^5. 10.
for it is not an imitation, nor by tradition, as your singing is, but it is
true Sacrifice, the Song of the Redeemed ones, which none can learn but the
Redeemed ones of the Lord, who is come and coming to Zion with songs and
everlasting Joy upon their heads; but your singing is Carnal, Traditional, and
Heathenish, and is an imitation, and is not with the spirit of Jesus, but with
the spirit of the World, with the spirit of Drunkards, Swearers, Liars,
Mockers, Scornners, Covetous ones, with the spirit of Wrath, Envy, Malice,
with the spirit of Cain, with the spirit of the Scribes and Pharisees, and
chief Priests, who persecuted the Saints which sang in truth in former
generations, and now the deceit is turned into the form of singing, and they
that live there, persecutes them that sings in the power; Amos 6. 5.
for thus it was ever, They that lived in Profession in the Word Outwardly,
persecuted them that lived in the power of which was Professed, and there you
and your Hireling is; but know that the Lord will take an account of you, and
give unto every man his reward, Romans 2. 6.
according to his deeds: You and your Priest, have got the Form of Baptism, of
the Communion, of Singing, and of a Church; but the power and substance of
these Ordinances you know not, for they are hid from all vulturouus eyes, and
from the generation of the Pharisees, and Serpents, who are called of men
Master, and which have the chief place in the Assemblies, as your Hireling
has, and who is called of men Master, Mat. (...).
as they were which Christ cried Woe against: true Preaching of Jesus Christ
Crucified we own and do witness, for the Preaching is out of the Will of man,
out of Form and Custom, and is foolishness to the wisdom of the World; now as
it was ever, this is not with the enticing words of man's wisdom, but in the
demonstration of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 1. 18 21
and of Power, and the Preaching of the Word of Faith, which is nigh thee in
thy mouth and in thy heart, 1 Cor. 2 4
that Preaching we do own, Romans 10. 8. 17
for Faith comes by the hearing of this Word Preached, and the Prayer with the
Spirit of truth we do own, for that is not in word to be seen of men, but led
to that, not by Custom, Form, and Tradition, but by the eternal Spirit, which
proceeds from God, which has free recourse to God, Isa. 66. 18
which God hears and does accept, for there iniquity is purged out of the
heart and is not regarded, for he that regards iniquity in his heart, God will
not hear his Prayer; but the Preaching and Praying of your Hireling I do deny,
for they are abomination to the Lord, for his Preaching leads from God, stands
in his own Will, in his own Time, in Form, Custom, and Tradition, and your
Souls are not refreshed by it, neither is true Faith known among you; for how
can he being evil speak good things? A corrupt Tree cannot bring forth good
fruit, Mat. 12. 34.
said he; Who cried Woe unto them that said and did not, Mat. 7. 18
in which generation he is, how can he teach and direct toward true Religion, 1
Cor. 3. 11
being he denies the Corner stone, the first Principle of Religion, which is
the foundation, which no other can any lay, Joh. 1. 9.
the Light of God, which has enlightened every one that comes into the world,
which he denies to have enlightened every one; poor people! I do pity your
souls (God is my witness) to see you lie in darkness, in ignorance, and
blindness, and in deadness, under your dead Hireling, and under his dead
traditional Preaching; your wisdom, reason, and dark minds is only fed and
strengthened by his preaching, Mat. 7. 26
and you all are but building upon the sand, hearing but not doing, and we, who
have suffered the loss, and have witnessed the destruction of that building, do
now Declare freely against it where it is standing, for we know the depth,
height, and breadth of all your Profession, and of all your carnal Worship, and
Observances; Jer. 23. 29
and the Word of God is as a fire, which will burn up; and as a hammer, which
will beat down all your imagined Worships and carnal Ordinances: And his
Praying is abomination to the Lord, for it is as theirs was, which the Son of
God cried Woe against, which stood Praying in the Synagogues, and which made
long Prayers, Mat. 6. 5
and the Praying of all such we do Deny, for their Prayers is as the Scribes
and Pharisees was, who were called of men Masters, as they are now, and who
were sayers and not doers, as your Hireling is; therefore all you people
consider, and diligently weigh these things: If I Declare to you the Truth, own
it without respect of persons, if I speak a lie, let me be accounted as
accursed for ever; and all you simple ones, who are seeking the living among
the dead, who are in the simplicity, seeking after the truth, and yet are
bewitched to observe that which God never commanded, Luke 24. 5
and to seek God in that way which he was never found in, Joh. 14 6
for Christ alone is the way to the Father, and he is but one from generation
to generation; in all generations for your sakes do I lay open the deceits of
your Hireling and chief Priest, who is in the way of Balaam, following the
wages of unrighteousness, and do advise you as from the mouth of the Lord* to
cease from man, whose breath is in his nostrils, and to cease from all your
customary carnal Observances, Isa. 2. 2^.
which God never commanded, but is only an imitation, and an imagination; your
souls are kept in death, under the power of Corruption, Pride, Drunkenness,
Covetousness, Oppression, and Earthly-mindedness, Wantonness, and the lustful
Nature ruling is head in you, Isa. 29. 13
and among you are that generation that draws near God with their mouths, Ezekiel.
33. 31
but your hearts goes after Covetousness, and are far from the Lord; ye Worship
an unknown god, and are persecuters of the true God, and of his Servants, as
ever it was in all generations by Priest and People, as it is now with you and
your Priest, they that professed truth in word, persecuted them that witnessed
the Power, Jer. 5 31
the horrible filthy thing is committed among you, Luke 6. 26
and you love to have it so, but what will you do in the end thereof? you are
in the generation of your forefathers, who spoke good of the false Prophets,
but persecuted the true Prophets; so it is now among you, he that has the Word
of the Lord from the mouth of the Lord to declare unto you, him you revile and
mock, and scorn and persecute, but he that speaks the imagination of his own
heart from the Saints conditions, him you own and hear, and here you show your
selves to be them which Christ spoke of, which would receive them that come in
their own name, Joh. 5. 43
but will not receive him that comes in the name of his Father; Repent, and
turn to the Lord, Eze. 14 9
lest his judgments come upon you and destroy you with an utter destruction;
Prove. 21. 15
the day of the Lord is terrible and dreadful, which will come upon the wicked,
Amos 5. 18
and upon all the workers of iniquity: Be ashamed ye Heathens, you maintainers
of the greedy dumb dogs, and upholders of the horrible filthy thing, the
persecuters of the righteous seed; the contemners of the Just, the generations
of Serpents, who cries, Let Barrabas go free; mat. 23
ye generation of Hypocrites, who professes God, mat. 23. 35
but persecutes the Son of God where he is made manifest, of this Generation,
in which you are: Isa. 1. 6
Shall all the righteous bloodshed be required even from Abel? mal. 1. 1
Repent, and cease from all your former ways and doings, from Pride,
Drunkenness, Covetousness, and Oppression, from Lying, Swearing from Mirth, and
Wantonness, and vain Pleasures, for the day of the Lord comes that shall burn
as an Oven, and the Proud, and all that do wickedly shall be as stubble, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8
fully dry, for the Lord will be avenged of his enemies, and render vengeance
in flames of fire upon all that know not God, mal. 3. 2
and that obeys not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: Who can stand when he
appears? Isa. 33. 14
Who can dwell with everlasting burnings? Even he that does righteously, and
that is purged from iniquity: Jer 9. 25
But then woe unto you all Hypocrites and Professers, and to the wicked and
profane ones, ye shall all partake of the righteous Judgment, Jer. ^. 20
and drink of the Cup of the Lords Fury and Indignation, for your iniquities
are seen, Rev. 6. 16
and your transgressions are not covered from the Lord; all your Profession
will not hide you from the presence of the Lamb, for in your Sacrifices are
found deceit, and in your Offerings lodges iniquity, the mouth of the Lord has
spoken it, therefore be ashamed of all your Profession, and of all your
Glorious Carnal Ordinances, for the Lord is coming to uncover you, H^b. 1. 13
and to make you and your profane Hireling manifest, for God is pure and holy,
and no iniquity dwells with him, Psalm. 102. 7
nor none that works wickedness, therefore stop thy mouth thou Hireling who
Preaches for hire, and Devines for money; and leans upon the Lord, mic. 3. 11
and uses thy tongue, and says, he says it, when the Lord never spoke to
thee: Thou art in the Generation of the Scribes and Pharisees, Jer. 23. 31
and be ashamed ye upholders of him, for now every tree that brings not forth
good fruit, must be hewn down, the Lord has said it, Mar. 3. 10
his word is as a fire, which will burn up all the wicked; Heb. 4 12
his Word is sharper than a two edged sword, which will cut down and wound the
head of the wicked; ye Mockers and Scorners, ye Swearers and Liars, ye Proud
and Covetous ones, ye Merry-hearted and Wanton ones, dreadful is the day that
shall come upon you, Joel 2. 2. 10 12
the Lord will make his power known, and glorify himself in your destruction,
except you repent, and turn to the Lord: Ye hard hearted ones and rebellious
ones, Exodus 7. 8. 9 Chap.
the Plagues of God is to rest upon you, therefore prise your time, and repent,
and fear the Lord God Almighty, Rev. 14 7
and lay aside your vain wicked ways, and confess your sins, and forsake them,
for such shall find mercy: Pro. 28. 13
All ye People, mind the Light of God within you, and hearken to that which
shows you what is sin, Ioh. 1. 5. 9
and evil, which shows you your proud minds, your carnal coveteous desires and
affections, which checks and reproves you for your ungodlie deeds; Ioh. 8. 12
this Light shines in darkness, but the darkness cannot comprehend it: Ioh. 11.
9. 10
this is the Light which has enlightened every one that comes into the World,
which Light is Christ, he that follows this Light walks not in darkness, but
has the Light of life; he that hates this Light stumbles, and walks in
darkness, ignorance, Jude 1. 4
and blindness, as you do, turning the grace of God into wantonness, Tit. 2.
11. 12
which same grace is the Saints Teacher, this is the free Grace of God which
has appeared to all men, which in all Generations taught the Saints to deny
ungodliness and wordlie lusts, and led them into purity and holiness: This
Grace do we witness, praised, praised be the Lord, to be led by it, which ever
was the Saints leader, and through the teaching of this Grace do we deny your
Hireling, and all such Pharisees and Hipocrites, who makes a prey upon the poor
people; and if you stop not into their mouths, Ezekiel. 34. from 2 to 9
they even prepare War against you, as the false Prophets of Israel did; and
daily are we taught by it in the ways of God to do his service, Micha 3. 5
praised be the only Lord of glory for evermore, who has gathered us up to
himself (to be taught alone by his grace) out of the mouth of your Hireling,
who once made a prey upon us, but eternal praise and glory to our God, who in
his Light has discovered unto us his nakedness and his shame, his hypocrisy
and deceit, in the eternal Light of God do we see him, and all such to be blind
guides, and leads the poor blind people in darkness and in ignorance, and none
is able to come to the true knowledge of the eternal Truth in his Ministry,
for he is no Minister of God, but an Antichrist, ^ Ioh. 1. 7
denying Christ to be come in the flesh, denying the Light to have enlightened
every one, as several times he has done to me; but my Father who is Light and
Glory, has now made him manifest: and in that Light Christ Jesus, do I see
him to be one whom has run, whom God has not sent, therefore does he not
profit you at all, nor puts no difference from the precious and the vile in
you, nor leads you to discern the clean from the unclean, the pure from the
impure in you, Ezekiel. 22. 26
but speaks the Divination of his own brain, feeding your dark minds, and from
the eternal Light made manifest in me from God the Father (who is over all, and
above all) do I Declare against him, and against all Hirelings and greedy dumb
Dogs, that seeks for their gain from their Quarter, Is. 56. 10, 11
as he does, freely do I declare as knowing them to be deceivers and blind
guides: For the simple ones sake among you, who are ensnared and kept in
ignorance by him under his dead, dry, barren, sloathful Ministry; Repent ye
people, who lies in the Captivity of Babylon, Rev. 13. 10
under your Babylonish Merchant, now is the Lord leading his Sons and Daughters
out of Egypt out of bondage, and now he that has led Captive is led into
Captivity, praised and honored be the God of Saints for evermore, who has
redeemed us out of the mouth of your Idol shepherd who feeds himself with the
fat, Ezekiel. 34
and who has enlightened our dead Consciences, 2 Cor. 4 ^
and has shined in our hearts, in his eternal Light, and of this have I
received freely, and from this do I let forth freely, to the laying open the
deceits of your Hireling: Now is the day of your Visitation, wherein the Savior
of the World stands at the door and knocks, Rev. 3 20
if any open to him he will come in; therefore prise your time, and hear the
Word of the Lord, Col. 3. 8, 9
and lay aside the works of darkness, Lying and Swearing, Mocking and Scorning,
and beating of your fellow Servants: Mat. 24. 4^ to 51
Woe unto you ye Strikers, who hardens your hearts against the Lord, and against
those who declare to you the wickedness of your ways; the Lord will come when
you are not aware, and give you your Portion with Hypocrites and Unbeleevers,
Joel 2. 12.
and cast you into utter darkness: Repent, and turn to the Lord your God with
mourning and lamentation, and cease from all your former ways and doings; Isa.
1. 16
cease from Covetousness and Oppression, ye aged people; and cease from
Lightness, Vanity, and Pride, ye young People; and from all your Priests and
Steeple Houses, for there your Lightness, Pride, and vain minds are fed and
nourished, and the enemies of the Lord are strengthened. Dear people, there had
I once fellowship with you in your Pride, Lightness, and Vanity and there was
once my joy and delight; but now am I chosen by the Lord out of all these
things praised be him for ever, to serve the Lord, in declaring against all
these abominations, Isa. 2. 12.
in whom they are standing: For, Woe unto the proud and light vain minds, who
are tripping upon the mountains, and whose hearts are not subject to the Lord;
against all these abominations do I Declare as from the Lord, and do advise you
as from him, to depart out of these abominations, for the day is coming when
you must be separated from all your lovers, a day of darkness and misery;
therefore prise your time, and hearken unto the Light of God within you, Joel
2. 2
which reproves you for your filthy and ungodlie deeds and words; 1 John 1. 7
this Light will lead you to God, John. 4. 24
out of all filthiness, obeying it; this will separate the clean from the
unclean in you, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 1
and will lead you to be taught of God, and to have unity with God, and with
the Saints; for it was in the Light that the Saints had unity; this Light will
lead you out of your Hypocritical and deceitful carnal Worships, to Worship in
spirit and truth; this Light will lead you to the true Baptism, out of your
deceitful imitation of a Baptism, which your Hireling upholds among you; this
Light will lead you to the true Church in God, out of your formal imagined
Church, and to the true Communion of Saints, and true singing to God, out of
your heathenish Communion and Singing: Therefore all ye people mind the Light,
for the Light has enlightened every one, which is the Savior and Redeemer of
him that loves it, and brings his deeds to it, but is the Condemnation of
him that hates it, John 3. 19*
and walks not in it; therefore all people mind this Light which is of God,
this will lead you up to God, this is the way to the Father, and none comes to
the Father but by me said he who was, and is the Light; this Light loving it
and walking in it, John 14 6
will free you from all the burdens which the Pharisee lies upon you, Mat. 23. 4
and from all the taxes of Pharaoh's Tax-masters, and will lead you into the
mysteries of the Kingdom of God, to know him who is invisible, and is present
every where, yet hidden from all dark minds, who lives in the imaginations and
imitations, as you and your Hireling does: If you love this Light and walk in
this Light, it will bring you to be witnesses of the Scripture and of the
Saints Conditions which you are but talkers of; this is the ^ight from which
they spoke that spoke the truth of God, Isa. 56
and from this Light did Isa. cry who lived in the obedience of it, Ier. 23
against the greedy dumb dogs, Ezekiel. 34
that sought for their gain from their Quarter; Micha. 3
and did Jeremiah, Mal. 2
Ezekiel, Micha, and Malachy, cry against Hirelings, and against those that
said, The Lord says it, and he never spoke to them, and against them that
Preached for hire, and that Divined for money, and that taught for the fleece,
and yet leaned upon the Lord as your Pharisee does, saying, Is not the Lord
among us? And from this same Light do we Declare against all such, and sees
them to be abomination to the Lord, now as they did then, praised, praised be
the Lord for ever, for now the abominations of the whore is made manifest that
sits upon many waters, Rev. 17. 1, 2, 3
that has made all Nations drunk with the Wine of her Fornication, and now is
the Judgment of the Whore come, and the day wherein she must reckon to drink
the wine of the Wrath of God; and he who was, and is this Light, cried Woe
against then that said, and did not; Mat. 23
and against them that had the chiefest place in the Assemblies, and that were
called of men, Masters: this same light do I witness, to be made manifest from
God the Father of Light, and am not ashamed to declare it before men, Mat. 10.
33
for he that denies Christ before men, he must be denied by Christ before the
Father; and this Light lived the Saints in, Acts 26 24
and spoke from, who were called Madmen, and Deceivers of them that professed
truth in word, but persecuted them in whom the Son was born and made manifest,
in which generation you and your Priest daily makes manifest your selves to
be, therefore repent, and come down ye high minds and lifted up spirits, for
the Lord is against you, and hearken to the Light of God in you, and wait in it
according to measure, and cease from all your formal, customarie, traditional
worshipping, and from all your dumb Teachers, who are Antichrists, and denies
the Light as having enlightened every one; John 14. 6
this Light is the only way to the Father, which all must (who comes to God)
follow and walk in, for he that walks not in this Light, 1 John ^, 10, 11
walks in darkness, and stumbles, and knows not whither he goes; and there are
all Priests and people in darkness and ignorance, who walks not in this Light;
therefore love the Light and obey it, it will separate you from all filthiness
and corruption, and lead you into purity and holiness, without which none
shall see God, and here is your Teacher always present with you, which teaches
to deny ungodliness, and the wicked ways of this world; he who walked in this
Light, 1 John 5. 19
by this Light saw all the world to lie in wickedness, but said they were of
God, and all that were of God heard them who dwelt in the Light, 1 John 4. 6
but he who disobeyes this Light, follows the blind guids of the world as you
do, and sets up Teachers to themselves having itching ears, 2. Tim. 4, 3
and that Ministry is of man, and by man called to the Ministry by the
earthly powers, by earthly Magistrates, or at Oxford, Cambridge, or
Newcastle, all this Ministry, who is here called is by man, and their Gospel
is of man, which the true Gospel is not, and he that harh the Word of God to
declare from God, Gal. 1. 16
his Call is not by man, neither does he go to man to be approved; for he that
Preached the true Gospel, consulted not with flesh and blood, and so it is now,
the same thing do we witness, and to be Ministers of the everlasting Gospel,
called not by man, but by God, praised be the Lord for ever, from generation to
generation, who has revealed himself unto Babes, and has hid himself from the
Wise and Prudent of this World; Mat. 11. 25
stop your mouths ye Ministers, which is by man, which Gospel is according to
man, for now the Lord is arising, whose Angel is gone forth Preaching the
everlasting Gospel: Rev. 14 6.
Sing praises to the Lord for ever ye Redeemed ones, who are brought from under
the empty, dead, deceitful Ministry, which is by man, to be true witnesses
of the true Ministry which is of God: therefore be ashamed ye upholders of
the deceitful Ministry, Nah^. 3. 4
which is but the Ministry of witchcraft, by which your eyes are darkened, and
under which your souls lies in blindness and ignorance under the power of
witchcraft and sorcerie* Be confounded ye Back-sliders, who once heard the Word
with joy, and received it; who were once among us, yet not of us; Mat. 13. 25
who has chosen the glory of this world, rather than the everlasting Truth,
and has sold your birthright of the everlasting inheritance, for the
satisfying of your earthly minds, with the earthly treasures: Hear the Word
of the Lord ye sloathful Servants, who not abiding waiting upon God, eats and
drinks with the Drunkards, and beats your fellow servants, Mat. 24 4^. to the
end.
and are now become haters, mockers, and revilers, suddenly will the Lord come
and cut you all asunder, and give you your Portion in the Lake that burns with
fire, Psa. 50. 22
except you repent: Repent you Back-sliders, and consider ye that forgot God,
now while you have time, before the Lord swear in his wrath that ye shall not
enter; hearken to that which convinces you of your filthiness, the Light of
God within you, which shall eternally witness us to be true, which Light shall
be your Condemnation, John 3. 19
because you love darkness rather than Light; ye are returned with the Dog to
his vomit, 2 Pet. 2. 20 22
and with the Sow to the wallowing in the mire, your latter end is worse than
your beginning, and the Parable is fulfilled upon you, for lying against the
Truth will the Lord plead with you, and woe will be your Portion for ever, for
the liars shall not enter into the Kingdom of God; therefore all people fear
the living God, Rev. 21. 8
and prise your time, and see where you are, his servants you are unto whom you
do obey; all must give an account to the living God, Rom 6. 16
and must receive according to what is done in the Body; in such an hour will
the Master come which you are not aware of, Romans 2. 6
and will take account of your stewardship, for God has given unto every one
a Talent, Luke 16. 2
therefore spend not away your time in wickedness, and in a deceitful
Profession of God, feeding your dark minds with the dead formal Preaching, of
your dead carnal blind Pharisee, but hearken to the Light of God within you,
and improve every one his Talent, the good and faithful servant improves his
to the honor and riches of his Master, Mat. 25. 20 21, 24, 25
but the sloathful servant hides his in the earth, living in the filthiness,
saying he has no power; now see which servant you are, and read your selves
within, how you stood covered in the presence of the living God, for woe unto
him that is covered but not with the Spirit of the Lord; the servants of God
brings forth fruit unto God, Isa. 30. 1
bears the image of their Father, and the servants of the Devil brings forth
fruits of darkness, 1 Cor. 11. 7
and bears the image of the Devil, which is glorious to the carnal eye, and
feeds the carnal mind: The Seed of the Woman is but one in all generations, Gal
5. 19, 20, 21
and the Seed of the Serpent is but one, which ever was, is ruling and reigning
in the Children of Disobedience, who are disobedient to the Light of God within
them; and betwixt these two Seeds is Enmity, the one against the other, each
Seed is known by its fruit; the old bottle pours out old Wine, Genesis 3. 15
the new bottle new Wine; therefore all people sink down to within, Mat. 12. 34
and call in all your wandering thoughts, imaginations and affections, and
desires, and see which seed is head in you, and see what your desires and
affections goes out after, for where your hearts are, there is your treasure;
see what you do possess of God in your Souls, and what you are made witnesses
of, for he that believes has the witness in himself, 2 John 5. 10 and 4. verse.
and Faith is the Victory over the world, he that can receive it* let him:
Dear people, I have freely Declared to you the Truth, and from the love of God
shed abroad in my heart to your Souls, and for the Seed sake in you, which
lies in death, captivated under your Wisdom and Reason, have I spoken the Word
of the Lord, which if you own it, and abide in it, shall be the savor of Life,
and in eternal joy shall you witness me to be true in what I have Declared, but
if you harden your hearts, and kick against the Truth, and against what I have
Declared, shall be the savor of death unto Death, and in eternal torment and
misery shall ye witness me in what I say, for to that which should exercise
the Conscience do I speak in every one of you, and to that in you have I
cleared my Conscience, and have freed my Spirit; this is the day of your
Visitation, the mouth of the Lord has spoken it: Remember that you have been
showed the Deceits which you live in, and have been warned of the misery and
desolation that shall come upon you, except you lay these things to heart, and
turn to the Lord. Farewell.

By him who is despised, and had in derision among you, who is not greater than
his Lord; and therefore is contented to be called a Blasphemer and a Seducer,
as he whom I serve was, by them of your generation. E. B.

TO all you my Country people of every degree, who are Inhabitants in
Vnder-barrow, have I cleared my Conscience, and have freely Declared to you
the Word of the Lord, and have laid open the Deceits of your Deceitful
Ministry and Minister, and have directed you to that in every one of you
which leads unto God, and which is the way to the Father, which is the true
Light which has enlightened every one that comes into the World, which light
all who loves and follows, walks not in darkness, but walks up to God out of
the Fall, from under the Curse, into the Being; but all who hates this Light,
and follows the imagination of their own brains, and of the divination of their
Hirelings and Pharisees, this Light shall be their condemnation, because they
walk not in it; even this Light, which is come into the World in every man,
even the witness in the Conscience which is placed by God, shall for ever
witness against you, and against all your false worships and Hirelings, and
shall bear testimony to what I have in this little Volume declared to be true,
when the Book of Conscience shall be laid open, for to every man's Conscience
am I made manifest in what I have to you declared as concerning your Hireling
whom God has never sent, but is in the way of the false Prophets and
Pharisees, for he that abides not in the Doctrine of Christ has not God, 2
John 1. 9. but is an Antichrist, and of the Devil. And as concerning the Light
within you, that Light will bear witness to it self, that every one of you to
whom I speak, has this Light, which shows you sin, your lying, swearing,
pride, and wikced ways, covetousness and wantonness to be sin: this is the
true Light, which is, as ever was, foolishness and a stumbling block to the
wise ones: This is the Light which your Pharisee denies to have lightened every
one, and this Light shall for ever witness me to be true, and shall witness
this poor people among you who is despised and contemned by you, and scornfully
called Quakers, to be the servants of God, whom I do own as my Brethren in the
sufferings of Jesus, who are my joy in the Lord. Now all people every where,
to you all, a word from the Lord, though I have spoken in this small Volume, as
moved by the Lord of Heaven and Earth, to the Inhabitants of Vnderbarrow, as
declaring against their false Teacher, and false Worships which they uphold:
now freely and plainly do I declare against all thy Teachers, O England, who
are one in the same generation with him in the Seat of Christ, and of his
Apostles, professing themselves to be sent of God, but walking contrary to his
commands, in the same footsteps which the Scribes and Pharisees walked in,
which were persecutors of the Son of God; and which he cried woe against, they
who said and did not, as all these thy Teachers do, who are called of men
Masters as they were, and have the chiefest place in the Assemblies as they
had, and Prayed standing as these thy professed Ministers do: Now the same
Light which ever was, the Saints did, which is, Jesus Christ is now born and
made manifest, which is witnessed among the saints, in which Light I see all
thy Teachers, O England, to be drunk with the Wine of her that has deceived
the nations, who sits upon a scarlet colored Beast, and is arrayed in purple
and scarlet color, and decked with gold and precious stones, and has the
golden cup in her hand full of abominations, whose name is written in her
forehead, Mystery, Babylon the great, the Mother of Harlots, and abomination of
the Earth: And in this Light do I declare against them all which are in the
generation of the false Prophets of Israel, which seeks for their gain from
their Quarter, and which steals the word from their neighbor, and have taken
the words of the Prophets of Christ and of his Apostles and sells the
divination of their own brain upon the Scriptures, which the holy men speak
forth freely to the poor blind people, and teaches for the fleece; and if ye
stop not into their mouths, they prepare War against you, and which are called
of men Master, which Christ forbids: Against all these freely (as from the
Lord) I do Declare to be no Ministers of Jesus Christ, but are Seducers, and
blind Guides, and are Antichrists, and leads the poor blind people in the ways
of death and destruction; for they are no Ministers of Christ that abides not
in the Doctrine of Christ: these have run, but has not been sent by God, and
therefore is not your Souls profited by them, but are in the dark heathenish
nature, as by your fruits is made manifest, leaning in the imaginations, and
not in the counsel of the Lord, and in lying, swearing, drunkenness,
covetousness, and oppression, and according to the course of this world; these
iniquities are ruling among People, Priests, and Rulers in this Nation, from
the least of them even to the greatest, every one is given to covetousness,
from the Prophet even to the Priest, every one deals falselie: All your
Hirelings and greedy dumb Dogs I do deny, and all who are of God denies all
such, and are taught of God in the ways of God, which ever the world derided:
All thy Teachers, O England, is denied of them who are taught of God, and whose
Teacher is the anointing, needs not any man to teach them: And by thy Teachers
who are in the way of the Pharisees, art thou blindlie led in the ways of
darkness and ignorance, and all thy carnal worship, which is in every part of
thee upheld, which is to Read, Sing, and Preach upon the Saints Conditions,
which were witnesses of God: All this I do deny and freely declare against as
from the mouth of the Lord, to be no worship of God, but imagination and an
imitation of the Worship of God: And the living eternal God of Heaven and Earth
is but mocked by you, in your imagined worship; for your reading of another
condition, and singing of that which you live not in, and preaching that which
is gathered from without by imagination, and conceiving upon that which the
Prophet Prophesied, or which Christ spoke, who was, and is the substance, and
which the Apostles witnesses; this is carnal and heathenish, and was never
commanded by the Lord, nor is no worship of the true God, and against this
worship I do from the Lord declare, as in the eternal Light of God seeing it,
to be deceitful and abomination to the Lord, being I am Redeemed up to God by
his eternal Spirit, and to worship in Spirit and in Truth, and am not limited
to a day, place, or time; neither at Jerusalem, nor in this Mount, etc. and am
freed and redeemed out of this fallen man's invention and tradition, which is
but Cains sacrifice, which God does not accept, but is abomination in his
sight, praised be the Lord for evermore. And O England, I do declare against
all these thy Teachers, and against all this thy Worship, as from the mouth of
the Lord, as moved of the Lord to speak this word unto thee, Thou have spent
thy money this many Generations for that which is not bread, and thy labor for
that which does not satisfy thee, all thy imagined formal Worships and carnal
Traditions and Ordinances of man is the Lord risen in his servant to declare
against: And the same Light which ever made manifest deceitful Worships, and
the deceitful Hirelings, and them that cried, Peace, peace to the people when
the Lord spoke no peace, is now risen and speaks in thy ears, O Nation, the
same everlasting Light, which the true Prophets lived in, who cried against
them that sought for their gain from their Quarter, and that cried against the
horrible filthy thing which is upheld in thee, O England, this same Light is
made manifest in the despised People, called Quakers, in this North part of the
Nation, O People; your Teachers has beguiled you, and have taught for the
fleece, and fed themselves with the fat, but your souls are hungered by them:
for they are in the Generation of them that said and did not, they love the
wages of unrighteousnes, and follows the Error of Balaam for reward, and have
devoured souls for dishonest gain; but the only true God is arising to beat
the mountains to dust, and to cleave the rocks asunder: In thee, O Land, will
the Lord make manifest his power, and will stretch forth his arm for the
deliverance of his Chosen, and for the redemption of his two witnesses, which
has laid slain in the great City in this Land, which they that dwell upon the
earth have rejoiced over, and made merry, and triumphed in their slaughter;
the Lord is arising to require his flock at the hands of the Idols shepherd. O
ye Idol dumb Shepherds, the Lord will be avenged upon you, for you have
scattered the sheep of his pasture, and have fed your selves with them; the
Lord of Hosts is grieved with you, and have shaken his hands at your dishonest
gain, and ye shall no longer wear Garments to deceive; ye have long deceived
the simple by your lies, and by your lightness, but now you are discovered and
made manifest in the eternal Light of God, and the mystery of Witchcraft is
not hid now from the Saints: Therefore, O England, hear the Word of the Lord,
Thy Prophets are light and treacherous persons, thy Judges, Judges for reward,
and thy Priests preach for hire, and thy Officers imprisons the just, and thy
Rulers are evening wolves, which seeks for the prey, and the Lord of Heaven and
Earth is grieved with these things, Therefore, O Land, tremble at the presence
of the Lord God of Jacob, for Esau shall become a place for Dragons, and shall
be disinhabited in the day of mourning, and lamentation is coming upon thee,
for that which the Lord has not planted will he pluck up, and every corrupt
tree shall be cast into the fire: All thy corrupt Judges, and Officers, and
Rulers will the Lord cut off utterlie from the face of the earth, and will
restore to his people Judges as at the first, and Counselors as at the
beginning: the mouth of the Lord has spoken it: Therefore, O Land* prepare to
meet the Lord thy God by true repentance, by putting off the works of darkness,
thy Pride and thy Oppression, O Nation, is seen by the Lord, and the cry of the
Oppressed through thy pride and tyranny is heard in the ears of the Lord of
Sabbath, and he will avenge the Cause of the Poor and needy; that is,
Oppressed by Priests in their Tithes, by Lawyers in their Fees, and by Officers
in their unrighteous dealings: and the Seed of Abraham shall go free, and
Israel shall no longer be subject to Pharaoh, nor to his Tax-masters. O
England, in the North part of thee is the Light of God arisen, which shines
clearlie, and which discovers the abomination of thy Teachers and of thy
Worship, and we are bold to declare against them, and against all thy corrupt
Officers, Judges, and Rulers, and this Light shall shine through the Nation,
and shall be spread over Kingdoms, and the fire is to be kindled which the Lord
has promised, which shall burn as an Oven, and the proud and all that do
wickedlie, shall be as stubble: This fire shall proceed out of the mouth of the
two Witnesses, as it did before they were slain, and shall devour the enemies
of the Lord: the sword of the Lord is drawn in thee, O Nation, and put into the
hands of them which is hated and despised by the Rulers and Officers, which is
scornfullie called Quakers, but they shall conquer by the sword of the Lord
which the Lord has put into their hands, over Countries and Dominions: For, O
Nation, the Lord is with them, and thy unjust Rulers and Officers cannot hurt
them, not a hair of their head shall perish without my heavenly Father: It is
for a testimony of their Fathers love to them that they suffer shame and
reproach, and some of them imprisonment by the unjust Rulers, and for a witness
against them that some of them are brought before them, the Lord is choosing the
weak things of this World, and he is making manifest his Counsels to Babes, and
revealing his Counsel and eternal Truth to Children, and keeps his hidden
Treasures from the eyes of the Wise, and vulturous ones, Praises, praises be to
him for evermore: For the Lion of Judah is opening, and has opened the Sealed
Book, let all his Saints rejoice for evermore. This is the day of thy
Visitation, O Nation, wherein the Lord speaks to thee by the mouth of his
Servants in word and writing, therefore return to the Lord thy God from whence
thou art fallen: Now will the Lord gather his Jewels and Chosen ones out of
thee, and will raise up the dead which lies slain under thy Teachers and
Pharisees, which makes a prey upon the people, which was never sent by God to
speak unto thee. O Land, Hear the Word of the Lord, Depart from all thy
Teachers, for the Lord has drawn his Sword, and lifted up against the false
Prophet, and the Vials of Indignation shall be poured upon him, and upon, all
that hpholds him in his Whoredoms, and Witchcraft, by which he deceives the
simple; therefore lest thou be partaker of their Plagues, depart from them: And
all people, mind that measure of Light within you, which the Lord has
lightened every one of you withal, for the Lord is risen to teach his people
himself, and he is fulfilling his prophecy in thy ears, O Nation, they shall
teach no more every man his neighbor and every man his brother, saying, Know
the Lord; for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest
of them says the Lord; for I will put my Law in thine inward parts, and write
it in their hearts, Jer. 31. 33. The Lord is about his great and wonderful Work
in thee, and all the Wars and Contentions in thee, O Land, has but been a
making way for this Work of the Lord, and has not been the Work which the Lord
has purposed: This Work is made known to them that fears the Lord, and
abides in his Counsel: The Lord will overturn, overturn the Nation, and will
create new Heavens and new Earth, wherein shall dwell righteousness, in which
all the Chosen of the Lord shall rejoice for evermore; And all the Kings and
Nobles shall cast down their Crowns before this Glory: And all the men of War
shall lay down their Armor and Weapons of War: And Nation shall not lift up a
Sword against Nation any more: For the Lord will establish Righteousness and
Peace; this will the Lord bring to pass in thee, O England, through the
destruction of that which now lives, and through the Resurrection of that to
Life which now lies in Death: Hear, O Land, give ear, O People, for the Lord
of Heaven and Earth is now turning the World up-side down, all old things shall
pass away, all things shall become new by fire, and by his sword will the Lord
plead with all flesh, and the slain of him shall be many; corrupt Judges and
Officers will the Lord sweep away, and their name shall no more be found in the
Nation, the fire is kindled and the sword is drawn, happy is he that keeps
himself from fighting against the Lord in this his Work, and happy are ye, O
Brethren, that stands faithful to the end to see these things accomplished,
great shall be the battle, it is now begun, many shall see death, and shall yet
live to see these things.

TO all the Despised and Contemned ones, who are Persecuted, and shamefully
entreated by the Generation of the Chief Priests, and by them who lives in the
highest Profession in the Word outwardly, ye who are the scorn of the Nation,
and the derision of all the Heathen, and are called Quakers; you are my
brethren, children of my Father, have been brought forth by the same Womb, and
have sucked the same Breast; Ye are chosen out of the world, out of all worldly
glories, and earthly excellencies, and are not of this world, and therefore
the world hates you, you are brought out of the broad way of the flesh, and
are separated from all the world in their ways, worships, and forms of
religion, and are redeemed out of the mouths of all idol dumb shepherds, and
has one Shepherd, and are gathered from all the mountains, and out of all the
desolate disinhabited places, and are come into the pleasant sheepfold, where
is green pastures and fresh springs of living waters: By Faith with Abraham are
ye come out of your native Country from among your kindred, and out of your
fathers house: And with Moses have you forsaken the glory of Pharaohs house,
and chused rather to suffer affliction among the poor despised people, than to
have enjoied the pleasures of sin; but great shall be your reward ye Contemned
ones, glory, and honor, and everlasting happiness is prepared for you if you,
stand faithful to the end, the Lord is with you as a mighty terrible one, and
therefore shall all your persecuters be ashamed and confounded, the sound of a
trumpet is heard among you, which makes all nations at a stand, and all the
heathen to wonder, and all the rulers, nobles, and chief Priests are in
consultation, combining together to suppress the Army of the Lord of Hosts,
which he is gathering together: fear not, nor be dismayed, for the sounding of
your trumpet causes an alarm, and makes all the inhabitants of the land to
tremble, and all bows before the sound of it; for the sound of it is terrible
to the nations, to all kingdoms and dominions the Lord of heaven and earth is
your Captain, which rides upon the Clouds, and whose glory is above the world,
and therefore in the battle shall you obtain the conquest, and all your enemies
shall be put to flight, and one of you shall chase a thousand, for he is with
you who has all power in his hand, and all your enemies are limited by him,
therefore be not discouraged at the raging and swelling words of your
adversaries, but be bold and valiant and faithful to him, for his is the
victory, and by his own right hand will he get himself the victory; Ye are my
fellow soldiers and fellow members of the same body, and my joy in the Lord,
stand faithful to the Lord and be bold and valiant for the truth upon earth,
for you has the Lord chosen of all the families of the earth to place his name
among, the Lord of glory is among you, and he will glorify his name by you,
he will accomplish his wonders, and make his power known, and the greatness of
his name in the sight of the heathen, let all flesh be silent before him, and
let all the Pharisees, and chief Priests, and the wise men of the earth stop
their mouths before the Lord, for you have the word of the Lord, and you are
made partakers of the everlasting wisdom, and are the beloved of God, for his
eternal Son is born and brought forth among you, and therefore does the wise
men and chief Priests consult to take his life; but woe unto you persecuters,
for they are the seed of evil doers, and better it were that a millstone were
hanged about their necks and they cast into the sea, for the Lord has sought
you to worship him, and he is worshipped by you in spirit and in truth, your
sacrifice is accepted, and therefore they that are of Cains generation
persecutes you seeking after your blood: You are made partakers of the
blessing, and therefore does Esau threaten your destruction, but your preserver
is the Lord of Hosts, and therefore shall all their consultations be
disappointed: For woe unto them that digs deep to hide their counsel from the
Lord, and that takes counsel but not at the Lord; all ye my brethren, be ye
faithful and obedient to him who has called and chosen you out from among the
heathen, out of all imagined worships to worship in truth, serve the Lord in
singlness of heart, and give up all to him freely to be ordered and disposed
by him, and look not back at the glory of Sodom, nor at the riches of Egypt,
but follow him, who has enlightened your dark understandings, and has
gathered you up by his eternal Light, walk in obedience to the Law of God, and
to the Light made manifest, for the kingdom of heaven is as a man traveling
into a far Country, which has given talents to his servants to improve, now
all you my beloved ones, improve every one your t^^^ that the Lord may receive
his own with usurie, that he may be glorified, and that you all may receive a
reward, therefore all be bold and valiant in the truth, and fear not man but
fear the Lord God almighty, and walk in the fear of the living God and despise
not the cross of Christ, but let the cross be your rejoicing, for through the
cross is the power of the Lord made manifest: Rejoice for ever and be exceeding
glad that you are counted worthy to suffer shame and reproach, and some of you
imprisonment for the truths sake: thus it was ever, he that was born after the
f^esh, persecutes him that is born after the spirit but be glad and rejoice in
the Lord, for you has he chosen and called even to shine as light in the dark
world, and to be as a burdensome stone to the nations, your fame is gone
abroad through nations, and because of the man child that is born is the
nations troubled and the chief Priests and Rulers combined together, but that
the Lord may be glorified, and for your sakes will he scatter the proud in
their imaginations, and will break in pieces the snares which the pharisees and
chief Priests have laid for your feet, and they shall be taken in their own
craftiness, and fall into the pit which they have diged for you, for the Lord,
who has called you, will set you upon a rock, and will preserve you out of the
mouths of cunning wolves who devours souls for dishonest gain: Sing praises for
ever to the Lord our God, who has chosen us to make manifest his love and
truth unto, and has gathered us up out of the mouth of all idolshepherds that
made a prey upon us, and from all the mountains and hills where we were
scattered in the cloudy and dark day, where we were devoured by the wild
beasts, being without shepherd and sheepfold, but praises, glory, and honor
for evermore that we are freed out of the cruelty of Pharash, and from under
his tax masters, which lies heavy burdens upon the people, rejoice and he glad
in faithfullness and truth unto our King for ever, who is the Lion of the tribe
of Judah, who has opened the book, and unlosed the seals, and has led us to
himself, and by suffering under all are we made Kings and Priests over all for
evermore, he alone is worthy to be praised, who has avenged us of our
adversaries, and has given her to drink of the wine of the warth of God, who
once made us drink of the wine of her fornication; I am with you, you despised
ones, and my prayers are for you, and the eternal glorious God of power be with
you, and keep you in the midst of this crooked and perverse generation, for
this generation seeks the blood of the saints; the beast, which was, is, and
now makes war against the lamb.

E B.

A true Declaration, and a discovery to all the World of my manner of Life;
what I have been, and what now I am at present.
I Was brought up by my natural Parents in the profession of Religion,
according to the generality of this Nation, going one day in seven to hear a
man Preach the Word, as they said to me, and to be exercised in the formal
worship which was then upheld, to read and sing, and to rabble over a Prayer;
but I was wanton and light, and lived in pleasure, without the fear of God, not
knowing of God but by hearsay, and tradition; but when I grew up toward twelve
years of age, something stirred in me, and showed me, that there was a higher
religion than that I was exercised in; and then I inquired where the chiefest
of the Presbyterian Priests Preached, and would have gone some miles of a first
day to have heard one of the best of them, which seemed liker truth than the
other, and so I got up to be a Presbyterian, and followed the highest of the
Priests and Professors of that form, and grew in favor with them, then some
small of my vanity and lightness I left, and Pride grew up in me, for wisdom
grew up in me, then some of my former acquaintance began to scorn me, calling
me a Roundhead, and the like; and by my laboring here, I gathered knowledge in
things without, but yet was ignorant of the living truth: Then when I was about
seventeen years of age, it pleased God to show himself a little to me, and
something struck me with terror, and when I had been praying, I heard the voice
often, Thou art ignorant of God, thou know not where he is, nor what he is;
to what purpose is thy Prayer? And so much fear and dread came upon me, and
broke me off from praying many times, and trouble came thick into my mind, and
fearfulness fell many times upon me, and I was struck off my delights that I
formerly loved, and what I had gathered in as of a god, died; and I left off
reading in the Scripture, for something showed me that I was very ignorant, and
knew not the true God, and the beauty of all things vanished; And I went to
some, asking, What God was, which was professed? for I said, I knew him not:
but got no satisfaction from any. And I was much separated from the vain ways
of the world, and from vain worldly people, and was made to reprove many,
often, for wickedness, in words and actions, and was much derided, and looked
upon scornfully by many; and then the Preaching of them whom I had formerly
much delighted in, was as withered and decayed, yet then it pleased the Lord to
snew himself a little in love to me, and I had sweet refreshments coming in
from him to my soul, and had joy and peace in abundance, and openings of the
living truth in me, which the world knew not of, and the mystery of the
Scripture was something opened, which before I knew nothing of, and I saw many
glorious things in it, which lie hid under the letter; and I was in much
rejoicing many times, and sang praise, for I was brought out of the land of
darkness, and could say, I was in the Light, and I grew up to know high things;
but not knowing the Cross of Christ, I ran forth in my wisdom comprehending the
mysteries of God, having a Light shined in me, and I grew up into Notion, to
talk of high things, for it was my delight to comprehend in my busy mind thus
being ignorant of the Cross to keep low in it, I ran before my guide up into
comprehension, and then was I above many of the Priests and Professors, and
followed only to hear the highest Notionists, that Preached high things, but
the fleshly man was at liberty, and so I became one of them in their
discoursings, and was looked upon by them to know much; the former terror was
gone, and I had got up from under the judgment, and now pride grew more than
ever, and self-conceitedness and presumption, and fleshly liberty to the carnal
mind, and my delight was much in discoursing, where I played the harlot, and
the prodigal, and gave holy things unto dogs* and cast pearls before swine (for
wisdom was hid from me) and here I lived pleasantly, for I had the true God,
and the true Truth in my comprehension, which by my wisdom in the light I had
comprehended, and I had the world in my heart, Pride, Coverousness, and the
earthly spirit ruled, and my delight was grown up to that, which once I had no
delight in, and the beauty of things grew up, which seemed to be vanished, here
I was run from my Husband after other Lovers, and had left the Lord my maker,
who had so graciously made manifest himself unto me, and had spended my portion
among harlots; but I became to be darkened, and had lost that which once I had,
and had but in memory that which before I had enjoyed, could tell of
Experiences, but they were dead to me; and something within me began to question
how it was with me; for I saw my self to be ignorant more than formerly, and I
saw I knew nothing; something desiring in me to be from whence I was come, but I
grew to be much given to the world to seek after riches, and glory in it; and*
fed my self with what I had formerlie enjoyed, and said, Whom God loves once,
he loves for ever: (but that was then head, and ruled in me, which he loved
never) I was wanton, and lived in the lustful nature, among heathens,
crucifying the Lord of Life, but the blood of that which I had slain, cried
continually, and the witness which laid slain, would give me no rest, which the
earthly made merry over; and I grew to be weary of hearing any of the Priests,
though never so high, for something, which shined deep in me, showed me
ignorance in all profession, and I was put to a stand many times in my self at
those things, which were come to pass; then it pleased the Lord to send his
true and faithful Servant and Messenger, who is called according to the flesh,
Geo. Fax. be spoke the language which I knew not, notwithstanding all my high
talking, for it was higher, and yet lower: And it pleased the Lord to speak to
me by him, that I was in the prodigal state, and above the Cross of Christ, and
not in the pure fear of the Lord, but full of corruption and the old nature,
though I had professed freedom, yet it was but such as the Jews professed; for
I saw my self to be in bondage to my own Will, and to my own Lust; and through
the word of the Lord spoken to me by him, I began to see my self (the witness
being raised) where I was, and what I had been doing, and saw I had been making
an image to the first Beast, which had the Wound by a Sword and did live, whose
deadly Wound was healed, and was full of Airie Notions and imaginations, and
was worshipping the image which I had made, and then I saw my self to be a
Child of Wrath, and that the Son of the Bondwoman lived, and that harlots had
been my companions, and was no more worthy to be called a Son: Then trouble
and distress came upon me, such as was not since the beginning of the world,
and I was at my wits end, and a day of thick darkness and trouble, a day of
weeping, and mourning, and misery, and a day of vengance and recompense, came
upon me, such as I had never known; one vial of Wrath after another, the great
Whore was to be Judged, and to drink of the Wine of the wrath of God, which had
made me once drunk with the Wine of her Fornication, and then I separated from
all the glory of the World, and from all my acquaintance, and kindred, and
betook my self to the company of a poor despised and contemned people called
Quakers, and now am I one in that Generation, which is, and ever was, hated of
the world, by the chief Priests and Pharisees, and Generation of Serpents, and
has chosen rather to suffer Affliction with a poor despised People, than to
enjoy the pleasures of Sin with the great multitude (though the worldly
pleasures was not wanting to me) and now do I bear witness against all Forms of
Religion, and false Hirelings, and chief Priests, who walks in the steps of the
Scribes and Pharisees, and of the false Prophets of Israel, and was never sent
of God to declare his Word: And do freely Declare against all outside
Profession, and Notion, And do witness Geo. Fox to be a true Minister of God,
one that speaks the Word of the Lord from his mouth, one who was sent of God,
and who is the Servant and Messenger of the living God, he is the friend of
God, and woe unto his persecutors, they are the Seed of evil doers; and now I am
despised of my neighbors and carnal acquaintance, and is not greater than my
Lord who was called a Blasphemer and a Deceiver as now I am, but praised,
praised be the Lord for evermore, who has separated me from the World and
Worldly glories, and has made me a partaker of his Love, in whom my Soul has
full satisfaction, joy, and content: Thus have I traveled through the World,
even unto the end, and am now come to the beginning of that which never shall
have end, which the dark mind of man knows not.

E. B.

I Am a Prisoner for the Truth sake, and for Declaring to man of his
Wickedness, and of his Transgression, of the spiritual Law of God which is
spiritual, and for writing of a Letter which was written from God, to show to
man of his wicked ways, and how he stood in the presence of God, as by the
spiritual light of God (which shines in the hearts of his servants) was
discovered and made manifest unto me, for who Speaks, Writes, or Declares, from
the light of God (which does discover all the dark paths of fallen man, and all
his spiritual Wickedness) Speaks, Writes, and Declares not as from man, whose
light is only natural and carnal, (which is darkness in the pure light which is
eternal) but as from God, whose light is spiritual, and does make manifest the
secret Whordom of fallen man; and from this light did the Prophets and
Ministers of God, who were sent by him to reprove Sin and Transgression, Speak,
Write, and Declare, and in this light did the true Prophets Jeremiah, and
Hosea, discover Israel to be Adulterous, and in the presence of God to be
guilty of Whordom, from whose presence they declared: And all now who are sent
of God, to reprove for Sin and Iniquity, declares from the same light of God,
and by the same Spirit which Jeremiah and Hosea did, For the pure light of God
is but one, from generation to generation, in all generations which discovers
Sin and Iniquity, the same light now, as in the time of the Prophets and
Apostles: and from this light (which is not carnal, but eternal) did all the
holy men of God Write, and Declare; And all who are sent of God now, witnesses
the same light, and Speaks from the same light now, as they did then; for, who
cannot witness this light, are no Ministers of God, neither ever were sent of
God, to Declare the Truth from God, but are Deceivers and blind Guides, and
speaks from the natural and carnal light, the imagined and supposed light,
which has not seen the living and spiritual God; for Declaring by Writing to a
man that he is guilty of all manner of wickedness, naming, Pride, Drunkenness,
and Whordom, I am imprisoned; I wrote not as from man, whose light is only
natural and carnal, and does only make manifest carnal Transgressions, of a
carnal Law, but as from the eternal and spiritual light, which does make
manifest spiritual Transgressions of a spiritual Law; And in this light, is he
to whom I wrote, guilty of all manner of Wickedness: Now this which I Declared
from God who is spiritual, is above the reach and comprehension of the carnal
and earthly law, for by the natural light through the earthly Law, is no
natural man able to Judge, of that which is spoken or declared from that which
is eternal, and spiritual, (for darkness cannot comprehend the light) which
light all the Servants and Ministers of God are guided by, to Act, Speak, or
Write; and therefore do I deny to have this Cause put into the Judgment of
carnal Lawyers, who Judges by the natural light, through the earthly and carnal
Law, yet willing I am before any Authority to Answer for my self, that whereof
I am Accused, but to the Judgment of earthly Magistrates I do not stand, but
to the Judgment of the living and eternal Judge, who Judges not according to
the sight of the eyes, and hearing of the ears, but who Judges with Equity and
Righteousness, thus rather I Choose to suffer imprisonment in the Body, yet free
as to God in the Truth, waiting to be Redeemed, not by the earthly Powers,
through the earthly law, but by him who is eternal, whose law is eternal, who
orders all things by his mighty Power, to which Power I give up my self to be
kept in it, and ordered by it continually.

Here I have given to all People the ground of my Imprisonment in the
particular of it, though I might in few words have declared the thing; for
between the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent, is Enmity put; and
he in whom the Seed of the Serpent is Ruling, seeks the destruction of him in
whom the Seed of the Woman is Raised: And here is the ground of all the Saints
Imprisonment, now as ever was, the envy of the Devil working in Fallen man,
against the living Truth of God, where it is made manifest.

E. B.

FINIS.

