Constitutio Liberi Populi. OR, THE RULE OF A Freeborn People. BY WILLIAM BALL
OF BARKHAM, ESQVIRE.

In Deum Omnia. Printed, Anno Dom. 1646.

TO THE HONORED. The Right Worshipful SIR FRANCIS PILE BARONET.
William Ball of Barkham, wishes health, and happiness.
SIR,
THE distressed County of Berks thinks it self happy in these unhappy times (I
speak in respect of the present extrinsecall calamities) to have access, for
redress to so worthy a Patriot as your self; and my self also, think my self
happy in so honored an acquaintance: what benefit Berks has my Pen may spare,
their Tongues speak; what benefit I have, I cannot gratisie; but to show or
manifest Actum Amicitiae, an Act, or Term of due respective friendship, I have
dedicated unto you this small subsequent Endeavor, wherein if any thing may be
worthy acceptance, I request your acceptance thereof, and to acknowledge

Quicquid bonum, Bonum Dei;
Quicquid malum, malum mei.
Which courteous favor I know you will vouchsafe to

LONDON, this 12. of May, 1646. Your Friend, and Servant to his power, WILLIAM
BALL.

Constitutio Populi liberi. OR, THE RULE OF A FREEBORN PEOPLE.
FIrst, Reason is Queen-Regent of Humane Affairs; by the sight whereof men
discern to walk in the prudent paths of Morality and Policy, even as by the
Light of the Day they disc^rne to tread the paths of the Earth; And albeit that
this interior light of understanding is in Divine things d^rkened, by the fall
of our first Parent, yet does the Eternal Light eve^ communicate to Mankind
sufficiency of Reason (I intend for worldly things) thereby to direct his
goings out, and comings in according to the un-necessitating determination of
God) as it were by a cloudy Daylight, though not a clear Sunshine, whereby
the Actions of men may severally be discerned.

2. Not ^ong since I wrote a small Treatise, entitled* Tractatus de ju^e
Regnandi, ei Regni, or the Sphere of Government the which a^beit I conceived
that I had squared it according to the Ru^e of Reason; yet some conceive, that
it wants its true proportion, or line, and that I have too much extended the
In^^te liberty of the Free-bo^n People o^ England: to satisfy (or otherwise
convince) such, I have pu^^ished this Epitome of State-Ru^e, or Government
desiring all men to weigh, and con^ider what I have written, not with the
Prejudicating Eye of Affectation (which many times mis^eadeth apprehensive
judgments) but with the Balance of Reason to ponder every Grain, and if the
weight ^e just and level to approve and accept of it; if ^omewhat too light,
to add of their own understandings what is def^cient

3. It is certain that had Man never fell from his state of Innocence, there
had ^in ^ superiority, or rather priority in Nature (viz. That the Parent
^hou^d have been known and reverenced as the Instrumental cause of the Child,
etc.) but there had bin no so^eraignty, and con^equently no subjection; for
Spirituum coelestium datur supe^iori^as, sive Prio^itas; quamvis omnes ^isione
beatifica perfruuntur: non tamen subjectantur inter se, vel ad in (...), quia
talis subjectio visioni (...), cui Omnes illi spiritus ordi^antur, opposita
foret; et Ratio est, quia si natura est libera, liberrima Glo^ia; at summae
libertali non conve^it subjectio, subordinata: preterea quilib^t spiritus
caelestis apprehenden^ Gloriam Dei per se, vel in se, and non per al^um, vel in
alio, non sufficiens habe^et beneficium, ut se ^al^^ creaturae subjiceret, cum
in Creatore perf^ctam simul omnium fruitionem habeat; utcunque tendentiam
Reve^enciae inferiores ordine spiritus supe^io^^bus, B^nig^itatis superiores
inferio^ibus adhibere probabile est.
had there been no s^nne there had ^een no need of a justiciating Power, nor a
Subject to which that Power could have determinated or terminated it self;
every man's Actions would have been regulated by the Eternal Law, written in
the hearts of men; So that there had been no need of Additionall, or National
Laws: wherefore (by the way) I cannot assent to the Opinion of that Gentleman
(Fortescue) who said, that all Mankind should have been governed by the Laws
of England, if Adam had not sinned in Paradise; for by his favor if Adam had
never sinned [in School-Reason, or Divinity] he had either always lived in
Paradise, or else finished a complete thousand years (which the Apostle Peter
calls a Day with God, 2 Pet. 3. 8.) and then had he either been assumed into
Heaven alive or else (if God had decreed a separation between his Soul and
Body) he had yielded himself into the hands of his Creator, sine do^ore mo^tis,
sine t^more paenae, without pain of death, or fear of punishment, and had left
his Earthly habitation to his posterity, who should have possessed and enjoyed
the same without any the least contention, or controversy regulated only by
the E^ernal Law aforesaid. But (to return) no sooner sin, but with it
subjection entered as a cur^e, and therefore God said to woman, that she should
not only bring forth in pain (which God would have di^penced withal if she
had not sinned) but also that her ^esir^ should be subject to her Husband, and
he should reign over her, Genesis 3. 16. It is very probable that if she had not
sinned, she should notwithstanding have tendered a re^erence to her Husband as
more noble in Sex, and created before her in time but she should not have
rendered a subjective Obedience, if disobedience had not made her subject.

4 And albeit that subjection is a scourge of sin, yet it has plea^ed the
Almighty according to his divine will, to cause some Persons, and Nations* to
be more subject then other some; many times enthralling, and ensla^ing them by
Tyrannical, or Imperious Instruments for their sins (as the sacred Books of
the Judges, Kings and Chronic^es sufficiently declare) and upon their
Humiliation, or for other secret causes known to his Divine wisdom, he has
mercifully released, or mitigated their yoke as the sacred Writ* yea and humane
Records testify at large: And sometimes God has done this by special, or
miraculous means, as he did to the people of I^rael; sometimes by ordinary
ways, as the Florentines (albeit of late enslaved) purchased their liberty of
the Emperor for money, and so also did other Cities of Italy, and elsewhere
in Europe, others by plain defiance and Arms, have regained their Freedom
(that is, to dispose of themselves) as did the Cantons of Switzerland, the
Provinces of Holland, Zoland, etc. and either of these ways may be said to be
just; for Id Iuris est, quod Nationis est, that is lawful, or Law which a Id
^uris est, qu^d Nationis est; id est, Id Jure humane obligat Nationem intra se,
cujus consensu Generali quid constitutum est, quamvis illud non sit semper
synodice Juri Divino, et rectae Rationi consentaneum; et Ratio est, quia
Homines se mutuo tam inconvenienter; quam conve^i^nter obligare possunt.
Nation generally approves, or admits of; and there need no special
Warrant from God for any thing that they shall do agreeable to their Natural
or Humane Reason, any more then it needed to the petty Kings and people of
So^om, and Gomorrah (instanced in my former Treatise) or to the Nation of the
Jews in the time of the M^chebees: And albeit that a Nation in general should
approve, and admit an erroneous Law (as I know not any Nation, State, or
Parliament that is infallible) yet such States or Parliaments are collective,
or Representative Nations not Universal, or Essential; ^^ in England and
Holland.
Law ought to be kept, and observed as a Law, because men have power to tie and
oblige themselves to inconveniences (if God prevent not and prudent Reason
dictate not the contrary) as to conveniences, and their Error being Nationally
general, must either be admitted of all persons (comprehended within their
Rule) as legally just, or else permitted, because it is constituted by the
highest Power humane, from which there is no appeal but to God, who in his
good time will either mercifully illuminate their understandings to reform
their Error, or justly chastise them for their perseverance in Error.

5. And the Rule of a Freeborn People, or a People free to dispose themselves
consists in that, wherein the People in general constitute or determine
themselves, not in that wherein they are constituted, or Constitutio populi
liberi constat in eo quo se constituit Populus, non in eo quo constituitur
Populus; et Ratio est quia talis constitutio debet esse Active libera, non
passive reactiva.
determined, tanquam ab alio ag^nte, by some other isntrumental cause, for
then are they not free: So that it is destructive to the very Essence of their
Freedom not to be able to determine themselves to that which they conceive to
be Bonum commune, that being their adaequate, and proper object: and this they
must not be able to do sometimes only, and originally, but perpetually,
otherwise, deficiunt a liberate proprie loquende, and sunt tantum liberi
secundum quid, vel denominative; they cease to speak truly, to be free, and are
only free in Denomination, or a kind of Titulary Freedom; for natural Reason
dictates, that every thing ceases to continue, when the Form thereof, or the
Original Form ceases to be; so that if a people can Originally dispose or
determine themselves, and cannot afterward Actually do it, their Original
power, or form of disposing, or determining themselves A free Nation or People
can ever Actually do it, when they are necessitated, or enforced to use their
Primitive or intensive Power, and resume their Power entrusted.
ceases to be. -- But it is to be noted, that no People in the world (intending
to be free) subditi potius quam subjecti, and who have either conserved their
Original Freedom, or Actually regained it, do, or did ever grant a Power to
one, or more, or constitute a Power in one, or more that should be destructive
to their intended Original Freedom; For as John Cook of Grays-Inne Barrester,
in his Epistle Dedicatory, in a Book entitled the Vindication of the
Professors, and Profession of the Law, has ingeniously said; All Power and
Authority is given for preservation, and edification, nothing for destruction
and desolation; so that albeit a People, or Nation, to avoid disorder, do
constitute a Ruler, or Rulers to conserve Order, and do generally consent to
direct their humane Affairs according to such Rules as shall be by him, or
them or both given, or prescribed; yet they ever intend that such Rules must
not be directly opposite, or against the Law of Nature, or their Natural
Liberty; if they be, they may choose whether, or no they will admit, or receive,
them; they constitute, or institute in their Ruler, or Rulers their power
extensive, but not primitive, or intensive, that is to say, their innate and
inseparable Freedom ever intended to dispose, or determine themselves, In bonum
commune In bonum commune, etc. vrgente necessitate coactiva; ut Antea.
prout omnibus visum* erit, this they never part, or parted withal; for at
what time soever they should do it, they cease to be Populus liber, or liberi
subdits, a free People, or a People which are freely under a Law by common
consent as aforesaid. -- And of this I shall instance a similitude in Nature:
The Element of Water is not of it self extensively colored, but is apt or
applicable to receive any color; yet it is intensively white (it being Natures
Innocent Original color) as is sufficiently discerned, when it is converted
into Snow, or congealed into Ice, or praecipitated Torrent-like, by an
extraordinary fall: so People or Nations are not of themselves extensively
regulated but apt or applicable to receive any Rule, which they, whom they
institute, or entrust, shall apply unto them; howsoever they are intensively
free to dispose themselves (it being their Natural-Innocent-Originall Rule) as
is sufficiently discerned by the several Alterations of Government in Athens,
Rome, Geneva, Switzerland, Holland, and many other places, where the peoples
affections have been either congealed by their over-domineering Lords (as it
were creatures of the second Region of the Air) or (Torrent-like) have been
praecipitated by an extaordinary fall, occasioned by some violent disturbers of
their common Liberty ((...)) the general benefit of Mankind. For my part,
Anathema be to such, who desire to deprive a King of His just Prerogative;
Anathema be to such, who desire to deprive a Parliament of their just
Privilege: but Anathema Maranatha be to such who should any way desire to
deprive a Freeborn People of their just Liberty, or Propriety.

6. Nor can I conceive, but that the English Nation, or People are (if rightly
considered) one of the most freest Nations in the World; for they cause, or
require their Kings to take their Oaths to conserve their Laws and Liberties,
before the Crown actually invest their Temples; thereby showing that they
reserve, and intend their general Liberty and Propriety; And albeit, that a
King of England have his Ius Regnandi, or Right of Reigning by Inheritance as I
have instanced in my former Treatise; yet illud jus quamvis sit quoad
potentiam, sive officium potestatis derivativum, est tamenquoad exercitium
potestatis Relativum, that Right of Reigning, although it be derivative in
respect of the Kings personal Authority, or rather Office Derivativum a Deo
ordinari^ per successionem.
for Authority, yet is it relative in respect of his Exercising, or performing
that Authority; for though the people obey the King as their chief Ruler, or
Magistrate before his Oath taken, yet it is ever with reference, or relation,
that He should take His Oath for their preservation, and good in general, and
perform the same; otherwise they have recourse to their primitive, or
intensive power, as in the case of Edward the second, from whom Sir William
Russell, Speaker of the Parliament, in the name of all men, or people of
Graston Chron. Hoc factum fuit legitim^, secundum Jus Primitivum, sive
intensivum Populi, Anne tamenlegitimo in foro conscientiae and rectae Rationis
modique question est.
England, constrained, or took his Royal Office, or Authority; or to speak
more truly, deprived him of it, without any former president, exercising the
intensive power of the people; for Trussell said not to EDWARD the second, in
the Name of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, or in the Name of
the Commons assembled in Parliament, but in the Name of all men or people of
England, etc. thereby expressing, or manifesting the Peoples Primitive, or
intensive Power, more then the Parliaments secundary or extensive Authority.

7. And as the English Nation, or People cause their Kings formally to swear,
or take their Oaths to conserve their Laws, and Liberties; so they cause the
Parliament (I mean the Body collective, or representative of the People, viz.
the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses) to take their Oaths (if not formally) yet
at the least virtually, to conserve their general Liberty, and Propriety, to
do all good they may for the places that entrust them; all which they
faithfully promise at their Elections: So that the English Nation, or People
never gave, or voluntarily assented, that their Kings, or Parliaments, or Both,
should have an absolute Domineering, or Arbitrary power over them, but only a
Discretive, or Legal Authority intended ever for their good in general; their
ever reserved, and as it were Essential Propriety.

8. Wherefore I cannot but marvel at such (whether Kingly Royalists, or
Parliamentary Realists, in this case it makes no matter) as by a kind of
Idolizing King, or Parliament, or King and Parliament, would suppose, or
persuade the People, that their Lives, Liberties, and Proprieties are
disposable by King, and Parliament, ad Placitum; one John Cook of Grayes-Inne
Barrister, by me already cited, has in his Vindication of the Professors, and
Profession of the Law inserted, that I have in my former Book, entitled, The
Sphere of Government, introduced a dangerous Opinion, by putting, or stating a
supposition, or rather a Praesuppositive case, that if King, and Parliament, or
King, or Parliament, should make an Act that they would, and might dispose of
all Subjects Estates in England (he should have added ad Placitum, for those
are my words) that in such case the Counties, Cities, and Towns corporate
might if not remedied declare, and protest against such an Act, if violated,
then they might defend themselves by Arms. -- And to convince this my
Assertion, in the next Page, he says, if the supreme Court be not supreme to
all intents, it is not supreme to any intent, because there is an higher above
it; this is no good consequence; for a Power (and consequently a Court of
Power) may be supreme to some things, yet not to all: the King of Poland, for
life, is supreme to appoint what place he thinks fit within the Precincts of
the Dominions of Poland for the convening or assembling the Diets, or Courts of
the Peers Spiritual and Temporal of that Kingdom; and the King of Poland is
also ^upreame to censure, or punish any of his own Tenants, and Vassals, or
Slaves; yet is he not supreme to censure, or punish any of the chief
Nobility, but by consent of his Assembly, or Court of Peers; nor can he meddle
with any of their Tenants, Vassals, or Slaves; or determine absolutely of Peace
or War, etc. In the Commonwealth of Geneva (which he calls a pure Democracy)
the People in general are supreme ^o nominate, or elect Two Hundred which are
the Grand-Councell; and those Two Hundred are supreme to nominate, or elect
the Twenty five, and yet not supreme to elect the four Syndiques, or Annual
Governors, or rather Rulers, etc. So that it is no good consequence (as
aforesaid) to affirm that, if the Supreme Court be not supreme to all
intents, it is not supreme to any intent, because there is another above it;
For in Geneva it is evident, that the Two Hundred, or Gra^d-Councell, is the
supreme Gourt, and yet not supreme to all Intents; the People indeed, or
Commonwealth in general, (which are the supreme Power, though not Court) are
supreme to all Intents; but of that hereafter.

9. But the Gentleman says, that there are in the Kingdom so many thousand
Acres of Land, either the Parliament may settl^, and determine the Right of all
their Acres (he meant surely those Acres) or not of any one of them, for there
is no medium, etc. But what is this to the purpose, of the Parliament having a
power to dispose of all Subjects Estates ad placitum? who knows not, but that
the Parliament can determine the Right of all Acres in England, in foro
judicii, as v. g. the Parliament can determine whether White Acre belong of
Right to Oaks, or Styles, let the Title of either of them be never so
difficult, or obscure, and the Parliament can determine whether or no, Oaks or
Styles have forfeited their Propriety of, or to White Acre for Delinquency,
etc. Moreover the Parliament can (which no other Court can do) applicare in
necessitatem Regni, apply to, or for the necessity of the Kingdom so much of
the profits of White Acre, as to them shall seem convenient; provided that the
cause, or causes thereof be made manifest, that Oaks, Styles, and all men may
(if they will) take notice thereof; and provided also, that an Account be given
how and which way the profits of White Acre have been for such cause, or
causes applied, and disposed of; for no Freeborn Englishman (much less the
Nation in general) ought to be deprived of any his Right, or propriety without
good cause: Notwithstanding the Parliament of England cannot disponere ad
Placitum, dispose at their will and pleasure barely of White Acre (no, nor of
one quo modo una particula terrae ad placitum disponi potest eo modo and omnis
Terra in Regno Angliae disponenda sor^t.
Acre of waste in England) v. g. that whereas White Acre belongs of Right to
Oaks, Styles shall notwithstanding have it because it is their will and
pleasure; this they cannot do; for at what time they should do it (albeit I
suppose it almost impossible that they should do it, as I have formerly
instanced) they fail, or fall from the Protection of the People, and usurp to
themselves an absolute Arbitrary and irregular Power, destructive to the
general good of the People, and consequently cease to be a Parliament, and
become Tyrants, and Oppressors.

10. I cannot therefore but somewhat admire, that a Lawyer, and one that
seems unto me to have understood Logic, should be (having been as it seems
to me sometimes seasoned with Intellectuals) so unsound in his Intellectuals,
as not to distinguish between Disposing at Pleasure, and Determining of Right,
or settling according to Right, being things of a different species, and not
magis, or minus in the same species. But it is not amiss to take a little
notice how the Gentleman opposes himself; in his Book Page 4. he says, it is
resolved in the Earl of Leicesters Case, that an Act of Parliament against the
Law of God and Nature is void; but this must be cautiously understood (says
he) that I speak not of secundary, or less principalls of Nature, etc. Pray
let him tell me, whether to dispose of Oaks, or Styles white Acre ad Placitum,
be not directly against the Law of God and Nature; the Decalogue says, Thou
shall not steal; Thou shall not desire thy Neighbors house, etc. and Nature
dictates, do, as thou would be done unto; Now he, or they that dispose at
their own pleasure, of theit Neighbors Acre, or Acres, do steal, for that
he, or they deprive their Neighbor, or Neighbors of their Right, and
Propriety; they covet also, for that they desire, and acquire to themselves a
power of disposing at pleasure; they oppose also directly the Law of Nature,
for they would not have any one to dispose of their Propriety, ad Placitum, or
at their own wills, and therefore ought not to do it to another; so that if
the King and Parliament should make an Act, or King, or Parliament make an
Ordinance, that they might dispose of all Subjects Estates, ad Placitum, etc.
they oppose the Law Plowdens Comment.
of God and Nature, and even by his own citation, and assertion, it is void;
and I am sure it is also directly opposite to the Rule, frame, and constitution
of a free Nation (such as are the English, being no Turkish, or Muscovian
slaves) where the Rulers and Governors are but entrusted (as I in my former
Treatise have instanced) for the general good of the Nation: And the
Gentleman, albeit he has cavelled at me in the latter end of his Book, yet
has he confessed, and acknowledged as much in his Epistle Dedicatory in two
several places: the first is by me already cited, notwithstanding I will
mention the words again; which are, all Power and Authority is given for
Preservation, and Edification, nothing for destruction, Dispositio mere ad
Placitum, est destruction and desolatio.
and desolation; the others in the same page are, for by the fundamental
constitutions of this Kingdom, and the very frame and series of Government, the
Power is entrusted into their hands to superintend and supervise all other
Courts of Justice; Now surely if Power be entrusted to the Parliament (as truly
it is) then can they not go beyond their Trust to dispose of the Free People of
England their Estates, ad Placitum, but only to determine of them, ad Rectum,
or Ius, or to apply them ad necessitatem Regni, to or for the necessity of the
Kingdom, of which necessity they are the
Judges. -- The Gentleman says, that many a man marryes a widow that would be
gladly rid of her children: for my part, I know not whether, or no, the
Gentleman be married; or whether he have married a Maid, or Widow, but I am
sure (if he rightly consider it) he may be glad to be rid of his sick-brain
begotten Child [his Asseveration that the Parliament is unlimited, and
consequently may dispose of all the Subjects, or Peoples Estates, ad Placitum]
for I verily believe, that no man found in his Intellectuals will harbor it,
or give it entertainment, nor can himself sustain it.

11. I grant him that the Parliament is the highest Deus est causa efficiens,
and finalis mundi, quia operatus est Omnia per se, et propter se. Populus etiam
est causa efficiens, and finalis Parliamenti quia per se, and propter se illos
eligunt, etc.
Court extensive (viz. to conserve Rule, Order, etc.) but the People in
general (viz. the Counties, Cities, and Towns corporate) are the highest, or
greatest Power Intensive, in that they are the efficient, and final cause
under God, of the Parliament; Now the efficient and final causes are the most
noble of causes, nor are they, or can they be subject, or subordinate to their
own effects, so far forth as they are causes of such effects; so that the
Parliament can never deprive the Counties, Cities, and Towns Corporate, by any
Act, or Ordinance whatsoever, of their innate, and inseparable Right and Power
of Electing, or creating Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, de futur^, or for
time to come, whereby a Parliament might be instituted, or assembled by any
other way, then by way of free Election; no more can the Parliament deprive the
free People, or Nation of England, of their General Liberty, and Propriety,
for in these things the Sphere of the Parliaments Activity is circumscribed by
the Nations large Bulk of Primitive, or intensive Power; Wherefore the
Gentleman mistakes when he says page 89. It is impossible that the supreme
Court in any Kin^d^me should be limited, etc. In these Precedents, amongst free
Nations all supreme Courts are d^ facto, limited; as in Aragon Gene^a* etc.

And for my part, I cannot find that the Parliament In Aragon, Valentia, and
C^^^lonia, the three Estates, or Cortes delos Regnos, as they call them cannot
alter so much as one of their Municip^l^ Privileges.
Practiceth an unlimited or absolute Power, for amongst other things they have
instituted Committees, and Sub-Committees of Accounts, not only to vindicate
themselves from the scandal imputed by some, (viz. that the Parliament should
exact more from the people then the necessity of the Kingdom req^^^ed, etc.)
but also to give the people a general satisfaction, how, and which way their
Estates are applied, and employed for the Necessity of the Kingdom.

12. And now I think good further to satisfy the Gentleman and such as adhere
or incline to his opinion aforesaid, concerning the Primitive or Intensive
power of a free People; I have already aid that a free People are ever free to
dispose, and determine themselves* in Bonum commune, prout omn^bus visum erit,
to a general common good, as it shall seem good to themselves; and that they
never part, or parted with this power, for that at what time soever they should
do it they cease to be (...) liber, or liber^ subdit, a free People* etc. And
to make this Assertion more conspicuous, and plain, I instance this simile;
Joint Freeholders, or Freeholders jointly, let a Lease for one thousand, or
two thousand years, if the World endure so long, with reservation
notwithstanding of a continual acknowledgment to themselves, or otherwise the
said Lease shall determine, and cease to be, and it shall be lawful for the
said Freeholders, their Heirs, or Successors to re-enter into the said
Freehold, or Free-holds, and to dispose and settle them, at their pleasure:
even so a free Nation, or People let a Lease of their power for one thousand,
two thousand, ten thousand years if the World so long endure, (no matter what
time) to their Rulers (whom they institute and entrust) in which they give and
grant power to them of Determining conserving, and applying their Liberties,
Rights, and Proprieties justly, So to the particular good of every man,
as may not repugne the general good of all; so to the general good of all
men, as may not annihilate the particular good of one unjustly, or indirectly;
with reservation notwithstanding of a continual acknowledgment to, or for
themselves, that they (viz. the Nation, or People) are the efficient cause of
their power, by electing, and creating them; and that they are not to domineer
over, or dispose of the^r Liberties, and Proprieties, ad placitum, but only to
determine of them ad Rectum, and apply them to the general good of the
Kingdom, according to the necessity of the Kingdom, Nation, or People, as
aforesaid; if otherwise their Power determines, and ceases to be; and it may be
lawful for the Nation or People to re-enter, viz. to make use Eo modo quo quid
constituitur, eodem modo and dissolvi potest.
of their first primitive power, and to dispose, and settle themselves at their
pleasure, or as they shall think good: And even as the Freeholders cease not
to be Freeholders, notwithstanding their long Lease, for that there is a
Reservation of a continual acknowledgment due unto them, and a power of
Re-entry in case of Breach of Covenants, and the like; even so a free Nation,
or people, cease not at any time to be free, notwithstanding their long Lease
of Trust, for that there is a Reservation of a continual acknowledgment
belonging unto them (viz. that they are the efficient cause, de saculo in
saeculum, from Age to Age) and they have likewise a power of using their power
p^^m^tive, and intensive, or power always intended and reserved, in cases
aforesaid: Notwithstanding, as the Immediate sub Deo Populus liber, est causa
efficiens, and perpetua potestati^ Regulatae.
Freeholders cannot re-enter, but only in case of Breach of Covenant
aforesaid; for if otherwise they do it, they are mere Usurp^rs, and
Oppressors; so the free Nations, or people cannot use their primitive, or
intensive power, but only when the fundamental frame of their Efficient Power*
and their Liberties, and Proprieties are destroyed, or violated ad placitum, as
aforesaid, if otherwise they do it, they are mere Rebels and Anarchists, for
they have entrusted all their other Judicial Power concerning Determination,
Conservation, and Application to their Rulers.

13. The Gentleman whom I have formerly cited has said in his Book, that he
never heard or read of any thing more prejudicial to the Parliaments
Authority, then my Assertion in my last Book, and in this, (viz. that the
Parliament cannot dispose of the Free-peop^e, or Subjects Estates here in
England, ad placitum; but I must tell him that I never read of a more
prejudicious, or pernicious to the Parliament, then to say that they may do
it; for what say many of the vulgar; if the Parliamen^ may dispose of our
Estates at their pleasure, how shall we know that they will not? if any man
tell them, that it is very unlikely, that so many will never consent to do
such a thing, for that they might by that mean enslave their own Posterities:
what say they, if they can dispose of all the Subject^ Estates ad placitum, for
ought we know they might exempt themselves, their Heirs, and Successors; and
likewise for ought we know they might make a Law that they will no more be
Elected, or cteated by the Counties, Cities, and Towns Corporate, but by a
perpetual Denomination by, or from themselves: and what can be of more
dangerous consequence, then that such an Opinion, or Opinions as these should
once take root in the minds of the Common People? and what can sooner cause
them to take root then that they find and read a printed Book allowed of to
that purpose? But if one tell the vulgar, that the Parliament cannot dispose of
the Subjects Estates ad placitum, or merely at their pleasure, but that they
can only apply in an equal way the Estates of the People to or for the
necessity of the Kingdom, of which Necessity they are the Judges; and likewise
that the PARLIAMENT cannot make a Law, or Ordinance that the Knights Citizens,
and Burgesses; shall, or may be appointed or denominated by themselves (thereby
to alter the frame and constitution of this NATION) but that they must
perpetually from Age to Age be Elected, or created by the Counties, Cities, and
Towns Corporate; then they begin to harbor a better Opinion, and are more
inclinable to undergo their Ordinances: And I believe that the intent why the
HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS published lately a Declaration the Seventeenth of
April. 1646. Ordered to be read in Churches, was to undecei^e the People that
they never had any thought to dispose of their Estates ad placitum, and so
forth; for they expressly say, and Declare, To main^ain the A^cient and
Fundamental Government of the Kingdom, to preserve the Rights and Liberties
of the Subject, etc. -- Wherefore I would not have the Gentleman or any other
to run be (...) the mark; I like not Quid ^imis; it has been (...) of many
Enormities in Church and Common (...)* my part I wish, ^^ I have ever wished,
and formerly expressed my self, that the King might enjoy his just Prerogative
(as some call it) or Right of Reigning; and I wish, and desire as much as any
other, that the Parliament might sustain their Privileges, and Judicatory
Power; But I could never suffer, nor would I if it were in my power any way to
prevent it, endure that my Nation, or Fellow Subjects should be enslaved ^y any
Exorbitant Power (Potentate or Potencies) For^ain or Domestic; And I doubt not,
but that the Ruler of Heaven and Earth will by his Divine Providence establi^h
such Rulers and Rules in this KINGDOM, as may be a means to conserve this
Nation from slavery and thraldom, AMEN.

FVrthermore, having in my former Treatise and in this affirmed that the
P^rliament is the ^upreame Power Judicatory to censure and determine all
matters doubtful, and disputable (for such has been the constitution of this
Kingdom for many Ages) I conceive therefore that the Parliament may* and have
only Power to settle what Form of Religion they shall think good; and albeit
they should err therein (as Parliaments may err, and some de facto have
erred) yet theit Ordinances oblige Iure ^u^^no; that is men ought ^ither to
obey such Ordinances, or if otherwise their Con^ciences dictate such Ordinances
to be erroneous, they ought to undergo such penalties Quicquid est contra
conscientiam edificat ad peccatum.
as should be by them inflicted if they should impose or ordain any such: And
as it is in the power of the Parliament to inflict penalties, so is it in their
power to mitigate penalties, or inflict none at all for matter of Religion;
wherefore for my part I greatly honor and reverence the ^are that the
Parliament seems to take, and which the Honorable House of Commons have
published in their Declaration 17. April 1646. already mentioned, That they,
have not as yet resolved how tender Consciences, such as differ not in
Fundamentals may be provided for, so as may stand with the peace of their
fowls, and peace of the Kingdom; thereby intimating that they intend not to
use severity, for matters of Religion merely (a course though practiced by
Pagans, befitting no men much less Christians) but rather by clemency to
induce men to embrace, o^ follow such Orders, or Ordinance; touching Religion,
as they shall institute: Mor^over, I cannot but greatly blame such as would
have m^ns Consciences wrackt and enforced in disputable matters, or Tenets of
Religion; such as blame Domineering in others, and yet would exercise it
themselves not considering what the Apostle Pet. has written, 1 Pet. ^. 3.
(...) that Rulers should not be as over-domineering Lords of Christ's Flock, but
as Types, or examples to the flock; nor do such consideratly weigh the Apostles
words, Gal. 6. 1. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are
spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness, considering thy
self, least thou also be tempted; he bids them not menace much less persecute
for error, nay the Apostle directly forbids it, Gal. 5. 15. But if ^e bit^,
and devour one another take ^eed ye be not consumed one of another, as if he
had said, if ye break the Bond of Christian Charity take heed least God give
you not over to your malicious intentions and practices by which ye may become
Instruments one to destroy another; The holy Apostle likewise Romans 14. 10.
forbids men directly not so much as to judge a Brother for things
indifferent, or for things which Christian Liberty in Christ gives leave unto;
for says he, We shall all stand before the Indgment Seat of Christ: but it may
be some will say, these, and such like Councels, or Precepts of the Apostle
were spoken, or delivered by him concerning meekness, to he used in
admonishing our Brethren, in errors merely of Practice not of Doctrine, or in
things not clearly expressed in Scripture, not in things evident, and plain in
Scripture: to such I answer; what are the great matters in debate and
controversy, or rather small matters in great strife, and contention now a
days agitated, but either matters merely Practical or exterior Forms of
Worship, and Ceremonies, whether tolerable, or intolerable; or else matters
obscure, or but by probable Arguments deducible out of Scripture, as Lay Elders
(a Business now of days, of no small consequence) whether they be not
sufficiently warranted by this Text, 1 Timothy 5. 17. Let the Elders that rule
well, be counted worthy of double honor, especially they who labor in the
Word and Doctrine; the Greek has it, (...) laboring in Word and Doctrine, and
from hence it must be deduced forsooth, that there were some Elders that did
not labor in the Word and Doctrine, and consequently that such were Laymen;
Truly others that are as sound in their judgments (it may be) as those that
make this Deduction, will say that the meaning of that Text is this viz.
Presbyters (or Elders) It is very probable that some Apostles and Disciples in
the Primitive times, labored more then others in preaching etc.
that rule well be accounted worthy of double honor, in respect of the younger
or inferior; but chiefly such as beside their care, and ordinary performance
of their charge labor extraordinarily in Preaching, and exhorting or edifying;
even as one might say, let Civil Magistrates that govern well, be counted
worthy of double honor, in respect of other ordinary, and inferior Persons;
but chiefly such as beside their care, and ordinary performance of their
Offices according to their Oaths, and Duties, labor extraordinarily for the
Public good by advising, and consulting; I do not find that it could be
deduced from this last inference, that Clergymen were or ought to be Civil
Magistrates; nor can I find, that it can well be deduced from the Apostles
words, that Laymen ought to be Presbyters, or Church-Elders: and yet a great
deal of stir is kept about this business, and such like; and some would
feign have their but probable Deductions, if so much, to be Orthodoxal
Expositions, and so to be held de Iure Divina, that is no presumption: but by
the favor of such, I would fain know whether they are infallible or no; if no
why would they then impose their Expositions de Iure Divina; if they are
infallible I would gladly know how they now come by such an extraordinary gift
of Infallibility, and that the World (by their own acknowledgment) has wanted
it for so many Ages, as they say, in all Ages since the Apostles time; as I
have said, that in Civil Affairs there should not be Quid nimis; so I say in
Church-Affaires and wish that men (for alas what are we all but men) would not
take upon them Quid nimis, especially in matters either indifferent, or else
obscure and difficult, or such as may admit of several interpretations and
Constructions. I will instance for Example sake one Text of Scripture; viz.
(...) 1 John.
etc. In the beginning was the word, etc. All Divinity te^s us that Eternity is
Identicu^ nunc, the selfsame now, and that it has neither Prius or Posterius,
beginning, or ending what beginning then can the Eternal Word or Son of
God) have? no beginning in time because Eternal, nor Pater Aeternus non semel
sed semper dixit verbum Aeternum mentis suae (sive gagnis filium) et Ratio est,
quia quod agit Pater semel ad intra, semper agit hodie, and quotidie, quia ad
intra nec Prius, nec Posterius: verba Psalmistae, ergo, ex utero ante luciferum
Genui te; non dicunt consummationem Actus Aeterni, sed completionem ejus, sive
perfectionem.
in Nature because Increase: what beginning then? or what may the word
Beginning in that place signify? Some will have the meaning of that Text to be
this; In the beginning when the World was created, the word (verbum meniis) of
the Fathers understanding was, and so if that were in the Beginning, that was
before all Beginning; but this is no good consequence, says an Arrian, for the
word might be before the World, and yet be a patre ta^quam effectus a causa,
be as an effect caused by God the Father, and so have some beginning (as every
effect has) though before the World, and to hold this is Heresy, for that the
Father is not causa filti, but only Principiu^ fil^i, not the cause, but
natural beginning of the Son: others will have the meaning to be thus; in
that beginning, or instant (which was and is ever, or Eternal) wherein the
Father knew formally his Essence, and Attributes, he spoke, or begot the word
of his mind, or understanding, being a Term of his infinite Knowledge, not
produced by necessity, or will, but emaning, or flowing as it were by natur^ll
faecundity: Others will have the meaning to be thus; in that beginning or
instant aforesaid, wherein the Father knew not only formally his Essence, and
attributes, but also all creatures possible and existent, he spoke or begot the
word of his mind or understanding; for ^ay they, the word which is the Term of
the Fathers infinite Knowledge is a perfectissim^, and plenissima cognitione
ejus, from his most perfect, and fullest knowledge; and from hence arise diverse
Arguments pro and contra, not only between the Thomists, Scotists and other
Schoolmen but also amongst other sorts or Sects of Christians; but must men
for these, or the like disputable differences cut one another throats, or
persecute one another? God forbid, there is not the least warrant in the New
Testament for it: in the time of our blessed Saviors passing his humanity on
the Earth, some there were casting out Devils in his Name, whom his Disciples
for^ad because they followed not Christ as they did; but our Savior rebuked
them, and bad them suffer them, and let them alone, saying he, or they that are
not against us, are with us, adding moreover that it was not likely that any
one should Mar. 9. 40.
do a miracle in his Name and speak ill of him; our Savior said not, that
such as workt miracles in his Name should confess, and speak all that ought
to be confessed, and spoken of, or to his honor; but that such as spoke not
ill of him should (if they confessed his Name) be permitted, or suffered in
this World; and shall not we then suffer one another in matters of Religion?
Shall we ambitiously compass our Neighbors goods, or means, under pretense
of Religion, thereby scandalizing Christianity: No! let all self ends be
abolished, and Peace and Union be embraced, that we of this Nation may become
an Elisiu^ of comfort of Christian Charity, and mutual Amity, one to another,
and a President of them all to other Nations.

WILLIAM BALL.

FINIS.

