A DECLARATION Of the present SUFFERINGS Of above 140. Persons of the people of
God ( Who are now in Prison,) called QVAKERS: With a brief account of above
1900. more, being but a part of many more that have suffered within these six
years last past, whose names and particular sufferings are not here set down.
Together with the number of 21. Persons who were imprisoned and persecuted
until Death. All which was delivered to Tho. Bampfield, then Speaker of the
Parliament, on the sixth day of the second Month, 1659. By which all people may
be made sensible of the great oppressions of the Innocent, and lay them to
heart, that the Judgments of the Lord may be prevented, which otherwise will
fall heavy upon the oppressors, and all that are at ease in the flesh, and
unsensible of the day of Jacobs troubles. As also an Account of some grounds
and reasons, why for Conscience sake we bear our Testimony against diverse
customs and practices at this day in use amongst men. Also a cry of great
Judgment at hand upon the oppressors of the Lords heritage, as received from
him on the 18. day of the first Month called March. With an Offer to the
Parliament of our Bodies, person for person to be imprisoned, for the
Redemption of our Brethren, who are now in Bonds for the Testimony of Jesus.

London, Printed for Tho. Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth, near Aldersgate, 1659.

DECLARATION Of the present SUFFERINGS Of above 140. Persons of the people of
God ( Who are now in Prison,) called QVAKERS: With a brief account of above
1900. more being but a part of many more that have suffered within these six
years last past, whose names and particular sufferings are not here set down.
Together with the number of 21. Persons who were Imprisoned and persecuted
until Death. That so all people may be made sensible of the great oppressions
of the Innocent, and lay them to heart, that the Judgments of the Lord may be
prevented why otherwise will fall heavy upon the oppressors, and all that are
at ease in the flesh and unsensible of the day of Jacobs troubles. As also an
account of some grounds and reasons why for conscience sake we bear our
testimony against diverse customs and Practices at this day in use amongst men.
Also a cry of great Judgment at hand upon the oppressors of the Lords
heritage, as received from him on the 18. day of the first Month called March.

London, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate. 1659.

To the Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND.
BEING

A Declaration of the Names, places and sufferings of such as now are in prison
for speaking the truth in several places: For not paying Tithes: For meeting
together in the fear of God: For not swearing: For wearing their hats: For
being accounted as Vagrants: For visiting friends, and for things of the like
nature, in all about 144. Besides, imprisoned and persecuted till death 21.
Also a brief Narrative of the sufferings within the last six years, or
thereabouts, of about 1960. persons already returned, being but part of many
more, whose names and sufferings are not yet returned; All which is desired may
be read and considered of by this Parliament, that right-may be done.

First, For speaking the truth in several places
BERK-SHIRE.
JOhn Evans cast into prison at Redding for speaking to a Priest at Shaw near
Newberry.

CAMBRIDGE-SHIRE.
John Norris of Swasey committed to prison at Cambridge for asking the priest
of Hardwick a question.

William Allen of Okington for bidding the people (after their evening
sacrifice was ended) to fear and tremble at the Name of the Lord, was committed
to prison.

CANTERBURY.
Thomas Pollard prisoner there for speaking in the Steeplehouse.

CUMBERLAND.
George Wilson, Prisoner at Carlisle, and also Matthew Dickson at Lampligh, for
speaking to the Priest.

DEVON-SHIRE.
John Roet, for bidding the people at the Steeple-house at Tiverton in Devon to
mind the Truth of God, was cast into prison at Tiverton, and sorely abused, and
denied straw to lie on; and they would not suffer friends to bring him
provision, but still remains a prisoner.

Edward Bradford for speaking to a Priest now in prison at Exon.

ESSEX.
William Monk of Sanden, For going into the Steeple-house, and asking the
Priest a question, was committed to prison.

William Allen, for exhorting people to repentance in the Town-street of
Wetherfield, as he was going to a meeting, was committed to prison by DUDLY
TEMPLE, Justice so called, and has remained prisoner above these six months.

John Claydon of Hadstock, arrested at the suit of Thomas Wallis of that town
for words pretended he should maliciously speak against him, and cast him into
Prison, where he has been a prisoner four months.

GLOUCESTERSHIRE.
Deborah Harding being moved of the Lord to speak to Joseph Woodward Priest,
was forced out, and carried before THOMAS ESCOT, one of the Justices, and sent
to Prison.

HAMP-SHIRE.
Ja. Potter, Committed to the Common Goal at Winchester, by Will. Whither* and
Ric. Kinsmell, called justces, for Reading a paper in the Steeple-house yard,
and at the following assizes, was fined 5. l. by Judge Nicholas for wearing his
hat when he was brought into Court, for which he was sent back to prison, and
has been a Prisoner twenty months, and so still remains.

Henry Streaters wife committed to prison by Justice REYNOLDS, for speaking
some of the Prophets words, to Priest CORBET, as he was traveling on the way*
who has a young child sucking, the said Justice REYNOLDS giving charge to the
Jailer, that she should be kept close prisoner, not having the liberty of
common whores, that have bastards; but is constrained to a little bad Rome,
where eight more are kept close prisoners.

KENT.
Elizabeth Fowler, cast into the dungeon in the common goal, at Tenterden, for
speaking; in a Steeple-house, where she has been ten weeks, committed by the
Mayor without bail or mainprize, and there still remains.

NORTHAMPTONSHIRE.
John Rogers, for speaking to WILLIAM SANDERSON Priest of Hindon, after he had
done and was come out of the Pulpet, was committed to Prison by JOHN BROWN
caled Justice, and has been a Prisoner thirteen weeks, and so continues.

John Green of Bugbrook, was cast into the County Goal by Justice BENSON, so
called, for speaking to BENJAMIN TOMPKINS Priest of Hartpoor, and has been in
prison seven weeks, and so remains.

SUFFOLK.
Anne Blakelin prisoner in Bury Edmonds for speaking to a Priest at Haveril,
and has been kept Prisoner there two years.

SUSSEX.
John Snashhold, for speaking in the Steeple-house has been kept prisoner
forty eight weeks.

Nicholas Beard, for speaking to the priest is Prisoner there also.

WORCESTERSHIRE.
John Clemance of Evisham, Prisoner there for going to a Steeple-house.

WESTMERLAND.
Richard Hebson, was imprisoned for speaking to a Priest where he and others
were cruelly beat and abused, by an unmerciful Goal or of Apleby, and Richard
Hebson being put forth of prison very weak, and bruised, died presently after.

WESTMINSTER.
Elizabeth Peacock, for saying without faith they could not please God, is
Imprisoned in the Gatehouse, by JOHN MAID-STONE from White Hall.

WALES.
Edward Stephens, prisoner in Tregarran, for speaking in a Steeple-house.

James Jones Prisoner there, for going to the Steeple-house with Edward
Stephens.

Tobias Hodge and Dorcas Erberry, Prisoners in Cardiff, for going into the
Steeple-house or speaking there.

WILT-SHEIR.
Francis Tailor, Prisoner at Salisbury, for speaking in a Steeple-house there,
and very badly used by the Constables, and people there, and then imprisoned by
the Justices so called, and lies very sick.

YORK-SHEIR.
Daniel Thackeray, was sent to the house of Correction at Wakefield by JOHN
DAWSON and MARTIN ISLES, for witnessing the Kingdom of Heaven to be within, and
at Leeds Sessions fined xs. and afterward sent to the Castle at York, where
he remains prisoner, by WILLIAM FENTON, JOHN PAYTON, and JOHN DAWSON, and
MARTIN ISLES.

Besides, for going into Steeple Houses, streets and Markets, and speaking to
Rulers Priests or people in the fear of the Lord, either by testifying against
the World, that the deeds thereof are evil, or exhorting to the fear of God,
and amendment of life, the Hireling Teachers, and persecuting Rulers have cast
into Prisons, holes, and dungeons, there to lie for many months, under blooddy
Goalers, and some till death, to the number of 347.
Secondly, For not Paying Tithes.
BERK-SHIRE.
Leonard Cole, had three horses taken from him, for 5s. Tithes, one of which
horses the said Cole was bid 3l. 10s. for; which horse they sold, but returned
nothing again; afterward, the said Leonard Cole was arrested by the Priest of
Arberfield near Redding, and thrown into Prison, where he still lies.

BUCKINGHAM-SHIRE.
George Salter, imprisoned at Alesbury for Tithes, he refusing to swear to his
answer, to the Priest of Hidgerlys bill of Complaint.

CORNWALL.
Loveday Hambly of Tregongeeves, was at the suit of Priest UPCOTT Priest of
Austel, persecuted and cast into Prison for Tithes, and has been a Prisoner
about nine months, notwithstanding the said UPCOTT did a little before her
imprisonment take from her the said Loveday Hambly, as many Cattle as were
worth 40l. and upwards, for 5l. pretended to be due for Tithes; and is now a
Prisoner for about 13s and 4p. It is to be noted, that this woman has been one
of the best friends that this Priest has had.

John Hambly, in Prison at Bodmin for Tithes, by a Priest.

CAMBRIDG-SHIRE.
John Smith the elder, imprisoned at Cambridge Castle, at the suit of JOHN
FYDOE Priest of Hardwick, for Tithes, by a Warrant given under the hands of
THOMAS SCLATER, and JAMES TOMASON Justices, so called.

John Smith the younger of Hardwick, was at the suit of the said Priest FYDOE,
and Priest CUDWORTH, imprisoned for Tithes in Cambridge Castle, and there
remains a Prisoner.

Robert Letchworth, now of Chesterton, but formerly of Soam, was for Tithes
cast into Prison, by the Priest of Soam; and there has been a Prisoner above
twelve months, and so remains.

CANTERBURY.
William Mott, Prisoner there for Tithes.

Robert Minter, Prisoner there for Tithes, and has had ninety pounds worth of
goods taken from him for Tithes, besides his imprisonment.

Edward Noakes, imprisoned for Tithes, and had goods taken from him, to the
value of 98l. for Tithes.

CUMBERLAND.
John Nicholson, was by RICHARD HUTTON Priest, cast into the Goal at Carlisle
for Tithes, where he yet remains.

DORCHESTER-GOAL.
Nicholas Masters of Bradford, was committed to Dorchester Prison the ninth
month, at the suit of Ellis Harvey, an Impropriator for Tithes, and so
continues.

Francis Beaton of Overcomto, was likewise committed to Prison, at the suit of
ROBERT BARTLETT Clerk, in a plea of debt, falsely so called, but it was because
for Conscience he could not pay Tithes, and still remains a Prisoner.

Nicholas Stone, committed to Sherborn Bridewell, by JOHN HUSKINS Recorder, and
the Bailiffs of the same Borough only, for going to a Steeple-house, and not
speaking a word till the Priest had made an end.

ESSEX.
Robert Abbott of Colen, arrested and cast into Prison f^r not paying Tithes to
RICHARD HARLACKENDEN, of that Town, and has been a Prisoner about eleven
months.

John Adams of Hadstock, in Prison for not paying Tithes, by THOMAS WALLIS, and
has been a Prisoner about four months.

Edward Morrel of Thaxstead, in Colchester Goal for Tithes.

Widow Ball, and her son William Ball, earrested and cast into Prison for not
paying Tithes to JOHN WRIGHT Priest of that Town, and have been Prisoners ten
weeks.

Thomas Monkford of Salem, in Prison for not paying Tithes to JOHN COOPER, and
has been a Prisoner thirteen months.

Henry Smith of Salem, was cast into Prison for not paying Tithes to ANTHONY
MAXEY, and has been a Prisoner six weeks.

Anthony Page of Salem in prison for not paying Tithes to JOHN COOPER an
Impropriator, and has been a prisoner thirteen months.

James Potter of Mark stane in prison for not paying tyths to William Turner of
the said Town Impropriator, and has been a prisoner five weeks.

FLEET-LONDON.
Alexander Heblethwaite, James Corny, and Richard Robinson, have ^^en prisoners
there two years.

David Hall has been Prisoner there one and twenty months.

Henry Gill ^^th been prisoner there six months.

Gerard Roberts four months and upward.

John Lucas has been prisoner 15. months, and 8. months in Alisbury, and
^even months in the Fleet.

William Glydwel has been prisoner 20 months, viz. 13. months in Alisbury,
and seven months in the Fleet.

William Clater prisoner there 32. months, for Tithes by a Priest who carried
away his goods by cart-loads.

Andrew Smith has been prisoner first in Colchester, and now in the Fleet
eighteen months.

GLOUCESTER SHIRE.
Edward Buden, and William Peasly who made their personal appearance before
the Barons of the Exchequer at the the suit of HENRY HEN Priest, and because
for conscience sake they could not return their answer upon oath, a writ was
issued forth against them, signed by Georg Raymond then high Sheriff, by virtue
whereof they were arrested and cast into Gloucester Goal, and have remained
prisoners a year and five months, for the value of Tithes about twenty
shilling^ ^ piece. Notwithstanding which, the Priest HENRY HEN did in the time
of their imprisonment drive away three Cows of the said Edward Buden, and six
Cows of the said William Peasly, and remain prisoners still.

Francis Pennel of Awst is prisoner for Tithes by reason of the said HENRY HEN
Priest, and in the time of his imprisonment, Nicholas Ireland by a demise or
grant from the said HENRY HEN of the Tithes, came with a wain and six men to
fetch away Loads of wheat, Barley, and Beans without any order of Law or
Magistrate, and yet has been a prisoner seventeen months and so remains.

Thomas Beal at the suit of WILLIAM BENET Priest of T^^ligh was for Tithes cast
into Gloucester Goal, in which time the said Priest BENNET took away some of his
Corn and Hay, the said Priest being an officer in the late Kings army, and the
said Thomas Beal was in the service of the Parliament both in England and
Ireland for diverse years, the value of the tithes being but four shillings, and
for which he has been a prisoner 18. months.

Joseph Tomlins, at the suit of ROBERT WICKENS Priest of Toddenham, was cast
into prison for tithes, and has been there six months, and so still remains.

Thomas White of Hucklewait imprisoned fortythes at the suit of WILLIAM BISHOP
Impropriator, and has been a prisoner one year and ten months, and so remains,
notwithstanding he is a poor man, and has many children.

Henry Lloyd and John Cox, both prisoners in Gloucester Goal for tithes
pretended to be due to NICHOLAS CAREY Priest by the persecution of the priests
servant.

HARTFORD-SHIRE.
George Huckle, a poor old man living in Hartford Shire for denying to pay to
THOMAS RIDNER Priest of Hitchin, offering money, Smoke money, and tithes of two
years for Ducks, Turkeys, and a Cow, was committed to prison, where he has
been a prisoner ten months, and so still remains, notwithstanding there is
evidence under 20. men's hands from the parish where he dwelt (sent to the late
Protector) that the poor old man, has not had nor kept any of those creatures
these 20. years.

Nicholas Lucas of Trinn, for the value of three shillings Tithes, was
committed to Harford Goal, and there remains prisoner.

HUNTINGTON SHIRE
Simon Sanford for the value of three shillings and four pence Tyths was by
JOHN MANTON Priest of Alcumburg Subpoena'd to the Exchequer who appeared in
person, but his appearance could not be taken, so the Priest got an Attachment
against him, by which he was cast into prison, where he has been prisoner 12.
months and so continues.

Thomas Purchase by means of JAMES BEDFORD Priest of Blunsome was for tithes
castinto prison the seventeenth day of the 9th. month, 1658. and remains a
prisoner still.

HAMP-SHIRE.
William Baker and Richard Baker committed to prison by John Hook called
Justice, for saying that the Priest of Bromsale was a Robber and covetous, for
taking a Cow from Robert Beadle, which the Priest had caused to be taken away
for 40s. Tithes, pretended to be due to him, but the Cow was worth 4l. 10s. and
has been a prisoner 7. weeks, and still remains so, and John Day had four Cow;
taken from him worth 12l. and 3l. only was for Tithes to the Priest. Now let
those that are moderate consider who is the offender.

Ann Potter imprisoned by Priest BENTAL in Chegny Court prison for tithes.

And Richard Dean imprisoned at the same time for tithes.

LINCOLNE-SHIRE.
Thomas Brumby of Fillingham, a poor old man, having a wife and many children,
was committed to prison about the 18th. day of the 7. month 1657. for about
6s. Tithes at the suit of RALPH HOLLING WORTH Priest of Fillingham, yet the
writ names neither Priest nor tithes, by the tenor of the writ his body should
have been had before the Barons of the Exchequer, from the day called St.
Michaels 3 weeks, to have answered the late Protector of diverse trespasses,
contempts and offenses; but the poor old man has suffered 66 weeks
imprisonment, and still remains a prisoner by the means of this Priest; which
contemps, trespasses and offenses were, for not paying the Priests tithes.

Edmond Wolsy was committed to prison the 12 day of the 12 month called
February, at the suit of FRANCIS BALL of Sibsey for tithes, this persecutor is
no Priest but an impropriator as is supposed, who has kept this poor man in
prison 47. weeks, who is now dead.

John Pidd, Richard Pidd, and Arnald Trueblood all of Beckingham were upon the
23th. day of the 9. month 1658. committed to Goal for tithes, at the suit of
GEORG FARTHING, lately household servant to Joseph Thurlsone Priest of
Beckingham, the man pretends the priest let him a Lease of the tithes of those
people called Quakers, two of which do still remain prisoners. And Arnold
Trueblood since dyed in the pit of the said Goal among fellons.

LANCA-SHIRE.
Oliver Atherton in prison has been three months by the means of the
Countess, so called, of Darby for privy tithes under twenty shillings, and the
servant of the said Countess has taken from him 6l. worth of corn, and given
no account.

NORFOLK.
William Barber committed to Norwich-castel for tithes and there remains.

NORTHAMPTONSHIRE
Edward Roberts at the suit of LYONEL GODRICK priest has been in prison for
tithes one year and two months, and the said Priest did take from the said
Edward Roberts four horses worth 28l. for tithes valued at three pounds, and
yet notwithstanding he remains a prisoner, to the destroying and undoing of
him, his wife and family, and the said Priest told him to his face, it was
pity that he, and such as he should live in a Commonwealth.

Peter Makerness of Findon sued for tithes by William Downer Impropriator, into
the Exchequer and because for conscience sake he could not swear to his answer,
was committed to the County prison, and has been there six months, and still
remains

NOTTINGHAM-SHIRE.
William Smith in prison in that county for tithes at the suite of William
Pocklington farmer of tithes.

OXFORDSHIRE.
Alexander Harris imprisoned by WILLIAM BROWN Priest for the value of 7s.
tithes, and has been a prisoner twelve months, and so remains.

William Cole of Chalbury sued by the same Priest for 7s. 6d. tithes, and cast
into prison, where he has been kept a year and ten months.

Thomas French of Chippingnorton by the means of William Norton Tithe renter,
was served up to London by a writ, for the value of 11s. Tithes, and the said
Norton served those servants that were hired to carry in the corn, with a
Subpoena, and made them pay eleven shillings six pence, and cast two into
prison where they have been nine months, and there still remains.

SUFFOLK.
Thomas Jude has been a prisoner in Bury Edmonds for Tithes above twelve
months, and so is kept.

Also Richard White, and John Easling are prisoners in Ipswich for Tithes.

SUSSEX.
Robert Adams, and Richard Pratt have been prisoners in Horsham Goal one year
for Tithes.

SOMMERSET-SHIRE.
William Sergeant, Geo. Tailor, and John Dogget are prisoners in Ivelchester
Goal for Tithes.

Samuel Clothier, Henry Clothier, and Thomas Lockier have been prisoners in the
said Goal for Tithes these 13. Months.

Thomas Loscomb, and Henry Moore are prisoners there for Tithes.

William Vinent, and John Langden have been prisoners there for Tithes six
Months.

UPPER-BENCH-PRISON.
John Pollard at the suit of BENJAMIN MADDOCK a pretender to the Tithes, cast
into prison about the 16. of the 9. month (58) he having been a prisoner in
Colchester for Tithes twelve months before.

WARWICKSHIRE.
Thomas Palmer, William Man's, and Richard Mills were subpoena'd at the suit of
JOHN DYKE (an ejected Priest for his wicked course of life) to appear before
the Barrons of the Exchequer for tithes valued at 14s. pretended to be due to
the said Priest, and they appeared accordingly, but their appearance could not
be received, and so were cast into prison 20. steps in the Dungeon for a
contempt, because they could not for conscience sake swear to their answer.

Thomas Palmer has been in prison 16. weeks and William Man's 11. weeks, and
still are prisoners.

WILT-SHIRE.
John Fry sued in the Upper Bench, and the Exchequer by John Menlas Priest of
Gumfield, who never demanded ought of him, and was cast into prison at
Fisherton-Anger near Sarum, by Richard Lovel, and Walter Thomas, they having
the Warrant of Isaac Burgess Sheriff of Wiltshire so to do, where they have
been kept from the 13. day of the 9. Month (58) to this day.

Richard Ast sometime of Collerne in Wiltshire imprisoned at Fisherton-Anger at
the suit of GEORGE MARSHAL Priest and Thomas Harris Impropriator for the value
of two or three and thirty shillings, and has been a prisoner 21. weeks and
more, notwithstanding they caused his corn to be taken out of his house and
field before his imprisonment. Also Priest MONLAS caused to be taken from the
said John Fry goods to the value of twelve pounds and more before he was
imprisoned.

John Jay who is also a prisoner there has sent an account of his sufferings.

YORKSHIRE.
James Tenant sued in the Exchequer by the Farmer of Tithes, and because he
could not for conscience sake swear to his answer, was committed to prison,
where he has been 35. weeks and so continues.

Robert Mainford at the suit of CHARLES KAME Priest has been in prison for
Tithes eight Months.

Matthew Major and John Ellis imprisoned at the suit of FRANCIS SWAYNE Priest
have been prisoners 20. weeks and so remains.

Stephen Lorimore imprisoned at the suit of Richard Sherborn for some small
Tithes, and has been a prisoner two years, and still remains so, committed to
prison by Thomas Harison Sheriff.

SALOP.
Edward Ward, for about 50s. Tithes had a yoke of Oxen taken away from him
worth about 12l. by EDWARD LAWRANCE Priest of Shrewsbury.

Besides for not paying Tithes (to the upholding of Priests who do not work for
them) there have been imprisoned to the number of 200. And moreover 44^.
persons suffered the spoiling of their goods, because for conscience sake they
could not pay Tithes, the value of Tithes demanded amounted to 706. l. 8s. 11.
d. For which they took of their goods to the value of some thousands of pounds.
For Meeting together in the fear of God on the first days.
GEorge Harrison violently taken out of Apelties house who is a friend in
Heverall by a rude multitude of the Town, and cruelly bruised in the street
till he did spit blood, who a short time after dyed, having never in his life
time recovered from the hurt he then received.

DORCHESTER-GOALE.
Lore Bag the wife of Richard Bag, and her Son Thomas Bag, and three of her
daughters Sarah, Mary, and Abigal Bag, all of one Town living in Brideport, and
of one family, were by Nicholas Sampson and Robert Prince Bailiffs, for coming
from a meeting about a bow shoot from the place where they dwelt, committed to
prison, pretending they committed them for being wanderers, and because they
would not give them 2s. 6d. a piece; and after were called to Sessions, where
Thomas Bag was fined by the Recorder thirteen shillings four pence, because he
wore his hat in the Court, and because (for conscience sake, knowing they had
broke no Law) could not give them two shillings six pence a piece for coming
from the meeting, and thirteen shillings and four pence for Thomas Bags
wearing of his hat, were all sent back to prison again, where they have been
sixteen weeks, and still remains prisoners, Lore Bag being above threescore
years old, and her husband Richard Bag a Mercer driving a trade; so his Whole
family is taken from him to their great loss and hinderance.

YORKSHIRE.
Andrew Hawks committed to prison by Thomas Dickison called Justice, for not
prosecuting a warrant which came from the said Dickison against several persons
therein named, which was for no other cause, but for meeting together peaceably
the first day of the week to wait upon the Lord; and the said Hawks has lay^n
in prison eleven months and have not been brought to any trial, and still
remains prisoner.

Henry Vbanck Thomas Thackray, and Christopher Thackray and Thomas Docker were
taken forth at a meeting in Leeds and sent to prison by John Dauson and Martin
Isles, and at the Sessions there fined twenty shillings a piece, and afterward
sent to York Castle where they remain prisoners.

Besides for meeting together in the fear of God on the first day of the week,
and denying the steeple-house worship, there have been imprisoned one hundred
sixty five persons, and moreover for going to Godly and Christian meetings on
the said day, 30. persons has had twenty eight horses, and other goods taken
and sold and nothing returned again, which horses have been valued at one
hundred thirty six pounds twelve shillings.
Fourthly, For not Swearing, and Wearing their Hats.
BUCKINGHAM-SHIRE.
GEorge Salter, imprisoned at Alesbury for Tithes, he refusing to swear to his
answer, to the Priest of Hidgerlys bill of Complaint.

DORCHESTER GOAL.
Bartholomew Logg was fined 3s. and 4 pence, by JOHN HOSKINS, for wearing his
Hatt, and for not payment thereof was committed to Prison, where he has been
fourteen weeks, and still remains a prisoner.

Thomas Bagg was fined by the Recorder 13s. and 4 pence, because he wore his
Hatt in the Court, and because for conscience sake (knowing he had broke no
Law) could not give it them, was sent to Prison, where he has been sixteen
weeks, and still remains there.

GLOUCETER-SHIRE.
Edward Buden and William Peasly, who made their personal appearance before the
Barons of the Exchequer, at the suit of HENRY HEN Priest, and because for
Conscience sake they could not return their answer upon Oath, a Writ was sued
forth against them, signed by GEORGE RAYMOND, then high Sheriff, by virtue
whereof they were arrested, and cast into Gloucester Goal, and have remained
Prisoners a year and 5 months, for the value of Tithes about 20s. a piece,
notwithstanding which, the Priest HENRY HEN did in the time of their
imprisonment, drive away 3 Cows of the said Edw. Buden* and 6 Cows of the said
Will. Peasly, and remain Prisoners still.

HAMP-SHIRE.
James Potter, committed to the Common Goal at Winchester, by WILLIAM WHITHER,
and RICHARD KINSMILL, called Justices, for reading a paper at the Steeple-house
yard; and at the following Assizes was fined 5l. by Judge NICHOLAS, for wearing
his Hatt when he was brought into the Court, for which he was sent back to
Prison, and has been a Prisoner there 20 months, and so still remains.

NORFOLK.
William King, committed to Norwich Castle, for refusing to swear, and was
fined 40s. by Judge BALDOCK, for refusing to do service for his Country, but
by yea and nay, and there remains.

NORTHAMPTONSHIRE.
Peter Mackerness of Findon, sued for Tithes, by WILLIAM DOWNER Impropriator,
into the Exchequer, and because for Conscience sake he could not swear, was
committed to the County Prison, and has been there six months, and still
remains there.

SUFFOLK.
George Sherwing, for not swearing to his answer to a Bill at the suit of the
Lady GANDEE, for Tithes, was committed to Milton Goal, by an Attachment from
Baron NICHOLAS, and has been there 2 years.

WALES.
Howell Jones, Prisoner in Tregarran, for not putting off his Hatt.

YORKSHIRE.
James Tenant, sued in the Exchequer, by a Farmer of Tithes, and because he
could not for Conscience sake swear to his answer, was committed to Prison,
where he has been 35 weeks, and so continues.

John Hall was taken forth of a meeting in Woodstock in Leeds Parish, and
because he refused to swear, was sent to Prison, by WILLIAM FENTON, and MARTIN
ISLES, they pretending he was a Jesuit, and still remains Prisoner in York
Castle.

Besides, for not Swearing, and Wearing their Hatts, Imprisoned 125 Persons;
and 38 Persons for not Swearing in their Courts have had goods taken from them
to the value of about 77l. 15s.
Fifthly, Under pretense of being Vagrants.
HAMP-SHIRE.
ANthony Millage, who was formerly a captain of a Frigot, was as a vagrant
committed to prison with Hunphery Smith, to the common Goal of Winchester, by
JOHN BUNKLEY, called justice, for no other cause at all, but for being in his
company, and has been a Prisoner Ten Months.

William Bailey was also committed by the aforesaid JOHN BUNKLEY, without any
accusation laid against him, but for being in the company with Humphrey Smith,
(from the parish where he was born) as a vagrant, and has been a Prisoner ten
months, and so remains.

Besides, cruelly whipped, and counted as vagrants and wanderers, though men of
considerable estates, 42. persons.
Sixthly, For visiting Friends in Prisons.
DORCHESTER-GOAL.
William Ellet the younger committed to prison, by NICOLAS SAMPSON; and ROBERT
PRINCE Baylifs of Brideport, only, for standing peaceably in the street, when
George Buly was examined, and has been a prisoner there 14 weeks and so
remains.

Besides, for visiting of their friends in Prison, imprisoned 30. persons, also
two persons only for entertaining their friends according to the command, to
entertain strangers, were imprisoned, and had four Horses taken from them worth
about 18 pounds.
Seventhly, For not repairing of Steeplehouses, and not paying Clerks Wages.
ONe hundred forty one persons, for the repair of Steeple Houses, and
Clerks-wages, had demanded of them 27. l. 14. s. 8. pence, for which was taken
from them to the value of about 139. pounds 15. shillings, and 10 pence in
goods.

Eighthly, Imprisoned, and Persecuted till death.
CAMBRIDGE.
Boniface Norris, being near four-score years of age, as he was riding to a
meeting, was sorely beaten and bruised, and fined 10. shillings for going to
the meeting, and afterward imprisoned by DUDLY POPE called a Justice, and a
week after he was let out of Prison, died.

DURHAM.
George Humble, an aged man, for standing by some of his neighbors whom GEORGE
LILBURN had set in the stocks for speaking to a Priest, the said Humble
standing by, and reproving the people, was for that sent to Prison to Durham by
the said LILBURN, where he was kept until death.

DEVON-SHIRE.
Jane Ingram, for going to visit some friends who were cast into prison, and
lay upon straw at Doomes-dale in Lanceston in Cornwall, was by JO. CHAMPION
Justice so called, cast into prison at Exeter, and there kept in prison upon
straw till she dyed.

LANCA-SHIRE.
Richard Apener, was imprisoned till death for Tithes, by Priest SHAW of
Oldingham, who also spoiled his goods, and made havoc of many more. As some
friends in Lancashire were coming from a meeting, they meet with a Priest upon
the high way, and others with him, to whom one Elizabeth Leavens spoke a few
words, whereupon the Priests party got hedg-staves and beat the friends,
amongst whom a woman great with child, was sorely beaten on the breast, and so
sorely bruised, that she presently fell sick, and with much ado got home, and
within two or three days after died.

BRISTOL.
Temperance Hignel, being moved of the Lord to go to a Steeple-house in
Bristol, to speak to JACOB BRINT Priest, after he had ended, was knocked down in
the Steeple-house to the astonishing of her senses, and sorely beaten and
bruised, her blood drawn, and her clothes torn off from her back in the
Steeple-house, and then cast into prison, and being afterward carried out in a
basket sick, within two or three days after she died.

Also George Harrison imprisoned there till death.

LINCOLNSHIRE.
Edmond Wolsey imprisoned for Tithes until death.

Also Thomas Bromby imprisoned until death, for about 6. s. Tithes.

GLOUCESTERSHIRE.
Richard Atwood, for 15 shillings tithes, was imprisoned till death by RICHARD
FOWLER Priest.

ESSEX.
James Parnel for speaking in Cogges-Hall Steeple-house, on a fast day was
imprisoned until death, by HERBERT PELHAM, THOMAS COOK, DIONYSIUS WAKERING, and
WILLIAM HARLACKENDEN, and before he dyed was most cruelly, and barbarously used
by the Goalers Wife.

NORFOLK.
Robert Jacob of Windham, being four score years of age, imprisoned till death,
being first cast into prison for not swearing to be a Constable, and released,
but afterward cast into Prison again for tithes, and for refusing to swear to
his answer, he was kept Prisoner till death.

OXFORD.
Elizabeth Fletcher a young woman, was by the Scholars of Oxford for speaking
the Word of the Lord to them, thrown against a Gravestone, and into a Grave,
and drawn through a Pool with ropes, and pumpt; which usage she said before her
death she should never recover, but carry to her Grave, and accordingly by
reason of that usage she died.

SUFFOLK.
John Cason, imprisoned for Tithes till death, at the suit of JOHN PADGETT the
Priest of Aldham, and also by Priest GLAUFIELD, and before his death was
barbarously and cruelly used by the Jailer.

SUMMER SET-SHIRE.
William Tucker of Naylsey imprisoned till death, by THOMAS GEORGE Priest.

YORKSHIRE.
William Peers, and Will. Sykes, imprisoned till death for Tithes.

John Sumerson imprisoned till death for Tithes, having first been Prisoner two
years.

Ma thew Wilkinson imprisoned till death for Tithes, in Pickering Castle,
because he could not swear to his answer to the Priests Bill.

William Wilkenson of Rosedal^, for not paying Tithes to JOHN MASON of
Middleton an Impropriator, was sued in the Court of Exchequer, and for not
swearing to his answer, was cast into Prison in Pickering Castle, where he
remained a Prisoner near a year, and then died in Prison.

WESTMORELAND.
Richard Hebson aforementioned, cruelly used by the Jailer of Apelby, died.

In all Imprisoned, and persecuted to death, 21.
Ninethly, Imprisoned for things of several natures.
BERK-SHIRE.
Leonard Cole of Arberfield, was put in Prison at Redding, and there kept above
twelve weeks, the last Term was brought to the Court at Westminster, called the
Common Pleas, where he appeared personally, and was from thence sent to the
Fleet, where he remains a Prisoner; two or three days after he came to the
Fleet, one GEORGE HATTON, brought him a Declaration of ALEXANDER STOAKE^
Priest, and about the second day of the first month called March, 1658/9* the
said Priest went with Bailiffs to the dwelling house of the said Cole, and
there entered his Barn, and turned out his Threshers, and seized on a Mow of
Wheat, besides what was threshed on the floor, to the value of 20 quarters, (as
the Bailiffs themselves did compute it;) Also they took away 10 kine, which
were worth near 50l. in all they took from him to the value of 100l. for one
years Tithes. For which Farm one WILLIAM THORRELL, who possessed it many years,
paid 6l. yearly to the Priest for the Tithes thereof, as he himself told the
said Cole.

CUMBERLAND.
George Bigland of Carlisle, was fined 22l. by WILLIAM BRISCOE, THOMAS CRASTER,
and CUTHBERT STEDHOLM, for following the occupation of a Weaver in the City,
notwithstanding he had served 7 or 8 years in the Parliaments service, yet
nevertheless was committed to Prison.

HARTFORDSHIRE.
Thomas Prior of Hitching, for setting up a Copy of the Priests unrighteous
Declaration in the Marketplace, taken out of the Exchequer, against a poor old
man, George Huckle, was by the Priest had before BROCKETT SPENCER, one of the
Justices, so called, who committed him to prison for setting up the said
Declaration, and for a color said, it was for setting up a Libel, which said
Thomas Prior has been a prisoner ten months, and so remains.

HAMP-SHIRE.
Humphrey Smith, was committed to the common Goal at Winchester, by JOHN
BUNKLEY, called a Justice, (upon the false oath of a Wicked man) and has been
a prisoner ten months, and so remains.

LINCOLNSHIRE.
John Seel of Leverton, a poor laboring man, was upon the 18th of the 4th
month committed to prison at the suit of EDWARD GREATHEAD Priest of that Town;
by the Tenor of the Writ, his body was to be had before the Barons of the
Exchequer within 15 days after the time called Trinity, to answer the late
Protector, etc. But neither the Persecutor nor Tithes are named therein, yet
the poor man has suffered 29 weeks imprisonment, by the means of this Priest.

Besides, summoned up to Westminster, from all parts of the Nation for Tithes,
400 persons.
The Number of the persons herein mentioned, are about 1960, who are but a part
of those who have suffered for things of the like nature, within these 6 years;
Many of them being sufficient and considerable Men and Women, have been cruelly
Whipped and their blood shed. Oh! do not ye let the Nation be covered with
innocent blood, by such as profess the Scriptures, who use people so
barbarously, imprison, and persecute about Church, Religion, Worship and
Ministry, which are out of Christ and the Apostles lives, who saved men's lives,
and wrestled not with flesh and blood, but brought the Creatures into the
liberty of the Sons of God. Do you walk in their steps?

Since the drawing up of this paper, some few of the Friends within mentioned
to be in Prison, may have been released, and others imprisoned.

Will Griffes, for speaking to a Priest in Shrowsbury, was by the Mayor of the
Town committed to prison, and has been a prisoner 5 months, and so remains.

Richard Sale of Chester, for bearing his Testimony for the Lord against the
wickedness of the people of that City, and for crying Repentance, was by the
command of the Mayor put into a hole of a Rock, called Little-Ease, the place
being too strait for his body, he was thrust in by force of men which bruised
him, insomuch that he spatt Blood; after some time he fell sick, and his body
much swelled, and he was heard to complain in the time of his weakness, of
those bruises which he had in that cruel place of torment, called Little-Ease,
the hole in the Rock; and after some time lying in pain, he died. Also Arnold
Trueblood died since in prison.

If the truth hereof be Questioned, many Witnesses may be produced to confirm
the same.

An account of some Grounds and Reasons of the Innocent Sufferings of the
people of God called QVAKERS, and why they testify against the vain customs
and practices of the World.
FRIENDS.
IT may seem strange unto you, as it does unto others, to hear that so many of
our Friends should be cast into prisons, there being few Goales or houses of
Correction in England to which some of them have not been committed, and you
partly know, how many of them are this day in Bonds, and it is no less strange
to us, that such frequent and heavy sufferings, for matters of conscience
should come upon us and our brethren, who for the most part have been
instruments with you and others, for casting off that yoke of oppression, which
at the beginning of the late wars, lay upon the honest people of this Land;
which made many fly into strange Nations, and to seek habitations in the
deserts; but we wonder the more, that they should come from those we accounted
our friends (that so much have pretended the liberty of conscience) and many of
themselves practiced the same things for which we now suffer.

May we not ask what has been done by our friends? What Laws are these which
they have broken? Whose Persons, or Possessions have they wronged? What force
or violence have they used to any man? Have you found them in Plots, or guilty
of Sedition, or making resistance against authority? Have they not patiently
born the greatest sufferings that any people of this Nation ever lay under,
since Queen Mary's days, without murmuring, and discontents? And when have
they sought to revenge themselves, or troubled you or others, to be repaired
for those many injuries and false imprisonments which they have endured? How
have they been counted as Sheep for the slaughter, perfecuted, and despised,
beaten, stoned, wounded, stocked, whipped, haled out of the Synagogues, and
cast into Dungeons, and noysom Vaults, where many of them have dyed in bonds,
shut up from their Friends, denied needful sustenance for several days
together, not suffered to have Pen, Ink, or Paper; And when they have layen
there many months, and some of them years, denied a Legal trial, continued
from Sessions to Assizes, and from one Assizes to another, and no eqnity to be
found, from Judge, or Justice?

If it be answered to us they are common disturbers of Ministers, they will not
pay Tithes, they will not swear, they will not put off their hats, they travel
up and down from one country to another, without a Magistrates Pass, and on
the first days to meetings at great distance, they will not pay fees, when
they are brought into Courts, nor plead in the forms there used, nor give
security to keep the Peace, or to be of the good behavior, when the Justices
of the Peace require it; And we have Laws, or customs, that require these
things should be done.

It is forgotten what was one of the great causes of our late Wars, the
sufferings that then was imposed, and lay upon many for matters of conscience;
And was it not a chief pretense of our fighting, that we might enjoy the
freedom of conscience, as well as outward rights, not only in the Inner man
(for that the Bishops, or high Commission Court could not hinder) but the free
exercise in all acts of Piety, and Religion, of what the Lord should make
manifest unto us? but whether this was then intended, or is now perverted, it
is that which is our right, which we must claim, and no man may take from us;
for this we know, that Christ Jesus alone has right to rule over the
consciences of men, unto whom every one must give an account of himself,
according to the just, perfect, and unchangeable Law of God which is revealed,
with that alone of God, which is made manifest in man, which he has showed
unto him, by which every one shall be judged at the last day, when the book of
conscience shall be opened; and therefore all unequal, imperfect and changeable
Laws of men we do deny, and by them, and for their transgression we shall not
be judged of the Lord; And all Laws made in their wills, by their wisdoms in
the things of God, which concerns religion, and the free exercise of a good
conscience toward God and man, against them all we do bear witness, and
knowing the commandments of the Lord, and what he required of us, and having
tasted his tender love, to those that keep them, and felt his terrors against
all disobedience, we are made willing to bear the greatest sufferings, rather
then sin against God; and in this ground we stand not careful what man can do
unto us, or say of us, nor to give him an answer in this matter; For whether it
is better to obey God, or man, Let him judge.

Yet here to prevent mistakes, we do with the like clearness declare our free
and willing subjection in the things of this World, to every ordinance of man
that is just (according to the Righteous Law of God) and our work is not to
weaken, but to strengthen the hand of the Magistrate, by laboring to bring all
to own that of God which should exercise their consciences; To do in all
things, as they would be done unto, in which is fulfilled the Law and the
Prophets, which takes away the occasion it self of the Law, and brings to live
in peace and love, wherein should be the Magistrates joy and glory.

And do but look back to the crimes charged against us, and all the sufferings
we lie under, and you may clearly see, that not for any evil done, or just Law
broken that concerns man, are we thus punished; but for things which concerns
our God, and chiefly for bearing our witness, as we are moved of the Lord
against the false Prophets and hirelings of these days, who by their fruits
are made manifest, not only unto us, but to many thousands besides; yea, the
greatest part of all the sober people of the nation, their own hearers will
confess it; and we see and know that they and all Ministries and worships in
the World, set up and standing in the will of man, shall perish and come to
nothing, and the Rise of these men, their growth and end, we comprehend, and
see their downfall hasten greatly; and all the powers of the earth shall not be
able to support them, and with them shall fall their Tithes, their Temples,
their gleab-lands, and offerings, their set days of worship in their wills,
and all Laws limiting the Holy one, made to uphold their craft, and blessed are
they, who through the day of trial shall stand in their witness faithful unto
God, not fearing what man can do unto them.

Do not you approve Christ Jesus his going into the Temple? And do not you own
the Apostles, who went into the Jews Synagogues every Sabbath day, and into the
Market places to testify of Christ Jesus, and reason with the people? And do
not you commend Luther and Calvin, John Wicliffe, and others (as famous for
their zeal in publishing abroad what then was manifest unto them,) and those
persons which in Q. Mary's days, went into the Popish Steeple Houses, to bear
witness against their superstitions, which caused her to make a Law against
them, by which many of them then suffered, and by which the Priests of England,
till the last Parliament were guarded, and is it now become an offense to
practice the the same things? And is that a just Law made by the late
Parliament, by which many have suffered? are not the Priests sprung from the
old root of Episcopacy and it from the Pope? and are they not forced to fly
thither for their vindication? And is not the spirit the same, (which makes
these Laws) to support them? How shall the Kingdoms of the earth, the Papists,
Turks, Infidels, Heathens, be converted? Your Priests sit down in their ease,
and will not go; They call themselves Ministers of the Reformed Church; and
have not you taught other Nations how to make laws, to restrain the Testimony
of those whom the Lord sends, and is sending into all the corners of the earth?

Did the Command of God which gave Tithes to the Jewish Priesthood concern the
Gentiles? was not the Commandment to the Jews themselves disannulled, when the
Priesthood was changed? did ever any of the believing Jews pay Tithes to the
Apostles, or any of the Gentiles either? Did not the Papists bring in this
doctrine, and oppression; Did not many of the Martyrs in Queen Maryes days
witness against Tithes, and was not that an Article, for which some of them
suffered? and do not you own and commend those Martyrs, or do you judge them
for holding an Error? has not all or most of those Countries that turned from
the soap, and are called Reformed, cast off Tithes with the Pope, and were
ashamed of them? And is it the Glory of England, who pretends to the highest
Reformation to keep up Tithes, (the Popish Priests maintenance) and first
Fruits, and Tenths (the wages of the very Pope himself) and to hale before
Courts, cast into Prisons, and spoil the Goods of all those who for Conscience
sake cannot pay them? Let that of God answer.

And how many have, and at this day do suffer because they cannot swear, which
Christ Jesus and his Apostles above all things forbids? how are the Commands of
Christ made void by the Customs and Traditions of men? were it not easy by
turning the Law against liars and false witnesses (which the Law of God is
against) to find out that which your Law against false swearing never did or
could discover?

Do you own Christ Jesus, of whom the Jews that put him to death gave this
witness, That he respected no man's person? Do you commend Mordecai? who could
not give the outward honor and bow to Haman? and do you regard his words,
whosaid, I know not how to give flattering Titles to men, for my Maker would
soon take me away? Has not God made of one mold, and one Blood all Nations to
dwell upon the face of the Earth? and does not he that respects Persons commit
sin, and is convinced of the Law as a transgressor? and must it now be an
offense not to put off the Hat, or give respect to the Person of him that has
a gold Ring, and fine Apparel? Has not all the earthly Lordship, Tyranny, and
oppression sprung from this Ground, by which creatures have been exalted, and
set up one above another, trampling under foot, and despising the poor? And is
it not easy to see that power and authority without contempt may be preserved,
the power honored, obeyed and submitted unto, and the Person respected?

Has not the great and heavy oppressions of the Law been long felt and cried
out against, the long delays in Courts, and the great Fees of Officers, which
causes many to be excessively rich out of the Ruins of the Poor, which has
brought an Odium upon the Law it it self? for to the Poor, the remedy is
frequently worse then the desease; and while people are free to feed this
deceit, there is little hope to have it amended. And how full of lies,
deceit, pretenses, and needless circumstances are all your pleadings and
proceedings, to the burden of many men's Consciences, and ruin of their
Estates? and how vile and wic^^^ are the greatest of Lawyers, that will plead
any thing for money, and by their subtilties do most commonly hide and cover
the truth? And when do the Judges reprove it? And how treacherous and deceitful
are the Solicitors and Attorneys, that truth or honesty can scarce be found
amongst them? And how do those eat up the people as it were Bread, and grow
great and rich, by raising and increasing suites, troubles, strife and debates
amongst their Neighbors? and we seeing these oppressions, are made to bear our
witness against them, and cannot uphold them, and our Testimony shall not be in
vain.

And how is the power given to Justices and Judges to bind to the Peace and
good behavior (being left to their discretion) turned against the most
peaceable, and best behaved Persons amongst men, merely because they cannot bow
to their wills, and hold their tongues when the Lord God requires them to speak?

Do you commend Christ Jesus, his Apostles and Saints, who were sent to preach
the Gospel, and traveled from City to City, from Nation to Nation, from
Country to Country, that the ends of the Earth might hear the glad tidings of
Salvation? and do you commend those they called Puritans, for going many miles
to worship the Lord? and do you now condemn those that practice the same thing?
would not your Law against Vagabonds have taken hold on Christ and his
Ministers, and hindered their work? by it have many honest and good people
suffered most shameful whippings and imprisonments, who were traveling in
their own Country, about their outward and lawful occasions, that were of
considerable Estates and could not be counted, Vagabonds; and what use is made
of this Law, throughout the Nation, you cannot but hear.

Are not these things like the sayings of those who said, Had they lived in the
days of the Prophets, they would not have persecuted and put them to death?
and yet they Crucified Christ; and so the cry at this day is against the Jews
for their cruelty, when themselves are found exercising the same things against
his Saints and Members.

Long has the Beast reigned, who usurped power in these things, and the false
prophets, who have overspread the Earth, and the great Whore, who have made
all Nations drunk with their abominations, and the Wine of their fornications,
with whom the Kings of the Earth have committed Adultery, whom Christ said
should come, and before the Apostles decease did come, who went cut from the
Apostles, and put on their clothing, but inwardly were distroyers, ravening
Wolves, which the whole World went after, who turned against the Saints, who
kept to the Spirit (the life which they went from) and made War with the Saints
till they overcame, and their power reached over the whole Earth; But now is
the Life risen, and is again made manifest which they went from, which gives to
see before the Apostasy was; Now is the Lamb risen, and rising to make War with
the great Dragon, the Beast and false Prophets, and now shall the great Whore
be taken, and her flesh shall be burnt with fire, and the Saints shall have the
Vict^^^

Therefore, Let all Kings, Princes, Rulers, and Magi^ be warned not to take
part with the Beast, nor to up^^^^ (...) their power) the false prophets, who
have long de^^^ved the Nations; but in their place stand to keep the out (...)
that none may offer violence and destroy another, ^^ich (...) been the way of
the beast and false prophets (the (...) support of their kingdom) but leave
Christ Jesus in his Saints to manage the War, whose Warfare is not carnal,
whose Weapons are not carnal, yet are they mighty through God to the pulling
down of the strongholds, and overturning the foundation of Satan's kingdom, and
they shall soon see what is truth, and what is error, for great is the truth
and will prevail; they shall not need to cry out for want of Ministers, or that
Christ Jesus is not able to send forth Laborers; nor will those he sends forth
trouble them for maintenance; and here is the Magistrates true place to keep
Peace amongst all men, to punish him that does evil, and to encourage him that
does well, to Rule the Kingdoms of the Earth in Righteousness, that justice and
equity may be exalted, that way may be made for the Lord Jesus Christ, who is
coming to Reign, and to take the Dominion to himself; and we are Witnesses in
our Measures of his coming, and of the working of his mighty power, by which he
is able to subdue all things to himself; and this is the Testimony unto which
we are called, and many thousands with us in the Unity of the same Spirit.

And Witnesses we stand against Priests, Tithes, Temples, Swearing, and all the
carnal way of worship, set up and upholden by outward Laws and powers, which
would limit and restrain the Spirit of the Lord, which is grieved, and daily
cries out against these abominations.

Witnesses we stand against Parliaments, Councels, Judges, Justices, who make
or execute Laws in their Wills, over the Consciences of men, or punish for
Conscience sake; and to such Laws, Customs, Courts, or Arbitrary usurped
Dominion, we cannot yield our obedience.

Yet we do declare, as it is testified in all Counties, Cities, Goals and
Prisons, to Judges, Justices and others, that as we preach Christ Jesus alone
in the things of God to be our Law ^^ver, so do we own him to be our King (and
own Magist^^^^ in things Civil) not resisting the evil, but following his
Example who was made perfect through suffering, and for his Salvation we wait,
till he alone shall plead our Cause; and therefore for Conscience sake we have
joyfully born, and do be^^ so many and great sufferings, since the day we were
convinced of the Everlasting Truth.

These things we have declared, not to upbraid you with the injustice of
others, nor to revile the Government it self, nor as a complaint against our
oppressors; but that you may see the ground, and true cause of all our
sufferings, and of the sufferings of the Saints, in all Ages, and Generations,
and in all nations of the World this day, and we leave it to that of God in you
all, to weigh and consider, whether it be not time to reform, both Laws,
Courts, and Officers.

From your Friends, who are lovers of peace and truth, who wait for the coming
of the Lord, to establish Justice, and righteousness in the earth, whom he
has raised up, as witnesses of his appearing, and of the dawning of the Mighty
and dreadful day of God, in Life, Light and Power, who are hated of men, and
reproached under the Name of Quakers.
And whereas there is a great cry up and down the Nation, that the Quakers
meetings must be broken and suppressed, and that this present Parliament
intends to do it, and of this I have heard in diverse parts of the Nation.
NOw to this I shall say and answer; first, as I have observed the spirits of
people concerning this cry, all the rude and ungodly people, as drunkards, and
the prophanest of men, they glory apace at this news, and rejoice at this
mightily, as if some great prize were befallen unto them; and it makes them
rude, and violent enough to the breaking of the peace in the Nation; but thus
it is with but the worst sort of people in the Nation, who are rejoiced with
these tidings, that the Quakers meetings must be broken; but as for the honest
people, such as be sober and sincere, thousands that had a hand in choosing this
present Parliament, never intended to send them up to London for such a work;
and the cry is by many of the sober people, if they go about such a thing, they
will destroy themselves, undo themselves, and leave their names a reproach;
Why say the people? (we have a Testimony before us) has it not been upon that
Rock of limiting tender consciences in former days, that has broken many
before these, which might be examples to these, not to do the same things? and
many sober people are offended at such news, and it makes their hearts sad,
whose conscience and the witness therein does answer that we are the Lords
people, and it ought not thus to be done concerning us, as the news reports;
so that by this news of the intended purpose, to break the Lords peoples
meetings, the ungodly and profane, are gratified, and strengthened in their
wickedness, and the righteous are made sad; And further, as for us, we have
been trodden down, and made a prey unto our enemies, and the gates of death and
Hell have stroven against us already, but have not prevailed unto this day; for
the Lord is with us, and who is it that shall prevail against us, and I may say
what is this that is reported to be done? What shall dust and ashes do, and man
whose breath is in his nostrils? and who are they that shall break down that
which the Lord has a purpose to build? who shall be able to prosper in going
about it? or what success shall God give to that work? I tell you nay, it is
the Lord that has raised us up, and we have given our power to him, to stand
by him, and to be protected, defended and upheld by him alone, and we cannot
give our power to any mortal men, to seek that from them which is not in their
hands to give; the power of the Lord God is over you, he that is our keeper and
preserver, in whose hands is your breath, to destroy it utterly, if you do that
which does offend him; for you shall know that we are the Lords people, by whom
we shall stand and grow in dominion and authority in his life, and the dread of
the Lord shall be upon our enemies, though they one gratify another, with
intention of evil against us; yet the Lord stops the purpose of his enemies,
and turns it backwards upon their own heads; And this I say from the Lord, if
such a thing be in your hearts, conceiving to be brought forth by you, it is a
birth that will devour you, ere ever it spring out of your bowels, it will be
too heavy a burden, and you shall never have strength to deliver it; this is
the word of the Lord to you, it shall be a Rock to overthrow you, and it will
be a snare to catch you, and if any such thing proceed from you, it will break
you, and your own wickedness will destroy you. Alas! do not you see evidently
the hand of the Lord fight for us? yea, we have evident testimony of his
presence, that he is and will be with us unto the end, and if any will be blind,
let them be blind, for these tidings do not trouble us, neither are we thereby
moved, no not to beg of any man the contrary, for we cannot give our power unto
you, nor come under the power of this World, no not to beg of you, contrary to
a good conscience, that you should forbear the fulfilling your intents; but
this it is in the Name and power of the Lord, though he requires nothing of you
to exalt his Kingdom by your power, nor to prescribe him a way, how he must be
worshipped, yet he requires that you should do nothing against him, nor his
people, by limiting the spirit of the Lord; and I say the Saints of the most
High can not give their power to you, to stand or fall thereby, nor to go by
the authority thereof, to exalt the Kingdom of God thereby; they can beg no
such thing, nor desire it of you, for it is not in your hands to give his work
of salvation unto the Nations; you cannot give nor lay one stone in the
building of his blessed Temple, but he alone will do it, and not by the arm of
flesh; yet does he require, that you should do nothing against him, nor abuse
your power, but and if you do, he will reward you according to your deeds, and
this you will find and feel in the day of God, when he brings vengeance, and
Judgment upon you, and when he sets his Kingdom over you all, and that comes
to reign over the Nations, which now is a sufferer. And when I first heard the
news sent abroad in the Nation, of such intentions, to break the Quakers
meetings, many considerations passed through me, will these go said I in the
same way, that many have been destroy ed in before them? Will these run upon
the same rock? will these take in hand to limit God, and to set him a way? and
shall all these sufferings of the Lords people for these many years be finished
by these, that all the unjust dealings, and oppressions of the Saints, may be
upon them? Is there no wise man among them, nor none that fears the Lord,
that he may be preserved from destruction? and is this their beginning in
Parliament, to destroy Gods heritage? The Lord, nor the people of this Nation
that fear God, have not entrusted them therein; but if it be so, said I in my
heart, if this wickedness be intended, and if they do so greatly abuse their
power, they shall leave their names as a reproach to after ages, and their
memories shall rot, and their wickedness shall lie upon them for evermore; but
I considered that we having given our power to the Lord, from him we have found
to this day, and do always seek defense, and to be carried on, and by him we
stand, and to him we fall; and not to mortal men, who are as clay in the hand
of the potter; wherefore let the wise in heart consider these things, and lay
them to mind; for if they shall proceed to that wickedness, the nations, shall
they never settle in peace, nor shall their Rulers, receive a blessing, but
they shall be a curse unto themselves, and to all under their authority; and
this is a Testimony to all sober people, showing unto them all, where our
confidence is, and in what it remains; And nevertheless if the heart of the
wicked be strengthened against us, and their hands made strong to deal
violently, yet shall the righteous rejoice, and be exceeding glad; for the day
of redemption and everlasting peace is come unto his people, that do and have
waited for him, and all under him shall bow and bend, and he will make his
peoples cup overflow, and spread their table, even in the fight of their
enemies, and they shall fear, and the terror of the Lord shall lie upon them,
and when they have executed their violence, then shall the Lord deal violently
with them.

E. B.

A Cry of great Judgment and vengeance upon the Wicked, near to be executed,
as it was received from the Lord into his servant.
ON the eighteenth day of the first month, as I was traveling in
Warwickshire, my Meditations being upon the Lord, and upon the cause of his
people in this Nation; and how unjust and unrighteous their woeful sufferings
have been executed upon them within these few years; even when I was pondering
of these things, in the deep consideration thereof, it came upon me from the
Lord, and the cry went through me, the Lord will be avenged, the Lord will be
avenged upon his enemies, and he will avenge the cause of his people; and this
cry stuck close upon me for some hours, that the Lord would surely execute his
judgments upon the oppressors of his heritage, who have spoiled and trodden it
down, and sought to destroy it; And I considered and took into full view in my
Spirit, how grievous, how sad, and how unjust the sufferings of Gods people
have been within these few years, and my heart was even broken therewith, and
my Spirit even melted; and it came upon me from the Lord, saying, Write unto
the Rulers, and yet once more warn them of that recompense, and of that
indignation which is at hand upon them; even a just recompense for all their
deeds; and as they have done, even so shall it be done to them; as they have
sought to destroy the generation of the righteous, even so shall they be
destroyed from off the face of the earth; and as they have unjustly judged and
condemned the innocent, so shall they be condemned and justly judged of the
Lord; and as they have cast the bodies of the poor Lamb^ of Christ into Prison,
and been a snare upon them, even so shall they be ensnared, and into captivity
shall they go; and as they have caused the goods and possessions of the
innocent to be spoiled and made a prey, even so in like manner shall the curse
of the Lord spoil their substance; and as they have done, so shall it be done
unto them; and as they have mete to others, so shall it be mete to them again.
And I saw a great misery and desolation nigh at hand, even the Sword of the
Lord, and it should slay them; and I beheld it was made ready for the
slaughter: and in the sense of these things a sadness fell upon my Spirit,
considering the desolation and the judgment that is at hand, to be executed
upon the cruel oppessors.

Wherefore all ye Rulers, and all ye that have trodden down the heritage of God,
and ye that have disregarded those many warnings that ye have had; I say unto
you all, in the power of the Lord God, in his Dominion, and by his Spirit, this
is once more a warning to you from the Lord, and that these things must surely
come to pass, and be fulfilled in their season, and no man shall be able to
deliver his brother; but every man shall bear his own burden, and drink his
own cup prepared for him; and though it has been counted a light thing amongst
you, and you have despised the reproof, and gone on without fear, yet in as
much as the Lord has spared you, and not speedily executed judgment upon you,
but rather waited for your return; yet the dealing of the Lord toward you in
sparing of you, you have not accepted, and therefore shall his judgments be the
greater upon you. For if you do now come to the witness in your own
consciences, What evil has this people done? Whose Ox have they taken, or what
have they desired of you? or what have they sought from you? or wherein have
they been a burden to you, Saving that they have reproved you for your
iniquities, and desired your Repentance? Would you but now at last come to
consider this, and confess the truth in your consciences, will not that tell
you, that they have suffered patiently all things that you have cruelly imposed
upon them? and have not they walked peaceably toward you, and humbly, meekly
and justly among their Neighbors? and have they not been meek and innocent
even as Lambs, and as the sheep before the Sbearers? and have they wrought
offenses toward any? have they sought the overthrow of the Government, or have
they sought vengeance against their enemies? or what injury have they done to
any man's person, or estate, saving to Satan and his kingdom? Have they not
sought to reform, and reclaim the ungodly from their ways? and have they not
pitied and prayed for their enemies? and have they not in all things walked in
good conscience toward the Lord, and toward all men? Yea, my friends, in the
day of the Lord, when the witness in your consciences shall not be limited,
but shall speak plainly, and when the impartial Judge shall appear upon his
Throne, then shall you acknowledge thesethings.

Wherefore I say unto you, receive the judgment of the Lord to purify you,
otherwise the judgment shall destroy you; and now come to be more wise, that
some of you may be as a brand plucked out of the fire, and be reserved from
being consumed; for the visitation of the Lord is near an end, when his loving
kindness will be shut from you, and his long suffering turned into fury; and he
will make you know that we are his people with whom you have thus dealt, yea,
you shall suddenly know it, the time is not long till he will crown his people
in the sight of his enemies; he will crown them with praise and with
righteousness, with honor and majesty, and he will keep them in safety, even
when sorrow compasses you about; his mercy and loving kindness shall extend
toward them, even when his wrath and judgments does smite you, and confound
you. O what shall I say unto you! for the deep sense thereof remains upon my
heart; for when I consider how that in all ages the Lord did avenge his peoples
cause, and when the time of their suffering was expired, he brake the bonds of
iniquity, and set them free; thus did he with his people Israel of old, and
many times it was his way with his people to bring them low by suffering, and
then to raise them up again in glory; and he suffered their enemies for a
season to glory over them, that he might bring them down; and thus he did in
England in the case between the Bishops and their crew of persecutors, and the
poor people at that day called Puritans: Did not he confound that persecuting
crew, and deliver his people? And is not he the same to effect the same work at
this very day? Yea doubtless, and much more will he do it, in as much as the
manifestation of truth is more clear then it was in their days, and in as much
as the Rulers and people of this Nation have rejected a more clear Testimony,
then either the Papists in Queen Mary's days, or the Bishops and Prelates in
their days; even so much the more will the Lord God execute his vengeance with
more violence, in a more manifest way, and all shall know, that it is he that
does it, and he will set his people free; for he has regarded their suffering,
and he has said it is enough; for he has tried them, and found them faithful;
and all this has been suffered to prove them, and not to destroy them; and
like as he has preserved them in patience, and peace through it all, even so
will he give them hearts to walk answerably to their deliverance; and as they
have abounded in patience in their sufferings, so shall they abound in praises
everlasting in the day of their Freedom; and the earth shall be glad, and shall
yield the increase and blessing; the Heaven and the Earth shall rejoice, and
the heart of the Righteous shall leap for joy, when the Lord has broken the
yoke of the oppressed, and set his people free, inwardly and outwardly, and
then shall they sing unto the Lord over all their enemies who shall be
tormented and vexed in the Lords sore displeasure, for their reward comes, and
their recompense shall be even as their work, and he will give unto them sorrow
and anguish, in stead of rejoicing.

But again, when I considered the long suffering, and patience, and forbearance
of the Lords innocent people under all their sufferings; and when I looked at
their innocence, and at their Righteousness, and Spirit of Holiness with which
the Lord has blessed them, my heart was made glad in the consideration of
this; and the more was my joy, the more that I beheld their innocence, and the
guiltlesness of their cause, whereby the unjustness of their suffering did the
more appear; and withal when I looked and beheld their increase under all their
sufferings, and how that the Lord had turned all these things to their good,
and to the overthrow of all their enemies; how that, by that way, wherein their
enemies intended to destroy them from being a people; even thereby did the Lord
most wonderfully increase them to be a great people; for through all have they
grown in life and power, in strength and in number, and through it all have
they been encouraged to follow the Lord with more zeal and boldness; and in the
consideration of this I did rejoice, with magnifying the Lord for ever, that he
had brought forth his praise even through the wickedness of the wicked, and he
had increased his people, and exalted them through the cruelty of all their
enemies; and that through all opposition they were attained to a happy rest,
and through all the tempests of great trials, they were arrived into the
harbor of renown and great glory; and when I considered this, how that the
Lord had given them dominion, and brought their life to reign over all their
enemies, these things were a joy unto me; and looking back into ages, seeing
there was nothing, nor any people for generations, that had grown, and risen
through all opposition like unto these; wherefore it is a sign and a Testimony
that we are the Lords, and that these things are of him, and from him, and by
him alone, that he might be praised for ever.

Again, when I do consider, how that the Lord has raised this people, even out
of the dust; and them that were not a people, are become a people; and the Lord
has provoked Nations, by them that were not a people within these few years;
and the Lord has carried on this work amongst his people, not by any thing of
man, nor by the arm of flesh, but in pure innocence and simplicity has it been
accomplished; not by the wisdom of this World, nor by men in places of honor,
and of power in the Nations; for all that has been wanting to them; and what
they are, it is through the opposition of all this; for they have had none of
the great men of the Earth on their side to defend them and establish them, but
all has been against them; and even oppression and tyranny executed upon them,
rather then any approbation, or justification from men in outward authority; so
that truly it may be said, that there has been nothing of man in this work,
but all of the Lord by his own power; and in a contrary way to all the false
sects and false churches, has the beginning and carrying on of these things
been; for we know that all the false sects in this Nation has risen and been
established through the countenance of men in place and power; and upon man and
the wisdom of this World, and authority of the powers of the earth, has the
rise and fall of all false churches depended; and as the powers of the earth
has sided with them, so have they been set up, and at the displeasure of
authority, have been cast down. But as for this people, they are raised of the
Lord, and established by him, even contrary to all men; and they have given
their power only to God, and they cannot give their power to any mortal men to
stand or fall by any outward authority, and to that they cannot seek, but to
the Lord alone, who hears their cry, and will avenge their cause.

Wherefore let all the persecutors bow before the Lord, and let all the Saints
walk humbly in his sight; and let them continue in that innocent life in which
they have begun; and let them never forget the mercies of the Lord, and what he
has brought to pass, who has manifested great things, and will do more and
more to the confounding of all his enemies, and to the praise of his elect
people. And all ye Saints upon the earth, have ye the Lord in respect
continually, and turn you not unto Idols, but let the Lord be your joy for
evermore.

E. B.

FRIENDS,
WHO are called a Parliament of these Nations, We in love to our Brethren that
does lie in Prisons, and Houses of Correction, and Dungeons, and many has in
Fetters and Irons, and have been cruelly beat by the cruel Goalors, and many
have been persecuted to death, and have dyed in Prison, and many lies sick and
weak in Prison, and in straw: so we in love to our Brethren do offer up our
Bodies and selves to you, for to put us as Lambs into the same Dungeons, and
Houses of Correction, and their straw, and nasty holes and prisons, and do
stand ready a Sacrifice for to go into their places, in love to our Brethren,
that they may go forth, and that they may not dye in Prison, as many of the
Brethren is dead already; For we cannot but lay down our lives for our
Brethren, and to take their sufferings upon us that you would inflict upon
them; and if our Brethren suffer, we cannot but feel it; And Christ says, it
is he that suffers, and was not visited. This is our Love toward God and
Christ, and our Brethren, that we owe to them and our Enemies, who are Lovers
of all your Souls and your eternal good.

And if you will receive our Bodies, which we freely tender to you for our
Friends that are now in Prison, for speaking the Truth in several places, for
not paying Tithes, for meeting together in the fear of God, for not Swearing,
for wearing their Hats, for being accounted as Vagrants, for visiting Friends,
and for things of the like nature, according to a Paper entitled, A
Declaration to the Parliament, etc. delivered the sixth day of the second Month
called April, 1659. to the then Speaker of the said House. We whose Names are
hereunto subscribed (being a sufficient number to answer for the present
Sufferers) waiting in Westminster Hall for an Answer from you to us, to answer
our tenders, and to manifest our Love to our Friends, and to stop the wrath and
judgment from coming upon our Enemies.

Tho. Raulinson Tho. Curtis John Crook Thomas Davenport John Foster. Thomas
Reese Tho. Hackelton William Garrold John Scanfield Rich. Crane Will. Travers
John Chandler Richard Simpson Tho. Kent William Brown Edward Shaller William
Mullins Humphrey Bache John Barnard William Styles Simon Robinson Robert Moor
William Woodcock George Rawlins Alexander Allens Cuthbert Harle Ralph John's
Joseph Jones John Gayon John Tyso George Bewley James Beech Rich. Burd William
Archpool William Bett Edward Giles John Radley William Hownell Steven Crisp
Edmund Cross James Allen William Shown John Boulton Tho. Norris Daniel Baker
Edwin Harrison Richard Quick John Freeborn John Love Tho. Moor Ric. Bax John
Stedman William Persehowse Richard Glipsham Nich. Bond Benjamin Turly John
Pennyman Rowland Elrudge Thomas Coveney Alexander Parker John Anderdon John
Baddeley John Newton John Yardley Rice Jones Richard Greeneway Robert Hasle
John Hope Francis Collins Thomas Bradly Roger Game Henry Godman James Smither
Richard Jews Nathaniel Gerrard Edward Brook Arthur Stanbridge John Blackfan
Ninion Brockett Richard Newman Nicho. Rickman Henry Woolger William Gering John
Barber James Grynier Robert Sooley Peter Gosse Thomas Tax Rowley Titchborn
Henry Abbat John Carter John Fielder Stephen Wix Thomas Blatt Benjamin Matthew
James Fenner John Stavelin Robert Mildred Steven Hubbard Joseph Busthell Thomas
Burchett Christopher White John Lee John Beckett Thomas Braborne Robert Wade
Philip Williamson Richard Deane John Steevens Gobert Sikes George Lamboll
Robert Stedman Thomas Stedman Richard Hindmarch James Tenning Thomas Lawrance
John Schoren William Spary John Wolrich Robert Engram Edward Southwood John
Furly jun. Justinian Holyman Samuel Vause Henry Cook Henry Airs Richard Tydder
John Lawrance William Johnson Joseph Lancley William Dike George Robinson
Robert Newman John Starkey Edward Bland Thomas Dowen Thomas Shortland Amor
Stoddart John Price John Hollis Edw. Byllynge William Plumley Richard Cockbill
Richard Iopson Benjamin Peirson Jonah Smith Richard Davis John Hawks Mannaseth
Casketer John Disborow Edward Owers William Penington William Marnar Richard
Hacher Jacob Carr William Harrwood John Allington Thomas Passenger Thomas
Seaman William Hamshere James Smith Calib Woods Humphry Kierbe Maximilian
Cokarel.

If we had been of Esaus stock, we should have fainted before Now; And if we
had been of Cains stock, we should have built up his City, and should have had
fought with his Weapons; which was not, nor is the way of the Just, and the
Elect; of which we are, before the World began.
ERRORS.
Page 7. line 13. blot out and, the same page line 38. for seventeen, read
eleven, page 12. l. 36. for Edward, read Richard, the last line of the same
page, for Shrewsbury, read Bas-Church, page 27. l. 37. add Not.

THE END.

