A TRUE NARRATIVE OF The undue, and greatly injurious Proceedings of one Edward
Bullock, late Petitioner unto the Parliament of ENGLAND.

Against one William Standen, Esquire.

Humbly Presented unto The Parliament of ENGLAND, By WILLIAM BALL, Esquire.



LONDON, Prined in the Year, 1652.

A true Narrative of the undue, and greatly injurious Proceedings of one Edward
Bullock, late Petitioner unto the Parliament of England, against one William
Standen, Esquire.
ONe Edward Bullock in November, 1650. exhibited his Petition to the Parliament
of England, setting forth, that one Thomas Bullock his Uncle, had Morgaged the
Manors of Arberfeld, and Barkham in the County of Berks, unto one Edmund
Standen for 4000l. with Power of Redemption: And that by corrupt, and foul
Practices between the said Edmund Standen, and the Lord Keeper Egerton, the
said Morgage was Ratified, on the behalf of the said Edmond Standen, without
Paying any farther consideration for the said Manors: And Prayed that the
whole Proceedings touching the said unjust Decree, And the corrupt Pratices in
obtaining thereof, might be Referred to a Committee to Examine.

VVhereupon the Parliament by their Order, the 7. of November 1650. did refer
the said Petition unto the Honorable Committee for Indemnity, to Examine with
Power to send for Persons, Papers, and Records, and to consider the length of
Time, and how far forth the matter was fit for Relief, and to give their
Opinions therein, and report it unto the House.

At the Hearing of the said cause before the said Committee, on Thursday the 20
of Macch, 1650. the said Edward Bullock made no Proof at all either of any
Morgage, or corrupt Decree upon any Bill for Redemption, much less made he any
show of Proof or Corruption in obtaining the same Decree; The Council of the
said Edward then ingeniously confessing, that they had mistaken their case in
the said Petition, and did then insist upon a pretended Title at Law, by virtue
of a certain Conveyance, made by the said Thomas Bullock, before the Sale of
the said Lands, made unto the aforesaid Edmund Standen; And also pretending
that the said Lands were undersold; although the said Petitioner, and his
Council very well knew, as it was then by Council made appear, on the behalf
of Standen the Defendant, that the said Precedent conveyance, was adjudged
fraudulent, and within the Relief of the Statute of 29. Eliz. ( as being made
with Power of Revocation, and with full intent to defraud any Purchaser from
him the said Thomas Bullock; as by several Decrees exemplified under the Great
Seal it does, and may appear) and it was so Resolved by the Judges of England
upon solemn Debate, and remains so reported in Sir Edward Cook his third
Book, in Twines case ( Standen and Bullock) and great reason there was, for the
Judges gave Resolution on the case mentioned; for he, or they who make a Deed
of Conveyance for Lands with power of Revocation, do when they Bargain, and
sell such Lands Implicitly, though not Explicitly revoke such former Act and
Deed; in regard the virtue of a Precedent Revocable Act, is determinable by the
virtue of a subsequent Absolute Act. Now let any indifferent Rational man
judge whether the said Edward Bullock, were not most Impudent to set forth in
his Petition a Morgage, and corrupt Decree, and afterward to plead a Pretended
fraudulent Title, and that after threescore years, and upwards? But Bullock
suggested the matter of Morgage, and corrupt Decree in his Petition, craftily
knowing or believing, that otherways his Petition would not have been Read,
and Referred by the Parliament: however of what ill consequence it may prove,
that any should be permitted to venture so audaciously to abuse the Parliament
with matter of untruth, I submit it unto their Grave censures; as also whether
it be consonant to Religion, or Reason, that the Lord Keeper Egerton should be
scandalized with corrupt and foul practices, to the Dishonor of his Family,
and posterity; and that Owners, and Proprietors of Lands should be damnified,
or molested by false and clamorous Petitions.

At the Hearing aforesaid, Standen the Defendant made it appear before the
said Committee, that Thomas Bullock in the Petition mentioned had sold the said
Manors, and Lands outright unto Edmund Standen, Esquire. for 4000l. by Deed of
Bargain and Sale acknowledged, and Enrolled the 12. day of June, in the 31.
year of Q. Elizabeth, with Fines, and Recoveries, and release of Interest with
warranty; It was made appear at the Hearing, by Bill, and Answer, Exemplified
under the Great Seal of Queen Elizabeth, That Bullock did acknowledge Edmund
Standen to have been the best Chapman he could meet withal, upon valuaable
consideration for the said Lands.
Also that the said Thomas Bullock had a Deed of Defeasance of the Manors, and
Lands set forth in the Petition, for, and during the Term of his natural
life, yielding, and paying unto the aforesaid Edmund Standen, his Heirs or
Assigns, but 150l. yearly; also that the wife of the said Thomas had Right,
and did for Diverse years enjoy Right of Dower; moreover that four Leases at the
time of the sale of the aforesaid Manors, and Lands, were in being upon
undervalue. Bullock the Petitioner, at the said Hearing, by certain
Depositions taken in the Country, since the exhibiting of his Petition (most of
the Deponents being of his own Kindred, or name) made appear only Heresayes,
as that such an one had heard say, that the Manors and Lands were Morgaged by
Thomas Bullock aforesaid, unto the aforesaid Edmund Standen; that such, and
such had heard say, that the Lands were worth 800l. per ann. yearly Rent; that
they had heard say, that the woods were worth, says one 7. another 8. another
9000l. for not any two of them agree in any one thing of their Hearesayes, as
by the said Depositions it does and may appear. Now whether Depositions of
heare-sayes, ought to be Balanced with Deeds, and Records, I leave it to the
judgment of All truly Rational, and understanding men.

However; I have here inserted a true Copy taken out of the Book of the Clerk
of the Honorable Committee for Indemnity, by which may appear the
Resolutions, and Results of that Committee touching Bullocks Petition, etc.

Thursday the 20. of March, 1650.
Committee for Indemnity, Bullock against Standen.
Council, and Evidence heard on both sides, upon Debate.

Question put; That it does appear to this Committee, that there was a Morgage
of the Lands in Question.

Resolved, etc. in the Negative.

Question, that there has been any Evidence given touching the obtaining of a
corrupt Decree as is Complained of.

Resolved, etc. in the Negative.

Ordered, that the rest of the matter of fact upon the Evidence be drawn up,
and reported to the House.

Ordered, that it be referred to Mr. Richard Darley, Mr. Moyle, Mr. Luke
Robinson, and Col. Peter Temple, or any two of them, to examine the Case when
it is drawn up to be Reported, and present it to the Committee.

Vera Copia, etc.



After this Hearing, and the Resolutions and Orders of the aforesaid Committee;
the Petitioner Bullock, and his Accomplices did for a while acquiesse; But being
of turbulent spirits, he and they move the said Committee (consisting
notwithstanding of different Persons, as often it did) that the Report
depending might be examined, and presented to the Committee, etc. Albeit on
their parts, there was no matter of fact upon Evidence to be drawn up, but
only matter of Hearesayes by Depositions, the matter of fact upon the Evidence
of Deeds, and Records being only made appear by Standen the Defendant: yet the
Committee for Indemnity then sitting, thought fit (as it seems) to add some
other Gentlemen to the former, to Examine the Case, when it is drawn up to be
Reported, and Present it, etc. whereupon two of those Gentlemen issued forth a
Summons, in these words following; viz.

9. of April, 1652.
In pursuance of an Order of Reference from the Committee for Indemnity
bearing Date the second of April Instant, made in the cause between Edward
Bullock Petitioner, and William Standen Defendant; we do appoint to meet on
Wednesday next the 14. of April instant at two a Clock in the afternoon, in
the Rooms called the Queens Court at Westminster, to peruse and examine the
Report made by the said Committee; and hereof both Parties are to take notice,
and attend us themselves or some for them accordingly.

This was Signed, Jo: Carew. Francis Allein.


Two Gentlemen added, as aforesaid, sat according to the Summons; And after
some rather talking, then Arguments used by both Parties, viz. the Petitioner
and Defendant by their Council, the Report was by those Gentlemen (who were
present at that time called for to be read, and examined; The Report had been
drawn up only by the Clerk of the Honorable Committee for Indemnity, who
either by mistake or by compliance, inserted the Hearesayes taken in the
Depositions on Bullock the Petitioners behalse, (touching the valews of the
aforesaid Lands, and woods) as matter of fact upon Evidence; which thing was
different from the Order of the Committee, which says, that the rest of the
matter of fact upon the Evidence be drawn up, and Reported unto the House: The
Order says not; That the rest of the matter of Hearesayes upon the Evidence be
drawn up, and reported to the House, certainly there is great difference
between matter of Fact, and matter of Hearesayes: Moreover the aforesaid Clerk
had omitted diverse things, either of purpose, or neglect which ought to have
been inserted on the behalf of the Defendant; and said, when it was accordingly
urged by the Defendants Council, that he desired to compare the Report with
his Book; It is an hard and unheard of matter, that a Clerks Book should be in
Nature of a Record, or warranty for matter of Title, etc.
The Gentlemen of the Committee, or sub-Committee aforesaid, perceiving that
the matter would require some debate, and time, adjourned; And soon after the
Committee for Indemnity, was dissolved by Vote of Parliament.

This is a true Narrative of the late Petitioner Bullock his proceedings, who
in his Petition set Forth only a Morgage and Corrupt Decree; But at the Hearing
he insisted upon a Title, adjudged Fraudulent, and Null by all the Judges of
the Land, and in almost all the Courts of Judicature in Westminster (in which
William Bullock the Petitioners Father became most notoriously vexatious to Ed:
Standen the Purchaser, and to William Standen his Son, by forgery, subornation
of witnesses, Riots, and such like Pratices, which for their Infamy, and in
jury, can hardly be paralleled in many Ages, as by several Records, and
exemplifications under the Great Seals of Q. Eliz. and K. James, it does and
may appear) and lastly at the hearing, or Auditing of the Report, the
Petitioner did insist upon the valews of the Lands in the Petition mentioned
according to some Depositions of Hear-sayes of his own Kindred, and name,
lately taken; whereas the contrary (if Requisite) can be made appear; viz. That
the Manors, and Lands in that Petition mentioned are not worth above 600l. per
an. after above 60. years emprovement; and if the said Lands were well wooded,
then were they of the less yearly Profit; However they that shall consider
that Bullock had, and enjoyed a Defeasance of the Manors, and Lands for his
natural life, (who might by course of years have lived a long time) that his
wife had and enjoyed Right of Dower for a long continuance; that four Leases
were in being upon undervalew, as aforesaid, That the said Lands were situate,
and being in the Forest of Windsor, may indifferently conclude that 4000l. was
in the 31. Eliz. a valuable consideration. Admitting notwithstanding, that the
Lands were worth more; if all that have purchased Lands at an undervalue,
should by such devices, as these of Bullock, be molested and troubled; not any
freeborne Person of this Land can be secure of his Estate. For as much as the
Manors and Lands in the Petition mentioned are claimed, and held by, from, and
under me (the Author hereof) during the term of my natural life (being
Cozen, and heir of William Standen late of Arberfeld, Esquire. Deceased) as by
Deeds, and Records it does, and may appear; I have therefore Published this
Narrative, to undeceive all, and such whom this may any way concern.

May 31. 1652. WILLIAM BALL.


