TO THE HONORABLE THE Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, now assembled in
PARLIAMENT.

THE HUMBLE PROPOSITIONS OF WILLIAM BALL, alias BENNET, Gent.

Concerning the Forts of this Kingdom. With some other Considerations of State.

LONDON, Printed by Barnard Allop for Thomas Bailey, dwelling in the Middle-Row
in Holborne, near unto Staple-Inne. 1641.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL Mr. SPEAKER.
RIGHT WORSHIPFVL;
YOur own real worth has ever deserved those due Respects from me, which I
have (as obliged thereunto) formerly tendered unto you; Now the eminence of your
Place may command me humble service: which (according to my ability) I shall be
ever ready (as in duty bound) to render at your pleasure. In token whereof, I
have attempted to dedicate these Propositions, chiefly to your Worship, to whom
they may most fitly have Relation, as being a principal Member of the great,
and happy Representative Body of this most flourishing Kingdom, now assembled
in Parliament. For the general good, and safety whereof, I have expressed, and
set forth these, though mean, yet my well-meaning Endeavors, being over ready
to e^d^avour (...), as my much Honored ^upe^^ours shall ple^se (...) command,
and direct m^, and G^d (...). Whose divine Providence, and G^od^esse, I shall
ever implore, for the happy success of all public ^ff^ire^, and great
Designs important to this Nation, and remain always*

Your Worships Servant to command WILLIAM BALL, alias BENNET.

TO THE HONORABLE THE Knights. Citizens* and Burgesses, Now assembled in
PARLIAMENT.
The humble Propositions of William Ball, alias Bennet, Gent. Concerning the
Forts of this Kingdom, with some other Considerations of STATE.
1.
FOrasmuch, as all men as well Inferiors, as Superiors, are by the Laws,
both of God and Nature; as also by Constitutions, Civil, and Military
(grounded upon Reason, and Honor) bound to conserve, as much as in them lies,
their native Country; in which they receive the life of Men, and enjoy the
liberty of Freemen; the most especial benefits (speaking morally) of this
Lower world: every one therefore is, not to hide his Talent in the ground, but
liberally to proffer, for the general good of his Country, what store soever
he possesses, or enjoys, whether or no, it be the endowment of Nature, or
Fortune: so that persons in Authority, are to procure their Countries welfare
by their well-ordered, and discreet Commands, and Government, Soldiers by
their valor, and Discipline, the rich by their wealth, learned and experienced
men by their knowledge and observation, Inferiors by prompt obedience, all by
good will. To expose these assertions to approbation, I conceive no Author need
to be cited, the Dictamen of reason averring them to be so, wherefore I cannot
doubt, that much honored Superiors (to whose grave censure J submit these my
Propositions) will any way be offended, that I have Dedicated to them these
subsequent Considerations, proceeding if not from sufficient reason, yet from
entire good will; so that if J have inserted any one clause, that may give the
least distaste; I humbly entreat, that -- quis enim succenset amanti? Ovid
Epist. Her Helen. etc. may excuse it.

2
THE most Politic- and martial men have generally esteemed Forts, and strong
places, the safety not only of mean Provinces, but even of the greatest, and
most puissant Kingdoms and Empires, the defects, and neglects whereof have
many (too many) times been the occasions or rather causes of most irreparable
Disasters, in great and commanding Monarchies, and Estates. The Roman Empire
invaded by the Persians, Saracens, Goths and Vandalls, the Greek Empire wholly
subverted by the Turks; Spain overrunne by the Moors (with other Countries)
were heretofore most lamentable Presidents of thraldom occasioned chiefly
(according to humane principles of State) by noe having their frontiers and
ploces of importance strongly fortified: But to instance provinces, and s part
more near, and notified unto us in these modern times, who knows not but
that the small remnant of Hungaria, the States of Venice and Holland, the
Islands of Sicily, Sardinia, Candy and Malta, ^ even all Italy, are all
principally conserved (speaking of the isntrumental cause) from foreign
subjection and tyranny by fort and strong places.

MOreover the most flourishing Kingdoms and Monarchies, both Christian and
Mohammedan, disdain not, but rather wholly endeavor to have the bounds and
borders of their dominions, if not extraordinarily, yet sufficiently
strengthened with fortifications and Garrisons both in peace and war: so do the
Roman or German Emperor, and Great Turk (notwithstanding of late the ordinary
peace or Truce between them) keep the one the forts (or rather Towns) of
Kamorra, Rab etc. the other of Strigonium, Buda etc. exactly maintained with
all necessaries; thereby wiesly preventing the sudden events of war, if their
enemies (albeit they make show of peace) should upon any distaste, or occasion
of advantage given them, attempt an invasion: For such places of strength,
although they are not always swords (which sometimes they are) to cut off an
enemy, yet are they ever Bu^klers to defend a Country, until such time, as
either sufficient power can be aised to expel them; or that reasonable
conditions be obtained, if so be that the enemy be not inviucible in respect
of number.

4. Nor can J, but commend in this point of fortifying (to omit the Hollanders
of all our neighbor nations most careful) the French and Spanish, but
especially the French: who, although they need not greatly fear, or at
leastwise tremble at any foreign Invasion from their neighbors by Sea, which
could impose the yoke of sujection upon them; by reason of their great, and
united Landforces, they are able to make, to expel, and vanquish any such
powers, as could by shipping, Galleys, and the like, enter into their
continent, yet have they on the Levant, and great Ocean Seas, strong towns,
and Castles well furnished with good Garrisons, and necessary provision for
defense, against a puissant Invader: as to begin on the Levant in France,
Tolou, Marseilles, Narbon in Spain, Barcelona, Denia, Alicante, Cartagena de
Levanto, Malaga, Gibraltar, Cadiz, the Groine, St. Sebastians, Fonte-Rabia; and
again in France, Baion, Blois sur Garroun, Broige, Rochel quondam, Breast, St.
Malos, Mount St. Michael, Grandvill, Cherbourg, Havre-de Grace, Diepe, Cales,
etc, so that the consideration of these aforenamed places of importance,
strongly erected, and warily kept, and repaired by those, and other our
neighboring Nations; have diverse times moved me to ponder, whether their care
in maintaining such Fortifications, or our confidence in omitting them, and, as
it were, quitting the charge thereof, may be more commendable?

5. First, therefore (not to flatter our selves) J conceive, that it must be
granted, that none of our best Sea-townes, or Castles, of Barwick, Hull,
Yarmouth, Harwich, Sandon, Dover, Portsmouth, Plymouth, etc. are (as they now
are contrived, and strengthened) to be compared with most of those in France,
and Spain, aforesaid: For although the situation of some of ours, may be as
convenient as some of theirs; yet our manner of fortifying is not to be
equalized with theirs; confidering their strong walls and Parapets, Bulwarks,
Halfe-moones, Horne-workes, Ports, Moots, Ditches, Rampires, and in some places
Redouts, and Sconces; as in the Low Countries: and what J conceive to be more
worthy of consideration, and more to be looked into; many places of importance
in this Kingdom, are in a manner without any Fortification at all; or else so
weakly maintained, or ill composed, that in time of war (especially with the
French our overseeing neighbors) they lie greatly (according to the Nature, and
martial Discipline of these days) exposed to danger,

6. For to instance, Milford Haven is a place of that situation, and
convenience; that a great Navy, even the greatest (almost for burden, how
soever for number) may arrive there; and being arrived, land what numbers they
shall be able without any their eminent, or great danger, there being no place
of strength to molest or hinder them, nor a people of any considerable power
(although they want no courage) to resist them: and may not an Army out of
Spain, or France (now more to be thought of) not only there land, but also
there fortify themselves, wasting, and destroying the Countries of
Pembroke-shire, Carmarden-shire, Glamorgan-shire, and Cardigar shire, before
sufficient forces could be raised to resist them, and enforce them to desist?
May not great powers likewise, not only spoil us, as before said; but also
invade the heart of the Kingdom from thence, and that with much convenience to
themselves, and inconvenience to us, for having so large, and safe and Haven
(as is Milford-haven) for their fleet, if it should be by them well fortifyed,
and kept (as that no doubt but they would do) might they not march along the
Sea Coast through the plentiful Countries of Pembroke shire, Carmarden-shire,
and Clamorgan-shire aforesaid, and from thence into Monmouth shire, Hereford
shire, and so farther according to their Potencie? Which how dangerous it might
prove (God of his goodness defend it) not only to the ruin of those
Countries, but also disanimating of our people living in, or about them; to the
incensing of Domestical discontented factions (if any such should be) with
other like Casualties. I leave it to the Consideration of my Superiors.

7 Moreover, not Milford Haven only (lying upon large, and commodious Seas,
and being likewise so situated, as that it may annoy (if once in the hands of a
stranger) Ireland, as well as England, and greatly disunite them, or at
leastwise molest their union; not only that, I say, but also to omit the mouth
of the River of Carmarden, Swanzey, Cardiffe, Newport, and Chepstow, or rather
the mouth of the River of Wuy in Monmouth-shire, the mouth of Severn, Kingrode,
Mynhead, and some other places in the Severn-Sea; the I Will of Sheppey in Kent,
the mouth of Thames, and Tinmouth Castle have need (in respect of future
Casualties) to be better looked unto, and strengthened: as likewise the towns
of Poole, Waymouth, and Portland Island in Dorset shire, are (in my small
insight) to be far better fortifyed then they are. For first, Dorset shire is
the nearest Country unto France (Kent only excepted) of any part of England;
next, it is by nature least strong, as lying wholly upon the Sea, having no
difficult Cliffes, or Rocks to incumber an enemy in landing. Thirdly, it lies
in the midst of the Southern Coast, having Eastward Hamshire, Sussex, and
Kent; Westward Devonshire, and Cornwall: and Northward the body of the
Kingdom: so that if a potent enemy should stand there, he might direct his
forces Eastward, Westward, or Northward; according to his most advantage: as
for the Castles of Waymouth, and Portland Island, they are not for strength
considerable; and yet who knows not, but that that Island, and the land of the
County, make a large Bay sufficient to contain a great Navy, where likewise
they may ride at Anchor in reasonable safety, unless the South, or Southeast
winds be extraordinarily stirring; so that, if that Island (let it seem of what
importance it please) should be but taken, and well fortifyed by the French
(besides the charge and hazard of recovering it, or blocking it up) they might
shrewdly annoy us, having Normandy so near.

8 And for that I have intimated the French, it may be thought either hate, or
aversion (without fundamental reason) if I show not some prudent, or at
leastwise, probable cause of suspicion in that Nation against us; wherefore, I
have here briefly set down the particulars, which I conceive of the French
proceedings, and greatness. First, therefore it is well known that France is
the greatest, most plentiful, and populous Kingdom in Europe, being at the
least four times bigger then England, and having 5 times as many people. The
King thereof is now the most absolute Monarch Christian (except the great Duke
of Moscovie, or Emperor of the Abessines, whom we scarcely know) so that the
King of France, his Sic volumus, sic jubemus, is in a manner a Law amongst the
greatest part of his Subjects; and thereby he has of late so augmented his
Revenues, that those of France alone, exceed the Incoms of all the large
Donions of Spain, and Portugal; or at the least wise, they equalize them:
besides, France has extended it self of late, through Lorraine, and in
Artois, and Alsatia, Lording as it were over Savoy, and Piemont: the Marquisate
of Montferrat, and Duchy of Mantua in Italy, are likewise under the protection
of France: but that which of all things ought most to awake us, is the French
Conquest in Artois, aforesaid, so near unto us, and nearly concerning us, as
I take it: the Proverb is, Tunc tua res agitur, paries cum proximus ardet. And
is not our neighbors house on fire in the Provinces of Flanders, are not Arras,
Aires, and Hesden by the French taken in? for my part were St. Omers,
Graveling, and Dunkerk by them likewise subdued, I should account that house
burntdown to the ground; and were the French once but Masters of Flanders, I
would know whether (according to reason of State) they might not overmaster us,
if they should make war upon us, as it is likely they would. If it should be
said, and concluded, that in such Case we would, and should enter into a league
both Defensive, and Offensive with the Hollanders; and by that means be
enabled to oppose the French. To this I answer, that it is a question. First,
whether, or no, the Hollanders would in such case break their league
defensive, and offensive which they hold with the French, to join compact with
us: for it may be very likely, that they would not draw upon them, so near,
and powerful an enemy; besides, they have of late been aided by the F^ench,
since they have in a manner been quit by us: Moreover, France can live of it
self without Holland, but Holland can scarce live without France; as having
great store of Corn, wine, and salt, and Canvas from thence: besides, it is
very likely, that the Hollanders would be content to subsist, and to enrich
themselves by trade (as do the Venetians) and so to live at peace with their
neighbors: and to say that they would join with us merely for Religions sake;
it may seem so to a weak Opiniatist, but never to an understanding Statist;
who well knows that Religion is many times the pretended, but seldom the
real Cause of war, or leagues: and as for the Hollanders, J am of opinion,
that they will never enter into war, or league, merely for Religion.

9 But grant that we should enter into such a league with the Hollanders; J
conceive, notwithstanding that France (if it had but Flanders added to it)
would be superior to them and us by land, and no whit inferior by Sea; for to
say, that the French in respect of their numbers both of horse and foot, would
not in such case as aforesaid, be masters of the field, were merely to flatter
our selves, and they that are masters of the field, will in time be masters of
as many towns and forts as they can besiege, and encompasse or block up by
land, if such towns cannot otherwise be succored by Sea; and it may be even
of them also: so that the Hollanders having their towns and Forts taken from
them, would be inforsed to break their league with us, and make their peace
with the French: and if it should farther be said, that in such Case, we would
not only make a league with the Hollanders; but also with other Princes, and
States, who should assist us. J answer, that this bare saying, or supposition,
must not go for a maxim. For first, it must be considered that, all Nations
are most inclinable to them that can stand them in most stead; now great
Britain, for that it is an Island, can stand no Nation in any great stead, for
the invasion of France (at leastwise by land) and that chiefly, because our
shipping (if we should be masters of the Seas) could not transport over any
great powers, both of horse and foot (especially of horse) to make a
considerable Conquest in so large a Continent, as is France.

10 Nor is it consequence to say, that formerly we have made Conquests in
France, with a small power. For 1. it must be considered, that the Nature and
Discipline of war is greatly altered. Secondly, we then had a third part of
France, or rather more under our obedience, having not now one foot within the
maine Land. Thirdly, France had then many Homagers and Peers, that durst, were
able, and did oppose the King; so that, by that means it was disunited;
whereas now, there is none of any Potency that dare control the King, or his
commands; or if there be, yet can they not but quickly be reduced into
subjection, or else expelled as Fugitives, France being now wholly under
obedience. Fourthly, it must likewise be considered, that the Forts, Ports, and
Citadels of France were not then so strong, as now they are, being now all for
the Major part, re-edified according to modern Fortification. Fifthly, the
Revenues of the Crown of France, are far greater then ever they were, as
aforesaid, the Revenues of Normandy alone, equalizing now the revenues ancient,
of the whole crown, whereby the King of France is enabled to leavy, and
maintain greater Armies: to all this may be added our long ease (a great
Disease I fear) by which we are of late become unexpert, to attempt any
notable designs against so potent a Nation, as is France.

11 So that for the reasons alleged, we can not stand other Nations in any
great stead, for the Invasion of France; and therefore it is to be thought, that
the German Princes, as many as can stand us in any stead, would not decline
from France, which does and may avail them (especially if the House of Austria
fall to decay) to incline to us, who can avail them but little; and the
Portugals (if they continue in a Kingdom independent from Spain) will, in any
occasion of great importance, either wholly devote themselves to France (for
that it may assist them against the Castilians, as likewise for Corn, Canvas,
etc.) or else the Portugals will remain Newtrals: as for Spain (if they
should lose Flanders) they would find enough to do, to keep themselves in
safety on the other side of the Pyrenans; and besides, they will conceive, it
may be, that for as much as we never thoroughly assisted them in their Countries
of Flanders, etc. that therefore they were no way obliged afterward to engage
themselves for us; and besides (Flanders once lost) they were not able to do
us any great good; no more were Italy, Denmark, Poland, and Swedeland in
respect of their remoteness; and it is most probable also, that those Nations
would remain as Newters between the French and us.

So that if France should gain Flanders, and then fall out with us, it is to be
feared, that the war once turned upon us, would come wholly to our shares to
bear, and make an end of; and in such case, I hope all will agree that it were
very necessary, that all our Ports, and places of importance, were strongly
fortified, and securely guarded: and surely it can not be amiss to foresee,
and prevent inconveniences by times, and indeed I conceive it now even high
time to be looked unto; for albeit that the French have not as yet wholly
subdued Flanders, yet are they in a reasonable forwardness, and possibility of
gaining it but letting that pass to take the event of war; admit now the
French should make a peace or Truce with the Spanish, who (by reason of their
many, and great troubles) would it is very propable (before all were lost in
Flanders) be glad to embrace Peace or Truce; and forasmuch as the French are on
the winning hand, it is very likely therefore, that they would capitulate for
their own advantage: let it therefore be supposed, that it should be concluded
between the French and Spanish, in a present Truce; that neither should aid,
or assist the enemies of one another during the time of such peace or Truce;
which condition I believe the Spaniards would not refuse if it were urged;
because they would not have the Portugals, Catalonians, and such like aided
against themselves: if therefore such Truce (as aforesaid) were made between
those two Nations, suppose the French should even now turn their furies and
ambition upon us, were it not then most requisite, that all our Ports, and
places of Importance were securely guarded, and strongly fortifyed?

13 If it be said, that we would be Masters of the Sea, and by that means we
should be able to divert any of the French forces, and not suffer them to land.
J answer, that first it is a question whether we could master the French at
sea, as they may be provided, and I believe, if the Hollanders (being now in a
league Defensive, and offensive with them) would join with them, we should be
deceived, and it would be well for us to be equal with them; but admit we
should be equal, or somewhat Superior to the French at sea; what great
security could be built upon that: they may draw (if they find themselves too
weak) our ships of war into one place, by daring us, and making show of a
Conflict with their ships, and yet with lesser vessels land an Army, or forces
in another place, and there surprise some convenient Port, Town, or Castle, if
not sufficiently fortifyed, and strengthened to make resistance; and how many
times have weak places bin suddenly subdued, to the great prejudice of the
owners, experience has showed to the ruin of many; on the other side strong
places (if not betrayed or most negligently kept) have many times foiled an
enemy, and secured a whole Province; for no enemy (except of an investible
power) will return far into another Country, leaving a strong place behind
him, to which his enemies may assemble, and join themselves against him to
make head, and if not fight with him afterward, yet cut off his succors, and
Convoyes, by the help of such a place, thereby, by little and little weakening,
and disinabling him. If it be farther said, that we need not fear an Invasion
from France, or any other Nation; and consequently need not erect any strong
Forts, for that a puissant Army of above 20000. 30000. or 40000. at the most,
cannot be by shipping transported, or landed in this Island, and as for such
powers our trained, or Military bands (with other forces soon raised) would be
able to overthrow them. I answer to this, that it is not good to put such a
thing to hazard; for (to omit the danger of Combines, etc.) Although I grant
our trained, or Military bands to be a very good means (I even the best we now
have) to preserve us, and to suppress an enemy: yet forasmuch as they are used
to fight in jest, not in earnest, they might be foiled by lesser powers of old
soldiers: such as now are the French, thoroughly exercised in the wars of
Germany, Italy, Spain, and the Low Countries: so that I conceive and conclude
howsoever, that our Ports, and places of importance are (notwithstanding of our
Fleet, and trained Bands) to be strongly secured.

14 It may be some will say, that there is no great fear that the French will
at any time molest us, but let such give me leave to tell them, that I could
wish it so, as well as they, and that all the world would, if it might be, live
and continue in peace, and unity; nor do J for my part accuse, or say, that
the French will, or have an intent to make war upon us; yet I verily believe,
J know, that

1. The French, in general, envy our Kings Title to France. 2. That they bear
unto us, old, and late Grudges for our I Will of Rey's Voyage. 3. That they desire
to be the chief (if they can, the sole) Regents in Christendom; and therefore
seek wholly to disinvest the house of Austria, that none should be able to
oppose them. 4. That they have set at variance, the Princes of Germany, and
fomented the wars there, to the ruin, and in a manner Desolation thereof. 5.
That they have seized upon the Duke of Lorraines Country, and other places not
belonging to them. 6. That they have reduced Savoy into the Nature of
Vassallage, and thereby opened a way into Italy. 7. That they have animated the
Rebellions of Catalonia, and such like. 8. That their Cardinal (who is upon
the matter, their Dominus fac totum) is a most politic Prelate, etc.
Now thereefor, if in zeal to my Country, J do but suspect the worst (not
insisting upon it vehemently) I conceive, I may be by all indifferent men
excused. Notwithstanding, I request all (especially my Superiors) to pardon,
if I have inserted any thing amiss; hoping, that what I have written
concerning Fortifications, or the Fortifying Ports, and other places of
importance, will worthily be taken into consideration. For as it is truly said,
that the Earth is

Ponderibus librata suis; So may it be as truly said, that a Kingdom or
Commonwealth is (or ought to be) by Justice, and Warlike power equally
balanced.

1 IF it be objected, that the Fortifying, and maintaining of places of
Importance will be somewhat chargeable to the Kingdom. I answer, beeter some
charge, then no security, or safety.

2. If it be objected, that Forts, and strong places, have diverse times bin,
and may be yet the Nests of Rebels: I answer, that such Care, Policy, and
Vigilance, may be used in placing, and displacing Governors, and Officers, as
that we may be as well secured from such dangers, as are the Spanish, Dutch,
Venetian, and of late, the French, with other Nations.

3. If it be farther objected, that strong places (if once surprised by an
enemy) are with greater difficulty regained, whereas weaker places are soon
got again. I answer, that stronger places likewise, are better able to keep
out an enemy: so that they cannot but by more difficulty be Conquered, and
weaker (if they once come into the hands of an enemy) will be by them made
strong, if they intend farther to invade; so that the recovering of a weak
place soon lost, may cost as dear, as of a stronger.

FINIS.

