BALL HIS VINDICATION Against BULLOCK; Showing, A former NARRATIVE subscribed
William Ball, to be true: AND A late Printed Paper subscribed Edward Bullock,
to be Notoriously false and Scandalous.

HUMBLY PRESENTED TO The Parliament of ENGLAND, BY WILLIAM BALL, Esquire

Printed in the Year, 1652.

Ball his Vindication against Bullock; showing a former Narrative subscribed
William Ball, to be true: AND A late Printed Paper in Answer thereunto,
subscribed Edward Bullock, To be Notoriously false and Scandalous.
THe Author of a late Printed Paper entitled, A short, and true Vindication by
Edward Bullock, etc. Page 1. charge me with indirect practices in the matter
in Question; and then in a Marginall Note says,, I call them indirect, because
I conceive it not warrantable for any to publish the proceedings of a
Parliament-Committee, before they have done it, or without their Order: By
Bullocks favor, I know no Law, nor Order that prohibiteth the publishing of a
Committee of Parliament their proceedings without their Order; but rather
think it reasonable, that their proceedings be published to manifest their
Justice, Equity, and integrity to the world, or the contrary if otherwise;
besides the then Committee for Indemnity had done, as to the substance of
Bullocks Petition; they having voted that there was no Morgage, nor corrupt
Decree as was complained of; Moreover the said Committee was by Vote of
Parliament dissolved, when I published the proceedings mentioned; And in the
late Act for Transferring the Powers of the Committees for Indemnity, there is
not one clause or syllable inserted, which transferreth any farther Hearing or
Reporting of Bullocks Petition; albeit (as I have been credibly informed) it
was urged at what time the said Act was passed; And certainly Bullocks
Petition, being by special Order of Parliament Referred to the Committee for
Indemnity, Unless it had been expressly comprehended in the late Act for
Indemnity.
cannot but by special Order of the Parliament be pursued by any other Power,
or Persons.

In the second Page, Bullock says, that as to the abbreviation of the
Petition, it is indifferent just, and much of truth in it, but as to the Order
he has most grossly, and fallaciously mis-rejected it. Truly I abbreviated
the Order, even as the Petition, but neither grossly, nor fallaciously on
Bullocks part (as he impudently alleges) but rather on the Defendants part
if defective: I shall first instance mine own abreviation, and then discuss
that instanced by Bullock, on the which he so much insisteth.

My Abbreviation is thus,

Whereupon (in Relation unto the Petition) the Parliament by their Order the 7.
of November, 1650. did refer the said Petition unto the Honorable Committee
for Indemnity, to Examine, with power to send for Persons, Papers, and Records,
and to consider the length of time, and how far forth the matter was fit for
Relief, and to give their Opinions therein, and report it to the House.

Bullock has it thus Printed,

Die Jovis 7. November 1650. The Humble Petition of Edward Bullock Gentleman,
an Inhabitant of New- England was this day read.
Ordered by the Parliament, that this Petition be referred to the Committee of
Indemnity to Examine the truth of the motter, [certainly, whether Morgage or
no Morgage (as was complained of) corrupt or no corrupt Decree] to consider the
length of time, and how far this case is fit for Relief [whether (in case it
were a Morgage) fit for Redemption in regard of the length of time] (and to
report the true state of it.) The Defendant Standen desires the true state of
the case may be Reported according to Records, and Deeds, but not according to
Heare-sayes.
[That the House might not be deceived in the case] with their Opinions to the
House [for their clear understanding of the matter in Debate] with Power to
send for Persons, Papers, and Records.

Henry Scobel Cleric. Parl.

Thus have I according to Bullocks Printed Paper inserted the Parliaments Order
(not differing in substance from mine own abbreviation) and have Commented
thereupon (according to Law, Equity, and Reason, as I take it) that Bullock may
not by mistake construe the Order of the Parliament of Old England according to
his New England sense; for although Bullock has in the Prayer of his Petition
requested more, then he complains of in the Petition it self (as if the
Adjective were of more validity than the Substantive) yet we know that our
Parliament understands Logic so well, as to know Relatum, and Correlatum, that
an Order in Relation to a Petition should not, nor ought not to be wrested or
interpreted beyond it.

In the same Page Bullock says; But the Author, to put the better vizard upon
his cause ( which (as he says) he is unwilling should come before upright, and
impartial Judges) leaves out the most material Parts of the Order, which you
find in the Parenthesis, and in the latter end says, And to give their
opinion therein; as if he would by that expression insinnate a belief in the
Readers, that the Committee had a power of determining the cause: in the first
place I have put no vizard upon my cause which needs None, nor am I unwilling
that it should come before upright, and unpartiall Judges, although I should be
unwilling that it should come before any Partial, or pr^-affected Judges; for
the material parts of the Order (which he calls so) I have interpreted them
already; but Bullock ought to Reflect on the material Parts of his Petition,
(viz. a morgage, and corrupt Decree) to the which the Order has Relation, and
then he would find the whole Order to be alike material; whereas he says,
that I by the words [And to give their opinions therein] would insinuate a
belief in the Readers) that the Committee had a Power of determining the cause,
he is greatly mistaken, for I have said in my abbreviation, and to give their
Opinions therein, and report to the House.

In the 3. Page Bullock says, that the Depositions (considering the length of
time, etc.) are taken from the mouths of such witnesses, against whom there is
no just exception, and do prove the most part of my complaint fully; to which I
answer (as formerly in my Narrative) that the Depositions are but matters of
Hear-sayes, excepting those of one Allnut, who by his own affirmation could
not be above 6. or 7. years old at the time of the Bargain, and sale of the
Lands to Standen the Purchasor, and yet that fellow (having been an
under-Sergeant or waiter at one of the Counters London) has audaciously sworn
Positively to his knowledge, Yea and has gone so far as to swear a
Negative; also that man and most of the Deponents are, or call themselves
Bullock the Petitioners Kindred (most of them being also of his name) they are
for the most part very mean, and inconsiderable Persons, One (if not more) of
them a Cottager; also that the Depositions were unduely taken in the Country;
for first, the Committee were empowered only to send for Persons, Papers and
Records; not to send down Commissions into the Country, And those Gentlemen
must give me leave to tell them, that a Parliament-Committee ought not to
exceed a tittle of their Order, or Power given unto them,
for that were to exercise an Arbitrary Power, ad Placitum, which not any but
the Parliament it self assembled (not Parliament Men in a Committee) can do:
^^^r can the ^^^liament me^^^d Placitum ^^^rcise an Ar^^^^ary Power, (...) with
cause ^^^sonably ma^^^ested, etc. I have in my ^^ok De consti^^^^e Pop^l^
li^^^i instanced.
Moreover Fleet Bullock the Petitioners Brother having a Commission into the
Country, vapoured exceedingly in the presence of the Deponents, and others;
saying, and giving out, That they were sure of the Lands, and that then they
would be Courteous Neighbors, etc. that they had many Parliament Men their
Friends; by which means, and by their Invitations, and Feastings they allured
many of their Deponents, to whom also they gave 2. s. 6, d. or more for their
pains, as can be proved. But admitting the Depositions were as full as Bullock
alleges, ^ave instan^^^ all this for^^rly in my ^^rrative.
shall Depositions of Hear-sayes be balanced with an absolute Deed of bargain
and sale enrolled; with fines, and recoveries exemplified under the great
Seal; with a Release of Interest with warranty for Standen, and his Heirs for
ever? certainly that were against all Law and Reason.

In the same Page, Bullock to color his pretense of a morgage in his Petition
mentioned, says, that, in the Deed the Estate is claimed by, is not only
granted the Estate in particular, but likewise all the Estate whatsoever within
the Realm of England, which should, or ought of right to descend to my Uncle,
etc. But what of this? if his Uncle (whom he calls the pretended vendor) would
sell all his Estate in England, might not Standen purchase, and obtain as much
as he could for his money? is there any law, or custom to the contrary? sure I
am that all understanding Lawyers will affirm that such General Terms may
be sufficient in a Deed of Purchase; however my self and my Kinsman hold no
more Lands which were his Uncles, then what are mentioned in Bullocks Petition,
lying in the forest of Windsor, and Division thereof.

In the Page aforesaid; Bullock says; that it cannot be expected he should
make out Corruption in a Judge Dead (after so many years, and not being a
party to the cause) so fully as if done but yesterday; by his leave, or rather
audaciousnesse, the L. Keeper Egerton was never accounted a corrupt Judge, nor
any way blemished with corruption; certainly had it been so in Bullocks case,
some of the succeeding Keepers, upon complaint would have Redressed it: But
Bullock seems to lay an aspertion upon the L. Keeper Egerton, in that he
passed a Decree in behalf of Standen, which he prayed not for (as says
Bullock) for my part I have not perused the Decree; but admitting what Bullock
alleges to be true, the L. Keeper might well do it, for Thomas Bullock had
made a fraudulent conveyance Dated, 2. of January 28.
of Eliz. (at this day to be seen) by which he endeavored not only to
defraud any Purchasor, or Purchesors; but also the Queen her self, her Heirs,
and Successors, of Escheates in case of Treason; as by the said Deed it does,
and may appear; in regard of all which the L. Keeper might well Damme, and
Decree against such Deed or Deeds, allbeit not prayed for; yet did not L.
Keeper Egerton Decree it by himslfe, but by, and with the assistance of the
Judges of either Bench, as by the Decree it does appear; and yet (by Bullocks
acknowledgement, Page 4.) the L. Keeper left his Father to the Common Law to
try his Title; which shows no morgage: in the same Page Bullock says; That
the L. Keeper being Judge in the Star Chamber (a just sentenced Court for its
Corruption, and oppression) the said Standen preferred his Bill there against
my Father, and had those Deeds (I offered at the Hearing, which were allowed
then by the now Defendants Council) Damned, and cancelled, and adjudged
fraudulent by Reason of the Pretended Power of Revocation. To all which I
answer; That the L. Keeper was (I believe) Judge in the Starr-chamber, as
usually the L. Keepers were; That that Court might be justly sentenced for
Rigorous oppression rather then for corruption; However it was in those Days
The Court to punish Forgery, Perjury, subornation of witnesses, of all which
Bullocks Father was guilty as by Records Exemplified under the Great seals of
Queen Elizabeth, and King James it may appear, as in my Narrative I have set
forth; so that Bullock was Justly sentenced in that Court for his unjust, and
enormious Practices. He says there that his Fathers Deeds were Damned, and
cancelled, and adjudged fraudulent by Reason of the Pretended Power of
Revocation; To this impudent Assertion I answer, That the Deed by which Bullock
would claim, is at this day uncancelled, Dated 2. of Ian. 28. Eliz. (as
aforesaid) comprehending a foregoing Deed made to Edward Combs Dated the 22.
of December before; that the forementioned Deed is signed Thomas Bullock,
William Kingsmell, Edward Combs before named; That it has an absolute and
express clause of Revocation to all uses, intents, and purposes whatsoever. To
the only use of Thomas Bullock (the vendor) and to his Heirs for evermore; as
by the said Deed it does, and may appear; so that Thomas Bullock had thereby
full power to sell his Lands, as other men have, who hold Lands to themselves
and their Heirs for ever: Moreover Thomas Bullock did actually Revoke this
forementioned Deed, the 3. of June in the 31. of Eliz. before six sufficient
witnesses, One of them being a Master of Chancery; another one of the six
Clerks; a third Clerk of the Petty-Bagg; all of them Esquires, as can be made
appear. Bullock says, those Deeds were offered and allowed at the Hearing,
which is most false; for his Council only talked of some Copies of Records;
this Deed he could not have; But what have such Deeds to do with a Morgage? if
there were a Morgage, why persued he not that, but waved from it at the
Hearing, and would feign have insisted upon his pretended Title? if there were
a Title at Law, why did he not mention that in his Petition, that we might have
known where to find him? But Bullock has, and does sometimes Pretend a
Morgage (which notwithstanding his Father never Pretended, as by Records may be
made appear) sometimes a title at Law,
which I have here instanced, and which was adjudged fraudulent by the Judges
of the Land upon solemn Debate; whom this man most audaciously Taxes, saying
in the forementioned Page that if the L. Cook, and the Judges were now alive,
they would be ashamed of their opinions and Judgments.

In the aforesaid Page Bullock says, that there was no fraud in the Deeds
(which is as true, as that there was no Power of Revocation in the Deed
mentioned The first of the Deeds being enrolled, That I take to be the Deed to
Combs, which if it be it makes no matter, for Standen had a fine, and
Recovery from Combs as well as from Bullock, moreover that of Combs is
comprehended, and comprised in the Deed made with Power of Revocation already
mentioned, which last was fraudulent, in regard fraudulently made, and
fraudulently concealed: as for the Fines, and Recoveries they do not Declare
the uses, intents, or purposes of a Deed.

In the same Page he says, I know not of any such Lease, nor charges, neither
was it proved by any Deeds, witnesses, or other writings, but by a pretended
Bill of Standens, And an Answer of mine Uncles in Chancery exemplified, which I
am persuaded is most false, and surreptitiously obtained, etc. First, for the
Leases they are in the Deed of Bargain, and Sale mentioned, and exempted;
which Deed was produced, and yealded unto by Bullocks Council at the hearing;
for the matter of Dower, it was alleged by Standens Council, and the Deeds
are in Being; but were insisted to disprove a Morgage, the maine scope of the
Petition; and that we so far disproved, as that the Committee has Voted that
there was no Morgage, nor corrupt Decree, as by Bullock was complained of. But
is not Bullock impudent to intimate a Bill, and Answer Exemplified under the
Great Seal to be false and surreptitiously obtained?

I am even weary of Answering this man's Insolences, and impertinences; but
shall briefly insist upon a few; he says his Father was five years in the
Fleet, so ought he to be for false clamor, and vexatious Practices: Page 6. he
says, that as to the Votes of the late Committee (which I have in my Narrative
inserted) they are in substance truth,
then is the whole substance of his Petition voted against, for that Committee
has voted that there was no Morgage nor corrupt Decree, as aforesaid; The
Residue is impertinent, or improbable, or absolutely false; as first, that the
Gentlemen of the sub-Committee should be a greater part of the time out of
Town (being a whole years intervall) that the sub-Committee should seem
inclineable to proceed according to the Order of the House, to Report the true
state of the Case. Truly I conceive those Gentlemen of more Integrity, and
Judgment; for a sub-Committee has not to do with an Order of the House, not
directed unto them, but others; they have only to do with the Committees
Order: Secondly, That his Father laid a continual claim, indeed he laid a
continual clamor. Thirdly, he minceth out his Fathers crimes, which
Exemplifications under the Great Seals of Queen Elizabeth, and King James,
will make appear Notorious for Forgery, Perjury, subornation of witnesses, and
such like: Fourthly, That one Nicholas Mead should steal away his Uncles
writings, where (says he) it is to be vehemently suspected, were the
Defeasance to the pretended Deed of Sale; how Rediculous this is let any man
Judge; for a Defeasance must be to a Real Deed of Sale, not to a Pretended
One; but as touching a Deed of Defeasance, his Uncle has acknowledged in his
Answer, exemplified under the Great Seal, that he had one for the term of
his Natural life, as for other writings they belonged of Right to Edmond
Standen the Purchasor; and whereas he says, that Standen gave Mead a
Coppy-hold, or 100l. as it is proved upon Oath, not any such thing is proved
but by Heare-sayes, and therein it seems they do not agree, one affirming a
Coppy-hold, and another an Hundred pound. Fifthly, he says that it was confessed
by one of the Defendants Council, that the Land was worth 1000l. per annum,
this is Notoriously false, but admit Council should therein mistake, what is
that to the purpose? he says also that it is proved to be worth 6. or 700l.
per annum, at the time of the pretended Sale, besides woods to above double
4000l. this is not any way proved, but by Depositions of Heare-sayes of his
own Name, and Kindred; of which I have instanced enough before. Sixthly, he
calls the Purchasor (Standen) a pretended Purchasor; that Edmond Standen was
an absolute Real Purchasor, has been already proved before the Committee at
the hearing, who have voted that there was no Morgage, therefore consequently a
Purchase: Lastly, he says,
that God has been pleased utterly to extinct that Name, and Blood (speaking
of the Standens) This is notoriously false, for my self the Author hereof,
being Cousin, and Heir of William-Standen late of Aberfeld, Esquire. Dceased, was
Son of Ioachim Ball Gentleman, and of Elizabeth his wife, Daughter of Antony
Standen of E^sher in the County of Surrey Gentleman, who was next brother to
Edmond Standen the Purchasor, as by matter of Record it does, and may appear;
certainly therefore I am of the the Blood, although not of the name of the
Purchasor: my Kinsman, who injoyeth the Lands by Agreement, and contracts from
me, was Son of Thomas Standen Gentleman, who was Son of John Standen of Egham
in the County of Surrey aforesaid Gentleman, who was fifth Brother of Edmond
Standen the Purchasor, so that he is both of the Name, and Blood: And if
Bullock be a Son to the Brother of his Ancestor, we are both of us Grandsones
to the Brothers of Our Ancestor: But by this may be perceived the Malicious, as
well as Contentions spirits of Bullock and his Brother; whom I leave to Gods
Justice: to the Parliaments Judgment, and to all Judicious and honest men's
censures.

I had answered this Scandalous Printed Paper sooner, but albeit I heard
thereof, yet until the 21. of this instant August, I could never procure it.

August this 24. 1652. William Ball.


