Dr. Burnet's SERMON, BEFORE His Highness THE PRINCE OF ORANGE. At the
Cathedral of Exon, on Reading His DECLARATION.

LONDON: ^^^^^ted for W. (...) MDCLXXXLX.

THE Divine Authority OF KINGS ASSERTED.
2 SAMUEL 1.14. And David said unto him, How wast thou not afraid to stretch
forth thine hand to destroy the Lord's Anointed?


BEfore we enter upon the consideration of this place of Scripture, we must
come fairly to it by making our way through the Context, to which the Text does
relate; and thus it was. There had been now a War between Saul and the
Philistines; a War that was sounded on the Law of God, whereby the Children of
Israel were forbidden to make any Covenant with the Inhabitants of Canaan, or
to show them mercy, Deuteronomy. 7.2. This War ended in the Death of Saul; and the
overthrow of his People though he was made King by God's own appointment,
though he was God's own Vicegerent over God's own inheritance, and undertook a
quarrel pursuan to God's own Will, yet in the Conclusion both He and his Forces
(Good Jonathan himself not excepted) are routed upon Mount Gilboa by the
Uncircumcised Philistines: To show that Success in War is not an Argument of
the Righteousness of a Cause, or of the Righteousness of a Party, but of the
unsearchable Wisdom and Righteousness of God.

Saul being defeated was full of Horror and Desperation, and resolved to hasten
out of the World, since he had fled before the Philistines; and because his
Armourbearer could not be entreated (by reason of that Awful regard he bore to
Majesty) to befriend his undone Sovereign with a Mortal Blow, Saul gives
himself his Deaths-wound with his own hands.

An Amalekite happening to be there, took off his Royal Diadem and Bracelet,
and with great Speed carried them to Ziklag to David, who by Common Fame was
known to have been Anointed next Heir to the Crown of Israel.

David received the news of Readiness and Jonathan's Death, with excess of Sorrow:
But hearing that this Amalekite had had an hand in Readiness destruction, his
Heart was struck through with Amazement and Indignation. Though Saul had been
his Blood-thirsty Enemy, yet his Soul was on a Flame, at the sad Tidings of his
being Murdered, and though this young man was not one of Readiness Subjects, but a
Stranger; yet for the Sake of God, whose Impress the Unfortunate King bore, for
the Honor of Marsty, and out of respect to Readiness Divine Unction and Character,
he was resolved to revenge the Kings death, with every drop of this Amalekites
Blood; and this was the Preamble to his just Sentence, How wast thou not
afraid to stretch forth thine Hand to destroy the Lord's Anointed?

In which words we are to consider, by way of Explication:

1. First, the matter of Fact, which this Amalekite owned himself to have been
guilty of.

2. David's deep Resentment of the Relation which this Amalekite made of the
matter.

1. The matter of Fact was, that he had stretched out his hand to destroy the
King of Israel; this he acknowledged, and seemed to boast of, as a Meritorious
Office, which he had done for David, who was to be Readiness Successor in the
Throne. Now it has been a great doubt both among Jews and Christians, whether
this was a Reality, or only a Pretense. Many of the Hebrew Doctors affirm
(which is also the general sense of Christian Writers) that Saul killed
himself, and that the Amalekite was a Liar as to that particular. Nor does this
opinion want its Reasons. For in the last Chapter of the First Book of Samuel
(where the manner of Saul's Death is related) no mention is made of the
Amalekite, but the Text says, that Soul took a Sword and fell upon it, v. 4.
On the other side, Josephus, and some more tells us, that Saul had not the Only
hand in the case, but that the Amalekile was the Principal actor. Antiquit.
Judaic. lib. 6.
Nor does this opinion want its Reasons neither. For the Amalekites were as
much Enemies to Israel, as the Philistines were; and this Amalekite was on
Mount Gilboa when Saul fell; and he did not only post away to David as a
Messenger of the Fact, but persisted in the story as an Agent that had been
concerned in it; persisted to the end too, without owning his Folly, or
excusing his Lie (which probably he would have done) when he saw, that a
Sentence of Death against himself was the Only welcome and reward, that he was
to receive.

Now for the Solution of this doubt, there seem to be some grounds for a Third
opinion yet, which will make the whole story to Agree, viz. that Saul and this
Amalekite did (both of them) jointly Concur in the carrying of this sad
Tragedy on. For that Saul fell upon his Sword, and so gave himself his
Deaths-wound, is clear. That his Armor-bearer might look upon him as Dead
(though indeed he was not) may be Probable. That being incumbered with his Arms
and Coat of Mail, he did not dispatch himself Fully, is not incredible: And
then it is likely enough, both that Saul did beg a Bloody Kindness of the
Amalekite, for fear of falling alive into the hands of the Philistines, and
that this Amalekite did readily gratify him, in hopes of a Richer booty, than
the price of the Crown and the Bracelet came to.

But it is not much material, whether this Amalekite was Really Guilty, or had
a mind only to Father the action. We will now (as David did) take his own Word
for it, and Suppose him to have spoken Truth. For none can be better believed,
then he that confesses against Himself. Every man will be sure to make the
best of his own story; and though an Evidence may Swear away other men's Lives,
he will be tender of his own, and beware of being his own Accuser, though he
deposes to a Lie. We will not therefore contrast the Credit of his own
Testimony, but acquiesce in what he said. and look upon him as a Criminal; and
proceed to.

2. The second thing (which is most pertinent to our business) David's deep
Resentment of this Amalekites relation; it was a Dreadful story, a most
Horrible and Fearful thing in the account of this good man, How wast thou not
afraid to stretch forth thine hand to destroy the Lord's Anointed?

He had it not been a Sin of a most Horrid nature and a clamorous voice, he who
was so near the Throne, would at least have forgiven the man, that did so
readily help him to the actual possession of it, especially being an Heir that
had waited with so much Suffering, and been provoked by Saul with so many
Indignities. But King-Killing is a Crime that is Odious and Abominable in the
eyes even of those, that fare well by the Regicide. To which purpose the
Learned Crot^m has rightly observed out of one of the Roman Histories, Tacit.
Hist. lib. 1.
that when the Emperor Galba^ was Murdered, Vitellius, though (Humanly
speaking) he had reason enough to be glad of the Fact, having thereby got the
power into his hands, yet out of a due sense he had of the Horridness of the
villainy he commanded those Traitors, who had served his turn, to be slain all
of them, when they had the confidence to Address for a Reward.

An instanc not much unlike King David's dealing with this Amalekite, when he
brought Readiness Blood upon his own head; because he had stretched forth his hand
to destroy the Lord's Anointed.

Those words, the Lord's Ant^nted, denote the great, nay the Sole thing, which
we find here, and in other places to have made such a deep and continual
Impression upon David's Spirit: So that when he had cut off the skirt of Readiness
robe, his Heart Smote him: When he was tempted to Kill him in the Cave, he
abhorred the very thoughts of it; when Abishai would have destroyed him at one
blow as he was asleep, David with held him with a strong hand: When Abner was
so careless of his Masters safety, as to let him fall into David's power, David
reprehended him: And at last, when this Amalekite had smote him (him, who had
so long hunted after David's Soul) He presently smote the Amalekite; all this
was grounded upon this Great and Weighty consideration, that Saul was the
Lord's Anointed.

A King is said to be the Lord's Anointed in a Twofold respect.

1. In respect of that outward, Ceremonial Unction, whereby for Sate-sake he is
by the Priest separated from the People, or rather Declared, Notified, and
Acknowledged to be a Sacred person. Now this is not the great thing
considerable, because it is but a R^te and Form that is not absolutely
necessary: For many Princes at this day are not thus Anointed at all; I know
not whether this Unction was ever used to Pagan Kings, who yet were Gods
Ministers, and had Gods Authority, as well as others; it was a long time before
it came to be used even in the Christian World; anciently and originally it was
a rite peculiar to the Jews alone; and among them it was not used constantly
neither; but when the Succession was broken, or a dispute arose about a
Successors Title; commonly one of a Family was Anointed for all his Posterity
and Issue; and even then the man was not made King because he was Anointed, but
he was Anointed because he was King. Though there be neither Horn, nor Cruse of
Oil in the case, yet be (...) nearer the less, and that upon an Higher, and
more Noble (...).

2. In respect of that inward and essential Unction, which he receives at the
very first minute of his Kingship, and by which he is Sanctified and set apart
and above all others in that very Article of time, and which from that day
forward is inseparable from his Person. Now this Unction consists in that
Supreme Power which is given unto him, in that Sacred Authority which is vested
in him, in that inviolable Majesty which is inseparable from him, in that
Divine Image and Impress whereby he bears a different and singular Character,
and becomes Hallowed. And because he receives all this at the hands of God
alone, because he owes all this, neito Priest nor People, but to God alone;
because this Power, Authority, Majesty, Image, and Character is given him by
the Lord only, therefore, he is called, The Lord's Anointed, that is, a Person
made so Sacred by God by the Communication of his own Authority, that now he
cannot be treated with rudeness or violence, without Dishonoring God's own
Majesty, and striking at the Face of God himself.

To this purpose we are to observe, what God said of King Cyrus, an Heathen, an
Infidel, a Foreigner, no more related unto him than a Philistine, or an
Amalekite Prince, yet all this notwithstanding he calls him his Anointed, Is.
45. Thus says the Lord to his Anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have
holden (or strengthened with Power) v. 1. -- I have even called thee by thy
name; I have surnamed thee, though thou have not known me, v. 4.

This was Prophetically spoken, for at this time Cyrus was not so much as Born:
And when he came to be King of Persia, he was no more Anointed there, than Nero
was at Rome; and yet, as the Prophet calls the former God's Anointed, so the
Apostle calls the latter the Minister of God, the Ordained of God; and both
Isaiah and St. Paul spoke so upon these grounds, because all Lawful Princes are
endued with God's Power and Authority, whereof the Material and Ceremonial
Unction among the Jews, was a Signification and Argument only.

Now do but compare all this, with what is recorded of Saul, whom David speaks
of in my Text, and styles him, The Lord's Anointed. Not very long after he came
to the Crown, out of Timorousness and Infidelity, he-offered up Sacrifice
himself in Samuels absence, 1 Samuel 13. and therein he was an Usurper of the
Priestly Office. Afterward, he spared the King of Amalek, c. 15. and the best
of the spoil, contrary to what he was required to do, and therein he was a
Rebel against Gods Commands. After this, he sought the Life of David, c. 18.
(the best Subject that ever any Prince had) and would have struck him to the
wall with a Javelin, and all this for David's good Service, therein he was a
Tyrant: After this, he unjustly Kills at once 85. of the Lord's Priests, c. 22.
besides the Men and Women, Children, and Sucklings that were in Nob, and
therein he was a Murderer. After this, he forsakes the Lord for the Devil, and
consulteth a Witch at Ender, c. 28. and therein he was an Apostate. And after
all this, last of all, as if he could not perish by any impurer hands than his
own, he rusheth on the point of his Sword, c. 31. endeavors and attempts his
own final Destruction, and there he was a self-Hemicide.

Notwithstanding all these Sins, he was the Lord's Ancinted still; and David
owned, treated, reveer'd, and in the end vindicated him, as the Lord's
Anointed. He distinguished between the Sinner, and the Prince; He looked upon his
Personal Crimes with one eye, and upon his Holy Unction with another. And if
the Scripture may be allowed to bear us out in any conclusion, we have warrant
enough to infer hence, that the worst of Kings (supposing him to be a Lawful
King) has a Divine and Indelible Character, for the sake whereof, he ought to
be accounted and Honored as the Lord's Anointed, and consequently as a Sacred
and Dread Sovereign.

Nor will it avail us to consider, how or by what means he came to his
Sovereignty, whether by Inheritance, or otherwise. A Lawful Prince is the
Lord's Anointed ever, beholding to God alone for his Power and Authority.
Succession, or Election may be the Instrument to convey the Title, but the Deed
is Gods, and the Sovereign Power is a Donative and Estate which the King
holds in Fee of God, and of God alone, whether it be by Nature, that the Man
is brought forth; or whether it be by the Sword, that he cuts his way; or
whether it be by the Consent of Men, that he is pitched upon, still these are
but the means, the ways, and the methods of a Nation, whereby a Prince is
brought to the Throne: It Is God that gives him his Commission to Reign in it;
the Right of Governing, the Authority he has over his People, the Power of
Life and Death, the Crown and Scepter, the Regalities and Prerogatives of a
King (however he may diminish or give some of them away) they are owing only to
the Courtesy of Heaven.

In this case it is necessary for us to distinguish between the Power it self,
and the Choice, or Application of the Person to that Power. Now, the Power is
God's, by whom Kings Reign: But under God there may be diverse Subordinate,
Instrumental, and Ministerial hands to give a man a Right to that Power.
Anciently and first of all, Monarchical Sovereignty went by Lineal Descent, and
Proximity of Blood; and this was the Regal and best way. But in after Ages the
Wickedness of a few Nations altered this course, and Monarchies came to be
Elective. And though a Prince be chosen by the Suffrages of the People, yet
this is but a Qualification of him to use that Power, and to exercise that
Authority which is given by the King of Kings. Nay, though they Anoint and
Crown him, yet in all this they are the only Masters of the Ceremonies, to
declare their Obligations to Obey, and to Assist in the Princes Investitures;
still the Authority whereby he acts, the Substantial and Essential Unction,
is from above. They may put on his Robes, and gird him with the Sword, and
place him in his Imperial Chair, and cover his Head with a Royal Diadem; but
when he is in his Throne, it is by a Superior Authority that he strikes with his
Sword, and by a Divine Commission that he Commands, Governs, and Ministers
Justice unto the People which he is set over: And so Valentinian told his
Soldiers when they had chosen him Emperor, and asked him something which he did
not like; It was in your Power to choose me to rule over you (says he) but
since you have chosen me, what you desire depends not upon your pleasure, but
mine. Your business is as my Subjects, to obey me; and my business is, as your
Prince, to order what you are to do. Though Valentinian was taken from among
the Soldiery, yet his Power was not derived from the Camp, but it was from God,
as King Readiness was, when he was fetched from among the Stuff, 1 Samuel 10.

Things are best understood when they are Illustrated by familiar Instances.
Take then 1. an Instance in an Ecclesiastical matter: Judas the Traitor being
dead, the Eleven think of Substituting some other in his Room, and by lot they
Elected Matthias, Acts 1. But Matthias was not their Delegate, nor did he Act
by their Commission, or in their Name, or by their Power; but his Authority was
from Christ, as the rest of the Apostles was: They indeed pitched upon the Man,
but his Apostleship, his Ministerial Character, his power to Preach, to
Administer Sacraments, to Bind and Loose, this Power was from Heaven. 2. Take a
second Instance in an Oeconomical matter: Say a Servant chooses his Master, or
a Wife her Husband, each of these pitch upon the Man, but neither of them gives
him his Authority, but both consent to submit unto it; his power of Governing
his whole Household is from Nature. 3. Take a third Instance yet in a
Political matter: Say a Parish do choose their Constable, or a City their Mayor,
or a County their Sheriff; these indeed determine upon the Person, but they
give them not their Power, nor do they act in the Names of their Electors; but
their Authority to keep the Peace, to Distrain Goods, to Sieze and Execute
Malefactors, is from the King, and the Kings Officers they are. Why, much like
hereunto is that other Instance when a People choose their King (though it would
be better for the World, if no People did so, Haereditary Government being the
best:) After a great deal of Clamor, Disorder, Animosity, Strife, Confusion,
Distraction, and perhaps Bloodshed, at last Necessity brings them to agree upon
the Man: But the Kings Authority comes not from the dirty hands of a Rout, nor
does he act in the name of a Sovereign multitde, but his Power is from God: By
his Command Kings are constituted, by whose pleasure Men are born; God appoints
them, and fits them according to the condition of the Times, says Irenaeus,
Iren. lib. 5. adv. Haeres. cap. 24. And so Tertullian affirms, that the Emperor
is thence, whence the man was before he was Emperor: Tertul. Apol. c. 30. He
receivenh his Power from the same hand which gave him his Spirit. And elsewhere
says he, We (Christians) worship the Emperor so as it is lawful for us, and
expedient for himself, as a Man next unto God; as one that has received all
that he has from God; and as one that is inferior to God alone. Tertul. adv.
Scapul.

Now, if the case be thus, where a Monarchy is Elective (as the Roman Empire
was, whatever is suggested to the contrary) the Plea is much the stronger for
the Divine Authority of a Prince, where the Crown descends by Inheritance
(as, God be blessed it does with us, and for the good of the Kingdom, may it
descend still in that Natural and Peaceful course to the Worlds end) In this
case, the Consent of the People is neither Essential nor Accessory; as they are
not capable of conferring the Authority, so they are praecluded the liberty of
disputing about the Person (where there is an apparent or undoubted Heir) for
God and Nature have alread determined the Controversy. Men may Recognize his
Right, (and in point of Conscience are bound to do so) as the Men of Israel did
Recognize Readiness Right, after he had been Anointed; but where a Kingdom is
Hereditary, ones Right takes place upon the voidance of another Possession;
which is the ground of that Maxim in our Law (which is the sharpest Dagger in
the Republicans Heart) that the King cannot dye.

I have been the longer upon clearing the account of the Divine Authority of
Kings, because it was the only consideration which David had in his thoughts,
when he was moved to proceed so severely against this Amalekite, for offering
violence unto Saul. Quare non Timuisti? How came it about that thou wast not
afraid, that thy Heart did not sink, that thy Soul could suffer thee to stretch
forth thine hand to destroy the Lord's Anointed?

And hence we may fairly proceed to Two Conclusions.

1. That it is a Fearful thing, even to Resist the Lords Anointed. A Fearful
thing indeed (according to St. Paul's Divinity) if it be a Fearful thing to be
Damned. For Opposition tends to Destrustion; and there is no more difference
between Resisting and Killing, then there is between the means and the end, or
between putting a Sword to a Princes Throat, and direct Cutting it. If he be a
Murderer (by Interpretation) who hates his Brother, he must be a Regicide (in
the intent,) who draws out his Artillery against his Prince, and Rebbels are
beholding to our Charity alone, in this as well as other cases, if we do not
say, that never any subjects drew the sword against their King, but with a
Resolution (if there was no other Remedy) to sheath it in his Blood.

I do not intend (for the Time will not give me leave) to handle the case of a
a Defensive War against a Rightful Sovereign, (a case, that never was maintain-
but by Republican Atheists.) When our Savior commanded us, Not to resist evil,
Matthew. 5.39. we must suppose him to teach us to suffer Indignities with
patience, as well from the hands of a Superior, as from the hands of an Equal.
And when St. Paul affirms, that whosoever resists the Power, resists the
Ordinance of God, Romans 13.2. we must conclude, that a War against Lawful
Authority is a War against Heaven. And when St. Peter requiring us to Honor
the King, presently Subjoined, Servants be subject to your Masters with all
fear, not only to the Good and Gentle, but also to the Froward, 1 Pet. 2.18. we
must look upon him to have taught us the necessity of Passive Obedience in the
State, as well as at Home; for otherwise it would follow (what is unreasonable
to conceive) that Princes have not so much benefit by the Gospel, for the
securing of their Authority, as every Ordinary and Private Man has.

And in saying thus much, God is my Witness that I aim at no other end, but to
vindicate the Doctrine of the Cross, which diverse lately have endeavored to
expose to Contempt and Derision. But (to return to David's practice in
reference to Saul) because David's having of an Army, has been pleaded by
Rebels to justify Resistance, for the removing of this Objection, many things
are to be considered. 1. That David's case was particular; for he was already
Anointed unto the Kingdom, and was Haeres Viventis, not only Lawful Heir, but
as sure of the Crown as if Saul had been dead. 2. That the little Army which
David had, was not of his own Raising, but they resorted unto him of their own
accord; partly for Refuge-sake (for they were Indigent and Disconted Persons)
partly to show David their best respects; partly out of pity and compassion to
a wronged Prince, and the Hearts of Men are generally pitiful and compassionate
in such a case) and partly to endear themselves to David, and to make their
Fortunes by him when he should come to the Crown. 3. That when the Men were
come, David used them rather as a Friendly Retinue, than as a formidable Army,
to secure his own Life from the hands of Pick-thanks, who otherwise might be
ready to shed his Blood to curry favor with Saul, and without Readiness Order and
Commission. 4. That when David employed his Retinue to Military purposes and
after a Military manner, it was against those People who were Enemies to
Israel, and who by the Command of God were to be destroyed, and even then too
David acted under King Achish, as his chief Commissioner and General. 5. That
from the beginning to the end of the whole matter, though David had so many
Swords at his command, yet he never once Resisted his own Dread Sovereign, but
only fled from him, and fled with more security than he could have done
otherwise. Nay, tho David had to the fairest opportunities, of making Saul his
Prisoner, and of taking away his Life, one in the Cave at Engedi, 1 Samuel 24.
and another on the Hill of Hachilah, 1 Samuel 26 yet still he forbore all manner
of violence, at both times using this Heroic and Loyal Expression, The Lord
forbid that I should do this thing unto my Master the Lords Anointed, to
stretch forth mine hand against him, seeing he is the Anointed of the Lord.

Whence I proceed to the next Conclusion, that the Destruction of the Lord's
Anointed, the stretching forth the hand to Invade his Life or Dominions, is of
all other Acts of Violence, the most fearful and horrid Crime: The Lord forbid
that I should do this thing, says David: When the Kingly Prophet David had
privily cut off the skirt of Readiness Robe (though it was only with a design to
let him see that he had been in his Power) his Heart smote him, as if he had
made a breach upon God's Law, and had been guilty of a very unworthy and
Disloyal Act (for the Oil upon a Kings Head (like the Ointment upon the Head of
Aaron that descended upon his skirts) makes even his Vestments Sacred.) But
with what Agonies and Convulsions would his Soul have been Tortured, had the
King of Israel been mocked by such a Juncto of Jews, as Butchered the King of
England, and in the name of the Lord vied for Wickedness with all the Devils in
Hell?

The story of Readiness Death is a very sad relation, all the parts and
appurtenances thereof, together with Readiness own Guilt, and the sin of his
Armor-bearer, and this Amalekite being rightly considered. But yet there are
some passages in the story, which it may not be amiss for us to observe:

1. Concerning the Armor-bearer. Saul commanded him to draw his Sword, and to
thrust him through therewith, being desirous rather to dye by the hands of his
own Servant, than to be abused by the Uncircumcised Philistines. But
notwithstanding the Kings own Command, the Armor-bearer refused to hearken in
that particular; he was sore afraid, says the Text, 1 Samuel 31.4. Read on now
to the next v. and you will find, that this Armor-bearer feared not to Kill
himself, though he was sore afraid to Kill his Sovereign. By which instance it
is clear, not only that he valued his Prince's Life far above his own, but also
that he thought it much a more pardonable sin to be a self-Murderer, than to be
a Regicide, though tempted to be so by his Sovereigns Command. Doubtless, for a
Man to Kill himself is a very horrid sin, because it is his last Act, whereby
(in Humane probability) he hurrieth himself off the Earth into Hell. Yet this
Armourbearer chose rather to Dye with the Guilt of his own Blood upon his
hands, than to Live Guilty of the Blood of the Lord's Anointed; and before he
would be such a Traitor, ran a sad venture of being Damned for ever, by being
Felo de se.

2. And then as for the Amalekite, that did effectually help on the Destruction
of Saul, though he did it not of Malice, but upon Readiness entreaty; though he
did it when Saul was now half breathless, and when he was sure otherwise to be
Killed by the Philistines, though he did it to rid him of his present Fear and
Pains, and struck him more like a Friend, than an Enemy, doing no other than
what Saul himself had already done in part; yet this Regicide's Conscience
seems to have been troubled presently at an excessive rate: His breast was
filled with Remorse, and Anguish, and Bitterness of Spirit, so that he could
not but put on a mournful and penitential Habit; for he ran to David with his
Clothes rent, and with Earth upon his Head, Confessing by his Actions, that he
had committed an abominable Crime, when his Lying Tongue pretended that he had
done a meritorious Act.

Come thy ways now, my Honest Amalekite (Honest in Comparison) who tho thou
wast not afraid to stretch forth thine hand to destroy the King of Israel, ye
for ought we know, did never suffer thine Heart to swell against thine own
Sovereign; did never trample Faith and True Allegiance to thy Natural Prince;
under thy Feet; did never break Covenants, nor violate Oaths, nor any ways
further or abett the Bloodshedding of the King of Amalek; nor did ever
harden thy Heart to that desperate state of Impenitence, Deadness or
Reprobation, as to Justify and Vindicate the most horrid Act of Treason, with
hands stretched out and lifted up before the most High God, as do those Sons of
Belial, the Rebels of this day.

And yet behold, a Greater Prince than either the King of Amalek or Saul, was
here: Greater for his Lineage and Extraction; Greater for his Wisdom, Faith,
and Constancy to the Truth; Greater for all Virtues Divine, Moral, Political:
Greater every ways, and only too Great by being too Good, for a most Unthankful
and Improvident Nation.

To draw now toward a conclusion, The design of this Discourse is not so much
to expose the Traitors, as to Represent the Sinfulness of the Treason, to the
end we and our Posterity may see what reason all of us have to be truly Humbled
under the Sense of it. For Rebellion is a Crying sin, that fills Heaven with
its Noise and Clamor: And one reason of it is, because it is not only an
Injury against the Man, but moreover a Contumely, offered to the Majesty of
God, whose Image the Man bears; and therefore Philo the Jew calls it (...),
Philo de Spec. Leg Sacrilege, and the Greatest of all sorts of Sacrilege:
Nay, it is of such a staining nature, that it polluteth a whole Land; as God
himself said, Blood it defiles the Land, Number. 35.33. And an Instance hereof we
have upon Readiness killing the Gibeonites: He slew them indeed in his Zeal to the
Children of Israel and Judah: but tho 'twas his Fact and Cruelty, yet a Three
years Famine came upon the Land for it, 2 Samuel 21.1.

And if all Innocent Blood especially that of Rebellion staineth a Nation so,
how much more the shedding of Blood Royal, the Blood of Kings, who in respect
of their High Office and Supreme Authority Represent God above all others, and
bear his Image and Impress after a Peculiar and Eminent manner.

I must confess, that I cannot but still own my Fears, that our Land is not yet
thoroughly cleansed from the Blood of that Innocent, Virtuous, Religious,
Matchless Prince, who was barbarously murdered among us. For though we may
believe, that the merciful God will not require that Sacred Blood of us, so as
to make us smoke under that Wrath which is the vengeance of another life, ( Us
especially, who cannot read, nor so much as Think of that Dismal Tragedy
without the deepest Sorrow Hatred, and Abomination) yet we have too great
Reason to suspect that the Sin is not forgotten in Heaven, that there is no
such Act of Oblivien There, but that as we have Smarted for that Sin already,
so we may Smart still under those Plagues and Judgments which are the
Discipline of this life. We are to distinguish between a Sin and its
Punishment. The Sin may be forgiven, and upon true Repentance is certainly
forgiven, so that it shall not Rise up in Judgment against the Sinner at the
last day: But seldom does the Cry of a Vocal Sin cease, before God lets lose
some Temporal Judgments upon it; either for the warning and Admonition of other
Men, or for the Correction and Reformation of the Sinners themselves or for the
exercising of their Patience, or for the like H^ly and Gracious purposes. The
thing is clear from that Instance concerning David, whom God visited with the
Death of his Child, and with sharp and poynant Evils for the Wickedness acted
upon Bathsheba and her Husband, though the Sin it self was forgiven him. The
Lord has put away thy Sin, thou shall not d^e, said Nathan; H^wbeit, because
by this Deed thou have given great Occasion to the Enemies of the Lord to
Blaspheme, the Child that is born unto thee shall surely die, 2 Samuel ^2.

Nor is it a just Ground for our Confidence and Security to consider, that that
Sin was acted by a Few in comparison) and that several Years ago too.

For, the Sin of One Man (and much rather of an Army) may be so Odious and
Abominable in God's Account, that by Occasion thereof he may visit the
Iniquities of a whole Nation, let us go to Achan for an Instance: Upon the
Destruction of Jericho, Achan found a Babylon^sh Garment, a wedg of Gold, and
two Hundred Sheckles of Silver; and because he took of the Accursed thing, the
Anger of the Lord was kindled against the whole Bo^y of the Children of Israel,
so that at the very next Battle, they were all routed by their Enemies, Josh. 7.

2. Again, God is not wont to punish a Nation to the Full, as soon as the Sin
is committed, but usually leaves a great part of the Burden, many Talents of
Judgment to fall down in aftertimes, to put Men still in mind of that Guilt,
which otherwise they would bury in perpetual Oblivion. Let us go for an
Instance hereof to the Jews in the days of Moses. At Shittim they join
themselves to Baal-Peor, and a Plague ensues thereupon. But, though for
Phinehas his zeal, the Plague was soon stayed, and the Wrath of God was turned
away from Israel for that time, yet afterward in the days of Joshua, when the
Israelites had been Possessed of the Holy Land, Phineas himself remembered the
Iniquity of Peor, and told the People that they were not cleansed from that
Iniquity unto that day, Josh. 22.17.

Now (to draw down this Consideration to our selves) if God be wont by way of
Discipline to chastise Evil Men, even after they have taken away the Guilt of
their Wickedness; if by occasion of One crying Sin, committed by a Few, or
perhaps by One only, he does sometimes bring Calamities upon a whole Nation;
and if this be often done some considerable time, some years after the Sin was
acted: Then truly, we of all People living have most reason to call to mind the
Calamities we have groaned under, and to Interpret Providence the Right way,
and not only to mistrust that God has visited us, hitherto, but moreover to
fear that he will visit us still (especially, if we repent not from the bottom
of our Hearts) for that loud and clamorous Rebellion which brought the
Destruction of the Lords Anointed (and a Man according to Gods own Heart too)
though he was destroyed and murdered, not by our own Hands, but by the Hands of
Amalekites, and that so long since.

Now, what if we should conceive, that when this City was turned into a Flaming
pile, the righteous God came to purge it from the Blood of his Anointed? When
the Jews of old were in any sharp afflictions, the business of the Golden Calf
usually came fresh into their minds, and on every turn they mistrusted, that
God afflicted them from the Iniquity of their Fathers in making a Golden Calf.
The story of it you have at large in Exodus 32. the People would have some
Representation to go before them instead of Moses their proper Captain and
Leader; they prevailed with Aaron to consent and concur with them, and they
contributed their Riches, their Gold and their Earrings to carry on the Work
of the day; and at last out came a Calf, a little Similitude of the Great Idol,
which was Worshipped in the House of Bondage, whence they had now been
delivered, so that, though they had escaped out of Egypt, yet they espoused the
Egyptian Religion.

And why should we not think now, that when God visited us with his Judgments,
he did not remember Peoples Ingratitude to him and his Anointed? Or why should
we not fear that he will remember us again and that with more Sore and more
Dreadful Judgments, if People persist in their Ingratitude still? For this is a
Sin of no ordinary rate, but one of the First Magnitude; the King's Authority
being a Donative of Heaven, and a Ray of God's Majesty, and his Power to Govern
and Punish, being given by God's own Warrantry, the Sin of Rebellion must
necessarily be of a Damning Nature, and of a Clamorous Tongue, however some
(whose Consciences are Armor proof against all Arguments from Scripture and
Antiquity) have begun again to speak of the Lawfulnes; of Resistance, as if
their hands were already laid upon the Hilts of their Swords.

Take heed therefore ( you especially of this Great City) that ye join not in
the Confederacies of Korah, least ye utterly Perish in his gain saying. Is the
Iniquity of Peor, and the Sin of the Golden Calf to little for us? Are not the
Judgments, which we have groaned under, heavy enough yet, but do we solicit
God to add more Talents to the weight still? Assure your selves, that if People
Repeat their Rebellious Sins, God will not fail to Repeat and Double his Blows;
and he has more Judgments in Treasure besides the Plague and the Fire; and the
Posterity that comes after us will (as we our selves have done) see the
^ollies, and smart greatly for the Impieties of their Fathers; for as Ezra said
upon the Return out of Captivity, After all that is come upon us for our Evil
deeds, and for our Great trespass, seeing that God has punished us less than
our iniquities deserve, and has given us a Deliverance (a miraculous
deliverance out of our Thraldom) should we again break his Commandments, and
join with the People in these Rebellions, would not God be Angry with us till
he had Consumed us, so that there should be no Remnant, nor Escaping?

For the preventing of the worst of Evils it is our great Concernment, and
ought to be our great Care, and 'twill be found to be our best Interest, when
all is done, to lay aside all Unnatural Animosities and Heart-burnings, which
Evil Men have so long made use of, In order to distract this Kingdom; and to be
filled with the true and primitive Spirit of Christianity; to be Meek, and
Gentle, and of Humble Minds; to ^ct according to that Wisdom, which is Pure and
Peaceable; to Study to be Quiet; to endeavor by all possible means to keep the
Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace; to be Tractable and Honest in Heart;
to be subject to the Higher Powers, and that not for fear of the Laws only, but
readily and ingenuously, and for Conscience Sake, to Fear God, to Honor the
King, and to Love the Brotherhood; to be in perfect Charity and Unity among
our selves, as becomes Brethren; and so, in all manner of well-doing to commit
our selves to God; to whom be Glory, Dominion and Praise. Amen.

This Discourse ought to have been insisted on by the Doctor, rather than that
seditious Sermon that he preached at Exon.



FINIS.
With Allowance.


