A CAVEAT FOR SVBJECTS, Moderating the Observator. WHEREIN His chiefest
Arguments are confuted, the Kings just Prerogative manitained: and the
Privilege of the Subject no ways Prejudiced:

By William Ball, Gent.

Printed at London 1642.

A Caveat for Subjects.
IT is usual (I know) for Books to have Prefaces, and Plays Prologues; but
whosoever peruseth this, must expect nothing but concise reasons; forasmuch as
Vnusquisque suo sensu abundat, so let him reflect and censure of this at his
pleasure.

The Observator, page 1. says, That power is originally inherent in the
people, etc.

To this the answer is, that power is in God primario and per se, according to
that of the Apostle; Romans 13. and in the King or people, but only secundario
and derivative; Power or dominion is not a gift of Nature, that is to say,
naturally inherent in us: for if it were, then might all men have equal power,
for that by nature we are all equal; but power is a gift of God to Nature, and
is gratia gratis data; and yet power is congruous in nature, as was the power
of King, and office of Priesthood in Melchisedec: for surely he had them both
given, or appointed to him by God, being by interpretation King of Righteousness
and King of Peace, Heb. 2.7. And therefore it is not likely that he usurped to
himself the Regal title of King, no more then he did of being Priest; and yet
it is very probable, that it was also agreeable in Reason and Nature, that
although not tyrannical, yet peaceable Kingly reign, and sacred Priesthood
did fitly belong to him: for he is by most Divines thought to have been Sem the
eldest son of Noah: and by the law of Nature, of Moses, and of most Nations,
the eldest is to inherit, so that what was the right of Adam, Seth, and Noah,
Seth and his generation began first to call upon the name of the Lord, that is
to say, to give to God some set form of worship as priests did, etc.
might belong unto him by birthright, although it may be God confirmed it unto
him extraordinarily. But to return, power or dominion is derived from God, and
congruous in Nature: but the power is in the people only when they are
absolutely free to choose to themselves what form of government they please, as
were the Jews before they subjected themselves to Kings, being formerly freed
from the bondage of Egypt by the singer of God. The Romans when they erected
their Senate and Consuls, having rebelliously (for it was no better) shaken off
the yoke of Kings. The Venetians, when they first instituted their
Commonwealth. But in Monarchies, where the people have been brought into
subjection either by the sword, as in Turkey, Persia, and the like; or by
innate, and prescribing, and prevalent authority, as in Florence, or by both,
as in France and Castile; in these Dominions power is not inherent in the
people, but in the Prince. And although some hereditary Monarkes are more
limited then others, as is the King of France more then the great Turk, and the
King of England more then the King of France: yet is their power derived
immediately from God, and inherent in themselves, not in the people: for those
limitations are (in conquered Nations) but mere donatives of grace proceeding
from the Prince or his successors to the people, touching certain immunities
and privileges; so that the Prince his power is the efficient cause of them,
and such immunities or privileges are but as material effects. Now as it is
most improper to say, that the effect should cause its own cause, so is it to
say, that a privileged people should cause the Princes power, or that Power
should remain originally in such a privileged people.

Some Nations elect their Rings, or Princes, and restrain them far more by
conditional inaugurations, then hereditary Monarkes are, or ought to be
restrained or limited. Yet have not such Nations power in themselves totally,
but only partially; that is, they have power to conditionare with their Kings
or Princes, how far forth they will be subject, and by what Rules they will
be governed; but they have not power to conditionate with their Kings or
Princes, that they will only be subject at their own pleasures, and as
themselves shall think good; that is to say, if they please at any time, to
assume more liberty unto themselves, and to alter and disanull former
Constitutions of Government, they may do it without the consent of their
Kings, or Princes. This they cannot do without treason to their Crowns or
Diadems: For although the persons of such Princes be elective, yet is their
power permanent, jure constituto Coronae; which though they claim not as from
progenitor, yet are they invested therewith as from predecessors. And therefore
being enthroned, they enjoy their dignities by prescription; that is to say,
what belonged to their predecessors, belongs in the same manner to them,
being once invested; nor can such Nations revolt from their elected princes,
without being reputed rebels.

Now of this nature are the Kings of Poland, Hungary, and some other (to speak
nothing of the Duke of Venice, for he is merely titulary, and a cipher) and
such Kings first and principally claim their authority from God, the author
of all power, who enspheareth them in the Orb of dignity above others.

And secondly, they acknowledge it from the general consent of the Nation
which made choice of them, and over which they rule. And surely such was the
right and title of Saul the first King of Israel: for he was appointed by God,
1 Samuel Chap. 9. verse. 17. then anointed by Samuel, chap. 10. verse. 1.
afterward approved by the people, ibid. verse. 24. And finally, confirmed in
his Kingdom, Chap. 11. verse. 14. And in the same manner was David likewise
established in his Kingdom; so that their first and chiefest claim was
immediately from God, and their second from the consent of the people. Nor is
it of any consequence to allege, as the Observator seems to infer, page 1.
that those Kings had an extraordinary institution from God; and therefore they
might more lawfully claim their right, as appointed, and appropriated to them
by God. For to such Allegation it will be answered, That there is no power but
of God, Romans 13. So that whether God institute Kings by extraordinary, or
ordinary means, it makes no matter. For although Saul and David were
instituted extraordinarily by Gods special appointment; yet most of the Kings
of Judah and Israel reigned after them but by ordinary succession; had they not
therefore the same power that Saul and David had? Surely the Scriptures tell us
they had. The Priests and Prophets in the old Law had an extraordinary
vocation, especialy the Prophets: the Priests or Ministers of the Gospel have
but an ordinary vocation, are they therefore defective in power to those of the
old Law? Or have they not their vocation from God, because they have not
extraordinary calling? Surly no. For how could Sacraments be administered, and
the word preached? So it is with Monarkes: for though they have but ordinary
succession; yet is their power immediately from God. Our Sovereign is a free
(though in some things a limited) Monarch, and deriveth therefore his power
immediately (not mediatly as do other inferior ministers of justice) from God.
And as touching limitations and privileges, they are nothing else as
(aforesaid) but acts of grace conferred on this Nation by his Majesty's
predecessors in several ages, and at several times, and some of them lately
by his Majesty himself, as the continuation of this present Parliament, the
abolishing of the Star Chamber and high Commission censures, and the like. But
these privileges, and others granted to the subjects, dis-invest the King of
no primary or Birth-right-royalty, but only oblige him in honor to observe
them as covenants. A Lord purchases a Manor for himself and his Heirs for
ever; his son and successors grant certain Franchises to the tenants, and
oblige their heirs for ever to perform them: so the tenants live in a more
free state and condition then they did in the first purchasers days, and
paying their rents, and performing their services, they are not altogeher
subject to be turned out at the pleasure (or rather displeasure) of the Lord:
but does this Franchisement or freedom of theirs, cause the Lord to derive his
right or title from his tenants? Law and experience tell us no. And this is our
Sovereigns case; The conqueror by his sword, or by deed of gift, or rather
indeed by both, came in as a Purchaser of the Kingdom of England for himself
and his heirs for ever, and by the law of Conquest had power to have made
greater alteration in the State then he did; and to have induced what form of
government he had thought good, even as the King of Spain has done in Navarre
and the West Indies; yet he did not, but only imposed some hard things, as the
having of Laws in the French tongue, which the people generally understood
not, Cover-few-bell, and the like, his successors ofterwards did immune and
ease the people from such grievances, so that they lived, and live at more
liberty, and enjoy more securely their liberties and properties: But do
therefore such immunities granted to the people, cause the King to derive his
power and right from the people? The laws and customs of all Nations and
Kingdoms that live under Monarkes, tell us no. The ancient and present
Monarchies of the world being sufficient witnesses thereof, besides the Dictamen
of Scripture and reason already inserted.

The Observator page 2. says, that it is an error in some Princes, to strive
more to be great over their people, then in their people. It may be some
Princes have committed such an error; but withal let the observator take
notice, that it is convenient for a free Prince to be both, that is to say, to
have them wealthy, and yet obedient subjects: for if he be only great in his
people, and not over them, he may resemble the now Roman or German Emperor,
or the ancient Kings of France, the one whereof is daily in danger to be
dis-invested by commotion and combinations of his Princes; the other were
heretofore almost continually molested by factions of their Peers and people;
and surely, the French themselves have greatly occasioned the heavy burden of
diverse tributes and impositions which they undergo: for they ever and anon
rising in Arms against their King, gave him occasion to slave them the more,
by his reconquering of them, or reducing them into his obedience, so that had
they subsisted in due allegiance, it is likely their King had been as equally
great over as in them; which equality or parity in government, is (no doubt)
the most happy and blessed co union that any Prince and people can enjoy.

The Observator tells us in the same page, that the King though he be
singulis major, yet he is universis minor. But why so? The Head Natural is not
only singulis, but also universis membris major Dignitate (though it may it is
not so in universis, as shall be by and by declared) For the Head has in it
self all Senses, other Members receive from it, but Feeling only, and Motion;
the Head governs and directs the whole Body, and is therefore in dignity
more Noble then all the Members of the Body considered together: and yet though
it be more noble and excellent then them all (for as much as Motion and Feeling
dimane from the Brain which is in the Head to them all) notwithstanding in
universis, in all things, or Faculties, the Head is not more excellent then all
the Members; for the Heart is the Seat of Life (according to most Philosophers
(being primum vivens, and ultimum moriens, and from it proceeds natural
heat; the Stomach likewise administreth sustenance, and aliment; the Feet go,
and the Hands work, and without them the Head cannot subsist, yet are they all
subordinate to the Head: and even so is it, or ought it to be in the Body
Politic, unless we must believe the Observator, who in his 19. Page says,
That the Head Political receives more subsistence from the Body then it gives,
etc. But by his leave, if Privileges and Immunities are (as they are) matters
of Grace, proceeding from free Monarchs (for of such the Treatise is) to the
People, do not such Heads give as much subsistence to the Body Politic, as
they receive from it? The Observator tells us, Page 6. That Edward the First
was the first (whether he were, or no, it is not material) that repaired the
Breaches which the Conquest had made upon this Nation: if so, did not he, by
such his reparation, give as much subsistence to the Common wealth, as he
received from the Commonwealth, or Body Politic? And do not his Successors
give likewise as much as they receive, when they confer the like acts of
Grace? Surely, he that considers rightly Magna Charta, and all other
Privileges and Immunities, which now extend to the freeborn People of this
Kingdom, will find them first to have proceeded from the Grace and Grant of
our Kings: and therefore it is improper to say, That the Head Politic does not
give as much subsistence to the Body Politic, as it receives from it.

The Observator says likewise in his second Page, That id quod efficit tale,
est magis tale; meaning thereby, that the People conferring, as the efficient
Cause, Power on the King, have jointly more Power in themselves.

It has been showed already, that free Monarchs, such as our King is, derive
not their Power from the People, but immediately from God: But suppose, our
King did secundarily acknowledge his Power from this Nations general consent;
as it may be, does the King of Poland acknowledge his Power in part from the
Aristocracie of that Kingdom; and as Saul and David did in part from the Jews
approbation and consent: notwithstanding it follows not from hence, that the
People are the sole efficient Cause of the Kings Power, but only the
secundarie and partial. Now, when it is said, that id quod efficit tale, est
magis tale, it is to be understood of entire and total causes; but in this
case, the People being at the most but the partial cause of the Kings Power,
the Axiom of Rule fails: as for example, the Moon being of her self a Body
dark, receives her Light (at least wise her chiefest) from the Sun, as from
an entire cause; the Sun is therefore truly said to be more Light, being the
total subordinate cause of Light; in this case therefore it is truly said, id
quod efficit tale, est magis tale: but the Sun, mediante homine; producit
hominem; and mediante Leone, Leonem; and mediante Planta, Plantam; for that the
Sun affords to all sensible and vegitable creatures an influx of vigor and
natural heat: yet for as much as the Sun is, in the production of these
creatures, but a partial and not an integrall cause; it were absured to say,
that the Sun were more a man* then is a man; or more a Lion, then is a Lion;
or more a Plant, then is a Plant: and so is it to say, that because a King may
acknowledge his Power in part received from the Peoples general consent, that
therefore the People have more Power then himself.

The Observator tells us, Page 3. That the Kings dignity was erected to
preserve the Communalty, the Communalty was not created for his service.

This somewhat too harsh, especially if we consider our King to be, in all
Causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, next and immediately under Christ,
supreme Head and Governor: such words would have been better accommodated to
a Duke of Venice, then to a King of England. The Jews, I believe, when they
asked a King at Gods hands, were somewhat inclining to the Observators opinion:
for they desired a King for their own ends, chiefly to Judge them, and to
fight their Battles; not well considering, that if they had a King, he must
and ought to have a Kingly Dominion over them: Whereupon God caused the Prophet
Samuel to instruct them concerning the Praeeminence of a King; and, that if
they would have a King, a King would be such, and such a man, as is evidently
characterized in the first of Samuel, chap. 8. where, amongst other things,
verse 17. the Prophet says, He will take the Tenth of your Sheep, and ye
shall be his servants: Where, by the word will, he shows the Authority
which Kings would have; and by the word shall, he shows the Obedience that
subjects should have: nor did the Prophet speak of some, or to some few only;
but of all, and to all the people (at leastwise to all the chiefest of them)
saying, Ye shall be his servants.

I desire therefore, that the Observator and all his other adhaerents, would
take more special notice of this Text of the Prophet, and that of Saint Paul's
confirmation of this Text, Let every soul be subject to the higher Power: For,
though Christian Monarchs ought not, by the Rules of Christianity, to
Tyrannize, nor make our Sons their Slaves, or our Daughters their Concubines,
and the like; as did many of the Kings of the Gentiles, and some of the Jews;
yet ought they not to be thought so contemptible, as that the Communaltie was
no way created for their service.

The Observator says in the same Page, That the right of Conquest cannot be
pleaded, to acquit Princes of that which is due to the people, as the authors
and ends of all Power; for mere Force cannot alter the course of Nature, and
frustrate Law; and if it could, there were more reason why the people might
justify Force to regaine due liberty, then the Prince might to subvert the
same.

By the Observators leave, for his first Clause it is answered already, That
in Monarchies the people are not the authors or ends of Power: for the second
Clause, That mere Force cannot alter the course of Nature, or frustrate the
tonour of Law; that is to say, that mere Force cannot captivate and debase a
people by nature free, and living under a law of common consent. I suppose the
words, cannot alter, should have been, cannot, de jure, alter, or ought not to
alter, etc. For that force can alter, and de facto has altered the freedom and
laws of people and nations, is known to most men, Histories and Chronicles
testifying to the world, the several alterations and forms of government which
conquerors have induced; but whether they ought so to have done, is a question;
yet should the Observator and his adherents take advice, that though in Nature
there is a parity of mankind, and therefore dominion may not seem to be
intended by nature, yet God the author of Nature, foreseeing the fall of man,
and the depravation in nature, which did ensue thereof, intended power and
dominion, and that some should be masters and or hers servants; some command,
and others obey; some should become slaves to tyrants, others subjects to free
Monarks; others members of popular Estates: and these things God has ordained
by his divine wisdom, according to his will, and disposes and alters them at
his pleasure: But as for the pot, it aught not to say to the Potter, Why have
thou made me thus? It is enough for it to know, that there is no power but of
God, and so to be appliable to the use it was made for; if for hononr, to
honor; if for servility, to servility, being subject for conscience sake, Rom
13.5.

Of a strange nature therefore are those words, viz. There were more reason why
the people might justify force to regaine due liberty, then the Prince might
to subvert the same. If this doctrine had been good, our Savior would surely
have counseled the Jews (when they asked him whether it were lawful to give
tribute to Caesar) to have kept their money in their purses, or to have made up
a stock of it, and by force to have sought to regaine their due liberty from
Caesar, and not have bid them, Give unto Caesar what is Cesars. If it be
alleged, that in case Christ had counseled the Jews so, they would have
played the Jews inceed, and have accused him of high treason; What then? would
Christ have concealed, or did he at any time conceal the truth for sear of
the Jews accusations? When he was coniured to express whether or no he were
the Son of God (a thing more hateful to the Jews ears, then the denying of
tribute could have been to the ears of the Romans) Christ answered, Thou have
said it, which is as much as Yes. But suppose the Jews would have accused him
of high treason, in case he had denied tribute to Caesar, and that God would
not have such a vile imputation as treason laid on the redeemer of the world.
Yet had regaining of due liberty by force been lawful, Christmight have said,
Ye may give tribute to Caesar in the potentiall Mood (in which words no
exception could have been taken) and not have said, give tribute to Caesar, or
give unto Caesar what is Cesars, in the imperative mood. Or otherwise, when they
asked him, whether it were lawful to pay tribute to Caesar, he might only have
answered them, Yes; but foreseeing in his divine wisdom, that some indirect
constructions might be made of such a single word, as Yes, it is lawful to pay
it, ye may pay it if ye please; it is not against the law of God, if ye do pay
it, etc. therefore Christ bid them show him a piece of money, and bid them give
it unto Caesar, informing the covetous minds of that perverse people, that they
ought and were obliged to part with their money and substance to Caesar if
demanded as a tribute; but (...) let Arguments of Divinity pass, and to induce
a few State reasons: If the people may justify force to regaine due liberty,
what Monarchy? what Aristocracy? what Popular estate can remain secure? the
French subjects being in general oppressed with taxes, may revolt from their
King, if this Tenet be good; and so may the Spanish: the Polish Peasants may
rebel against the King and their Lords, for that they hold them in villinage:
and the Townsmen and Boores in Holland, and the Pisani in Venice against the
States, for their imposing on them terrible excizes. This Tenet, or Position,
may quadrate, it may be with the Irish rebels (for they pretend by force to
regaine due liberty) but never with loyal subjects. And surely this Tenet or
Position aforesaid, is dangerous to all the Monarchies and States of the world,
I even to Parliaments themselves, if rightly considered, and opposite also to
the law of God and Nations. The Observator tells us, p. 13. that where the
people by public authority will seek an inocnvenience to themselves, and the
King is not so much interested as themselves, it is more inconvenience to deny
it, then grant it. This is a strange assertion, and against all rule of
Monarchical government. Suppose (for a supposition is no fallasie) that a
Christian people should generally (which God forbid) desire to revolt from
Christianity to Mahometanisme; should their King grant it? they seem to be
more interessed then the King, because it concerns their salvation or
damnation, is it injustice therefore to deny it? Surely no; but most just and
acceptable to God to hinder them from it. Suppose this nation should in
general (which God of his goodness prohibit) desire to turn Anabaptist and
Brownists, whereof there are to many already, is the King bound, or ought he to
condescend to their desires? Surely no: but as Gods Vice gerent to oppose such
exorbitant inclinations of the people: but if the Assertion of the Observator
be good, Pilat seems to be excusable whom the Observator condemns in the page
befoere: for the Jews sought by authority of the Priests and Elders to
crucify Christ, (an inconvenience enough to themselves) and instanced a law,
and that by that law he ought to die, Ioh 1 9.7. and the Jews were more
interested in Christ, (he being their Countreyman, and subject to their laws,
as they conceived) then was Pilate: so that according to this assertion of the
Observator, it was more inconvenience and injustice for Pilate to have denied
to the Jews Christ to have been crucified, then to have granted it. Iudica Deus.

The Observator says, page 17. The name of a King is great, I confess, and
worthy of great honor, but is not the name of a people greater?

The Observator must give me leave to tell him, that in Monarchies where there
were or are Kings, the name of a people neither was nor is greater then the
name of a King; Senatus populusque Romanus, ceased to be, and gave place to the
name of Caesar: The Ottoman name at this day, dignifies that great Empire
subject to that family; and so does the name of Sophy the Persian. The name of
the House of Austria decorates their dominions; and so does that of Burbon
France. And I see no reason but why the name of Stewart should do as much in
England. If it be asked, But what avails the names of these great Monarchs,
without their Kingdoms or Dominions? The answer is, that Dominions are to
Monarchs, as it were, material subjects; themselves (from whom their names
result) as Forms. Now as the Form is more worthy then its matter, so is a
free Monarch more worthy then his Empire, in respect of dignity political.

And indeed the word Monarch infers as much for Monarchy, and is derived from
Monarch, not Monarch from Monarchy. But it may be some will instance from
hence, that if it be so, the good of a Monarch seems to be preserred before the
good of all his subjects in general, so that a whole Kingdom or Empire should
be utterly pillaged, wasted and consumed, rather then his treasures be
destroyed. Not so: for though Empires and Kingdoms are but as material
subjects, and Monarchs as forms political, yet even as in nature, forms
cannot subsist without matter, (from whose power all forms, except the
rational soul, are educed) so in policy, Monarchy cannot subsist without
their people, from whose subjection and obedience their power is educed
immediately from God, as are forms from matter by nature: the good of both
therefore must be consistent together, so that not salus populi alone; as the
Observator would have it. but salus Regis and populi, is the true end of
Monarchical government.

Thus have I briefly answered the Observators chief arguments, from whence all
his other assertions and conclusions are drawn, desiring him and all others,
rather to study how to produce reasons for obedience (where it is due) to
Monarchs, then to derogate from Monarchical government to endeavor how to
incline, and not to disaffect (by nice positions) the distracted minds of the
people toward the King* to propound prudent Arguments which might move the
King to accommodate with his Parliament and not by lessening his authority, to
divert him from it. Finally to seek how to unite the King and Commonwealth and
not to disunite them by impertinent and invalid conclusions. God of his goodness
grant co-union as much as in this world may be, between our Sovereign and his
people, that (...) may know truly how to rule, and they to obey.

FINIS.

