AN EXPOSITION WITH Practical Observations CONTINUED Upon the Fourth, Fifth,
Sixth, and Seventh Chapters of the PROPHESY OF HOSEA. Being first delivered in
several LECTURES at Michaels Cornhil London. By Jeremiah Buroughs. Being the
Fifth BOOK, published by Thomas Goodwyn, William Greenhil, Sydrach Simson
William Bridge, John Yates, William Adderly.


LONDON, Printed for Peter Cole, at the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil,
near the Royal Exchange, 1650.

To the READER.
Reader,
WE here present thee with a continuation of Expositions and Observations upon
other Four Chapters of the Prophet Hosea, delivered by that Worthy Man, now
with God. Himself in his lifetime published the Three first Chapters; These
now made public, were compiled out of the Manuscripts which Himself under His
own Hand left, which being short, have been filled up and enlarged out of the
best Copies of Sermon Notes taken from His own mouth. We must not undertake for
all imperfections or mistakes that happily may be found, though a diligent and a
skilful hand had the coll^cting of them. We only give Letters of Credence to
them, that they are genuinely the Authors, and that they are singularly worthy
of all acceptance, especially by such Readers as have their thoughts exercised
in observing the ways of Gods proceedings in and toward the Nations of the
world where His Name is called. One great piece of His Dispensations under the
Old Testament, was that toward the Ten Tribes, who remain in captivity to this
day, 2 Cor. 10
and who were set up (as their Predecessors in the wilderness) as Types ^f Gods
dealing in like cases with us under the New Testament; as we may see in the
instance of the Eastern and Gracian Churches that have groaned under the
Mahumetan Tyrannies and Oppressions, Rev. 7.
of whom the Ten Tribes may seem to be the livelyest pattern, as the condition
of the Saints in the Western European Churches under the Pope was exemplified
in the captivity of Babylon which befell the other two Tribes. Yet so, as both
in sins and punishment the one and the other are general examples unto us upon
whom the ends of the world are come, in which God acts over with a quick and
swift motion, as being the last act, what was done more slowly under the Old.
The worthy Author was one of the most accurate spectators in his time, that
with a curious and searching eye beheld what God was a doing in the World. He
was as one of those Wise men that knew the times, (as it is said of Ahasuerus
his sev^n Counselors, Esth. 1.13.) and skilled therein, not as they in an
humane or political way, but as the transactions in the world do relate unto
Gad, who governs this world by the rules and presidents in His Word. He was one
of those who as the Psalmist speaks, Psa. 111.
had pleasure to seek out the great works of the Lord, and to parallel those in
these times with those of old under the Old Testament; and unto that end, in
the entrance to these alterations in our times, he pitched upon the explycation
of this Prophecy, which the studious Reader will with much delight read over
when he shall observe how He made application all along to the Dispensations of
that time in which He preached them. The Lord bless them to them of this
Nation, for which they were principally intended.

Thomas Goodwin, Sydrach Simpson, William Greenhil, William Bridge, John Yates,
William Adderly.


The Titles of those five Books of Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs lately published; VIZ.
An Exposition of the 4, 5, 6, and 7. Chapters of HOSEA. A Treatise of EARTHLY
MINDEDNES, etc. GOSPEL-CONVERSATION. GOSPEL WORSHIP, etc. The rare Jewel of
Christian CONTENTMENT.
All Printed for Peter Cole, 1650.

THE CONTENTS.
HOSEA, CHAP. IV.
VERSE. I.
Observation, 1. THE consideration that it is the word of the Lord, is a
special means to prepare the heart to receive it. Page 1 Obs. 2. The nearness
of a people to God exempts them not from Gods contending with them. Page 2 Obs.
3. The nearer the relation is, the more grievous is the controversy. Ibid Obs.
4. Sin causes a deadly controversy between God and the soul. Page 4 1. God is
above the sinner. ibid 2. The controversy is just. Page 5 3. We first began
it. ibid 4. It is an old controversy. ibid. 5. It stirs up all the wrath of
God. ibid. 6. It is a deadly controversy. ibid 7. A controversy with God.
ibid 8. Only Jesus Christ is able to make it up. Page 6 9. It is against
infinite advantage. ibid 10. It is likely to prove everlasting. ibid
Obs. 5. Men should be willing the cause between them and their inferiors
should be pleaded. Page 19 Obs. 6. Gods mercies are fruits of his faithfulness.
Page 20 Obs. 7 God contendeth not with a people without cause. Page 21 Obs. 8.
God contendeth not against a people for little things. Page 22 Obs. 9. It is
vain for any man to talk of Religion, and make no conscience of the second
table. Page 23 Obs. 10. Gods controversy with Covenant-breakers is very
dreadful. Page 26 Obs. 11. The merciful God sets Himself against merciless
men. Page 29 Obs. 12. Vnteaching Priests and Man's Inventions keep out the
knowledge of God from a people. Page 38
VERSE. II.
Opened. Page 40 Obs. 1. The abuse of an Oath is a dreadful sin. ibid Obs. 2.
There is no man that makes not conscience of an Oath, that can make any of a
Lie. Page 44 Obs. 3. When sin is not mortified, though it be restrained for a
while it will break out. Page 59 Obs. 4. Breaking out is a great aggravation of
sin. Page 60
VERSE. III.
Explained. Page 62 Obs. 1. All the glory and pomp of the men of the world is
but as a flower. Page 64 Obs. 2 Times of affliction take away the jollity of
men's spirits ibid Obs. 3 When the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air
are destroyed, man's comforts are soon gone. Page 65 Obs. 4. The good or evil of
the creature depends on man. Page 67 Obs. 5 When God is in a way of wrath he
causes it to reach to those things which seem most remote from him. Page 68
Obs. 6 No creature can help man in time of Gods wrath. ibid
VERSE. IV.
Obs. 1. Sin cannot be gotten from men without striving. Page 69 Obs. 2 Private
men so long as they have hope should strive with their brethren by way of
admonition. ib. Obs. 3 It is a great aggravation of sin and forerunner of
destruction to despise the admonitions of others ib. Obs. 4. Sin does increase
in places where it is let alone. Page 71 Obs. 5. There is a time when men may
and should leave their reproving of others. ib. Opened Page 72 Obs. 6. It is
the duty of the Priest to contend against men for their sins. Page 75 Obs. 7.
When Ministers do contend against the people, they must look to be striven
withal by the people. Page 76 Obs. 8. To strive against those that come in Gods
Name to reprove is a great aggravation of sin, and hastening of judgment. Page
81 Obs. 9. If public means prevail not there is little hope of private. Page
84.
VERSE. V.
Obs. 1. Those in office must go on though they be striven against. Page 85
Obs. 2. When a threatening comes to particulars then it works. ib. Obs. 3 The
falls of the Prophets are falls in the night. Page 87 Obs: 4. It is a sad
judgment for people in affliction to have no Prophet amongst them. ibid
VERSE. VI.
Obs. 1. Ignorance is both father and mother of destruction. Page 90 1. The
rational creature is working in the midst of snares ib. 2. The way to eternity
is in the midst of a hundred cross ways Page 91 3. Man must not go with his
own light. ib. 4. Our work is a most curious work. ib. 5. Ignorance makes men
objects of Gods hatred. ib.
Use 1. How vile a thing it is to deny the means of knowledge to men to satisfy
the humors of others. Page 92 Use 2. Hopes for England because the knowledge of
God begins to shine in it. ib. Obs. 2. Suffering truths will hardly go down
with many Ministers. Page 94 Obs. 3. There is a peculiar way of Gods rejecting
wicked Ministers. Page 95 Obs. 4. Unfaithfulness in service provokes God to
cast men out of service. Page 96 Obs. 5. It is a great judgment to be rejected
from the Priests office. ibid Obs. 6. It is a blessing for godly children of
godly Ministers to succeed them in their office. Page 97 Obs. 7. The families
of wicked Ministers are many times forgotten. ibid
VERSE. VII.
Obs. 1. It is a usual thing where there is increase of number to be increase
in sin. Page 98 Obs. 2. It is men's vile disposition to increase in sin as they
increase in mercies. Page 99 Obs. 3. God does love to stain the pride and
haughtiness of man Page 100 Obs. 4. It is usual with wicked Priests if they be
countenanced by authority, to glory. Page 102
VERSE. VIII.
Opened. Page 104
VERSE. IX.
Obs. 1. Evil Ministers in a country are the causes of miseries in the country.
Page 112 Obs. 2. If Priest and People be alike in sin God will make them alike
in punishment. ibid Obs. 3. Look how Ministers are, so usually the people are.
Page 114 Obs. 4. God has his days of visitation wherein he will narrowly
enquire into the ways of men. Page 119 Obs. 6. God will call men to an account
for their thoughts. Page 120 Obs. 7. Wickedness in thought is the worst
wickedness. ibid Obs. 8. Sin passes away in the act with much sweetness, but
God will make it return in the guilt with much bitterness. Page 120 Obs. 9. The
good works of the Saints shall return again with much comfort and peace. Page
121
VERSE. X.
Obs. 1. Whatsoever a man undertakes unlawfully, he can never expect to
prosper. Page 124 Use, It is the best way to keep us to Gods Ordinances. Obs.
2. Idolaters seldom come in and return. Page 125 Obs. 3. Take heed of your not
taking heed. Page 126 Obs. 4. The way to keep the heart and life in order and
obedience is to take heed to the Lord. ibid Obs. 5. All things in Gods worship
should be according to Gods rule Page 127 Use, Take heed of Idolatry. ibid
VERSE. XI.
Opened Page 128 Obs. 1 It is just with God that those that will not seek to
satisfy themselves in him should be given over to the sinful lusts of the
flesh Page 129 Obs. 2. Sensuallity is a besotting sin. ibid Obs. 3. Ministers
when once they grow negligent usually grow sensual. Page 132
VERSE. XII.
Obs. 1. Bodily and spiritual whoredom usually go together Page 133 Use, We are
not to marvail that such as seem to be men of understanding are given to
Idolatry. ibid Obs. 2. What poor ways Idolaters had to know the minds of their
gods. Page 135 Use, Let us bless God that we have his word. ibid Obs. 3. There
is an eagerness of spirit in men to things that are evil. ibid Use 1. Look to
your spirits when you find an eagerness in them to a thing. Page 136 Use 2.
Labor to be acted by the Spirit of God. Page 137 Use 3. Pray to God that he
would satisfy us not only in body and in soul but in spirit. ibid Obs. 4. All
false worship does put a man from the protection of God. Page 138 Obs. 5. So
far as we are from being under Gods command, so far we are from being under his
protection. Page 129
VERSE. XIII.
Obs. 1. General accusations without particular specification, will not prevail
with stubborn hearts. Page 140 Use. Godly Ministers must not leave things in
general if they would convince. ibid Obs. 2. What seems most specious in our
eyes if it be not according to the rule may be most abominable in the eyes of
God. Page 141 Obs. 3. Ministers ought to present to the people the foulness of
those things that they think have least evil in them. ib. Obs. 4. When God
chooses a place, he puts a stamp of holiness upon the place. Page 143 Obs. 5.
Idolatry is brazen faced and loves to be public. Page 148 Use, Labor to make
the worship of God as public ibid Obs. 6. When the Ordinances of the Gospel
come to be public, then it is time for Babylon to fall. ibid Obs. 7. Idolaters
seek to rise to the height of their way in false worship. ibid Use, Let us
labor to do so in Gods worship. ibid Why they sacrificed under trees? 1.
Because the Heathens dedicated the trees to their gods. Page 149 2. In
imitation of the Patriarchs. ibid 3. The shadiness of the place struck some
reverence in the hearts of men. ibid 4. They thought the spirits of their
Worthies were there. Page 150 5. They were fit places for the committing of
filthiness. ibid 6. They conceited God was the more honored by it. ibid
Obs. 8. Superstition thinks it has a great deal of reason for what it does.
Page 151 Obs. 9. It is the pride of men's spirits to think Gods Ordinances are
too plain ibid Obs. 10. God sometimes punishes sin with sin. Page 152 Obs. 11.
It is a great reproach for any family to have uncleanness committed in it. Page
154 Use, Let Governors have a care of their families. ibid Obs 12. Our
unfaithfulness with God is made more sensible, when those that dwell near us
are unfaithful to us. ibid Instances. 1. When our children are stubborn. Page
155 2. Ill wives. ibid 3. Friends unfaithful. Page 156

VERSE. XIV.
Opened. Page 157 Obs. 1. It is one of the most fearful judgments in all the
world for the Lord not to restrain men from sinning. Page 158 Obs. 2. When
parents are filthy and unclean what can be expected but their children should
be so too. Page 161 Use, Take heed how you sin before your children. ibid Obs.
3. Those that are filthy and unclean, will sometimes make show of Religion.
Page 162 Obs. 4. Idolaters are no understanding people. Page 165 Applied to our
times. Page 167 Obs. 5. It is a fearful judgment of God to leave men to
perplexed councels. Page 170 Obs. 6. When wicked men are fallen they shall be so
perplexed that they shall not know what to do. Page 170
VERSE. XV.
Obs. 1. Ministers should especially look to those whom they are bound unto by
office, yet so as to labor to do good to others. Page 171 Obs. 2. When we see
our labor lost to some, we should try to do good to others. ibid Obs. 3. To be
near Idolaters is very dangerous. Page 172 Obs. 4. The nearer a false worship
comes to a true one, the more dangerous it is. Page 174 Obs. 5. Those that
enjoy Gods Ordinances in a true way should take heed of doing as other people
do. Page 175 Obs. 6. We must not do as others do in point of Gods worship. Page
177 Obs. 7 It goes nearer the heart of God when his People offend, than when
others do. Page 178 Reas. 1. There is more unkindness in their sins Page 179 2
There is more unfaithfulness in them. ibid 3 Gods Name is more polluted by
them. ibid 4. The excellency of their graces makes their sins worse. ibid 5.
They go nearer the heart of the Saints than the sins of others. Page 180
Application to our times. ibid Obs. 8. We must not come near places that are
dangerous to draw us to sin. Page 186 Obs. 9. Places corrupted lose their
honor. Page 188
VERSE. XVI.
Opened. Page 192 Obs. 1. Liberty may prove to be ones misery. Page 195
VERSE. XVII.
Opened Page 196 Obs. 1. Wicked children are great dishonors to their parents.
Page 197 Obs. 2. Governors are usually the causes of the evils of the people.
Page 198 Obs. 3. Idolaters hearts are strangely glued to the ways of Idolatry
Page 200 Use, Join your selves to Jesus Christ Page 201 Obs. 4 We must take
heed of communicating with Idolaters in their false ways Page 202 Obs. 5. It
is a heavy judgment upon a people when the Saints withdraw from them ibid Obs.
6 God has a time to give men over to themselves. Page 205 1 Because he has no
need of them. Page 206 2 He has another way to fetch glory from them ibid
Obs. 7 It is the most woeful judgment upon a people or person when God lets
them alone in sin ibid 1 It is a testimony of disrespect in God Page 207 2
These are going apace into misery ibid 3 They are in the midst of abundance of
dangers Page 208 4 God intends to make way for some fearful wrath to come upon
them ibid 5 He will not vouchsafe to hear them speak to him ibid 6 It is a
dreadful sign of Reprobation Page 209 7 It is greater than all earthly
judgments Page 210 8 It is worse than to be given up to the Devil Page 211 9 It
is worse than to be sent to Hell presently Page 212 10 Though he be without
grace he must answer for it as though he had it Page 212 11 All means of grace
are made improfitable to him. Page 213
Use 1 See what poor creatures men are ibid Use 2 Let us fear and tremble at
this judgment ibid Object I fear God has laid this judgment upon me. Answer 1
It is a good sign that thou art troubled with such a fear Page 214 Answer 2 It
is a good means to keep thee from being let alone ibid Answer 3 If thou have
not a heart to let God alone, God has not a heart to let thee alone ibid Use 3
Bless God that he has not inflicted this judgment upon thee Page 215 2 Bless
God that he has not inflicted it upon the Kingdom ib.
VERSE. XVIII.
Opened Page 217 Obs. 1 Rulers should be shields to the people where they live.
Page 219 Application to our times Page 220
VERSE. XIX.
Obs. 1 Such as are superstitious look upon Gods Ordinances as vile and their
own inventions as glorious Page 325 Obs. 2 The judgments of God upon wicked men
who have been spared a long time, come violently ibid Causes of shame 1
Disrespect from those we desire honor from Page 326 2 When a man takes a great
deal of pains and it comes to nothing Page 327 3 Disappointment of hope ibid 4
When God discovers that to be vile which a man glories in. ib.
Use, Admonition to the superstitious to take shame to themselves Page 328 Obs.
3 God has a time to make all Idolaters ashamed of their sacrifices Page 332
Obs. 4 Duties performed with a carnal heart are mixed with base ends ibid Obs.
5 Our sacrifices are defiled by the foulness of our hearts. ibid Question What
are those sacrifices we should render to God and not be ashamed of? Answer 1 Be
sure they be his own Page 333 Answer 2 Let them come from faith Page 334 Answer
3 Let your ends be high ibid Answer 4 Let your whole strength be taken up in
them ibid Answer 5 Offer up your selves a sacrifice to God ibid Answer 6 Be
humbled after all your best services Page 335 Answer 7 Tender up all in Christ
Page 336
CHAP. V.
VERSE. I.
Opened Page 337 Obs. 1 When God comes in judgment he expects we should
seriously mind what he is doing Page 338 Obs. 2 Generallity in sins is no way
to escape judgment ibid Obs. 3. The Priests have usually been the causes of
wickedness in and judgments on a nation Page 339 Obs. 4 The people will go the
way the King and Priests go ibid Obs. 5 Kings and Princes must have sin charged
upon them as well as others Page 342 Obs. 6 Though they are to be reproved for
sin, some due respect ought to be given them Page 344 Obs. 7 When God pleads
against us let not neglect ibid
VERSE. II.
Obs. 1 It is a dangerous thing to venture upon the beginnings of false worship
Page 354 Obs. 2 It is a dangerous thing to be deeply rooted in superstitious
ways Page 355 Use This should teach us to deny our selves Page 357 Obs. 3 The
hearts of Apostates are most deeply rooted in wickedness ibid Application to
our times Page 358 Obs. 4 Idolaters are profound and deep ibid Obs. 5 Idolaters
are deep in policy ibid Use Let us labor to be wise in the worship of God ibid
Obs. 6 The Ministers of God must rebuke sin Page 361 Obs. 7 When Ministers
rebuke in the way of God, then God does rebuke Page 362 Obs. 8 Idolaters hearts
are stubborn ibid Use Let not us be troubled at the stoutnesse of Idolaters
Page 363 Obs 9 It is a greater evil to stand out against Gods displeasure than
against his commands ibid Use Let us charge this sin upon our spirits Page 364
Obs. 10 Prophets rebukes must be impartial rebukes Page 365 Obs. 11 It is a
hard thing for a few men to stand out against a State in matters of Religion
ibid
VERSE. III.
Opened Page 366 Obs. 1 Gods eye is upon the secrets of men's hearts Page 367
Use 1 Then all Hypocrites must needs be Atheists ibid Use 2 Admire at the
patience of God Page 368 Use 3 Pray to God to make known your own hearts to
your selves. ib. Obs. 2 Gods eye upon our hearts and ways is a special means
to humble us. Page 369 Obs. 3 God will deal with men according to their present
ways Page 370 Use. Here Is hope for repenting sinners Obs. 4. Defiled worship
exceedingly defiles the souls of people. Page 372 Objection Does the mixture of
the wicked defile the worship of God? Answer 1 The best Church in the world may
have wicked men in it Page 272 Answer 2 The Sacrament is not defiled to the
receivers for the presence of wicked men ibid Question How shall we distinguish
mixture of Communion? Answer 1 The Congregation is defiled if they do not use
the power Christ has given them Page 373 Answer 2 Particular persons are
defiled when they neglect the duty belongs to them Page 374 Obs. 5. A defiled
Nation is near unto ruin ibid
VERSE. IV.
Opened Page 376 Applied to England Page 379 Obs. 1. Apostates have seldom any
inclination to turn to God. Page 384 Obs. 2. True repentance is not only to
leave evil and do good, but to turn unto God as our God Page 385 Obs. 3. It is
Gods just judgment to leave men to the Devil to be blinded when they forsake
him and his truth Page 386 Obs. 4. Impetuousness of spirit blinds the mind Page
388 Use, When we come to examine truths let us look to our spirits. Page 389
VERSE. V.
Obs. 1. Ignorance and pride usually goes together Page 390 Obs. 2. Idolaters
are proud men Page 391 1 They look upon Gods worship as a mean thing ibid 2
They put more upon the creature than God has Page 392 3 They prescribe to God
which way he shall be worshipped ibid 4 They honor their own ways because they
are their own ibid
Obs. 3. The spirit of sin is casting down Page 397 Obs. 4. Pride goes before a
fall ibid 1 A proud man goes from God ibid 2 He goes against God ibid 3 He goes
beyond God Page 398 4 He goes above God ibid
Obs. 5. It is a great aggravation for any one to think what misery he brings
others into Page 399 Obs. 6. It is no plea for any to say they follow the
example of others Page 400 Obs. 7. If Gods people comply with wicked men they
must expect to fall with them in outward judgments ibid Use, Why so many fall
in these times Obs. 8. The falling of the Saints with wickedmen is of special
consideration Page 401 1 God would have us take notice how holy he is ibid 2 He
would have none presume on former services Page 402 3 God is not engaged to any
if they transgress ibid
Use 1 God can be without men Page 403 Use 2 Admonition to wicked men ibid
VERSE. VI.
Obs. 1. Those that depend upon duties are in a destraction when their duties
prevail not Page 403 Obs. 2. God contemns the services of Hypocrites,
superstitious and Idolatrous persons Page 404 Obs. 3. It is a sad thing when
God will not own as his what we tender up to him ibid Obs. 4. Idolatrous and
superstitious people are abundant in their services Page 406 Obs. 5. Idolatrus
and superstitious people will spare no cost in their own ways Page 407 Obs. 6.
There is a time when vile and wicked men shall see a need of God. ibid Obs. 7.
The vilest Idolaters that can be pretend to seek God as well as any. Page 408
Use, Take heed of such pretenders. Page 409 Obs. 8. Superstitious and
Idolatrous men are most abundant in their services, in the time of affliction.
Page 409 Obs. 9. Carnal professors think to make God amends for former failings
by outward performances. Page 410 Obs. 10. If God be to be found any where, he
is to be found in his Ordinances. ib. Obs. 11. The end of all holy duties
should be to find God in them. Page 411 Obs. 12. God will not always be found
when he is sought. ib. 1. When men seek him in a superstitious way ibid 2. When
we seek our selves rather than God ib. 3. When we do not seek God as a God ibid
4. When we seek him too late. Page 412
Obs. 13 God delights not in superstitious and formal professors. ib. Obs. 14.
It is a sad thing when God withdraws from the creature when he seeks him in
distress Page 413 1. God puts a dishonor upon him. ibid 2. No creature can help
us. Page 414 3. Some great judgment must be expected. ib. 4. No protection can
be expected. ib. 5. Conscience flies in ones face. ib. 6. It is a forerunner
of his eternal withdrawing. ib.
Question. Does not God withdraw Himself from his Saints? Answer. 1. They
retain good thoughts of him in his absence. Page 415 Answer. 2. He draws
their hearts after him to cry more earnestly ib. Answer. 3. He leaves some
light behind him that they may see which way he is gone Page 416 Answer. 4. His
bowels yern toward them ibid Answer. 5. Nothing will satisfy them till God
come again. ibid Answer. 6. He does not utterly forsake them ibid
VERSE. VII.
Opened. Page 417 Obs. 1. When wicked men come to seek God, God looks upon the
wickedness of their hearts. Page 419 Obs. 2 The sins of such as are in covenant
with God are sins of treachery Page 420 Applied to our times ib.
Obs. 3 Parents have the charge of their children committed to them by God Page
424 Obs. 4. Children are usually as their parents are, and education is Page
426 Use. 1 To such as are well educated ibid 2 To such as are ill educated ibid
Obs. 5. It is a dangerous thing for children to follow the example of their
parents in wickedness Page 427 Use, Children ought to examine their parents
ways ibid Obs. 6 When the succeeding generation is wicked, there is little
hope of such a people Page 428 Obs. 7 God takes it exceeding ill at men's hands
when they corrupt their young ones Page 429 Obs. 8 God has a set time to
reckon with sinners Page 433 Obs. 9. This set time is the time of their
destruction ibid Obs. 10. The more special the providence of God is in mercy,
the more severe are his judgments if provoked. Page 434 Obs. 11 A carnal man
has his portion in this world only ibid
VERSE. VIII.
Obs. 1. When a people is in danger of Gods wrath it is high time for them to
awake Page 436 Obs. 2. When danger is apprehended as present and real, it takes
the heart wast Page 438 Obs. 3. Ministers of God must make the things they
preach as real before the peoples eyes Page 439 Obs. 4. Ministers if their
embassage of peace be slighted must denounce war Page 441 Obs. 5. Gods
displeasure of sin is the cause of war in a land ibid Obs. 6. Superstitious
places are in greatest distress in the time of Gods judgments Page 443 Obs. 7.
In time of trouble superstitious people are in greatest perplexity. ibid Obs. 8
It is an ill thing to have ill neighbors. Page 444 Obs. 9. When the wrath of
God is against our neighbors we had need look to it Page 445 Question What
shall we do in such times? Answer 1 Humble your selves before God Page 446
Answer 2 Rise up as one man and help your brethren Page 447 Answer 3 Meet your
own danger before it comes ibid
VERSE. IX.
Obs. 1. The day of Gods peoples affliction is the day of their rebuke Page 448
Obs. 2. God has his set times for rebuke Page 449 Obs. 3. When wicked men
stand out lesser judgments they have cause to fear greater ibid Obs. 4 It is a
dreadful time when God so rebukes a people that he destroies them ibid 1 All
the wrath that was treasured up breaks out upon them. Page 450 2 All their sins
comes together into Gods remembrance ibid 3 The cries of justice prevail
against such men ibid 4 Mercy leaves such a people ibid 5 The Lord intends hurt
to them ibid 6 All the creatures dare not own them ibid 7 All their services
are rejected Page 451
Obs. 5. God smites not a people with judgment before he warns them Page 452
Obs. 6 When God threatens he is real in his threatenings Page 453 Obs. 7 The
revealing of sin before judgment aggravates both sin and judgment Page 454 1
The goodness of God is not honored ibid 2 The truth of God is not honored ibid
3 It aggravates the sin ibid
Obs. 8. There is a time when there shall be no help to deliver from judgment
Page 455
VERSE. X.
Obs. 1 We had need pray much for Princes Page 461 Obs. 2. The bounds of
Religion and Law keep in obedience and keep out judgments ibid Obs. 3. God
punishes according to men's sins Page 462
VERSE. XI.
Obs. 1. It is a great judgment for a people to be under oppression. Page 466
Obs. 2. Idolaters are great oppressors Page 467 Obs. 3. God has a righteous
hand in delivering men into the hands of unrighteous oppressors Page 468 Obs. 4
A special cause of oppression is peoples following of false worship Page 469
Obs. 5. Our giving to much to men God oftentimes punishes by making them the
greatest instruments of our misery ibid Obs. 6. It is Satan's course to get
false worship backed with authority ibid Obs. 7. Man's authority is not a
sufficient warrant for us 470 Obs. 8. The more willing men are to sin the
greater is the sin. Page 472 Obs. 9. Willing obedience in evil things brings
guilt upon a people. Page 473 Obs. 10. Commands for false worship easily
prevail ibid Obs. 11 It is the duty of Christians willingly to obey God Page
474 Obs. 12. Bad Princes give liberty to men's lusts ibid Obs. 13. Idolatry is
filthy stuff ibid
VERSE. XII.
Opened Page 475 Obs. 1. God may be in a way of wrath against a people and yet
mean while be very patient Page 480 Obs. 2. God many times lets out his
wrath against a people in little things Page 481 Obs. 3. When God lets out
his wrath in small things it is contemptible to carnal hearts ibid Obs. 4.
Though carnal men despise Gods wrath in small things yet it shall eat them out
at last Page 482 Obs. 5. God is slow in punishing ibid Obs. 6. God has secret
judgments to bring upon a people ibid Use, Beware of secret sins Page 483 Obs.
7 Our corruptions within us, breed our trouble and undoing ibid Obs. 8 Gods
wrath though secret many times eats out men's spirits Page 484 Obs. 9 Though
others go before them yet they shall follow not long after Page 485 Obs. 10
What a poor creature man is ibid Obs. 11 How long God condescendeth that he may
express his meaning to men Page 486
VERSE. XIII.
Obs. 1 The pride of man's heart will not easily acknowledge the hand of God Page
488 Obs. 2 God will force men to be sensible of his hand against them. Page 489
Obs. 3 Men are more subject to see their wound than their sin. ibid Obs. 4
Carnal hearts seek to the creature in time of straits Page 491 Obs. 5 There is
much guilt contracted by resting on carnal helps. Page 492 1 They will infect
ibid 2 They cannot pray Page 493
Obs. 6 Creature comforts avail little in the day of wrath Page 495 Obs. 7 Of
all things men rest on for help wicked men are like to prove most helpless Page
496
VERSE. XIV.
Opened Page 498 Obs. 1 When Gods lesser afflictions work not God will be most
terrible Page 499 Obs. 2 Our seeking out shifting ways in times of
extremities, provokes God Page 501 Obs. 3 When God in wrath causes war in a
Kingdom than God teareth Page 502 Obs. 4 God has a righteous hand in the worst
actions of men. Page 504 Obs. 5 The hand of God is more immediate in some
judgments than in others. Page 505 1 Thereby the heart is humbled Page 506 2 It
is a special means to quiet the heart with patience ibid 3 The soul is the more
put upon enquiry Page 507 4 It causes the soul to receive content in nothing
but God. ibid

VERSE. XV.
Obs. It is a heavy judgment for God to tear, and then to leave a people Page
509 Text opened Page 511
Obs. 1 Sin desturbs Heaven and Earth ibid Obs. 2 In times of public judgment
God leaves his Majesty in Heaven to set things in order on Earth Page 512 Obs.
3 Gods administrations to his people sometimes may be such as if he regarded
them not ibid Obs. 4 When wicked men are in perplexity then God enjoyes himself
in his perfection Page 513 Obs. 5 Sometimes God turns his back upon sinners
till they acknowledge their sins ibid Obs. 6 God humbles himself to behold what
is done upon earth. ibid The words explained Page 514
Obs. 7 So long as men prosper in their sins, they will contest with God ibid
Obs. 8. Affliction sanctified brings men to see and acknowledge their sins Page
515 Obs. 9. It Is a sign of a hard heart not to confess when Gods hand is upon
us ibid Obs. 10. God will have glory from us Page 516 The words opened ibid
Obs. 1 It is not enough to acknowledge our sin but we must seek Gods face Page
517 Obs. 2 When God leaves his people he leaves something behind which causes
the heart to seek after him Page 518 Obs. 3 True repentance is not so much to
seek our own ease as Gods face ibid Obs. 4 Gods Ordinances and Worship are his
face Page 519 Obs. 5 Repenting hearts solicitous about Gods Ordinances ibid
Obs. 6 The worship of God is his Name and Ordinances ibid Obs. 7. What good God
aims at in his administrations to his people he will have it Page 520 The words
opened Page 521
Quaere 1 What time does this seeking of God refer it self unto? Answered 1
When the seventy years were at an end ibid Answered 2 In their captivity by the
Romans ibid Answered 3 At the calling of the Jews ibid Quaere 2 How did they
seek God in any of these times? ibid Answered from several Scriptures ibid Obs.
1 In the sorest afflictions which befalls the people of God, he intends their
good in them Page 522 Obs. 2. God has little honor in this world Page 523 Use,
God takes it ill when he seldom hears from us but in our extremities ibid Obs.
3 Times of affliction are times of seeking God ibid Obs. 4. When God is pleased
to work grace in the heart, that heart is taken off from all creature helps
ibid Obs. 5. We are not to be discouraged in seeking God though afflictions
drives us to it ibid Use, Despair not in afflictions ibid Obs. 6 We must seek
God early, else not sufficient Page 525 Opened in Three particulars ibid Quest.
What is it to seek God diligently? Page 526 Answered in Five particulars ibid
Use: Admonition to England. Page 527
AN EXPOSITION Of the PROPHESY of HOSEA.
CHAP. 4.
VER. 1. Hear the Word of the LORD, ye Children of Israel; for the LORD has a
Controversy with the Inhabitants of the Land; because there is no truth etc.


IN this Chapter we have 1. A suit commenced. 2. God declares. 3. Judgment is
pronounced. 4. Exhortation to Jud^h to beware she comes not into the same
condition. 5. Execution, the giving up Ephraim to himself, and unto Gods wrath.

For the first, Israel is cited, Hear ye the ]

The knowledge of any truth (hard and grievous to flesh and blood) to be the
Word of the Lord, Obs.
is a special means to prepare the heart to receive it with reverence and all
due respect. It was a hard Message that Hos^^ had to bring, to tell them of
Gods Controversy; he therrefore makes thi^ preface. (...) Word of the Lord.
Hard truths are hardly born; but when the Authority of the Infinite God appears
in them, be they either making for us or against us, our hearts must bow to
them; they lay bonds upon the conscience and bind over to eternal death if you
reject them. 2 Chronicles. 26.12. Zedekiah, a King, is charged that he did not
humble himself before the Prophet Jeremiah. Though the Prophet be never so poor
and contemptible in himself, yet if he brings the word of the Lord, Zedekiah
the king must humble himself before him.

Ye children of Israel] In this appellation God puts them in mind of the
covenant he had made with them and the^ with him; you are not Heathens you are
the children of Israel, in covenant with me, a people near to me, yet I have a
controversy with you.

Obs.
The neerness of a people to God exempteth them not from Gods contending with
them for sin: Neither should neerness to us exempt any from our contending with
them. Deuteronomy. 13.6. If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy
daughter, or the wise of thy bosom, or thy friend which is as thy own soul,
entice thee secretly to worship a strange god, Verse 8. thine eye shall not
pity him, neither shall thou spare, neither shall thou conceal him, but thou
shall surely kill him, thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to death.
Controversies between those that are near are very grievous, Quid dicturus es
o Propheta qui tanta diligentia vocas ut audiatur verbu^ Domini. Oecolo^p. in
locum.


3. The nearer the ^^lation is between any the more grievous is the
controversy, if there be a controversy at all. Hear the Word of the Lord ye
children of Israel. It is a sad thing for one Nation to have a controversy
with another; much more for a people to be at controversy with it self; Yet
more when when the controversy comes nearer, into the family, between husband
and wife, between father and child, between dearest friends who were before to
each other as their own souls, controversies there are very sore and grievous,
Prove. 18.19. A brother offended is harder to be won than a strong City, and
their contentions are like the bars of a Castle. Wind within the body is most
troublesome and dangerous.

Hear ye.] O Prophet (says Oecoloppdius upon the place) what is it thou have
to say that with so much earnestness thou call to have the word of the Lord
heard; This is the solemn message of the Prophet to this people, The Lord has
a controversy with the inhabitants of the land.

The word translated Controversy, signifies a debate, (...) his expostulatio
judiciu^ The Sepuag in t (...) judicium. the same word translated by them also
(...). Job 29.16. Ministers must plead for God, take heed they plead not
against him.
a contention, it comes of (...) Contendere vel privatim vel coram judice, to
contend privately or to come before a Judge; sometimes a cause pleaded in Law.
As Exodus 23.3. Neither shall thou countenance a poor man in his cause. That Is
the same word with this here, a Controversy. The Lord has a cause to plead
with this people, it is the controversy of the Lord; the Prophet stands up for
God in his Name to plead against them, he pleads for the King, the King of
Heaven: So should all faithful Ministers be sure they be on Gods side, pleading
his cause; For all Ministers are Gods Sergeants at Law, his Attourneys, his
Soliciters. The Kings Lawyers are sworn, they shall never plead against him, or
take fee on the other side; And yet how many even in the exercise of their
Ministry show that they have taken fee on other side! How do many plead against
God, against his Sabbaths, against his Ordinances, yea, plead sometimes against
the power of Godliness, against those things wherein the chief dignity and
glory of God consists! sometimes perhaps pleading for them but pleading more
against them at another time. The Devil has not more cordial Solicitors and
pleaders for him than those who would be accounted the Prophets of the Lord.

The Lord.] As if the Prophet should say, Know, you have not to do with me, nor
with Amos (who was contemporary with Hosea, and a Prophet to Israel) though you
think you can make your parts good with me and with the other Prophets, know
God will not now stand pleading with you so much by his Ministers, he will take
the cause into his own hand and will plead, by his Judgments he will now take
up the controversy himself. The Lord tells the people ( Genesis 6.3.) that his
Spirit should no longer strive with them: what is that? That is, it should no
longer strive in the way of No^h's Ministry, but he would come and strive
himself after another manner, by bringing the flood upon them.

(...) Gods pleading is, the more dreadful.
It is most dreadful for sinners for God to take the controverse into his own
hand to contend with them in a way of judgment; It is a fearful thing to fall
into the hand of the living God You think Ministers are hard, they preach
terrible things; but if you have to deal with God immediately, if he should not
speak to you by man but come himself and plead with you, you would find it
harder to deal with him. When Jobs friends were pleadi^g with him, he could
easily make his part good with them, but Chap, 38. ver. 1, 2. God himself comes
and speaks out of the whirlwind, Who is he that darken^th counsel by words
without knowledge? and so goes on in a chapter or two; Chap. 42. ver. 5. Job
falls down now and says, I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but
now mine eye s^eth thee, wherefore I abhor my self and repent in dust and
as^es. Psalm. 130.3. is a notable scripture for this purpose, If thou Lord
should mark iniquity, Oh Lord who should stand? Mark the words, how Lord is
twice here repeated, it would have been full sense thus, If thou Lord should
mark iniquity who shall stand? There would have been a mighty emphasi^ in the
word Jehovah, who shall stand, for it is thou oh Jehovah; but it comes in
again, to Note that herein lies the Emphasis, if thou Lord should mark
iniqity, Oh Lord who shall stand? This Oh Lord seems to be a pleonasme, one
would think that it breaks the sense, but the scope is to show that the sight
of having to deal with God in our sins, is very terrible, If thou Lord ma^kest,
sin causes a dreadful controvercy between God and man.
then Oh Lord who shall stand?

But further, that which is the main thing in this, is, That sin causes a most
dreadful controversy between God and the soul, between God and a Nation: For
this God comes to strive, to contend for his glory, and the siner strives and
contends against God.

Isa. 45.9. Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker. Let the pots^e^rds of the
earth strive with the potsheards. Yet thus does every sinful impenitent soul,
and every sinful impenitent Nation, they strive with their Maker. The Lord is
above them: therefore to intimate the distance between God and us in this
controversy; says the text, The Lord has a controversy with the inhabitants
of the land, poor earth-creeping creatures that have dwellings here below whose
houses are h^uses of clay, and God is the great God of Heaven and Earth.

The controversy that God has with a sinner is a just controversy,

Thirdly, It is a controversy that we have begun, God did

Fourthly, It is an old controversy a controversy of our Adam, and one
generation after another has stood forth to hold up the controversy, and thou
wretched sinner stand up in thy generation in thy place to hold up the
controversy that mankind has had with God since his calling out of Paradise.

Fifthly, It is such a controversy as stirs up all the Power Levit. 26.
diver^ places in that chapter, If ye walk contrary unto me I will walk contrary
unto you, my Power my Wisdom all mine Attribu^es are against you. A man that
has a controversy with another imployes and improves all the strength he has
against him that he is at controversy with.

This controversy is a deadly controversy, it is such as

A controversy with God who is set upon it to h^ve satisfaction

Such a controversy as only the Lord Christ that great Mediator, that great
Peacemaker is able to make up; None can reconcile God and a sinner but Christ
God-Man, He must stand before God to satisfy for the wrong the sin of man has
done unto him.



Psalm. 57.16. I will not contend for ever, neither will I always be wroth, for
the Spirit should fail before me. This is spoken to those that are in Covenant
with God, in regard of the lesser controversies that after their reconciliation
may be between God and them: But with thee if not reconciled to God in Christ
who art yet in the great controversy that God has with sinful man, (I say if
thou look not to it) it may prove an everlasting controversy to thee:
Certainly God will overcome thee, God will have the day of thee, the Lord will
overcome when he judges. Julian strove a great while against the Lord, but at
length Vicisti Galilae vicisti, he was forced to acknowledge with his blood cast
up into the air, The Lord has overcome, the Lord will overcome.

It is a vain thing for thee to stand out striving with this great God. Job
40.2. Shall he that comendeth with the Almighty instruct him? So it is
translated in your books, but according to the words in the Hebrew, and so
translated by Pagnin and others, Is there any wisdom, or any learning in
contending with God? any knowledge showed in that? No certainly there is no
knowledge, no wisdom, no learning in contending with the Almighty: Our
greatest wisdom is to fall down, to be humbled before the Lord. The Lord has
appointed a certain period for thy coming in to make up thy peace with him, to
satisfy him; if thou neglectest that time thou art lost, undone for ever.

My brethren this is no time to have any controversy with God, to stand out
against him in ways of enmity. It is time now when such blackness of darkness
is upon us even storms of blood hang over our heads, It is time now (I say)
however, to be at peace with Heaven, to make our peace with God. Job. 36.18.
There is wrath, beware therefore that he take thee not away with his stroke.
The Lord is come forth from his place, he is pleading his cause, and now in the
ways of his administration he declares that he will have glory from his
creature, he has sworn by Himself and the word has gone out of his mouth in
righteousness that every knee must bow to him and every tongue confess his
Name, he seems now to resolve he will have it so indeed, he will have all to
bow before him. It is no time therefore now for us to have controversies with
God, to have controversies with God and man both, with Heaven, and Earth, and
Hell, and with our own consciences and all. What shall become us? Be not thou a
terror O Lord unto me (says Jeremiah) for thou art my hope in the day of evil.
If God be a terror, and the days be evil, Ier. 17.
what will become of us? It is time to fall down and make peace with God.

Consider of this you who are so often in controversies with your Neighbors:
Remember in all your controversies that God has a great controversy with you;
And satisfy not your selves in this that you are able to clear your selves
before men, what is that so long a^ this controversy continues?

It is a dangerous thing to go on long in this controversy with God; it is
wisdom to make an end of it betime, Pro. 17.14. The beginning of strife is like
the letting out of waters, wherefore leave off contention before it be meddled
with. The beginning of strife especially with God is most dreadful, if thou
go on but a little while, thine heart may be most desperately set against
God and for ever left to strive against him, never to come in and be humbled
before him. This is the reason (I verily believe) of the most horred wickedness
of some men amongst us: we wonder at it that ever any man should dare to
venture upon such horrid wickednesses, one after another; Surely here is the
reason, at first it may be when they were young there was some dreadful breach
between God and their souls, they fell (though the world perhaps knew it not)
into some foul and abominable sin, and having made such a dreadful breach
between God and their souls then, they now go on desperately and fight against
the God of Heaven in such a desperate manner as never any age can cell us any
examples of such desperate fighting against God as is in this age. God has a
controversy with Nations also for their sin. Those who are to suit for God may
well charge us, that the Lord has a controversy with the inhabitants of the
land at this day. If ever he had a controversy with a people he has it with
us. The Lord has a fearful controversy with us, he has most fearful things to
charge this land with, I might instance in some things that are more peculiar
to this nation than to any other upon the face of the earth.

England has, nor never had since the world began, Persecution of faithful and
godly Ministers, of the same Religion holding all fundamental Truths, yea, all
the Articles of Religion, every point of the Doctrine of Religion together with
them; (I say) never any Nation was guilty of that persecution as we of this
Kingdom are; Silencing many for ^rifles and toys; Persecuting for keeping the
Sabbath: It is true, other countries are loose in their practice or the
Sabbath, but no country upon the face of the earth has ever persecuted the
keeping of it as England has done; and that by the c^untenance of those in
authority. We are si ner and others are sinners, but the Lord has a
controversy with us for these things in a more special manner than with any
people upon the fac^ of the earth this day.

Jer. 32.31. that God speaks concerning the City of Jerusalem unto us, This
City has been to me as a pro^ocation of mine anger and of my fury from the
day that they built it even unto this day. So ever since the Reformation has
begun have we bin a provocation to the Lord.

people, with wicked people, with godly people, with the Saints, with all.

Fourthly, It is the most unkind controversy in regard of

Fifthly, The Lord has sent many faithful Ambassadors England, yet we have
stood out.

Sixthly, We have had as many offers of mercy as ever people

Seventhly, The Lord has been as patient, he has stayed as

Eighthly, The Lord has had us at advantages as much as

Ninthly, God has broken the backs of others with whom Germany, and how has
he dealt with them? Thus he begins to deal with us. It is reported that in
Germany when the war was but twenty or thirty miles off them, they went on in
their trading and followed their businesses, buying and selling and hoped that
they should be safe; so it is with us, Is not some part of England at this day
as desolate as Germany it self?

Tenthly, Those that knew most of Gods mind, have been so afraid of this
controversy that they have fled for fear of the wrath of God, and we have
slighted, jeered them for it, thought it was their foolish timerousness and
melancholy conceit; The Lord now seems to justify their fear.

The Lord is now for the present out against us in as dreadful a way of wrath
as ever he was against any people of the earth. I never read in Scripture nor
in History of a more dreadful wrath of God against a people all things
considered, than is against us at this day. Amos, 7.4. The Lord calls to
contend by fire: Surely the Lord does it at this day, he calls to contend
with England by fire, in a most dreadful way, and who knows what the end shall
be? That he has a most dreadful controversy against England at this day, will
appear if we further take these considerations.





At the beginning of this Parliament, when we began to have hopes of some
liberty and reformation, Oh what a joy was there generally in the Kindom! all
men agreed together; but when those that were wicked and carnal began to see
that their godly neighbors rejoiced and that they blessed God for what was
done that they had their minds; now they turn out of a spirit of malice against
them, rather than they shall rejoice, rather than they shall have their minds,
we will turn back again to the bondage we were in before, and we will stand and
oppose that which heretofore we rejoiced in. Certainly here is the very ground
of so much contradiction as there is at this day; They have therefore turned
Malignants against that Cause which a man would wonder that ever rational men
should be against; But there is a spirit of malice against Christ and his
Ordinances, fearing a reformation; they would have their lusts, and they think
if reformation come they should not have them with that liberty they have had;
here is the very reason that the Gentry and others in the country are opposite;
Surely God has a controversy with us.

Thirdly, That men should so vily desert those whom they out as they did of
Luther, that they are the trumpets of sedition and rebellion; whereas on the
other side if they should say nothing, then people would have cried out that
they had betrayed their Country and that they were not so faithful in their
places as they should, therefore people were so bad as they were. Thus hard it
is for God or man to please people.

Again. That not only people should desert them, but that so many of Nobles,
and some Members of the Parliament themselves should desert their Brethren
there, and join with Papists, French, and Walloons; When as not long since a
company of vile wretches being gathered together to fight against our brethren
of Scotland, and yet those vile people could not be brought to fight against
them by any means; But now not the vile ones, but Nobles, Knights, and Gentry
can be brought to fight against the Parliament their own Brethren; Is not here
a mighty hand of God against us? Could this ever be if God had not a dreadful
controversy against England?



England and the Countries about us that such an ill cause should get so high
and prosper so much as it has done; Surely the Lord is against us or else it
could not have been.

Sixthly, When there shall be such a desperate design so long

Seventhly, That we should have so little fruit of our prayers England have
been sent up to God for the Palsgraves children, and that now instead of
answering our prayers God should send two Arrows as it were out of those loins
to do us mischief, that it should come from them for whom England has done so
much to maintain them and sent up so many prayers to God for them, and in
recompense of all they should come hither to make havoke of the Kingdom. Surely
the hand of God is out against us.

Eighthly, That our brethren should be so spoiled and our French, Walloons, and
Irish to spoil the Kingdom, to destroy our Brethren, would one have ever
imagined that English men should have born it and stirred no more than they
have done? You talk indeed of this and that and of going forth every fourth
man, but all such resolutions and such great words of men do usually sink and
fall down and come to nothing, a^ if men were willing and content to lay down
their necks upon the block. Surely the guilt of the blood of our Brethren may
justly come upon us, and God may have a controversy with us for suffering
their blood to be spilt.



Numb. 13. when the people were come very near to Canaan and were even ready to
take possession, God was resolved against them, that none but Caleb and Joshua
should enter, they were beaten back again: now Chap. 14.33. it is said that the
people when they heard this, mourned greatly, they saw the hand of God out
against them. The truth is we have been even in Canaan, Oh what an opportunity
God put into our hands in the West, I say not we lost the opportunity, but
there Gods own hand showed it self against us; Bristol then might have been
saved, but God would not; And so when we were even at our deliverance God
seemed to drive us back, as if he told us, well I like not the business in
hand, for this generation, I have somewhat more to say to them, it may be to
their young ones I may show mercy afterward, but against this generation my
wrath shall be let out. Surely we may be afraid in regard of the ways of Gods
present administration lest this should be in Gods heart. Howsoever let us
consider it and mourn greatly before the Lord. God has a controversiy with the
inhabitants of the land.

It is no time now to have controversies one with another, to be wrangling one
with another, for this opinion and the other opinion. It is time for us now to
lay down all our private controversies and fall to the making up the
controversy with our God. It is no time now for Brethren to strive with
Brethren, but to strive and wrestle with ^od in prayer. If we have any strength
with us, let it not be spent in contending one with another, but let all our
strength be spent in seeking to make peace with our God. It is said of the
Romans that they had a Temple of Concord and none were to go to offer any
further sacrifice but those that came first to offer in the Temple of Concord.
The Lord looks it should be so with us, we should come and agr^e one with
another, lay down all our own controversies and then give up our selves as one
man to this great work to make up our controversy with him. If two Chickins be
fighting and the Kite come near, they will leave picking one another and run to
the Hen for shelter. We stand picking and snarling one at another, and many men
that say they will do thus and thus for the public cause, but they take
exception against this man and the other man, and at this thing and that thing,
and now their private grudges come in and that draws them away and takes them
off; Oh let us not be picking now, the Kite is coming near, let us run and
shelter our selve^ under the protection of God, that cannot be but by making
our peace with him.

As for the controversy that is this day between the King and us, we can in
that appeal to God, that there is no just cause the King should contend with us
no hurt ever intended or done by us unto him. Only we desire to deliver ou^
selves from Tyranny and slavery. Our Privileges and Libe^ties are deer to us,
they are our Right as truly as his Honor is his. That which he inheriteth it
was his for^fathers, and that which his forefathers, his predecessors
inherited, it was at first from the People, they set up such a family to rule
and govern over them; and certainly they never set it up for any other end but
only for the public good, not for their misery and ruin: We can appeal to God
that we desired nothing else but to l ve peacably and to serve God in our land,
enjoying only what God and nature and the Laws of our land had made our own. We
know the relation between him and us, and the bond it is mutual; and if there
be any thing done now that perhaps cannot be justified by any positive
explicit Law of the land, let men know that yet it may be justified by the
very light of Nature and by the Law of Arms. It cannot be imagined but if
those that ought to be the protectors of the Law should come against Law so
hardly upon us, that we must have recourse then to the Law and light of nature,
it is impossible this should be otherwise, and this God himself approves.

Whatsoever therefore becomes of this controversy between him and us, whether
reconciliation or not reconciliation, yet we have peace in this, that what we
have done in the resisting of a deluge of misery that was coming upon us, if we
had not done it, our consciences would have upbraided us, the generation to
come would have cursed us, the Nations about us and our very enemies would have
scorned us and derided us for our base cowardliness, for our sordid spirits,
for an unworthy generation that should see it self and posterity sinking into
misery and brought under slavery, and out of base fear and sluggish litherness
of spirit and effeminate softness, should suffer all to be brought into bondage
to the humors and lusts of a few men. We can therefore with comfort and
boldness stand at Gods Tribunal and plead the uprightness of our hearts and
justness of our cause in this Controversy whatever becomes of it. But in the
controversy that God has against us, there we fall down at his feet and
acknowledge our selves guilty before him, yea, we come with sackcloath upon our
loins and ashes on our heads, with ropes on our necks, and plead only mercy for
our lives. And this is the work that we have to do in all the days of our
humiliation, to seek to make an Atonement between God and our souls and the
Land in regard of that dreadful controversy he has against us. Now blessed
God, because thou tellest us in thy word, Because I WILL do this, therefore
prepare to meet thy God O Israel: Thou threatnest hard, great and sore evils,
and thou call now to us, because Thou will do this, England, O England
prepare to meet God; We come (Oh that this might be our answer) we come Lord
and meet thee with our souls bowed toward thee, with our hearts bleeding that
we have provothee to cause so much bloodshed of our brethren amongst us. O Lord
our hearts are open to thee, and with trembling spirits we cry to the Lord,
what will thou have us do? If thou proceedest against us in thy controversy we
are undone, we are undone, Oh Lord forgive, Oh Lord arise and be merciful we
beseech thee, for by whom shall Jacob rise for he is small? by whom shall the
people arise? by whom shall the power of godliness and thine Ordinances be
maintained?

How happy were we think some if the controversy between the King and us were
at an end, that we might have peace. Oh if the people were happy that were in
such a case, how happy the people that were at peace with the King of Heaven!
If the controversy between God and us were at an end we should be happy
indeed. The Lord and the Land is at a controversy, and this controversy makes
us cry out unto God; but yet woe unto us, here is the misery, we yet keep our
sins that make the controversy. Jer. 35. Will the Lord reserve his anger for
ever? will he keep it unto the end? Mark what the answer is, Behold thou have
spoken and done evil things as thou could. Thus you have said, but what is
the fruit of this? You have done evil as you could. We in the days of our
Fasts cry, Lord will thou reserve thine anger for ever? will thou keep it unto
the end? Behold thus we speak, but yet we continue to do evil as we can. Isa.
59.9. We looked for light (says the text) but behold obscurity, for
brightness but we walk in darkness, we grope for the wall like the blind: We
indeed grope as if we had no eyes and we stumble at noon day as if it were
night. Men to this day are ready to cry out and say, what shall we do? as if the
way were not clear before us what we should do; The way is clear enough if we
had hearts, but we grope as if we had no eyes and we stumble at noon day as in
the night. In many places of the Kingdom they roar out as bears, and they have
cause to do so, For they are miserably spoiled, their wives ravished, their
houses plundered, themselves imprisoned; and for the rest of us we mourn like
doves night and day, and we look for judgment and there is none, and for
salvation but it is far from us; Mark what follows, For our transgressions are
multiplied before thee, (there is the ground of all the controversy between God
and us) and as for our sins they testify against us, and our trangressions are
with us. Surely my Brethren God is willing to be at peace with England again;
the controversy is great and sore, yet we may confidently speak that the Lord
is yet willing to be at peace with England, and the sufferings of England go as
near the heart of God as ours. Oh that we knew then what it is that is the
great makebate between God and us that we might get rid of it! Would you know
it? 2. Sam. 20.21. says Joab there, Deliver us Sheba the son Bichri and we
will depart from the City and go every one unto his tent. If amongst us
Delinquents were punished as they ought, if the hearts of people were prepared
to have the remainders of superstition and Idolatry cast out, if they were
willing to receive Jesus Christ as King among them, the sound of retreat would
soon be heard, the controversy would soon be at an end; and except this be the
foundation of our peace, either there will be no peace at all, or it will not
hold long. In our raising of forces therefore to help our selves and our
brethren (seeing we pretend we will do more than before, and it is time we
should if we be not a people destinated to destruction and ruin) be sure we
begin here, let us do more than ever we did before to make up this controversy
with God. It is reported of Achior one of Holopherness his Captains that he
counseled Holopherness to enquire first whether the Jews had offended their
God before he attempted to make war against them, for if they had, he then
assured him that that would be their ruin and he might go up and overcome
them, but if he could not hear that they had sinned against their God it was in
vain for him to strive against them. Truly it concerns us nearly to make up our
peace with God that when our adversaries come out against us they may not
indeed be made use of to avenge Gods quarrel upon us, for then they will easily
improve all their advantages this way, and say indeed that they are not come
out against us without the Lord; Every victory they now get they are ready to
please themselves in this and say that God fights against us, and God
approves them, they tell us the reason they prevail is because God is against
us, and so we know Rabshekah did though a foul railer, yet says he, Are we
come up without the Lord? And the enemies of David Psalm, 71.12. Mine enemies
have said, God has forsaken him, now persecute and take him, for there is none
to deliver him: Thus they will be ready to say upon any occasion, now the Lord
has left them, now let us take them: And certainly if the Lord should suffer
them to prevail many of them would think they do God good service to slay and
to root out that generation of Gods people that is here in England, and they
would be confident that it is the mind of God that they should be rooted out.
Therefore we had need look to it to make up our peace with God that the
controversy between him and us may not prove to be their victory.

The Lord has a controversy with the inhabitants of the Land. There are only
two notes to be further observed hence. God having to deal with poor earthen
creatures, he might presently have let his wrath out against them and destroyed
them: But Mark, God is willing to have his cause pleaded with vile creatures,
so that all the while he is pleading there is time and space for them to come
in. This teaches us this excellent lesson: Observe.
[That men should be willing that the cause that is between them and their
inferiors should be pleaded, and not stand so much upon their superiority, and
scorn to humor an inferior so much as to have any matter debated between
them.] As husband and wife if a controversy be between them, though the one be
superior and the other inferior, think it not much to debate it between
themselves with meekness and love, Job, 31.13. professed he did not despise the
cause of his man-servent when he contended with him, but he would have that
pleaded and made out. Jehovah, the mighty God condescendeth to put his cause to
a suit, he will not pass sentence upon poor creatures til it come to a trial.
Be not surly and scornful toward your inferiors.

Another Note, [The inhabitants of the Land] lies a little more couched. The
inhabitants of the Land, what Land? The inhabitants of the Land of Canaan, a
controversy with them. Mark, God fulfilled his promise in bringing them into
the Land of Canaan, and now he pleads with them for the forfeiture of their
promise. Psalm. 105.44, 45. he tells them that he had given them the lands of
the Heathen, that they might observe his Statutes and keep his Laws, that was
their condition. God fulfilled hi^ part, he brings them into the land, but
when they were in the land they minded not their part. You know God often gave
them charge when they came into the land to do this and this, they promised
they would do it, but when they were once brought into the land they forgot it,
they forsook God. God now comes and pleads with the inhabitants of this land;
As if he should say, I have done my part in bringing you into the land, now I
come to plead with you for breaking your promise and covenant. Take this note
from hence. [Whatsoever mercy you have from God you are to look upon it as a
fruit of Gods faithfulness to you (if you be Gods) and as a ground of your
obedience to him, Observe.
and his pleading with you if you walk not answerable to it.

The inhabitants of the Land.] Hierome has another note upon it, but that is
further off, I will only name it. Rightly says he are they called to answer
and to judgment that are the inhabitants of the land, and do not look upon
themselves as sojourners and strangers in the land; But he that can truly say
with the Prophet, I am a pilgrim and a stranger here, such a one can never do
that which may cause God to have a controversy against him. This is the reason
men do that which causes God to have a controversy with them, because they
look upon themselves as possessors of the land, and not as pilgrims and
strangers. But this is too far off.

The second part follows. [God declares.] A suit first is entered against
such a man, when the Court day comes, there is calling for a declaration, the
Lawyer declares: God does so, and the Prophet is Gods Lawyer, and here are
three Articles put in thi^ declaration, Because there is no Truth, no Mercy, no
knowledge of God in the land.

First in general, that there is a declaration, take these two useful notes
from thence.

First, God contendeth not with a people without a cause. How many are there
that strive and contend one with another without any cause at all! they vex and
rage, contend and sue and great controversies there are, but if we come to
examine the cause we can find nothing at all; great dull is raised but whence is
it? if we look to the bottom and examine wherefore it is, we can see just
nothing, they themselves know no cause, they can give no rational account of
all their pleading, one against another. As David said to Eliah his eldest
brother, 1 Samuel 17.29. when Eliah came and wrangled with him, says David, What
have I now done? is there not a cause? Eliahs spirit was up through his envy,
chiding and wrangling with David; but what have I done says David, have not I
cause for what I did! Thus many have their spirits up, chiding and wrangling,
but examine the cause, and they can show none at all. How many are there of
bitter spirits, who even go about like mad-dogs, snarling at every one, even at
those they know not, with whom they had never any thing to do, yet cry out
against them, railing upon them every where! Ask them, do you know the man? can
you prove any hurt against him? The truth is they know him not, they are not
able to make good what they say, only there is a general noise of such and such
men that they do thus and thus, and so they bite and snail, and rage against
them, but when all comes to all they know no cause. Such and such men they say
disturb the Kingdom and trouble the people, a great deal of cry but little
wool, the foundations of the earth are out of order, but what has the
righteous done? You would think when you hear such railings and cryings out
against such and such men, that they were the most monstrous men upon the
earth, but examine what it is that they have done, there is nothing. God does
not so with you, God never contendeth with man but for a just cause.

Secondly, Because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the
land, but by swearing, and lying, and stealing etc. From whence in the general
there is this, God contendeth not against a people for little things, Ob^.
when God says he has a controversy with the inhabitants of the land it is
not for trifles, for ordinary infirmities, for daily excursions, but for great
notorious things. Not that little things do not deserve a controversy, but it
is from the virtue and fruit of the Covenant that this comes to pass; in
others that are not in Covenant little things make a controversy, but between
Gods children and himself they are not little things that make a controversy.
But men are of froward spirits, every trifle is enough to make a controversy
between them. Yea, usually the greatest controversies between nearest friends
is some trifle or other. Is there a man and his wife live lovingly and sweetly
many years, do they fall out afterward? Is there a bitter controversy? Examine
it, it is but about some toy. So between one brother and another. I could give
you examples in Histories of great and bitter controversies that have been
between nearest friends upon small and trivial grounds. I remember Camerarius
tells us a story of two brethren, these two walking out in a starlight night,
says one of the brethren would I had a pasture as large as this Element, and
says the other would I had as many Oxen as there be Stars; says the other
again, where would you feed these Oxen? in your Pasture, replied he; what
whether I will or no? Yea said he whether you will or no; what in spite of me?
yes said he; and thus it went on from word to word till at length each sheathed
his sword in the others bowels. This verifieth that saying of James, Chap. 3.5.
Behold how great a matter a little fire kindles! So it is in many families,
sometimes perhaps a look is the beginning of a great controversy, one thinks
such a one does not look lovingly upon him, and then he begins to suspect that
things boil within him, perhaps afterward some words come forth that may seem
to argue discontent, and then that word begets another, and that other a
third, and so a miserable breach comes to be in a family. It is an argument
that these people have Gunpouder spirits that a little spark of fire can so
quickly blow them up. Truly the controversy here in England the ground of it
at the first beginning was little enough on our parts; Only were it not that
there had bin a desperate design in our adversaries, it were impossible that
such a little beginning should ever come to that height. But God does not so,
they are great things for which he has a controversy with the inhabitants of
the land.

But what is it? what is the declaration? No truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of
God in the land. These three especially, the first does exceeding nearly
concern us.

First, No Truth. God is a God of Truth, he is true in all his ways. He justly
pleads with them that have dealt falsely with him. No truth; No reality in their
Religion, that is something, but that is not all. God comes upon them for the
breaches first of the second Table; for they ar^ more convincing; we have
greater advantage against a natural man to convince his conscience in those
than in matters of Religion. If you speak to them concerning sins in matters of
Religion, they will say they acknowledge the true God and they worship him.
Well, therefore the Prophet begins first herein the matters of the second
Table, concerning the want of truth between man and man; As if he should say,
Talk what your will concerning your worshipping of the true God, there is no
truth between one another, you deal falsely and cruelly, and are merciless to
your brethren, never therefore talk of Religion and of acknowledging the true
God. Obs.
Thence the Note is this. [That it is in vain for any man to talk of his
Religion, if he make no conscience of the second Table as well as the first.]
For a man to talk of praying, and hearing Sermons, if he be cruel and hard
hearted, and false in his dealings, the Lord rejects all let him talk what he
will.

No truth in your dealings one with another. First there is abundance of
flattery amongst you. You flatter one another in your sin, you do not deal
unfainedly one with another. You flatter your Princes, and your Princes have
little truth in their Courts. It was once a speech of one, All things were
plentiful in the Court but only truth. And this is the unhappiness of great men
that those that are about them usually deal falsely with them. You shall seldom
know one that deals truly with great men, they tell them that their
bloodshedding and ruining of Kingdoms is but the maintaining of their just
Honor and Prerogative. I have read of Dionisius his flatterers, that when he
spit upon the ground they would lick it up and then tell him that that spittle
was sweeter than any Ambrosia and Nectar, the sweetest that ever they tasted,
merely to please him: And so you have many that are near to great men, though
they see them do things never so abominable; things that make never so great
breaches between God and them, between them and people, yet they tell them that
they do more bravely than ever any of their Ancestors did. There is no truth.

Truth here some take for Justice. Thus it is sometimes taken in Scri^ture.
Zech. 8.16. Speak ye every one the truth to his neighbor, execute the judgment
of truth and peace. As if he should say, you do not execute justice upon
Malignants that are in your power; you speak of raising Arms to fetch in
Delinquents, but you execute not judgment upon those that you have in your
hands, you will have God in a solemn manner to be blessed because he has
delivered you from them, but judgment is not executed in truth as it should be.
Nor No Mercy: That is, you show no mercy to the innocent; you talk of
indulgence, your indulgence to Delinquents is cruelty to innocents, Oh how many
of our brethren in Oxford and other places suffer most dreadful things because
these here enjoy so much liberty and have so much favor as they have. So there
is neither mercy to the Innocent not justice to the Nocent.

But the special thing here intended is, That you are not true in your dealings
nor in the trust committed to your charge; There is no equity in your
dealings. Isa. 59.14. And judgment is turned backward, (it is turned upon those
that it should not be executed upon) And justice stands a far off. If one be
greater than another, the meanest shall come under the stroke of justice and be
executed, and the greater not: And truth is fallen in the streets; how comes
that in? Thus, as if he should say, It is true, they that are in place of
Authority will not execute judgment and justice, but are not the common people
faithful in their dealings one with another, No, Truth is fallen in the streets:
this seems to refer to the multitude; And equity cannot enter; the word that is
here translated Equity, comes of a word that signifies a thing that is just
before one; As if he should say, those very things that one would think were as
plain (as we say) as the nose on a man's face, things that are so evident, that
are just before us, that have so much equity and reason in them, yet those
things cannot enter, those things cannot be entertained, there is such a
general confusion amongst the people, such a corruption among them, they are so
set upon wickedness, that things that are equal and plain according to common
sense and reason, yet it cannot enter into their hearts, they will not receive
it. And is not this in a great measure our condition at this time?

There is no Truth, they are false in the trust committed to their charge. Oh
here is a controversy indeed that God may have against us. Was there ever a
time that either England or any other country knew when there was so much
falsness in men in the trust committed to them? All things in Israel at this
time were come to that confusion, that through the falsness of men any thing of
the greatest consequence that might be was betrayed. It is a sign of Gods
fearful wrath upon our Nation that there is no truth in men, when people are
lest to the treachery and perfidiousness of others; that such whom one would
think one might be confident of their truth, nay venture their lives upon it,
yea, such as a long time before were trusty; yea, trusty to admiration, yet
at last when they think they may suffer, [their own ends are not so clear to
attain to as at first] they will betray all that trust that is committed to
them and venture even their own undoing rather than endure further hazard in
that way of trust. Such cursed selvishness is there in the hearts of men that
have not the grace and true fear of God to balance their hearts; they will
even betray God himself and a whole Kingdom for their own private ends. But what
an unworthy thing is this for men to betray public trust when so much mischief
may come upon it merely for their own ends; It is as if a man should set an
house on fire to roast an egg: what are men's own particular ends in comparison
of a Kingdom? not so much as an egg in comparison of an house. This was the
complaint in Micah's time of Judah as well as of Israel here, Micah was
contemporary with Hosea, Mic. 7.5. Trust not in a friend, put ye no confidence
in a guide, keep the doors of thy mouth from her that lies in thy b some: A
man's enemies (ver. 6.) are the men of his own house. But though there are many
of them thus corrupt and there is no truth in them, you cannot tell how to put
any trust in them, are there not some of them better? Mark the 4. verse. The
best of them is a bryar, the most upright is sharper than a thorn hedge. In evil
times you shall find those whom you most confide in to be so froward in some of
their ways, so perverse, that if you go to them for shelter, they will prick
you; even those men that you cry most up, those whom you think to receive most
from, yet when evil times come their spirits will be so stirred that if you
come to them for shelter you shall find them extreme perverse: And this indeed
is the day of the perplexity of a Kingdom, what shall we do in this case? Mark
the 7. verse Therefore will I look unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of my
salvation, My God will hear me; As if he should say, If I look unto man I have
little help there, little comfort there, the best of them is a bryar, if I
trust in men and look for any help from men, I see what they will do, verily
every man is altogether vanity; therefore our condition is very sad and
miserable, Lord what shall we do? I will look to the Lord, I will wait for the
God of my salvation, My God will hear me; Men cannot save me, God will hear me
though they will not.

Observe.
Gods controversy with Covenant-breakers, with those that betray their trust,
is very dreadful. I will show you an example or two out of the Scripture and
out of History.

First that notable place in 2 Samuel 21. when there was a famine in the days of
David three years together, David would know what the matter was, God gave him
this answer, That it was for Saul and his bloody house, because he slew the
Gibeonites; Because Saul would not keep that trust to the Gibeonites that was
promised them, God therefore brings a famine upon the whole Land for three years
together: And I beseech you mark the aggravation here of Gods displeasure
against any that break trust; first this promise was not made by Saul, but by
Saul's Progenitors, and it was made above three hundred years before his time,
And then to whom was it made? unto a Heathenish people, to the Gibionites; And
this promise they got deceitfully, they deceived Joshua and so got it by craft;
further it was a promise made them without asking counsel of God, so the text
says, Josh. 9.14. Again, this promise was against the mind of the
congregation, verse 18. All the congregation murmured against the Princes:
Again, Saul when he slew the Gibeonites he did not do it out of a perfidious
spirit, but out of a good intent, for so the text says, 2 Samuel 21.2. He slew
them in his zeal to the children of Israel, because he thought that the
Gibeonites remaining amongst them would perhaps prove some hinderance to the
good of Israel. Further, this work of God comes not upon Saul then when he
broke the trust, but upon his posterity afterward, and that shows it to be
greater wrath. Lastly it comes so upon them as it will not be appeased till it
has their lives: you may see then how God is set upon it to revenge
promise-breakers.

Another example as notable as that, is in Ezekiel. 17 15. when Zedekiah the King
of Judah had made a Covenant with the King of Babylon, and broke it, he
rebelled against him in sending his Ambassadors into Egypt that they might
give him horses and much people; Shall he prosper says the Lord? shall he
escape that does such things, or shall he break the covenant and be delivered?
This covenant was made with a wicked man with a Tyrant, and yet God calls it
his Oath and his Covenant, ver. 18. And then with what an Emphasis does God
speak this. He despised the Oath by breaking the Covenant when lo he had given
his hand yea ver. 16. God professes it shall cost him his life, Surely says
the Lo d, in the place where the King dwells that made him King, whose Oath
he despised, and whose Covenant he brake, even with him in the midst of
Babylon shall he dye: yea further, God swears against him and that by his own
life, ver. 19. Therefore thus says the Lord God, at I live surely mine Oath
which he has despised, and my Covenant which he has broken, even it will I
re^ompense upon his own head: Then further, God tells him that all the strength
that he had got to him and all his policy and all his cunning devices should
not help him, ver. 20. I will spread my net upon him and he shall be taken in
my snare, and I will bring him unto Babylon and will plead with him there for
his trespass that he has trespassed against me: And lastly, the wrath of God
shall not only be upon him, but upon all those that joined with him and a bet
him in the breaking of this covenant, ver. 21. All his fugitives with all his
hands shall fall by the sword, and they that remain shall be scattered toward
all winds. I know not two scriptures more full for Gods being set to contend
with men for breach of promise. Oh take heed all you that are entrusted in any
public trust that you break not covenant.

And as you have examples of this in the Scripture, so there is also an example
or two in History which are exceeding full for this purpose. I suppose that is
known unto you of Rodolphus, who having set his hand to a Covenant with Henry
the fourth which he afterward brake, and his right hand coming to be cut off,
his conscience accused him, Oh says he, This is that right hand that
subscribed the Covenant, and now God revengeth the breach of it upon this right
hand. But above all that is the most remarkable that is in the History of the
Hungarians, concerning Vdislaus the King of Hungary, and Amurath the great
Turk; they report that Vdislaus making war with Amurath, having before promised
the contrary; in a battle between them the Turk had the worst of it, AMURATH
being there and having with him the Covenant made between the King of Hungary
and him, and seeing himself put to the worst, he plucked forth the Covenant out
of his bosom and with his eyes fixed toward Heaven he speaks thus, This Oh
Jesus Christ is the Covenant that thy Christians have struck with me, O holy
Jesus they have done it in thy Name and sworn by thy Majesty, and yet they
have violated it, they have perfidiously denied their God; Now Oh Jesus if thou
be a God as they say and as we guess thou art, revenge this wrong that is
done unto me and unto thy self upon these that have violated their faith and
promise, and do thou show unto us that do not know thy Name that thou art an
avenger of such as betray their trust, and then we shall know thee to be a God.
Now just upon this God so ordered it that the Hungarians having the better of
the day, they through covetousness of the prey broke off the fight and fell upon
the laden Camels, whereupon the Turks totally routed the Hungarians, Vdislaus
their King was slain, and a famous Victory left unto Amurath.

Thus you see how God will be avenged for the breach of trust, certainly God
will follow those that have been guilty of it; we see it apparently how God
follows them already. And indeed if we have to deal with men that are popish As
Rodolphus and Vdislaus were.
how is it possible that we can confide in them in any thing they promise, in
any thing they agree to? For we know it is their very opinion, that fides non
servenda hereticis, faith is not to be kept with heretics; This Is their
opinion they hold, that for the Catholic Cause they may break al their trust,
promises and covenants. Certainly that people are besotted that shall so depend
upon those that are Papists and carried away by Papists, as to lay their lives,
their liberties, and their outward comforts at their feet, at their mercy; for
certainly there is no truth in them. The Nations of the earth are even besotted
in this, that they will ever make any covenant, any league with Papists who
hold such an opinion that they may break all their Covenants for the Catholic
cause. What a case should we be in if we lie down at the mercy of those that
have no truth in them, when afterward we shall find they break assunder al
their bonds of agreement and all their covenants, and then we our selves know
that this was their opinion before, and that they would enter into league and
make peace with us merely to serve their own turns, and when they have what
they would have then to make our estates, lives, and liberties to be a prey to
them? But we must let that pass, only this in a word added to it.

Nor no Mercy.] The Merciful God sets himself against Unmerciful men, and has
a dreadful controversy against them; And when this controversy comes to be
pleaded, Unmerciful men will be confounded before the Lord; For God will lay
his plea thus, What you that stood in so much need of mercy every moment to
keep you out of Hell; You that lived upon mercy continually as you breathed in
the air; You who are begging at my gates every day? You who are undone for ever
it you had not mercy supplied every hour, and yet You unmerciful to your
brethren? This plea will stop the mouths of all Unmerciful ones. It was the
controversy that God had with Sodom it self, because they were Unmerciful:
Much more than has God a controversy with the inhabitants of the land of
Israel if they be unmerciful. Ezekiel. 16.49. there God lays his charge, his plea
against Sodom, That they did not strengthen the hands of the poor.
Unmercifulness it is a sin against the very light of nature. Josephus in his
15. book of Antiquities, Chap. 12. reports this of Herod that wicked and
ungodly king that we read of in the Gospel, That there being a great famine in
Judea, he melted all his movables of Gold and Silver that were in his Palace,
he spared nothing of his Plate either for the preciousness of the matter, or
for the excellency of the fashion of it, no not so much as those vessels
wherein he was daily served at his table, but he melted them all and made money
of them, and sent this money into Egypt to buy Corn, which Corn he distributed
unto the Poor, and he appointed Bakers to provide bread for such as were sick,
and he provided raiment for the naked, because the sheep were likewise dead and
the poor had no work; yea he sent to his neighbors the Syrians Corn that might
be Seed-corn for them to sow the ground with. This was that wicked Herod, and
yet in time of public calamity thus merciful was he to the poor. Surely God
must needs have a controversy with Israel then, with Christians then that have
received so much mercy from the Lord if they shall be unmerciful in times of
common calamity. And if ever unmercifulness were a vile sin and provoked God
against a people, it must needs do now at such a time as this, when there are
so many objects of pity and commiseration daily presented before us: If this
should but prove to be our charg, that there is no mercy in the land at this
day, God must needs have a fearful controversy against us. The whole land
cannot be said to be charged now as at some time it might have been. Not long
since in England there has been crying out of violence and wrong, those which
ruled over us have ruled over us with violence, rigor, and cruelty, according
to that complaint Ezekiel. 34.4. With cruelty and force have ye ruled my people.
They have turned judgment to wormwood, Amos, 5.7. Their Courts of Juducature
that should have been for right judgment have been turned into bitter wormwood
and have been full of cruelty. What have many of them cared for the lives, for
the comforts of thousands, for the extremity of all misery they shall suffer,
so be it their own humors and their own lusts might be satisfied, as if all
other men were but as dogs except themselves? The Lord does at this day charge
this upon some of them, and will charge it more. I remember once a speech of a
reverend Divine in this, City, now with God, whom you all honored when he was
alive, being put into that Court, the high Commission, when he came home one
day from thence he tells this story of what he observed there. I heard (says
he) crying out much of Grace, and please your Grace, and much crying out of
peace, if there were any noise, then peace peace, but I saw no MERCY th^re
says he, nothing at all but Cruelty.

Jer. 50.17. you may see in what indignation God does take it, for men though
the greatest upon earth to be cruel to his people, This Nebuchad rezza^ King of
Babylon has broken his bones; Who was this Nebuchad rezzar? A mighty great
Prince, yet God looks upon him with indignation when he sees him breaking the
bones of his people. We have amongst us those who as Psalm 27.12. breath our
cruelty, and indeed they act nothing less, there is cruel hatred in their
hearts and ways, according to that Psalm, 25.19. No marvel therefore though
heretofore our brethren left the Kingdom, because they found such cruelty here
there was no mercy in the land; they did but according to that which the Church
calls the members of it to, Cant. 4.8. Come with me from Labanon from the
Lions dens, from the mountains of the Leobards. When they went from us, they
went from the Lions dens, and from the mountains of the Leopards; No marvel now
the Lord is so severe against our Land, because there has been so little mercy
in the land. That is the second Article against Israel, That there was no Mercy.

The third is, Nor no Knowledge of God in the land.] In the Hebrew it is, And no
knowledge; but now Vau that is there for And, it signifies sometimes quia, as
well as et; And so it may indeed be well rendered here, Because there is no
knowledge of God in the land; the reason why there is no mercy is because there
is no knowledge of God: The knowledge of God will make wicked men to be merciful
men. Cruel men know not God. These two are put together and joined most
elegantly in Psalm. 74.20. The dark places of the earth are full of the
habitations of cruelty (says the text.) The knowledge of God will make men
civil and humane at least, but when there is no knowledge of God men grow cruel
and savage. And do we not find this to be true at this very day? From what
places are men that do now rise up to be plunderers, to shed blood, to be cruel
in most desperate outrages, from what places are these men beholden for their
assistors and abettors this way? Are they not beholden to places where they are
in ignorance, where they have no knowledge of God, where there is no preaching?
In the Countries round about observe those Parishes, those Towns, where there
has been least or worst preaching, where they have had least knowledge of God,
there you have most malignants, that are bloody and cruel. No mervail then that
our adversaries are such enemies to the faithful preachers of the word of God;
no marvel then they are made the But of their malice; for indeed if they bring
the knowledge of God into the land they will bring humanity, civilitie, they
will bring mercy and love, and there will be few or none that will be fit for
their turns. Indeed it is their complaint of the Parliament that they set
ignorant men in places, but certainly this complaint is but a pretense, for it
were better for their turns that all the congregations in England had but
ignorant men, had no men to bring the knowledge of God amongst people; but they
know well enough what ever they say, that those that are sent are such as do
bring the knowledge of God among people, and there is nothing does them more
hurt than this knowledge of God.

No knowledge of God.] This is a heavy charge indeed: Power out thy fury upon the
Heathen that know thee not, Jer. 10.25. Though they be Heathens and yet know
not God, the wrath of God is to be poured forth upon them, surely then Gods
wrath must be upon Israel that know not God. And Isa 2^.11. They are a people
of no understanding, therefore he that made them will not have mercy upon them,
he that formed them will show them no favor. 2 These. 1.8. The Lord Christ
shall come in flaming fire to render vengeance upon those that know him not.
What no knowledge of God? what glory then can God have from such a people? God
has done great things in the world, he has manifested himself an infinite and
a glorious God, and his end in all that he has manifested himself in is, that
Angels and men might behold this, might adore, admire, worship, fear, and
praise him; but where there is no knowledge of God, there all Gods glory passes
by and there is no notice taken of it, to what purpose is the world made? such
an one can never sanctify the Name of God in any duty of worship. in the use
of any creature: where there is no knowledge of God, there al good is kept out,
there the unclean spirit a spirit of darkness dwells: when the Crow has picked
out the eyes of the Lamb then it makes a prey upon it; As in dark vaults there
are toads and filthy creatures, so in dark soul there are crawling and filthy
lusts; As in blind Alehouses there is abundance of disorder, so in a blind
heart, there is abundance of distemper and disorder.

No knowledge of God.] The Septuagint turn this word Knowledge (...)
by a word that signifies acknowledgment, there is no acknowledgment of God in
the land. People should walk so in all their ways as to hold forth the glory
of that great God they do profess. If they know God to be such as he is
revealed in all his Attributes and works, they should in their lives (I say) so
walk as to hold forth this before the children of men. I appeal to you in this:
Perhaps some of you can speak concerning God, and tell us what God is, and
concerning his Attributes, yet are your lives in your families, in your
conversations, so as that one beholding them may see written the glorious
Attributes of God upon them, that you hold forth these glorious Attributes,
that in all your ways you carry with you the glory of the great God holding
forth your fear of this God, your love of this God, and giving up your selves
to this alsufficient God who is worthy of all. There should be thi^
acknowledgment of God as well as knowledge, and God has a controvers^^e with a
land with a-familie, with a particular soul when there is not an acknowledgment
of God in their ways.

But no knowledge of God in the Land.] In the land, here is the Emphasis. Oh
this is a very sad thing: What not in the land of Israel no knowledge of God?
Psalm. 76.1. In Judah is God known, his Name is great in Israel. It is expected
that God should be known in their land, and for God not to be known there; he
was not known to any people in all the world but Judah and Israel; and here ten
Tribes are charged for not having the knowledge of God in their land. Surely
they refused to know the Lord, they shut their eyes against the knowledge of
God, they say to God, depart from us we desire not the knowledge of thy ways.
Men may live where there is the means of knowledge and yet be ignorant all their
days. How many men of excellent parts in respect of all outward affairs, in
the country and City, come and speak to them about matters of State, they will
speak understandingly about them, they have deep reaches for State affairs;
speak to them about the affairs of Merchandise, of their trades, they will
speak understandingly; but speak to them about God, about Christ, about the
things of eternal life, how poorly, how weakly, how childishly, how sottishly
shall you have them speak about those things! Men of parts and living under
much means yet may be very ignorant of the knowledge of God. Howsoever the want
of knowledge may seem to be a little matter, even in pl^ces where there is
means, yet let men know that it is a fearful brand of reprobation for people to
live under the means and not to have the knowledge of God, 2. Cor. 4.3. If our
Gospel be hidden, it is hidden to those that are lost. And it is pronounced as
a great curse for a man to live without knowledge, Job, 36.12. They shall perish
by the sword, and they shall die without knowledge. Oh how many at this day do
perish by the sword and die without knowledge? It concerns us now to get the
knowledge of God because the sword may be nearer us than we are aware of, and
what will become of us if it fall out to be our portion to perish by the sword
and to die without knowledge?

But though they had some means of knowledge, yet their means did grow very
short. And there are two special reasons why Israel at this time was without
knowledge, why there was no knowledge of God in the land of Israel.

First, Because that Jeroboam had in the defection of these ten Tribes of
Israel, set up the lowest of the people in the place of the Priests Office. Any
man that desired to be a Priest though never so base and vile, Jeroboam would
set him up. In the 1 of King. 12.31. there you shall find it, He made an house
of high, places, and made Priests of the lowest of the people which were not of
the sons of Levi; no mervail then they had not the knowledge of God amongst
them. Thus it has been in Ireland, and therefore no mervail so little knowledge
of God there, any tradesman that scarce understood right reason, les^ divinity,
he was set up there to be a Priest, and what horrible cruelty has been there!
So in England: howsoever some of them complain of ignorant men that are in the
Ministry, the truth is they have set up men of far less understanding in former
times: for a little money to a Bishops Clark might not any tradesman, any cast
butlar from a gentleman's house, any cast servingman, might they not come into
orders and read their prayers and so become a Priest? This has been the cause
of much ignorance. How many cast Servingmen have had places in doing what they
can do, when as learned and godly Divines must be cast out of the Kingdom and
denied to have any liberty to preach the knowledge of God unto his own people!
Here is the reason of our ignorance even that which was Jeroboams sin, the
letting of the lowest of the people in the Ministry; And now that there is an
examination of men, we find what abundance of vile men there are in places, and
those people in those places are alike to them, such Prophet such People, and
the truth is people love to have it so. That which is complained of, in 2 Chronicles. 15.3. that for a long season Israel had been without the true God, and
without a teaching Priest. This Israel includes both Judah and Israel, for
sometimes it does so in Scripture. Israel had been (says he) without the true
God and without a teaching Priest: thi^ was a sad condition indeed that Israel
should be without a teaching Priest, and without the Law; And mark how they are
joined, and without God; A people are without God that are without a teaching
Priest, without the Law. If they have not means to instruct them in the
knowledge of God they are a people without God. But now ma^k what follows upon
this, ver. 5. In th^se times the^e was no p^ace to him that went out, n^r to
him that came in, but great vexations were upon all the inhabitants of the
countries, and Nation was destroyed of Nation, and City of City, for God did
vex them with all adversity. Truly our condition comes to be almost like to the
condition of Israel at that time. And here we may see what the fruit of this
controversy was, they were without a teaching Priest and without Law, and in
those time; there was no peace to him that went out and to him that came in,
but great vexation there was, City destroying City, and Nation destroying
Nation, for God did vex them with all adversity. Oh how does the Lord even vex
us at this very day! and this as a fruit of Gods controversy with us, because
there is so little knowledge of God in the land.

And the second reason why there was so little knowledge of God in that land at
that time, is this, Because the pure Worship of God and his Ordinances were
s^ut out of doors, and men's inventions were brought in in the ro^m of them. For
so it was, after the ten Tribes defection from Judah, then they left the right
worship of God, to worship in the Temple at Jerusalem, and they set up their
Calves in Dan and B^thel, and so brought in their own inventions instead of the
true worship of God; And no mervail though there came dismal darkness upon the
land when this was. That is certain my brethren, When ever the pure Ordinances
of God and the right way of his worship is shut out from a Kingdom, there will
come woeful darkness upon that Kingdom. The right knowledge of God vanishes
when men's inventions in his Ordinances come to be honored. As painted glass in
your windows hinders the light, you may daub your glass by paint, but you
will have the less light by that; so the more inventions of men there are in
Gods worship the less light comes into the heart of the people. As some not
contented with ordinary plain letters they make such flourishes about them that
you can scarce tell what they are; you shall have some write their names with
such flourishes that you can not tell what to make of them; so many men that
will not content themselves with plain Ordinances, with the Ordinances of
Christ, but they must have flourishes of their own inventions, at length you
know not what to make of them, they come to darken the right understanding of
the mind and truths of God. To the Law and to the Testimony, (says the
Prophet) if they speak not according to these it is because there is no light
in them. If they will leave the Law and the Testimony and will go according to
their own inventions in Divine Worship, it is because there is no light in
them, they are in darkness, and they will bring darkness upon the people.
Colos. 2.22. it is said of the rudiments of the world and the Ordinances of
men, that they perish in the use: that is, there is no efficacy at all in them
to do any good unto the souls of men. Our adversaries call Images and Pictures
lay men's books to teach them; but the Scripture tells us they teach a lie; And
if they be lay men's books, there are many Errataes in them, they are full af
Errataes in every Page and more Errataes than true lines. The best that we can
say of any Ceremonies brought into the Church by men, (because people would
strive and study to excuse the first Reformers) that they thought at that time
there was some use of them in reg^rd of the dullness of men, for so they say in
the Preface to the Common Prayer Book, that it was to stir up the dull minds of
men. But mark, if it could possibly be imagined that there could be any use of
them at the first, in the first Reformation (which indeed there was not, but
rather they did hurt and made men's minds more dull, as I dare appeal to you,
those that have lived continually under such inventions of men in Gods
worship.) But if possibly (I say) there could be imagined any use of them at
the first, the best is that they were but as Horn book, and fistcue^ for the
childhood and infancy of the Church. They say themselves that they needed such
things, but to put the best gloss on them, they needed them but as children
need Horn books and fistcues. And is it seemly always to learn upon them? what
knowledge shall be got if when you set your children to learn to read they
shall be kept ten, twenty, or thirty years to their Horn books? Now thus would
our Prelates have debased people to keep them continually to learn the
knowledge of God by their Horn-books and fistcues.

Now take these two reasons together, Unteaching Priests, and Man's Inventions,
they keep out the knowledge of God from a people; And they are brought on
purpose to bring blindness, because that is most fit and suitable to the design
that men have to bring people under slavery. So it was here, Jeroboam at that
time when Hosea prophesied, his design was to bring the people under slavery,
to keep them from the house of David to be his slaves, and what course does he
take? He first sets up the basest and lowest of the people to be their Priests:
and secondly he introduces false worship, and that brings in blindness and
ignorance, and so by this means he knew he should soon bring them under
slavery. And nothing is more clear than this, that it has been the design of
many that would have been Rulers of the Church, they have labored with all their
might, (as servicable unto others) to b^ing blindness and ignorance into the
Land, that so they might bring the land under sl^very and there is nothing has
vexed them more, than that there is so much knowledge in the land, therefore
their spiries were so enraged at peoples flocking unto Sermons? it was even
matter enough to silence any Minister to have people flocking to hear him
preach; so they were enraged at peoples repeating of Sermons in their private
families, because it was a way to bring in knowledge. Any thing that was a way
to bring in knowledge, their hearts were enraged against it, why? Because they
knew knowledge would keep men that they would never bear slavery; And truly it
is a very strange thing, that though in some Countries (as in Wales and in
other places) where men have not knowledge they are contented to come under
slavery; but that in these parts where there is, though not so much as should
be, yet such a degree of the knowledge of God as there is, one would think it
impossible that men should suffer themselves to be brought into slavery here;
and that they fear most. We read of the Philistims that when they had taken
Sampson, they put out his eyes, and then they made him to grind in the Mill. So
these men would fain make us to grind in the Mill, (as it is said some have
threatened to make the Dames of London to work for a penny a day in Bridewel)
They would fain make you al slaves, but first they would put out your eyes,
they would take away knowledge and then they know they shall soon make you
slaves. Well, the Lord has promised, Isa. 25.7 That he will destroy the face of
the covering cast over all people, and the vail that is spread over all
Nations; And mark: In that day (ver. 9.) it shall be said, Lo, this is our God,
we have waited f^r him, and he will save us. O come Lord Jesus, come quickly
and destroy the covering, the vail that is upon the eyes and hearts of a great
part of the people of this Lrnd. The work would soon be done if the Lord would
but destroy the vail of darkness that is upon the eyes and hearts of people,
and we should triumph in our God and say, Lo, this is our God, we have waited
for him, and he will save us, yea he has saved us. And thus much for that
third Charge of this people here, That there was no knowledge of God in the
land. Now we come to the second Verse.

Verse 2. By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing
adultery, they break out, and blood touches blood.


YOU see what a Catalogue of gross sins are here mentioned. And indeed when
Idolatry does prevail in any Country, there will be all manner of wickedness.
We found it so here in England, that the more superstitious wai^s prevailed
amongst us, the more abominable wickedness there was generally spread about the
country.

First, For Swearing. The word here translated Swearing, it is of (...) and
signifies Maledicere, Execrare; and likewise P^rjurare. It signifies these
three things, to Curse, and to be Perjured, and to Swear. Any of these three
this word imports. And likewise it signifies sometimes to howl out, Ejulare,
(...)
Joel 1.8. Lament like a Virgin girded with sackcloth etc. It is the same word,
Lament, or howl out. So that the same word that signifies cursing and swearing
and forswearing, signifies to howl and cry, for God has a time to make cursers
and swearers and forswearers to howl and cry out. An Oath is a sacred thing, a
part of Gods worship, and therefore the abusing of this is a dreadful sin;
Especially if it be abused to swear to that which is false. In Aegypto siquu
juret per Caput Regn and non praestet, morte plectitur, nec permititur ut auto
vel alia revita^ redimat.
Paulus Phagius in his Comment upon Genesis, 42. says it is reported of the
Egyptians, that if any man did but swear by the life of the King and did not
perform his Oath, that man was to die, and n^ gold or any thing in the world
could redeem hi^ life, so did Heathens hate that sin of per^urie. Yea we have
found others that have not had much Religion in them, yet have extremely hated
the sin of ordinary swearing. I have read of Lewis the 9. of France, that he
punished that sin by searing the lips of swearers with an hot Iron which Law
being executed upon a Citiz^n of Paris, some said it was two cruel, which he
hearing of, gave this answer, I would to God says he, that with searing mine
own lips with an hot Iron, I could banish out of my Realm all abuse of Oaths.
He could be willing to sea^ his own lips that he might banish the abuse of
swearing. Chrysostom in some 16. Homelies together if not more, (...). Hom. 11.
Ad pop. Antioch.
whatsoever his text was he always concluded against swearing, as being such a
vile and notorious sin: And amongst other things because some pleaded custom,
he puts them upon this, says he, if you would but punish it thus, that if
there were an oath sworn in your house, he that swore should but abstain but
from one meals meat; that that servant or that child that swore an oath should
not dine that day, that would do somewhat, yet says he, the command of God
will not do so much as that. Diverse other expressions I might name, but I must
hasten. That place Jer. 23.10. is remarkable for this and suitable to this text,
For because of swearing the land mourns, the pleasant places of the
wilderness are dried up, and their course is evil, and their force is not right.

It is a sin that has more malignancy in it against God by how much the less
the temptation is unto it. I verily believe that if God had never made the
third Commandment, there would never have been so many Oaths in the world, but
it springs from a mere malignancy of spirit that is in men against God because
he has forbidden it; For there is no profit that can come by it.

If men be guilty of thi^ sin merely thorough a vain custom, what high
indignity is this against God? what slighting and neglect of God is there? As
if sinning against God were an argument of no more weight but that the using of
a thing without any reason, when nothing can be got by it, could down-weigh
that argument. Custom indeed is enough to prev^il in things that are of no
moment, a now, some man that has by custom gotten such a kind of posture of
his body, or taking hold of hi^ beard and the like, such a kind of gesture he
has gotten by custom and he cannot leave it, why? because the thing in its own
nature has no great consequence in it, and so custom prevails; But that
custom should be enough to be set against the high displeasure of the blessed
God or be set against his solemn professi^n that he will not hold that soul
guiltless that takes his name in vain, this argues a most insufferable
vilifying his sacred Majesty.

Secondly, To swear that thereby the words of men may be graced, this is more
horrid impiety; As if the polluting of the holy Name of the most holy God were
the best ornament of thy speech, as if the dishonor put upon God were the best
grace to thy language.

Thirdly, To swear out of a conceit that this argues braveness of spirit, a
braver spirit than other men have, a spirit of valor and courage, as if
according to the fullness of mouthing of Oaths there were a braveness of spirit,
this yet is more hideous wickedness; As if that were the courage and excellency
of our spirits to fly in the very face of God. Whence it is that many men if
any anger them, what do they do? they fall a cursing and swearing, that is,
when others displease them they will fly in Gods face, that is the language of
it though you will not dare to say so, but that is the language of your
practice, others displease and anger me and I to revenge my self will fly in
the very face of God. A hiddeous wickedness there is in this that you do not
think of. You that are passionate spirits when you come home and your wives and
children or servants anger you, you fall to cursing and swearing, Know you do
no other but this, this is the language of your practice, they displease me and
to revenge my self I will fly in the very face of God; And whence it is that
Gentlemen and Noblemen and those that belong unto them are such great
swearers, because they imagine that it is an argument of some braveness of
spirit, and that thereby they express a spirit of a higher strain than other
men. Oh hiddeous and abominable wickedness! This is all the valor that many
men have that they da^e sin against the glorious God and never be troubled at
it; wherea a godly man is described in Scripture, Eccles. 9.2. To be a m^^ that
fears in Oath; but for these it is not for them to fear, it is for tim^rous
melanch^lly poor spiri^s, but they are m^n of b^ave spirits, and they would
have men know that they can swear and not be troubl^d at it, they have stronger
spirits than o her m^n h^ve. Thu^ is the bles^^^ God di^honored by this sin
more than we are aware of.

There is a fourth sort that are higher than these, and those are they that
swear that they may not be accounted Puritans or of the number of such a
faction; Because where they go if they be but suspected to be savorers of such
kind of men as were heretofore named by that nickname and now are by another;
(I say) if they go into company where they think they may be suspected to be
inclined to that party, what do they? They do, to give evident demonstration
to the contrary, swear lustily, and rap out Oaths one after another. Oh what
horrible opposition unto God and unto the Spirit of Christ is this, Christ
says, That our light must so shine before men that they seeing o^r good works
may glorify our heavenly Father; Now they let their wickedness appear before
men that they may be known what they are: And hereby they give testimony that
they can be brought to yield unto any thing, that is the very ground of it,
they do (I say) by that give testimony to the other party, that they can be
brought to yield unto any thing and that they can serve their turns; and this
is the reason why willingly they would entertain no other than such as these,
for if they hear a man swear lustily then they think thus, such a man surely
either has no conscience at all and then he is fittest for our turn he will
not be a scrupulous fool, or if he have a conscience he has broke his
conscience and now his conscience cannot prevail over him, therefore now let us
put upon him what we will if it may suit with his own ends and with his own
profit, this man will do it; but as for your Puritans that are so conscientious
we cannot have our own ends by them, therefore we will have none of them, that
is the reason why they do so much hate them and others that they might be
entertained by them and give full testimony that they are fit for their turns,
therefore they will swear. Oh how black are men's mouths at this day by their
cursed Oaths new execrations newly invented, that the world never before heard
of! Wherefore then, though God might ma^e these men as scorpions for a while to
scurge us, ye^ if our spirits were up we need not fear them, for certainly they
are the people of Gods curse, those that are so full of curses in their mouths.
Thus much for the first.

I^ follows, By swearing,

-- And Lying.] These two go together: There is no man that makes not
conscience of an Oath, that can make conscience of a Lie; though the world
would think to part them and say, Oh you will not swear but you will lie; but
God says otherwise. Swearing and Lying go together, those that will swear,
certainly will lie. But for Gods own people, God frees them from this sin, from
lying though the world would cast it upon them, for there is no sin more
against godliness than lying. Isa 63.8. says God of his people, Surely they
are my people, children that will not lie. God engages himself for his people,
these are the people that will not lie says God. Are you in profession any of
Gods people? God does engage himself for you in this, that certainly you will
not lie. It is said of the Devil, that he is a Liar and the father of lies. And
women that carry false tales up and down and are slanderers, in Scripture they
are called Devils, 1 Timothy 3.11. Women must he grave and sober, not sl^nderers;
Diabolus, not Devils; A women that is a slanderer, that carries false tales up
and down to the prejudice of her neighbor, the Scripture calls that woman by the
name of a Devil; And the word that signifies Detractor in the Hebrew it is
Rachil, (...)
and some think our English word Rake-hel comes from that word, one that makes
no conscience to speak falsely.

This sin of Lying is the breaking of all society, there can be no converse
between man and man where this i^. Augustine writing to his friend that sent to
him to have his Judgment concerning an Officious lie (that is, a ly that tends
not to the hurt of any but of him that tells it) he writes back his answer, That
a man must not tell a lie to save the whole world, If it were (says he) to
save thy father or thy mother out of Hell, if p^ssibly it could ^e, thou must
not tell a lie; if it were to s^ve Kingdoms from destruction, thou must not
tell a lie. That is his opinion: And certainly there is a truth in it, for God
will never be beholden to the Devil to do good through his means. Surely then
thou must not tell a lie to gain a groat, or to gain a shilling, or to gain a
good bargain, or to prevent the displeasure of thy Master or Mistress, but
rather willingly open the truth than to think to cover the fault by a lie. The
ground of that is Atheism that servants and children when they have done amiss
seek to cover it by a lie. God is exceedingly displeased with this sin, and
has a controversy against a Nation, and against a family, and against a
particular person for this sin of lying, and therefore Prove. 6.17. and so on,
you shall find if you read diverse verses together, that the Lord says, That
six things he hates, yea seven is an abomination unto him; now amongst those
seven things you shall observe that he repeats lying twice, though under
seveval terms; Prove. 6.17 Opened,
And that place i^ famous that we have in Revel. 21.8. that liars shall have
their portion in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone; Take that home
with you, you servants, and children, and tradesmen that will tell lies for
gain; God does rank and chain up liars together with notorious sinners that
shall all have their portion in the lake of fire and brimstone which is the
second death.

There are none in the world that make such advantage of lying as the
Antichristian party does, either to draw a party to themselves or discourage
those that are against them, inventing all manner of lies that possibly can be.
And because they invent so many themselves, wh^tsoever is said against them,
you presently hear in m^lignants mouths, That Is a lie; they think all men are
liars because they are conscious unto themselves, that they themselves are
continually so. And no mervail that the Antichristian party are so full of lies
for the very Doctrine of Popery, take the lump of it. it is altogether called a
lie, 2 These. 2.7. 2 These. 2.7. Expounded.
God gave men over that did not entertain the truth in the love of it to
bele^ve a lie that they might be damned. Do you ask the question why so many
Learned men, Scholars, understanding men turn to the Popish party? Mark the
reason here, because they enter^^in'd not the truth in love, God gave them over
to believe a lie, A lie, what is that? that is the Doctrine of Popery; So the
very quintessence of it, it is a lie. That being therefore the great lie in the
world it must have a company of little lies (as I may say) to underprop it, to
uphold that great Lie of Popery, a company of lesser lies, Esa. 28.15. they
make lies their refuge. It is a text as notable for our times as any I know, it
shows the practice of our times, when they cannot get any thing by any fair
way, then they invent lies and make lies their refuge. It is the Maxim of the
Jesuits, C^lumniare audacter, aliquid herebit, Calumminate and ly stoutly to
purpose and somewat will stick, for every one that shall hear of the report
shall not come to hear of the answer that can be given to it. And that is their
policy, to spread abroad lies as much as they can, and especially to invent
lies of those that are most eminent and active in public affairs; and that is
the reason of those strange inventions that are raised of such as are most
active in Parliament, and also in the City and in the Ministry, things so
hideous, that if they were true would render men altogether unfit to be
entertained in a Commonwealth. But you will say, what can they get by it when
it proves to be false? Yes, because their lye^ spread a great way further than
the answer to them can spread: And those in Jer. 20.10. do fully set out the
condition of these men; I heard the defaming of many (says the Prophet) how?
Report say they, and we will report it. This was their plot against Jeremiah;
the truth i^ we must defame Jeremiah, we see he has got a great deal of credit
and prevails with the people, and we know not how to help our selves, only if
we can but defame him, if we can but raise up something that may take away his
esteem with the people, we may then have our end, Ier 20.10. Opened.
therefore devise somewhat, report and we will report it, we will spread it
abroad, we will put it into a frame and print it: As now, if a company of
Malignants get into a Tavern, there they will talk against this Minister and the
other, against thi^ Parliament man and the other, against this Citizen and the
other, what shall we do say they? we see they prevail, let us devise somewhat
that may defame them, report somewhat and we will spread it. This has been the
way to this day to maintain that Antichristian party, that great Lie. Jer.
9.3. They bend their tongue like their bow for lies, and ver. 5. They have
taught their tongue to speak lies; They are now become artificial in it, and
they do it the rather because they know it will please some great ones. It was
so in former times, Pro. 29.12. If a Ruler hea ken to lies all his servants are
wicked; If any Officer, or any that are about him see that it will humor him
to raise ill reports against Gods servants, the servants of such a Ruler will
be wicked and raise lies enough. And amongst other places that is famous, Hos.
7.3. Hos. 7.3.
the text says there, They make the King glad with their wickedness, and the
Princes with their lies. Opened.
It is spoken of J^roboam and the other Kings that followed him, that set up
false worship; How there were a great many in Israel whose consciences would
not give them leave to follow that way of false worship; upon that there were a
company of Promoters and Apparitors and Baylifs, and some Courtiers, they would
invent lies against those that would needs go up to Jerusalem to worship and
would not content themselves with the Calves that the King set up; Now when
they had invented lies of some of the most zealous men amongst the people, they
brought these tales to the King, and said thus, Did your Majesty hear such a
thing? There are such men in your Majesty's dominions that dwell in such To^ns,
and they are forsooth so scrupulous, they will not be content with that
Religion that the Law has established, but they must go up to Jerusalem to
worship, yea, and at such a^ m^ they get into a corner and there they commit
such and such wickedness, and they live in these and these wicked waie^; And
thus they came and told the King t^les of them, and the text sai^s, They mad^
the King glad with their tales, the King was tickled with it and rejoiced at
it, and he gave them his hand, gave them encouragement. Cert^inly amongst u^
there has not been wanting men that have endeavored this, that w^^ld have
accounted this their happiness to get a t^ i^ ^o tell of a Puritan or of a
godly Mini^^er, though it were never so false. Thus we have briefly pa^^ over
this second charge in this second verse, ^wea^ng, and Lying.

The next follows. The Lord has a contr^^^ (...) with (...) of the land for
Murder, for Killing. Murder, that is a provoking sin, God seldom suffers it to
go unrevenged in this world. Whence are all those discoveries of Murders;
scarce any one but can tell strange stories of the discovery of murder. We have
a vain distinction of murder and manslaughter as it is called, that forsooth if
a man be angry and in a passion kills another, thi^ is manslaughter and no
murder: God will not own that distinction, for if you shall by your passion
make your self a beast, and so kill a man, God will require this at your hand,
for Gen 9.5. God says that he will r^quire the blood of man at the hand of
every beast, much more at the hand of a man that by his passion makes himself a
beast. The life of a man is precious to God and God will not suffer any
creature to have absolute power over it, he keeps the dominion of men's lives
unto himself. Mr. Ainsworth upon Genesis 9.6. cites the the Jewish Doctors,
affirming that a Murderer though it were possible for him to give all the
riches of the world, yet he must be put to death, because the life of the
murdered is the possession of the most holy God; this is their argument.
Certainly it is not in the power of any man upon earth to save a murderer be he
what he will be. The greatest man upon earth has no liberty from God, no
prerogative to save a Murderer, but he that sheds blood by man must his blood
be shed. God avengeth the blood that Manasseh shed a long while after his
death, 2 King. 24.4. And for innocent blood that he shed which God would not
pardon. Though Maness^h did repent and so we have cause to hope well in regard
of his soul and his eternal estate, Though Calvin seems to be of the contrary
opinion. Deuteronomy. 28.
yet the Lord came upon the Nation after his days and would not pardon his
shedding of innocent blood. What ado do we find in the Law concerning the
killing of a man? When a man was found dead in the field nigh unto a City the
Elders of that City they must come to the dead body, wash their hands over the
heifer to be slain and ^ake a solemn Oath that they had no hand in the murder
and so clear the City from the guilt of it. This shows how precious the life of
man is in Gods esteem and that God has a controvers^e with a land for shedding
of blood.

And if this be so, what a controversy think you has God against many in this
Kingdom at this day? How fearful is Gods controversy against some that must
feel it for that blood that has been shed in Ireland? There is upon record one
hundred and forty thousand that have been murdered there since the beginning of
this rebellion, and every body will say, it is plain murder. And they whosoever
they are that have had a hand in this, and abetted it, and strengthened the
hands of the Murderers, what will they be able to answer unto God? Shall the
blood of one righteous Abel cry loud in the ears of God and never leave crying
until it has had vengeance, and shall not the blood of one hundredth and forty
thousand innocents? (I mean innocents in this regard, in regard of the cause
for which they were murdered:) We now in England begin to be somewhat sensible
of the guilt of Murder what it is to have it lie upon a Nation. In the last
Declaration of the affairs of Ireland, the Parliament gives an intimation of
some fear they have that possibly the guilt of the blood of King James may some
way be upon US. God has a controversy for murder wheresoever it lies, if it
be not punished accordingly. And for all that blood that has been shed here of
late, where ever the cause lies, God will find it out one day. Oh the blood
that will be upon the head of some! Jer. 51.35. The violence done to me and to
my flesh, be upon Babylon, shall the inhabitants of Zion say, and my blood upon
the inhabitants of Caldea, shall Jerusalem say. So let all Christians (they may
do it and they have warrant from God to do it) let all Godly people in this
Kingdom that have had their Husbands killed, their Children killed, their
Apprentices killed, their Friends killed in these unhappie wars, let them say,
the violence done to my flesh be upon the Babylonish party, the Popish party,
and the blood that has been shed of our husbands, of our children, of our
servants, of our friends be upon the inhabitants of Caldea, the inhabitants of
the Popish party that are risen up and shed so much blood as they have done.
Oh how vile and cursed are men's hearts even in this thing, that are so set upon
their designs, that to attain them they will go thorough streams of blood that
lie in their way, and no matter for the liv^s of thousands of men so their
lusts may be satisfied! How are men vilified in this thing, that their lives
and bodies must go to be servicable unto the lusts of a few other^! Certainly
God never made such a difference, he never put such a distance between one man
and another.

But now in the ways of execution of justice there we must not account the
shedding of blood to be killing. God has not a ^ontroversie with a land for
bloodshed in the execution of Justice; nay on the contrary the Lord has a
controversy against a people when there is not shedding of blood that way Jer.
48.10. Cursed be the man that withholds his hand from blood. such a case may
be. And 1. King. 20.42. when Ahab let Benhadad go, the text says that a
Prophet came to him, in the name of the Lord saying, Because thou have let go
out of thy hand, a man whom I appointed to utter destruction, therefore thy
life shall go for his life, and thy people for his people. So when we have men
in our hands whom God has appointed to destruction, who are guilty of death,
who have sought not the blood of some few but the massacring of a City, if for
private ends of our own we let them go, God may require our lives for theirs.
And this is the cause it may be amongst others, that there is so much bloodshed
at this day amongst us, because there is no execution of Justice upon
offenders, and God requires the blood of many for many. It is true, Papist^ for
their Religion are not to be put to death: that we acknowledge, but the Lord
because he intends the ruin of that party, will leave them to those ways
that they shall be guilty of death by the Law of the Land, and by the Law of
Arms, and then the putting them to death in that kind is the execution of
Justice and not the breach of the sixth Commandment.

Oh killing is a grievous thing, we never were acquainted with killing as we
have been of l^te; were it not better we were all at peace than that still so
much blood should be shed?

there may be no more bloodshed. Take this speech barely considered and it is a
good speech, and we are all I hope of the same mind, Cursed be that man I say
that shall not yield to this. But certainly peace though upon hard terms, it
were to be desired, if that peace would save blood; though half our estates
went for it; But what if it prove that that peace we talk of should be a means
of more bloodshed? If you should let in such men into your City as bloody
Papists, French, Walloons, and Irish Rebels, and that merely upon their bare
word that they would do you no hurt, do not you think if they were once in,
that you would every night be in danger of massacring? and would there not be
much more bloodshed than yet has been? Therefore let not men say that those
are bloody men that will not yield up their throats to bloody men, that will
stand up to defend their brethren from being massacred; but they stand up and
take up Arms, not to shed blood but to prevent the shedding of blood: For
certainly if the City and Country had in the beginning of these wars rose up
as one man and gone into the field, they might have saved abundance of blood
that has been shed. Many thousands that have now lost their lives might have
been preserved if you had took up Arms to more purpose sooner than you did: But
when every County looks to it self, and the enemy goes to such a County and
there sheds blood, and then to another and there sheds blood, and you sit still
and do nothing, God may require the blood of your brethren at your hands; and
you cannot clear your selves from being guilty of the sheding of the blood of
your Brethren when you do not appear to the uttermost you are able to subdue
the power of those that shed their blood. We cannot see any way to keep the
blood that i^ now in our veins, but by subduing the Malignant and Antichristian
party that have already tasted so much of the blood of the Saints, that they
are like the Country-mans dog --

And so those Irish Rebels that in Ireland have tasted so much blood, and now
are come over hither to join with Papists, you cannot in any way of sense and
reason imagine any safety but by subduing that party. Is that a way to prevent
the shedding of your blood to lay your necks upon the block, for that which
comes under such a specious name, may be in truth no other but a laying your
necks upon the block, and giving up your wives and children to be a sacrifice
to their malice.

The Lord has a controversy for Blood. We know when we have to deal with
Papists what they have been of old, and therefore we hope God has a
controversy with that party, that as they have drunk the blood of the Saints,
so they shall at last swell and burst themselves in pieces. In France they had
as good terms of Agreement as we can expect in the time of that Massacre, and
yet Histories tell us of more than ten thousand Protestants that were murdered
in one night in Paris, and that at that time when they were in as fair a way of
peace as possibly could be, and there was a Marriage solemnized and a great
deal of rejoicing for the Union of one party with another, and yet (I say) in
that night so many were slain; and you may expect no other if the Malignant
party get power. You will say, They have not done so to other Cities which
they have taken. No, they have not got the day yet, they are but in their
design yet if once they get this City, then they have got the day, and having
gotten the day, you may expect all manner of cruelty from them. And this
Massacre in France went on to other Cities, for within a few days after there
were forty thousand more computed to be murdered. I remember that History of
France tells us of that King Charles the 9th by whose Commission this was done,
that afterward God struck him with such a disease, as that there issued out of
his body at several places nothing but blood, so that in that sickness he would
sometimes fall down and wal-himself in his own blood, Be men great or small,
yet being guilty of blood, at one time or other the Lord will manifest that he
has a controversy against them. And so much for that third Charge.

The fourth follows, and that is, [Stealing.] God sets bounds as to men's
habitations, so to men's estates, and he will not have one break, in upon
another; no not so much as to covet that which is another. In seeking
therefore an increase of our estates, to get in any sinful way, in that we do
as it were say Gods care is not over me to provide needful things for me,
seeing I cannot have them from God I will see if I can have them from the
Devil. This is the language of all kind of gain that we get by any unlawful
way; you do not say so in words indeed, but this is the language of your
actions. Says a poor body, well, I see I am in want, I want bread for my
family, and clothes, and many outward comforts, money to pay my Rent etc. I see
in Gods providence he does not provide for me, well, I will go unto the Divil
then, I will see whether the Devil will do more for me than God; I cannot have
it by Gods allowance, for if I might have it by his allowance I might have it
by lawful means, therefore says he I will have it whether God will or no. This
is the language of all kind of stealing; And the curse of God is upon that that
is got so unjustly, and all the repentance in the world is not sufficient for
such a man as has gotten his estate unjustly, unless he make restitution of it
again to the uttermost of his power.

And this stealing is not only meant of your Pilferers or Robbers by the high
way, or such as cut purses, but any wrongful gain that is gotten by way of
trade. If I were preaching of this argument at large, much might be said to
those that live by a way of trade. But for the present take that one Scripture,
Ezekiel. 28.18. Thou have defiled thy sanctuaries by the multitude of thine
iniquities, by the iniquity of thy traffic. Let Merchants and Tradesmen that
have gotten any thing unlawfully, take this text home with them, Thou have
defiled thy sanctuaries, by the iniquity of thy traffic. It may be by
trafficking unjustly you have gotten such an estate, and you come to Gods
sanctuaries as if you were very holy, and no body should suspect you for your
false books and gettings that way, God says in this Text that you defile all
the Ordinances by the iniquity of your Traffic. Perhaps you think after you
have gotten unjustly, to give somewhat to adorn such a place as this it is well
enough; but you do defile them.

So for all kind of oppression, that is meant by stealing too. Latimer in one
of his Sermons before King Edward, says, that the greatest man in the Kingdom
cannot hurt an oppressing man, so as a poor widow may; and with what arms I
pray says he? Can he bring the Judges skin over his ears? The arms are these,
the tears of the poor run down from their cheeks and go up to Heaven and there
cry for vengeance. So that the text here speaks not of the meanest but of the
greatest thieves. Says Calvin upon the place, those that had the most power by
their honor and riches and were oppressors of the people, they are the thieves
here spoken of. And Isa. 1.23. Your Princes are rebellious and companions of
Thieves. And Isa. 33.1. When you shall cease to spoil you shall be spoiled:
This is a text for our spoilers at this day, it may be God will let them go on
till they have done their work, and then God comes upon them, and then, not at
the first when they begin to spoil, but when they have done spoiling they shall
be spoiled. Oh this controversy seems to be upon England that was threatened
and was upon the people in that place we read of, Isa. 42.22. This is a people
robbed and spoiled, they are all of them snared in holes. If they had come into
the field, perhaps it had been better with them, but they crept into holes and
they are snared and spoiled: They are a prey and none delivers them, they are
for a spoil and none say, restore; Who amongst you will give ear to this? Mark
what the text says, Who amongst you will hearken and hear for the time to
come? Who gave Jacob to the spoil and Israel to the robbers? Did not the Lord,
he against whom you have sinned? for they would not walk in his ways, neither
were they obedient unto his Law; therefore he has powered upon them the fury of
his anger, he has set them on fire, and who has laid it to heart? We are a
people robbed and spoiled, and it is upon this, because we have not walked in
the ways of God nor been obedient to his law, and the Lord has powered his
fury upon England at this day, and his fire burns, and who has laid it to
heart? No body stirs, because the fire is not kindled in the City you lay it
not to heart and you suffer your brethren one Country after another to be
spoiled. Take heed, if you stir not more than you have done, as many of you may
answer for the blood of your brethren, so for the spoiling of their goods,
because you do not lay to heart this heavy judgment that is upon the land at
this day, The execution of this controversy.

But yet in times of war you must know, that the taking away of all men's goods
otherwise than merely by the positive Law of the Land, is no stealing, nor no
breach of the eighth Commandment, for it is against common sense and reason
that in times of war we should be wholly tied to those positive Laws of a State
that are made for times of peace: But it is according to the Law of Nature, to
the Law of God, to the Law of Arms that our enemies should be deprived of what
may strengthen them against us. Therefore let none cry out of stealing and
robbing in these times; Indeed it is not fit that any should be suffered to be
as robbers, but yet it is just that those that will not be on one side should
be taken as enemies to the other; and (I say) it is agreeable to the Law of
Nature, and to the Law of God, and to the Law of Arms, that in times of war,
when the war is just (in which I hope you cannot but be fully satisfied) that
what may strengthen the enemy, may be taken away. Indeed they plead for Law who
wholly break it themselves, because they would have all the privilege they can
to strengthen themselves by our goods and the goods of others; but certainly
God gives us allowance, being in a lawful war, to strengthen our selves by the
estates and goods of those that appear enemies unto us, without breach of peace
or the positive Law of the land, or his own Commandment. Thus much for the
fourth charge.

The fifth is, [Committing Adultery.] The generation of a rational creature who
must live unto all eternity, is a work that God challenges a special hand in,
to appoint it to all at his pleasure, therefore the breach of Gods Order in
this, and the casting filth upon this to satisfy the brutish lust of a man or
woman, it is a most cursed evil, against which God has a most dreadful
controversy. It is a breach of the blessed Covenant of God, and a sin that is
most opposite to Gods Nature. And take that text all you that are guilty of
this; for perhaps many seem not to be guilty, that are professors of Religion
and live fairly amongst their neighbors, and yet may be secretly guilty of it
too; take that text home with you, Prove. 22.14. That the abhorred of the Lord
shall fall into the pit of the whore. Go thy ways in that condition wherein
thou art, thou can know no otherwise by thy self but that thou art the man or
the woman that art abhorred of God. Thou art beloved of thy Whore, but God
abhors thee. And Tertullian speaking upon that place Ephesians. 5.6. Let no man
deceive you with vain words; Nunqua^ mac^^o aut fornicatori secundam
paenitentia^ esse permissa^. Dui maechiam concienatur esse remissibilem. He
admitted but 1. repentance after baptism. See lib. de penitentia, and de
pudicitia.
he that expression which I confess I would not dare to have; These are (says
he) vain words, be that preaches of repentance to adultery, especially
adultery in a forcible way, he deceives men with vain words. You may see how
he apprehended the sin; we dare not justify what he says in that, but only
show you how dreadful he apprehended the sin to be. And in another place,
speaking of the sin that is unpardonable, in Heb. 6. he has this expression,
We never read, (says he) or ever knew a second repentance promised to an
adulterer or fornicator. These were his thoughts of Adultery. The Athenians
made a law, That if any man found his wife in the act of adultery, he might
presently kill her. And I have read of a people among the Heathens, that have
punished this sin for the filthiness of it, by putting the adulterers head into
the panch of a beast where the filth of it lay, and so stifled him. If Heathens
hated it so much, surely God must have a controversy with those that profess
themselves Christians because of this sin. And the greater controversy because
it is so little punished by men. And though many great ones can get beyond
punishment by man, yet they cannot get beyond this controversy. I remember Mr.
Cleaver reports of one that he knew that had committed the act of uncleanness,
and in the horror of conscience he hung himself, but before when he was about
to hang himself, he writes in a paper and left it in a place, to this effect,
Indeed says be, I acknowledge it to be utterly unlawful for a man to kill
himself, but I am bound to act the Magistrates part, because sin punishment of
this sin it death. God would have that sin punished with death, but the
Magistrate did not punish it accordingly, therefore he in horror of conscience
lays violent hands upon himself. We justify not his act, but it shows what a
controversy God has with men that commit this sin. Thou committest that
abominable sin, and thou have some pleasure and delight in it, Go thy way, thou
art a dead man in Gods eyes, look to thy self, one way or other God may bring
death upon thee, and though man's Law take not hold upon thee, God may thou
know not how soon. I have read of a King of Navarre that by adultery had
weakened his body very much, and in regard of that, his Physicians caused his
body to be wrapped about with a Cerecloath dipped in Aqua-vitae, and the party that
sowed the Cerecloath, having done, went to burn off the thread with a candle,
which presently took hold of the cloth and consumed both it and the King.

And as God has a controversy for this sin which is so little punished by
man's Law, which by Gods Law is death; so the rather has God a controversy for
this sin if it be committed by men of knowledge, by learned men, by men that are
in public places, by men that carry a show of holiness, by men that are in the
Ministry, If they commit it God has a dreadful controversy with them in a
special manner. Jer. 29.23. The Lord make thee like Zedekiah and like Ahab,
whom the King of Babylon roasted in the fire, because they committed villainy in
Israel, and have committed adultery with their neighbors wives. It was a
proverb, Jer. 29.32. opened,
The Lord make thee like Zedekiah and Ahab whom the King of Babylon roasted in
the fire: This was not King Zedekiah and King Ahab, but two false Prophets that
were called by that name, and they were unclean wretches, and though it were
the King of Babylon, a Heathen, yet he so hated that sin of adultery that he
caused them to be roasted in the fire, for that was the punishment of that
Nation for capital offenses, to burn or roast the offenders in the fire.
Therefore those who are Ministers that are learned men, that have any show of
holiness more than others, if they be guilty of this sin God has a most
dreadful controversy with them.

And see how we should have a controversy too ag^^nst this sin of uncleanness,
especially when it is in a forced way. Judge. 20.27. you shall read there that
there was four hundred thousand men, all men of war that were raised up as one
man, and they all said (verse. 8.) we will not any of us go to his t^nt, neither
will we any of us ^urn into his house: And upon what did all these men rise?
Chap. 19. the cause was only this, that there was a Levite that had a
Concubine, which C^ncubine had played the harlot and had gone from the Levite,
he going to fetch hi^ Concubine whom the men of Gib^ah a City of Benjamin, came
in a violent way and ravished his Concubine until she died, upon thi^, the
Levite took the dead body and divided it into twelve several pieces, and sent
them into all the coasts of Israel, and wished them to consider what i^ done.
Upon this the hearts of all the men of Israel were rais^d a^ one man, and
covenanted among themselves that they ^ould none of them turn into their houses
until they had brought those Delinquents that had committed that horrible
offense to condign punishment. Mark now, that the hearts of people should be
so set upon it and think it cause enough to gather an Army of four hundred
thousand to bring to condign punishment those that had but ravished a whore
(for she was no other) and resolved never to go home til those Delinquents were
punished. Have not we heard of worse than this amongst us? Oh what adulteries,
what rapes have there been wheresoever the Soldiers come! what horrible
villainies are committed that way, taking not men's concubins and whores, but
grave m^trons and on purpose those whom they think to be most godly, and defile
them before the eyes of their husbands, and then when they have done murder
them! And yet we stir not for all this to fetch in these Delinquents. Now we
have rapes and ravishments of thousands amongst us, and yet our hearts stir
not, though no question the same thing is intended against us here that is done
to our brethren in other Countries, for you can expect little else from such as
these, Judge. 5.20. it is the speech of Siseras Mother, Have they not divided
the prey, to every man a damsel or two? They aim as much to satisfy their
lusts upon you as upon your goods, you must not think your lives will satisfy
them, but their lusts must be first satisfied; Yet O Lord the deadness of men's
hearts, that though there has been such horrible villainy committed in Ireland,
in England, which certanily if there were no more but that, God requires the
people of the land should rise up to avenge such a thing as that is, that there
should not be such horrible wickedness committed in Israel, but that the
offenders should be brought to condign punishment. If you regard not your
lives and estates and liberties, yet regard such a horrible villainy as this, as
is committed in the open heavens. These here resolved not to go to their tents
nor to turn into their houses till this was done; Be content to shut up your
shops for a while, and to leave your trades and to lie in the fields until you
have brought these Delinquents to their just punishment. Be not discouraged
with a little ill success; there were forty thousand of the better side slain
here before Israel got the victory, until they had thoroughly humbled
themselves, and then they had the better of it. Though our adversaries meet
with success in their ways, let us not be discouraged, they that ^ood to
defend this horrible wickedness of the Men of Gibeah, they got the first day
and the second day; yet they went on in their way till they had brought the
offenders to condign punishment; We should resolve never to follow our
business, nor regard our houses and private estates until we have got this
wickedness punished in this land and wiped off the guilt from the Kingdom. So
much for that fourth charge. A word of the last.

They break out and blood touches blood. They break out.] Erumpunt; That is,
like the erruption of waters; As waters break over the banks when it has been
kept in a while, so they break out thus, they overflow all bounds. When sin is
not mortified, though it be restrained for a while, it will break out: As many
young men that have lived in good families and have had good governors, then
their sin was restrained, but afterward when they come to live at their own
hand then they break out, Erumpunt then; sin grows to that strength that
nothing can res^rain it, like that man that had an unclean spirit and lived
among the graves ( Mark, 5.) no man could bind him no not with chains.

Secondly, Breaking out is a great aggravation of a man's sin. It argues
strength in sin, impudency in sin, desperatness in sin. And this breaking out
of sin is not breaking out only as water in an overflowing time or tide or so,
but like breaking out of the fire indeed rather, or if you will like water
breaking out of some fountain; now you know if a water break out of a fountain,
there is not the less water in the fountain, but rather an increase of it. And
as the fire when it breaks out, the breaking out makes it not less but more, as
when an house is on fire it will keep in a long while, but when it breaks out
at the roof or so then it flames the more and increases with more violence; So
it is no diminution to sin that it breaks out, as many foolish people are ready
to say, that will speak horrible wickedly in their passion, I will let it go,
as good out as in; they foolishly think there is so much less corruption
within, and that is a diminution of sin, but it is an aggravation of sin, and
notes impudence in sin.

And blood touches blood.] That is, as some will have it, one gross and
abominable sin, that is accounted a bloody sin, follows another. But some take
it thus, one murder follows another, one oppression follows another; Blood
touches blood, now thy wickedness is broken out there is no end of it, but one
murder follows another. Pareus thinks it has reference to those times in the
2 King 15. where you may read what murders there were and how blood touched
blood at that time, as if the Prophet here had said, they being used to murder,
there is now nothing but murders, you hear of murders in this place, and in
that place, and in the other place. Thus we may soon have it amongst us, if the
Lord did not raise up means to keep in and subdue the rage of ungodly men, if
it get head and overcome the opposition that it has, blood will then touch
blood, one messenger shall not have done his relation of one horrid and cruel
murder, but another messenger will be at his heels to tell you of another more
horrid and vile than that. So it is in some countries, there comes one and
says in such a place such a man and all his family were murdered, there comes
presently another and tells you in such a Town such a friend of yours was
murdered: Thus the messegers come at the heels one of another and tell the
relation of blood touching blood. So some carry it.

But I rather thus, they defile themselves incestuously (So that this is
somewhat more than bare adultery) not regarding the neerness of blood, but
blood touches blood, they that were nearest in blood one to another they
mingled themselves one with onother in filthy and abominable lusts. So the
Septuagint they translate it (...) they mingle; so Jerome Sanguis sanguine^
tetigit, they mingle and touch blood with blood, those that are near of kin yet
they come near one another in filthy lusts. Now this was a sin that God cast
the Heathen out of Canaan, out of that good land for, and therefore well may
God have a controversy with the people of the land now; for God cast out the
Heathen even for this very sin; As you may find it Levit. 18.6. None of you
shall approach to any that is near of kin to him to uncover their nakedness:
And so in many verses afterward he shows what degrees of consanguinity we must
not come near, and then ver. 24. Defile not your selves in any of these things,
for says he in all these the Nations are defiled that I cast out before you,
and the land i^ defiled, therefore I do visit the iniquity thereof upon it, and
the land it self vomiteth out the inhabitants of it. This the rather still has
God a controversy with a people for this sin, because there is so little
punishing of it. I would but know at thi^ day what punishment there i^ for
Incest, or for any uncleanness among us only the man must keep the child; And
what ever punishment has been it was that which did as little good a nothing
at all, they were to come to the Court and that would enjoin them a white sheet
which they could take off with a very little money. That was the most then, and
little it is that is now, and in that regard we may fear that Gods controversy
is so much the more against us, and pray to God that speedily the land may
deliver it self from this guilt by having severe Laws for the punishment of
this horrible wickedness lest God come and punish it himself, and then woe unto
us.

Now it follows upon all this charge; Thus God has declared: and then follows,
the Land mourns. Well may a land mourn when God has such a controversy with
it.

Verse 3. Therefore shall the Land mourn, and every one that dwells therein
shall languish, with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of heaven, yea
the fishes of the sea also shall be taken away.

4. Yet let no man strive; nor reprove another; for this people are as they
that strive with the Priests.

5. Therefore shall thou fall in the day, and the Prophet also shall fall with
thee in the night, and I will destroy thy mother.

6. My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge; because thou have reje^t^d
kn^wledg, I will also reject thee, that thou shall be no Priest to me: seeing
thou have forgot the Law of thy God, I will also forget thy Children.


YOU have heard that God in this Chapter commenceth a suit against the ten
Tribes. He puts in his Action, and he declares, and then judges. The
Articles of his Declaration or Charge against them we had some of them the last
day. Hereupon Judgment is past, upon this Declaration, Therefore shall the
land mourn.

The Land.] How can the Land be said to mourn? As when the Land is fruitful it
is said to laugh and sing. Meadows that are green and fruitful laugh: And it
is the Scripture phrase, Psalm. 65.13. The valleys are covered with corn, they
shout for joy, they also sing. So when a land is desolate and God brings
famine, then it is said to mourn. Jer. 12.4. Jer. 12.4.
How long shall the land mourn, and the herbs of every field wither for the
wickedness of them that dwell therein? The beasts are consumed and the birds,
because they said, Explained.
he shall not see our last end: I warrant you as long as his eyes are in his
head he shall never see that fulfilled that he speaks of, therefore shall the
land mourn, and the herbs of every field wither. And likewise when a place is
left disolate of people that were the beauty of it before, then it is said to
mou^^, Isa. 3.26. Her gates shall lament and mourn: Lament. 1.4. The ways to
Zion mourn, because n^ne come to her solemn feasts. As now in time of Plague,
the streets of your City may be said to mourn because they are desolate, they
look in a desolate way when the grass grows between the stones; her gates s^all
lament and m^urn. The end of thi^ expression here is to upbraid the hardn^ss of
the hearts of the ten Tr^bes. As if God should say, Notwithstanding al their
d^eadful sins that should break their hearts and make them howl and cry out,
yet they will not mourn, therefore their Land shall mourn. When God will
upbraid men for stopping their ears and refusing to hear, and th^^ they were
not obedient, he calls to the Heavens, Isa. 1.2. H^^r, O He^^ens, and give ear,
O E^rth: to upbraid the deafnes of men that will not hear: And Jer. 2.12. Be
astonished O ye Heavens: Because men will not fear, therefore for their
upbraiding God calls to the Heavens to be astonished; so because men's hearts
are hard, therefore God calls to the Land to mourn, yea says, it shall mourn:
The ugly ghastly face of your sin (that is the meaning) shall appear in the
miserable desolation of your Country. There is an ugly face of sin, and it were
well if you saw it as it is in your own hearts, the guilt that you have brought
upon your own spirits? but seeing you will not apprehend that ugly face of sin
in your own hearts, you shall see the sad face of it in all things of the land.
God will have sin appear vile and ugly unto us one way or other. The Lord this
day is making our Land to mourn because we have not mourned, because we do not
mourn. Many Countries know what this expression means, their Country mourns,
their Land mourns. The very sight of the dreadful effects of sin upon many
parts in England is that which would break any man's heart: As it has been
formerly in Germany, Travelers that have traveled there and have seen Towns
and places of great riches and traffic, now to be overgrown with nettles it
breaks their hearts, they see the Land to mourn: And it begins to be so
amongst us in many places of England, in Yorkshire, and so in the West. Oh
that we all could mourn in the bitterness of our spirits, that our land might no
further mourn, that our Cities might not mourn. But we must not give liberty
to our selves in pathetical or affectionate way, but keep our selves as near
as we can to an Explicatory course.

And every one shall languish.] That follows. The word translated languish
here, signifies the withering of a flower, or the withering of herbs and
trees; And so it is in Nahum, 1.4. The flower of Labanon languisheth; it is the
same word with this here, Every one shall languish. and the signification of
the word does hint us this useful Note, That all the glory and the pomp of the
men of the world it is but as a flower, Obs.
and even as soon as a flower withers so soon does it pass away.

Again, Times of affliction they take down the jollity and bravery of men's
spirits, and make them fade, wither, and pine away.

The word it is translated by some, infirmabitu, they shall be made weak. When
wicked men are in prosperity their hearts are stout and strong to sin, they can
stand out against God and against all threats, but when the hand of God is upon
them then their spirits are poor, they are weak, they are presently down. Oh
the difference between the jolly, brave, stout spirits of wicked men in their
prosperity against God, and their poor, weak, withered, dejected spirits in the
time of their adversity, In Ps. 39.11. When with rebukes thou corrects man for
iniquity thou make his beauty c^nsume away like a moth, surely every man is
vanity, Selah.

And a notable expression we have of the withering, the languishing of the
spirits of wicked men in the time of their adversity, that whereas now in their
prosperity their tongues are their own and they must speak and will speak, who
is the Lord? etc. they are loud then in their Oaths and blasphemies, but mark
now in their adversity how they are, Esa. 21.4. Thou s^alt be brought d^wn and
shall speak out of the ground, and thy speech s^^ll be ^^w out of the dust, and
thy speech shall whisper out of the dust This is the fruit of the languishing
of their spirits in the time of their trouble. As many a riotous and boisterous
g^llant that would so mouth it when he wa^ in prosperity, yet set God but lay
his hand upon him in sickness and his conscience then accusing of him, he
whispers and speaks low out of the dust. It follows,

With the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of Heaven, yea the fishes of
the Sea shall be taken away. Hierome here allegorizeth it, and would not take
it literally, but to be the expressions of several sorts of men suitable to
this. But we must not stand to that, but rather take the words at they are
literally. Only for the reading of them a word or two first.

With the beasts of the field] In the Hebrew [Be] which is translated with, is
as much sometime as, for, in that tongue, for the beasts of the field; so it is
in the 5. chapter and the 5; verse. Israel and Ephraim shall fall in their
iniquity, or, (...)
for their iniquity, there it is Be too. So that if we should translate it so,
for the beasts of the field, then we might have this Note; Obser.
Here we may see the poor condition that we are in, that when but the beasts of
the field and the fowls of the air are destroyed, our comforts are gone
quickly. The comforts of natural men depend upon poor things, upon the beasts
of the field, the fishes of the Sea, the fowls of the air, if Gods hand be but
upon them, they languish for them; Now the cups are taken from their mouths and
their full dishes from their tables, now they languish. It is otherwise with a
gracious heart, according to that in Habak. 3.17. Although the figtree shall
not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines, the labor of the Olive
shall sail, and the fields shall yield no meat, the flock shall be cut off from
the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls; yet I will rejoice in the
Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. A gracious (...) does not languish
because the beasts of the field and the (...) of the air are taken away: let
them be taken away yet he can rejoice in God, his spirit will be kept up.

Another word in the re^ding is to be observed, [they shall be taken away.] The
word in the Hebrew is, they shall be gathered, (...)
for it is observable both in fowls and in fishes when they perceive any thing
noxious unto them or that they are in any danger, they gather themselves
together: And that is the reason that fishes at some time of the year are in
such sholes as they are; they going from one place to another, finding one
place noxious and hurtful and perceiving some danger, they gather together: And
so it is observed in countries where there are fowls, that in the winter time
they go to some other place. I have heard many in Holland say of the Storks
that in one week they all of them go away together, they gather themselves in
the space of a week or there abouts and go away from that country, gathering
first al together and so fetching their ^ight: from thence I take the word
here, they shall be gathered together, that is, there shall be such times of
danger, and there shall be such infection in the air, and in the very waters of
the Sea, that the fishes and fowls shall perceive it and so shall be gathered
together, as they use to be gathered (when they perceive any such thing) to go
away; Text opened.
and being so gathered together they shall be destroyed. It is good for men in
times of danger to gather together and to join one with another and not be
scattered one here and another there, as the creatures many times use to do in
the time of their danger. This only for the reading of the words.

The scope of the holy Ghost here in the threatening the taking away the beasts
and the fowls and the fishes, it is this, To show the severity of Gods wrath
against the ten Tribes, that as a King does not only execute a Traitor but pull
down his house and burn all that i^ in it, so the great wrath of God shall be
upon these ten Tribes, that he shall not only destroy them but for their sakes
he shall bring even destruction upon the creatures. And this seems to be a
threatening of greater wrath tha^ (...) let out when he destroyed the world: In
destroying the ol^ world the w^ath of God was not so great as that here
threatened against these ten Tribes, for then the fishes of the Sea we do not
read of any hurt unto them; but here the beasts of the field the fowls of the
air and the fishes of the Sea shall be taken away. It refers unto some
fearful plague, wherein not only the air but the waters are pestilential and
the cattle and the fish die. So it has been in other Countries, even in
England, in the time of Edward the third, our Chronicles report of such a
pestilential quality that was in the air and water that birds and fishes were
found with botches upon them, A strange plague in London.
And then there were in one Churchyard in one years space (I think it was
about the Charter house) fifty thousand buried of pestilential diseases. Such
advantage has God us at and can let out his wrath by such ways as these, and
such plagues are very fearful fruits of Gods wrath upon a Country. What cause
have we to bless God that he has delivered us from the infection of the air!
If God should have but brought a plague upon London the last year, Oh it would
have been a plague indeed, we had been in a sad condition; it would have been
the heaviest plague that ever was upon any Kingdom in the world, if we had had
but such a plague that should have caused men to have fled and the Parliament
not have set and even by that should have been dissolved, and so all the
Kingdom would have been in a lamentable estate at this day. Bless God for that.

And the fish of the Sea.] I remember upon this text a Jesuit that wrote but
very lately; Cornelius a Lapide, has a most audacious lie, says he, since
Scotland and Ireland has departed from the Catholic faith (that is from
Popery) Gods judgments are out against them, and whereas they were wont to be
such plentiful countries for fish, God has cursed their very waters, and now
their trade of fishing is nothing like to what it was wont to be. Upon this
text he observes such a judgment to be upon those Kingdoms, he observes it
not of England at all, for he was one that wrote lately, and he had it seems
some hope that England was coming to them again. But through Gods mercy both
Ireland and Scotland and England have found it otherwise in this regard.

But for Observations from hence, thus.

First, The good or evil of the creature depends on man; Observe.
beause it was made for man, man i^ punished or blessed even by the creature,
and the creature comes to feel good or evil according as man's behavior is
toward God. Let then mercy and pity toward the creature be an argument to keep
us from sin. If you have not cruel hearts toward the creature keep from sin,
for you do not only undo your selves but undo the world, undo the creatu^e by
your sin. And when at any time we see the hand of God out against any creature,
let us reflect upon our own hearts, and say, My sin is the cause that this
creature feels that evil that it does, and say as Judah said unto Tamar, She is
more righteous than I. So do you say of the creature, Indeed Gods h^nd is out
against it, but the creature is more righteous than I.

God when he is in a way of wrath can cause his wrath to r^^ch to those things
that seem to be most remote from him; As the fishes in the Sea seem to be most
remote, therefore this is na^^^ ^^^re, yea and the fish in the Se^ also: As if
he had said, my ^^^th shall burn, burn fiercely, and shall reach not only to
your selves and houses and Cities and your Land and Cattle, but to the very
fish in the Sea. God can let out hi^ wrath as far as he pleases.

No creature can help man in the time of Gods wrath; Why? for every creature
suffers as well as man does. How vain then are the hearts of men who comfort
themselves in hope of the enjoyment of comfort from this or that creature in
the day of God wrath; If you cry unto the mountains and hills and say, help us,
they will give an Echo, help us, for they had need of help as well as you,
their Echo will be, help us too, for the wrath of God is upon the creature in
the day of his wrath, therefore the creature cannot help in the day of wrath.

Verse 4. Yet let no man strive nor reprove another, for this people are as
they the ^^rive with the Priest.


Yet] The Hebrew word is, (...), Vere, as if he should say, truly it is in vain
for any one to stand striving or reproving his neighbor, or seek to convince or
admonish him, it is in vain for one friend to meddle with another, Text opened.
for they are so violent in their wicked ways, they are so far from harkening
to private admonition, that they will contend with the Priest, even with him that
is set by God, and designed by special office to teach and reprove. Some carry
it thus, They are so vile as no man is fit to reprove one another, being their
wickedness is general no man is fit to reprove his brother of his sin. But I
rather take it the other way.

It does first import thus much unto us in the general, Obs.
That sin cannot be got from men without striving. Such is the perverseness of
men's hearts, that they take fast hold of deceit Jer. 8.5. and you cannot get
them away without striving; like men in a frenzy, you cannot get them off from
that which will mischieve them without struggling with them. When you admonish
and reprove men for sin, you must make account aforehand that they will strive
with you, strugle with you, yet afterward perhaps they will bless God for
you; If you come indeed at the first you shall have rugged usage, What you come
to judge u^, as they said to Lot? Who made you a Ruler? So you have very ill
language usually from men at first when they are reproved, yet be not be
discouraged, they will bless God for you afterward, they will say as David unto
Abigail, Blessed be God, and blessed be thy advise, and blessed be thou for thy
counsel.

Secondly (which is employed in the former,) Even private We must not say, Are
we our brothers keepers? that is the language of a Cain. There is much striving
and contending one with another for our own ends; Oh that there were more
striving and contending for God and his glory! It is a sign that the Glory of
God and the Souls of our Brethren are not precious in our eyes when we can so
strive and contend to have our own wills, and though God loses his Glory, and
our Brothers Soul is like to perish, we cannot strive and contend there, not
even those that are too too full of strife otherwise.

Thirdly, It is a great aggravation of sin and a forerunner of destruction to a
people, not to regard the strivings, admonitions, Let no man strive; It is in
vain to strive now, (that's the meaning) Indeed so long as there was hope there
might be st^iving, but now they are past striving. This was their height of
wickedness that they were grown unto, and the forerunner of that wrath of God
that was now ready to fall upon them, because they were now past all
reprehension and admonition. I will give you for that two or three notable
texts of Scripture to fatten this upon your hearts, that it is a most fearful
thing for people to stand out against admonition and reprehension. That place
in 1. Sam. 2.25. is a notable one, the text says of Eli's sons, that they
hearkened not unto the voice of their father, why? Because the Lord intended to
destroy them. Oh you children do you hearken to this Scripture, turn to it,
read it over, you (...) stout rebellious children, and your parents they are
(...) ^^ving you for your sins and admonishing you, but you will not hearken to
them, and in the pride of your hearts and stoutness of your spirits you refuse
admonition; but if you read that Scripture and believe that it is the Word of
God, Oh tremble at it, They hearkened not unto the voice of their father,
because the Lord would slay them. Here is a stuborn child, regards not the
voice of his father and mother reproving him, it is a fearful argument that God
intends to destroy that child. Another text you have in 2 Chronicles. 25.16. 2 Chronicles. 25.16.
it is a speech of the Prophet to Amaziah; when the Prophet came to rebuke him
for worshipping the gods of that people whom he had overcome in battle (Here is
the infinite vanity and sottishness of Idolators, Amaziah falls to worship
those very gods that could not deliver themselves nor their people out of his
hands;) when the Prophet (I say) came to reprove him for it, in what a rage was
he? One would have thought that there was so much the more reason for (...)
^^^rit to have yielded to the Prophet's reproof, but says the King, Opened
Art thou made of the Kings Counsel? forbear; it may be he has other fetches,
other intentions, what have you you to do to meddle? The Prophet did forbear
indeed, but mark what he says, I know that God has determined to destroy
thee, because thou have done this, and have not hearkened unto my counsel. Here
was his collection, because the King would not regard admonition and reproof,
certainly God had a purpose to destroy this King; here is the forerunner of his
destruction. And it is observable of this King, that he should now stand out
so: for in the Chapter before you shall find him seem to be of a yeildable
spirit though he was a naughty man; when he had hired an hundred thousand out
of Israel to ^oyn with him in battle, and had given them all pay, yet when God
did but send to him by the Prophet to send them back and to loose those hundred
talents that he had paid the Soldiers withal, upon the very word of the Prophet
he sends back a hundred thousand of his Soldiers and loses all their pay; and
yet this Amaziah that was so yeildable at that time how stubborn was he against
the Prophet at another time! And therefore at that time when he did so yield to
Go^ (...) prospered him in the battle, and he overcame his enemies (...) had a
glorious victory, and after that victory he falls a worshipping the Idols he had
overcome, and was stout against the Prophet, and so soon after he was destroyed
accordingly. The last Scripture is that in Pro. 29.1. He that being often
reproved hardneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without
remedy. It is a dangerous thing to stand out against reproof and admonition.

Again, Let no man strive with his brother.] You may see that this people were
grown to a worse pass than they were before, for in the second Chapter of this
prophecy, Say to your brethren Ammi, and to your sisters Ru^hamah. There those
that were godly amongst them were admonished to speak to their brethren and
their sisters, though they were naught yet the godly that were dispersed amongst
them must be admonishing those they lived withal; but now it is come to such a
pass that there must be no more striving, no mo^^ (...) ^^monishing. Here we
may take this note, That sin does increase in ^^aces where Those that were
capable of admonition one while, going on in sin and hardening their hearts,
grow quickly past all admonition.

Fifthly, There is a time when men may, you men should Especially in these two
cases; when those that they should admonish scorn their admonition, when they
grow scorners; when they trample their admonitions under their feet as swine,
or turn again upon them and rend them as dogs. There are two sorts not to be
admonished or reproved, Swine, and Dogs. When they grow to be swine and dogs
then you may leave, yea you ought to leave admonishing them. For admonitions
and reprehensions are precious things, they are pearls, they must not be cast
to swine, Mat. 7.6. Mat. 7.6.
Give not holy things to dogs, neither cast pearls before swine; they are holy
things and precious things; For I do not take that place to be meant of the
Sacrament only, it may be by an argument a minori ad majus applied to it, but
that place, Give not holy things to dogs, and cast not pearls before swine, is
meant of admonition and reprehension. Opened
So that admonition is to be looked upon as a holy thing, as a pearl, you are
to prize it and therefore not to be angry when we come to admonish you, but you
are to look upon the holiness of God in it and so reverence it, and look upon
it as a mercy of God and bless God for it. There are many in Heaven now
blessing God for the admonitions which they have received from others, as David
blessed God for Abigail and her counsel. Many think it a great happiness unto
them that they can re^ect admonition and counsel, and when they are gone from
such as have admonished them and are among their companions they can boast and
say, Oh such a one came and reprehended me, but I said thus and thus to him,
and so rejoice how they have re^ected admonition. But if they knew all they
have cause to mourn, it is a great m^sery for them when as it comes to that,
that God shall bid those that have to deal with them to strive no more with
them; when as men have rejected the admoniti^^ of others, that they think they
have stopped their mouths, I Will warrant you say they, such a one will never come
to me more; Oh your misery is the greater. F^^.

^ ^st, You have deprived your selves of a special Ordinance of G^^. Admonition
and reprehension, even brotherly admonition and reprehension is an Ordinance of
God.

Secondly, T^ose who strive thus, who admonish and reprove you, they must give
an account unto God what becomes of their admonition and reprehension. You
must give an account to God one day, and so must they give an account unto God
too; yea they should do it for the present, thus, After they have done they
must go to God and tell him how it has sped, for they have done it in his Name
when they have done it right; And when they go unto God if their admonition and
reproof have prevailed with you, they are to return to God with blessing, to
bless God that he has been pleased to bless their admonition to such a one.
And on the other side if you reject their admonition they are to tell that too
when they go unto God, they are to tell a lamenting of your condition and to
entreat God to look upon you, and to tell God, Lord I have been thus and thus
admonishing such a one; it has been in thy Name, but Lord he contemns it, he
rejects it: When you are laughing at it that you have rejected such a friends
admonition, then he that has been faithful to you he is telling God of it, and
do you not think there will come somewhat of this one day?

Lastly, You are left to Gods striving and rebuking, and it is a fearful thing
to fall into the hands of the living God. It is better when God striveth with
you by men than that he should come and strive with you himself. As now, if a
father send his servant to go and fetch in a child, to rebuke a chile, and he
comes and tells the father, he cares not what I say; No says the father, I
will go my self, and then it is worse with the child, the child then smart^ for
it; So God sends thy brother to rebuke thee, and to fetch thee in, thou carest
not for him, thou look upon him as thy fellow creature, and so thy brother
goes to God, Lord he does not regard what I say, No says God? I will rebuke
him my self, and Gods rebukes in this case will be furiou^ rebukes; Ezekiel 5.15.
When I shall ^x^^^te judgments in anger and in fury and in fur^^us rebukes,
Mark it. furious rebukes; The rebukes of a brother are loving reb^kes, but if
thou reject them Gods rebukes may com^nd they wilt prove furious rebukes, The
rebukes of a brother are out of ^^^e but Am^s 7.4. The Lord calls to contend by
^^^e. When (...) friends did strive with him they could not pr^vail, but Job.
38.1. God calls out of the whirlwind to answer to him, and who is this that
darkneth words without counsel? The Lord out of the whirlwind calls to
contend with Job and so overcomes him. If thou regardest not friends
contending with thee, the Lord himself out of the whirlwind may come and
contend with thee. Take heed how thou rejectest the strivings of a brother with
thee, tor God may not only say he shall strive no longer, but my spirit shall
no longer strive with thy soul.

This people are as one that striveth with the Priest.] That is the reason why
they must not strive one with another. Here are only these two things by way of
explication;

Priest rather than with the Prophet?

[as] they that strive with the Priest? did not they strive with the Priest?
why then is it not said this people are a people that strive with the Priest?

For the answer to these two briefly.



As those that strive with the Priest. It may be the Priests were generally so
bad that there was scarce any Priest that did strive with them at all, those
Priests being Jeroboams Priests they did join with them in their wickedness,
therefore he could not say they did strive with the Priests, but yet thus their
hearts were as vile, God saw this in their hearts that if there were Priests to
strive with them they would strive with them.

Or secondly thus, As those that strive with the Priest; because indeed those
Priests of Israel at this time they were not such as were called of God, for in
1 King. 12.31. the text says of Jeroboam, that he made Priests of the lowest
of the people which were not of the sons of Levi, and chap. 13. ver. 33.
Whosoever would, he consecrated him, and he became one of the Priests of the
high places. But the people received them as Priests still, for indeed they
thought that the Kings authority was enough for all, because the king would
have them to be Priests they would receive them, as it the King had the
absolute power to make all Church Officers, if they were sent by the Kings
Authority they must be acknowledged to be Church Officers. So it was then, and
that may seem to be the reason of that expression, as those.

Now from hence the Notes are these, for you must take it that this is employed
here, that suppose there were Priests faithful and godly that did strive with
them, yet their hearts were so hard that they would strive against those
Priests, and this sets out the grossness of the hardness of their hearts. Take
then the sense thus and here we may have these Notes

First, Observe.
That it is the work of the Priest to contend against men for their sin. That
is the proper work of a Priest, to strive with men against their sin. They are
the salt of the earth and so they should have some acrimony in them. In 1 Timothy
3.3. 1 Timothy 3.3
It is said indeed of the Minister of God that he should be (...) mo striver. A
Minister of God should be one that is in office to look to the souls of people
and he should be no striver; How will you say then that he should strive? That
is, Opened
he should never strive with men for his own ends, for his own ways, no
brawler, no striver, no adulterer but one of a quiet and gentle spirit, that
should pass by wrongs done unto himself; but when he comes for God he should be
a striver; All faithful Ministers should be strivers when they come in Gods
cause. Oecolamp.
Oecolampadius writing to his fellow Ministers, I remember he has a notable
expression, Let not our zeal and anger (says he) burn when we are scorned our
selves and reproached our selves, but when the Truth is in danger, and the Name
of God i^ in danger, then let our heat arise, then let us strive. This indeed
is the Character of a true godly Minister, that he is in his own cause, gentle,
yeildable, but when it comes to the cause of God, the heat rises in his face,
and there he has zeal and fervencie, there he will strive and contend with men
in the ways of their sin.

Obser.
Secondly, When Ministers do reprehend and strive with people, they must expect
to be striven withal by people. These are as a people that strive with the
Priest, they have such vile hearts that had they never such faithful and godly
Officers that were set over them by God, they would strive with them. And
indeed all faithful Ministers must expect that if they strive with men for
their sins, men will strive with them. If there had at any time any faithful
ones been sent amongst them by God, they would have been ready to have cried
out of them and have told them, You are the cause of our misery, for you will
not yield to Jeroboam, you are so strict and precise, and it is you that make
this disturbance, you threaten us that there will judgments come upon us but
you are the cause of our misery, were it not for you we should have all the
people yield to what the King has set up, but you stir up the people against
it and so our disturbance comes from you. Thus no question but they would be
ready to strive with the Priest at that time. And thus they did with Amos,
chap. 7. ver. 12. Go to Judah and prophecy there; they strove with Amos that
was contemporary with Hosea, prophesying at this time unto this people, the
land say they cannot bear Amos his words, let him go to Judah, he were best be
gone, he tells us we are a superstious people, and that we do not worship God
in the right manner and in the right place, let him go thither, we wish he were
out of the Country; he and such as he is raise a fire in the land. Thus when
Ministers discharge their consciences showing people their sins and the mind of
God, this is ordinarily the recompense that they have. Thus it was with
Jeremiah, chap 15. ver. 10. We is me says he, that my mother ever bear me, for
I am (says he) a man of strife and of contention to the whole earth, and every
one curses me. Jeremiah a grave and holy Prophet, yet a man of contention to
the whole earth, and every man cursed him: A strange thing that he should meet
with such hard dealing, and yet he appealed to God in the matter of his
sincerity, he desired not the evil day, and he prayed for the people so long
til God bid him pray no more; when thy were railing upon bim he was praying for
them. This was the ill condition he was in for that respect. And so it was with
other Prophets besides him. I might name other texts in Jeremiah, as chap. 20.
ver. 7.8. I am in derision daily, every one mocketh me, for since I spoke I
cried out, I cried, violence and spoil, because the Word of the Lord was made a
reproach unto me and a derision daily; After I threatened that there should come
some judgment upon the Nation I cried out of the violence and spoil that they
for the present made in the Nation, and then they mocked and scorned me. The
like we have in Esa, he had the same dealings from the people. Esa, 28.13, 14.
Isa. 28.13.14.
But the Word of the Lord was to them precept upon precept, line upon line,
here a little and there a little, that they might go and fall backward, and be
broken, and snared and taken. You will say, how do they strive against the
Prophet in this? I take it this Scripture is often mistaken, and the scope of
these words are to show how the people did jeer and mock the Prophet in his
preaching. But the Word of God was to them precept upon precept, that is thus,
Opened
they scorned at Gods Word, What we have nothing but precept and precept, one
precept after another, in a scorning language, the word of the Lord, and
Commandment one after another, and one Prophecy after another, a line upon
line, and now you would have a little more; it is spoken in a contemning way;
And I rather take it to be thus, because in the Hebrew the sound of the words
do carry it in a mocking, in a jeering way, as thus: trar letrar, kar lekar;
(...)
precept to precept line to line. As mocking people will jeer in the nose at
men, so they did at this time with the Prophet, the very sound of the words in
the Hebrew is such as notes a mocking and jeering of the Prophet, and they
pronounced the same words again and again, as mockers and jeerers use to do,
nothing but precept and precept, and when will the fellow have d^ne? And I take
this to be the meaning because the threatening follows after, that they might
fall backward and be br^ken and s^^red and taken, wherefore (says the text in
the very next words) hear the word of the Lord ye scornful men; They manifested
a scornful spirit in such kind of expressions, retorting upon the Prophet in
such a manner; And Gods anger rises in his face Wher^fore ^ear ye the word of
the Lord ye scornful men. It is the us^al way of many scornful men that if they
can get any thing that Ministers speak and get a sound of it, they will by
sounding of it double express their jeering and scorning; So did they with the
Prophet who was one of the most admirable elegant, and eloquent Prophets that
ever was, a man that spoke in hi^ time so as never man spoke, for he spoke in a
most high style, he was himself of the Kingly race, a great man, a Noble man
born and a most admirable eloquent man, yet when he came to prophecy to this
people in the name of God, thus they jeered and scorned him. And Esa. 30.10.
Which say to the seers, see not, but preach smo^th things to us, tell not us of
such and such things as these are. Thus they contemned him. Yea and in Christ's
time we find that when Christ himself preached, one time as soon as ever he had
done his Sermon the people got him up to the brow of a hill that was upon the
side of the City and would have thrown him down and broke his neck; that was
the reward he should have had. And Paul that was one of the excellentest
preachers that ever was (It was one of Austins wishes that he could but see
Paul in the pulpit) yet when he came to preach, What will this babbler say? and,
he is a pestilent fellow, one that is of a furious spirit and an incendiary,
and where ever he goes he turns the world ups^de down. Such kind of
entertainment had the Apostles. And Luther I remember has such an expression,
Quid est praedicare Evangelium? What is it to preach, unless it be this, to
derive all the fury of people upon ones self? if one would preach
conscienciously. And Mat. 5.12. there Christ tells his Disciples what they were
like to meet withal, how they were like to be reviled and persecuted, for so
says he persecuted they the Prophets which were before you. Acts, 7.53. Which
of the Prophet h^ve not your f^thers pe^secuted? Thus those that are in office
those that are sent to speak unto the people, they must expect if they would be
faithful in their administrations to be striven withal.

But though wicked men do strive, yet as Samson said unto the men of Judah that
came to bind him that they might deliver him into the hands of the Philistines,
Do not ye fall upon me your selves. It were well if faithful Ministers were not
striven withal many times by those that are godly. It is not so much for a
faithful Minister to have wicked and ungodly men to strive with him. Though
they bind them, Oh brethren do not do not you bind them: after that in
conscience of their duty and in love to your souls they have hazarded all the
hatred and malice that may be of the adversary, even to stand in the forefront
as the But to their malice, yet in requital of all, even many that are godly,
if they see them grow troublesome, they are ready to strive with them; because
wicked men are exasperated by the Word of God preached, therefore they could
wish that even such Ministers had never come amongst them, and this even such
as make profession of godliness do. Is here a requital of he hazard that
faithful Ministers undergo? I appeal unto you, Are there any people in the
Kingdom that stand as a But against the malice of the Adversary, so much as
godly and faithful Ministers do? Do not think that it is out of that
precipitancy, that ra hness that we do not consider what danger we stand in in
doing what we do; yes, we consider it beforehand, But out of conscience of our
duty and in faithfulness unto your soul^ we hazard our lives, we hazard all the
rage and malice of the Enemy. Now when we have done all this, we expect a far
better r^quittal from many people than we find. When Moses and Aaron came unto
the people of Israel when they were in Egypt to deliver them, (for that was
their message) but because for the present their bondage was increased and the
wr^th of Pharaoh more incensed, therefore they were weary of Moses and Aaron,
and they fall to striving with them as if they were the cause of their misery,
Why 'twas better with us before than three you came, if you had never come
amongst us it would have been better with us. So it is now, because those that
are faithful, out of conscience, labor to declare to you the mind of God, and
to draw you to those duties that God calls for, (this indeed enrageth the
adversary, they are the more incensed when you follow what your Ministers
teach,) and you are ready to think, they h^ve brought us into this way, they
have kindled the fire, they have told us it is the Cause of God, they have
exhorted us to come in with our Estates, and now the King is exaspered against
u^, and our adversaries are enraged against us and we are like to be in some
misery; And so even all the strivings of the better sort are ready to devolve
upon the Ministers, and they strive with them as the only incendiaries and
troublers of the places where they come. Well, howsoever Ministers may meet
with hard dealing from some, even from professors, yet their way is with the
Lord, and their judgment is with the Almighty: As there is a most admirable
promise to help those that have been most forward to rebuke sin and in a
zealous way for God, though men are enraged against them. Isa. 49.2. Isa. 49.2.
He has made my mouth like a sharp sword, in the shadow of his hand has he
bid me. This text is true of every faithful Minister: Mark it, He has made
made my mouth like a sharp sword; why if I did speak smooth things I were not
like to be in so much danger, but if speak sharp things do not I hazard my
self much? Opened
I shall incur the rage and anger of all kind of people; but mark, He has made
my mouth as a sharp sword, But in the shadow of his hand has he hid me.
Ministers whose mouths are as sharp swords they are in a great deal of danger,
yea but let such be comforted, here comes a promise presently, in the shadow of
his hand has he hid me. So that those Ministers whose mouths are sharpest in
the Name of God, and who speak but the Truth of God, those are under Gods
protection more than any other Ministers that have held their peace, they are
in more safety, they are hid in Gods hand, in the shadow of his hand more than
any other. So God comforted Jeremiah, Chap. 10. verse. 15. after he had cried
out, woe is me, I am a man of strife, well says God, Verily it shall be well
with thy remnant, I will cause the enemy to entreat thee well in the time of
evil and in the time of affliction. It may be many of you think it is a weakness
in Ministers to appear so much as they do and discover themselves, for they
endanger themselves, and cannot they be quiet as others are? there are many of
more moderate spirits and deal wiselyer for themselves, they keep in and say
nothing, and so they may escape of either side, looking which side will prevail;
May not these escape? No, they are in more danger than the other, for the other
are under a promise, these are not, they are so studious for themselves and for
their own safety that God will take no care of them. Our Savior Christ takes
care to encourage his Disciples against the st^^ings of people with them; we
have in Luke 6. many blessings pronounced, blessed are the poor, blessed are
they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, blessed are they that mourn
etc. But they that understand the Original shall find that the word [ye] is not
in, only blessed are the poor, and blessed are they that mourn etc. But when he
comes to his Disciples verse. 22. there is an Este put more than in the other,
Christ speaks more particularly to his Disciples: when as people shall speak
evil of them and cast out their name as filth, then there is a blessed are ye,
(...).
with an este, more than there was in all the other blessednesses; That shows
God has a special care of his Ministers when men speak evil of them and strive
with them. But on the other side, Luke, 6.22. Opened
Woe to you when all men speak well of you; It is meant most of Ministers, it is
true indeed of all Christians, but I take it that the scope of Christ in that
place is concerning Ministers that were to go and preach, and woe to you when
all men speak well of you. The word that is translated well, it is (...), that
speak of you so as to commend you for a spruce curious neat Teacher; I there
are such and such fiery men, but here is a Preacher, a quaint man, an Eloquent
man, a dainty man, a man that has brave language with him, and they will never
persecute such as these. The other are pronounced blessed when they are reviled
and cast out as evil.

These are they that will strive with the Priest] The next Note is this, That
though the Ministers of God must expect striving withal, Obser.
yet to strive with those that come in Gods Name to reprove, it is a great
aggravation of sin and a hastening of judgment. God expects when he sends his
Ministers that you should obey them in the Lord and not strive with them. 2 Chronicles. 26.12. God took it ill that King Zedekiah did not humble himself before
Jeremiah the Prophet; And in ver. 16. of the same chap. it is said, They mocked
the Prophets, and contemned them until the wrath of God arose against his
people and there was no remedy; No remedy when once they strove with those that
God sent amongst them. Those that are sent by God they are the special
witnesses of God: Revel. 11. It is said of those two witnesses that if any do
them hurt and contend with them, fire shall go out of their mouths and devour
their enemies. Those that are sent by God and come in Gods Name they have the
power of Jesus Christ with them, Mat. 28. Matt. 28.
All power is given to me etc. Go and teach etc. As if he should say, Opened.
know as I have all power given to me, it shall go along with you to do good to
those that obey your Doctrine and to execute revenge upon all those that strive
with you. The Apostles were to shake off the dust of their feet in contempt of
those that contemned their Doctrine.

May we not in any case strive with the Minister?

nullus mortaliu^ praesumat redarguere, quia cunelos ipse judicaturus a nemine
est judicundus Lex Canonic.
that though he should carry down with him by heaps souls to Hell, yet no
mortal man must presume so much as to rebuke him or find fault with him, for he
being spiritual as they say (for so they abuse that Scripture) he judges all
men and no man judges him; and in a proportion all their Priests would fain
have that power. And this certainly has been the policy of our Priests of
late to bring the people into ignorance that so they might not be able to
contend with them let then) do what they will. They cry out there was never
such a time when every Tailor and every Shop keeper has had so much knowledge
that they can contradict their Minister as now, and try the Doctrine of their
Minister. They vex at this that poor men have so much knowledge as to be able to
try their Doctrine they preach, they would fain so preach as that you must be
led like a company of sheep what way they would lead you and believe what ever
they preach. Certainly so many gross errors and doting conceits of Popery could
never have prevailed except they had prevailed with people in their blind
obedience. Therefore there may be some striving with Ministers and that
according to God, though here their striving is forbidden; As thus, Christ
requires that his sheep should know the difference between his voice and the
voice of a stranger: Yea we know that there is a charge that if any preach any
other Doctrine he should be accursed; even people should look upon those that
come to them to preach any other Doctrine as accursed; Therefore they are
required to know; And they are commanded to try every thing and not to believe
every spirit, yea not to bid them good speed that bring other Doctrins; And
they are to say to Archeppus, Take heed to thy Ministry which thou have
received that thou fulfill it; so far people have leave. Yet still it must be
done in ways of respect to them. If they look upon them as true Officers
(whether they be or no yet if they look upon them as such) the rule will take
hold of them, Receive not an accusation against an Elder without two or three
witnesses, You must not be so ready to strive with those that you look upon as
officers. And rebuke not an Elder, but entreat him as a father; It must not be
in a male pert way but with respect and reverence; And when you have done that,
contended by witnesses, and spoken to them with reverence as owning the place
wherein he stands, you have liberty then if he bring ill Doctrine, or if his
life be naught, to strive with him and contest with him in the Name of the
Lord, and not to suffer your selves to be under such bondage as to believe what
ever they would have you, and they never to be called to any account at all.
There was wont robe crying out of people if they went from their parish
Churches (as they called them) Oh it could not be suffered, and yet they
themselves would be away a whole year together, as if the relation were not
mutual, and they bound as much to continue with their people as the people tied
to keep unto them; If the Minister may have leave to go away, certainly the
people may have the same freedom; whereas indeed neither of both ought to go
away, so long as the one is looked upon as an Officer and the other as under
that Officer. But I speak of that bondage that they would have brought you into
whereby in time they would wholly have freed themselves that you should have
had nothing to do with them in Church power. And then they would be the
Clergy, whereas it is an absurd thing that they should be accounted the
Clergy, for the Scripture speaking of the people in distinction from the
Ministers, calls the people the Clergy, 1 Pet. 5.3. (...). which in the same
verse is called the s^ock.
Let them not lord it over Gods Clergy, so the word is there. But they would
be accounted the Church and the Clergy, as if the people were no part of the
Church at all, all Church power must come into their hands. And then they
endeavored to free themselves from all Civil power too, as the Papists you
know do, so they aimed at it and were going many steps in it; therefore they
would send forth things in their own names, and in time they would have wrought
themselves free from all Civil power and have had all Church power in their
hands, and so indeed you could not strive with them. Bless God for the
deliverance he has now given you.

Obs.
Yet further, If public means prevail not there is little hope of private. Why
should one man strive with another, these are they that strive with the Priest?
Though they had never so good public means, they resist that, surely then they
will resist private. Therefore public means is to be preferred before private;
When a man can speak as an officer to another, that is more to be regarded and
will be more efficacious to those God has a love unto, than private means. If
this be so, let parents take heed how they teach their children to deride
public means: When you have been at a Sermon, perhaps you will despise what
you have heard; It is just with God they should, despise your admonition and
reproof, for you have taught them to despise public means.

Again further, To reject those that we look upon in Office, though their
calling be not good, yet it is a wickedness that God will revenge, (I say)
though their calling be not right, if you look upon them or think them to be
true Officers, so long if you despise what they do that is according to Gods
will, so long God will avenge it. If they come in Gods Name and you know
nothing to the contrary but that they are true Officers, you must not oppose
them, so long as you have any apprehensions that they are true Officers, though
perhaps if they were examined they have no true calling, yet if you cannot see
but they have a true calling, you are to have such reverence and respect unto
them, that you are to be subject to them.

Verse 5. Therefore shall thou fall in the day, and the Prophet also shall fall
with thee in the night, and I will d^stroy thy mother.


Mark, Though private men are here bid not to strive one with another, or
reprove one another; yet Hosea he goes on in his striving and reproving.
Therefore shall they fall in the day and the Prophet also shall fall with them
in the night. Obser.
So that those in office must go on though they be striven against; so long as
they remain in office they must still go on though people strive against them.
It is a speech I remember Latimer Latimer
has in one of his Sermons, Many Ministers (says he) they will not preach,
and if they be a^ked the reason it is this, because they can do no good to
people; Oh this (says he) is a naughty answer. Certainly so long as you
continue in that place whether you do good or whether you do not good, you must
go on in your work.

Therefore shall [thou] fall. He directs the judgment to the particular, Thou
every particular of you, in the singular number. Perhaps some might think, well
though the generality suffer I may escape; No, look to your selves every one of
you. Observe.
When a threatening comes to particulars then it works.

The word translated, thou shall fall, (...)
it is a word that signifies the falling ofa man by stumbling in the dark,
suitable to their sin, they had no knowledge therefore they shall stumble in the
dark.

Thou shall fall in the day, Thou shall stumble as a man in the dark, but it
shall be in the day to thee, and yet thou shall stumble. [In the day;] that is,
First in thy prosperity, for in the latter times of the second Jeroboam (which
was a little before the destruction of the ten Tribes) they were in a better
case than they had been in before, yet from thence they began to fall. I say,
not long before their ruin they were in more prosperity than they had been in
many years before, therefore it is here said, thou shall fall in the day, even
when thou art in a prosperous condition. Or secondly, thou shall fall in the
day, that is, you shall see your misery before you yet you shall fall, you shall
not be able to prevent it; it shall be in the day time, at noon day, you shall
see plainly where your misery lies, yet you shall be as if you were in the
night you shall stumble and fall.

Oh my brethren this is a Scripture that does nearly concern us here in England
as much as any I know. If England falls and perishes now, England
it falls and perishes in the day. We see apparently our evil before us; we
see means to prevent it, God does not bring night upon us in this sense, that
is, he does not bring misery so upon us as that we do not know how it comes or
by what means, or how we should prevent it. No we are not so in the night, but
in the day; we have seen the misery that has come upon us by a continued
design, we know almost the very bottom the very beginning of that design, how
it has gone on by degree, step by step; we see now the reason of the breaking
of it out, because the stream is stopped it violently breaks out: We know who
are the causers of our evil, what their counsels, intentions, what their ways
are notwithstanding all their protestations, we see what we are like to be
brought into if we do give but a little way and do not appear to quit our
selves like men; And we see apparently what God would have us to do; we see
ways to help us and power to help us if we will, we have power to help our
selves, and direction to help our selves too; we all of us know or may know
clearly what we should do, and what in an ordinary course of providence would
help us. Yet Lord how do we fall, we fall notwithstanding this, we fall even in
apparent day light: so that if this Kingdom of England be brought into slavery,
it will be the heaviest wrath that ever fell upon a Nation. There was never any
Nation fell in a clear Sunshine day as we are like to do if we perish now
having such means for our help.

Again, You shall fall in the day] Hodie, that is, soon, presently, your
destruction shall not be long.

And the Prophet shall fall with you in the night] There seems to be some
difficulty in this. How comes this in, you shall fall in the day, and the
Prophet shall fall also with you in the night?

First, The Prophet shall fall with you] The blind lead the blind and they both
fall into the ditch. You gave your selves up to false Prophets to be guided by
them, and here is all the good you shall have, both you and they shall perish
together, the Prophet shall fall as well as ye. This is observable here, The
falls of the Prophets are the falls of the night, Obser.
For in the captivity of the ten Tribes they had no Prophets, nor never had
since. Judah was carried into captivity yet they had Prophets among them, as
there was Ezekiel, and Zechariah, and Haggai, they had Prophets to direct them
though they had a great deal of misery. But Israel shall be carried into
captivity and shall have no Prophet to help them. Here is a Note of great use
from hence, Obs.
It is a most sad judgment for a people to be in affliction and to have no
Prophet at all amongst them; no Prophet to tell how long, to tell them any part
of Gods mind. Look to your selves that you regard the Prophets of God now,
otherwise when you shall be brought into misery, under the power of your
adversaries, you shall have no Minister among you, none to show you Gods mind,
none to open his will. It was so with Israel, they never had any Prophet since
the captivity to tell them the mind of God.

Thus the Prophets shall fall, but why in the night? Some therefore because
they think hard of the different expression, they read it thus; You shall fall
in the day with the Prophet, in the night your mother shall be destroyed, and so
do but point it differently. It may be fairly read so, You shall fall in the
day with the Prophet, in the night your mother past be destroyed. But I had
rather read it as we have it, You shall fall in the day, and the Prophet with
you in the night. Upon these two reasons, the Prophet shall fall in the night,
false Prophets, so they are meant, they shall fall.

Observe.
First, Because God would inflict a greater darkness upon them in his just
judgment, than upon the people. Those that abuse most light they come into most
gross darkness, and therefore it is a usual expression in Scripture when
Prophets are threatened, to threaten, that darkness shall be upon them, Micah
3.6. To you (says he, speaking of the Prophets) it shall he dark, night shall
be upon you, the Sun shall go down over the Prophets, and the day shall be
darkened over them; over the Prophets in a special manner. And Zech. 11.17.
Zech. 11.17.
His right eye shall be utterly darkened, the chief understanding that he has,
the pregnancy of parts that he has he shall be besotted in, Opened
even in his very parts. Do we not see it even at this day that the Prophets
fall in the night? There is more darkness upon wicked Ministers at this day
amongst us than upon ordinary people. Ordinary people they understand more what
God would have them to do than ill Ministers. Ill Ministers God does besot them
in their very parts and abilities, and they do nothing but cry out still for
that which will bring themselves and us into slavery. Were it not for them,
people would see competently well what to do, and the great darkness that is
upon people comes from the Prophets, they bring darkness upon the people,
therefore their darkness is more than the darkness of the people. In diverse
Towns are there not many people that know the mind of God and see need of, and
desire a Reformation in Gods worship? and yet notwithstanding wicked Ministers
will see no need of any Reformation.

But there is a second reason and that is more evident yet, [The Prophet also
shall fall with you in the night] That is, the distress that shall be upon the
Prophets shall be greater than shall be upon other people, it shall be night to
them indeed, not only shall there be more darkness upon their understandings,
but more darkness in regard of their afflictions, they shall be in greater
horror of conscience and distress than any other people, for they shall see
that they have brought you into all misery. And the truth is at this day the
great misery that is come upon England it is through false Prophets, through
wicked Ministers, through that Doctrine that they have taught. We had never
been in such a condition as we are had not they flattered at Court and told at
Court that all was at the Kings power and pleasure, and there ought to be no
resistance, and that whatsoever he would have, to refuse it is rebellion. Had
they not taught such things as these we never had had such times. Now if this
Kingdom be destroyed, it may be God may bring horror upon their consciences,
how ever they would put it off unto others, yet those that have any light
remaining in them, the Lord will cause horror to be in their consciences and
distress in their spirits as the cause of all that evil that shall be upon us.
They shall fall in the night, a black dismal night shall be upon them when
judgments comes. Therefore in tims of public judgment, Gods Ministers are to
look upon Gods hand as especially against them, and more horror and distress of
conscience shall be upon them than upon others.

I will destroy their mother] They boasted of their mother a^ the Papists do of
their mother the Church, that is, their Church State and Civil state shall be
destroyed, and so there shall be no hope of this people, both children and
mother shall be be destroyed; it seems to have some allusion to that in the Law
where we are forbidden to take the dam with the young ones because of the
preservation of succession; but here says God my wrath shall be so hot, that I
will not only take the young ones, but the dam, they shall be destroyed
together with their mother.

The word that is here translated destroyed is a word that signifies shall be
brought to be silent, (...)
for indeed this word signifies silence, as noting thus much, in times of Gods
judgments wicked men shall have nothing to say for themselves, but their mouths
shall be stopped, and they shall be forced to lay their hands upon their mouths
and be silent. It follows.

Verse 6. My people are destroyed for want of knowledge, because thou have
rejected knowledge I will reject thee, etc.


For want of knowledg] As if he had said, if they had the knowledge of God they
might have prevented all this, but they were ignorant and sottish people and
this was the forerunner of their misery and destruction. Quos perdere vult
Jupiter dementat prius. Obs.
The Heathens were wont to say, If their god Jupiter would destroy one, he
would first besot him; so these people were first besotted and then destroyed:
Ignorance is not the mother of devotion but rather the father and mother too of
destruction. How diametrically cross is the language of the Scripture and the
Doctrine of Papists! Ignorance is the mother of devotion say they, Ignorance is
the mother of destruction says God, they perish for want of knowledge. In the
beginning of this Chapter we have the sin of ignorance set forth, here we have
the danger of ignorance set forth. There we had the charge, that they had no
knowledge of God in the land, here we have the judgment, that they are destroyed
for want of knowledge.

Ignorance is not only the deformity of the soul as blindness is the deformity
of the face, though a man or woman have never such a comely visage otherwise,
yet if they be blind it mars their comeliness, if they have but one eye it takes
away their beauty; so ignorance takes away the beauty of the soul, and not only
so but it is dangerous; it is destructive; And that in these regards.

he? no creature is so full of activity as the rational creature is, he will be
active in the world, and then wanting knowledge, in what danger is he?

Further, Man's way is for eternity, and there is but one

But you will say, Though he be dark himself yet he may have some others to
guide him and so he may do well enough.

Therefore consider in the third place, That man is not only

Fourthly, The work we are to do about our souls and eternal

Further, Blindness in this world makes men objects of When you see a poor
blind man here, what is he loathsome in your eyes because he is blind, do you
hate him? No, you pity him. But now the blindness of your souls makes you
abominable in the sight of God, and it is that which God will be avenged on you
for. But you will say, How can we help it? We have put out our own eyes, God
gave us light at first and we brought ignorance upon our selves.

How vile is it to deny the means of knowledge unto men merely to satisfy the
humors of others! How many hundred congregations are there that have been
deprived of their Ministers, for a Surplice or a Cross, etc.

Obedience unto a Church is a great matter?



If this be the ground of perishing for want of knowledge, then though diverse
countries have felt the hand of God most fearfully, yet we hope that England
shall not perish, for the knowledge of God is begun to shine among us, and never
since the word began has the knowledge of God and of Christ shined more
brightly upon a Kingdom than upon us. We hope therefore though God intends to
chastise us we shall not perish.

Because thou have rejected knowledge,] Only let us take heed that we do not
reject knowledge and despise it. The word [reject] signifies contemning, (...)
despising, thou have cast it off with despite and contempt, it is, Ignorantia
non merae negationis, sed pravae dispositionis, affected ignorance. Thou have
rejected knowledge; these two ways. First when the means of knowledge is
rejected then knowledge is rejected. Secondly when the directions of our
knowledge are rejected, when we refuse to be guided by our knowledge, upon this
our knowledge does decay and so knowledge is contemned.

Now this is a great sin in any but especially in the Priests. When others
think that the knowledge of God and his truth is too slight too mean a thing to
take up their thoughts, this is vile. When Merchants and Tradesmen shall think
they must busy their heads about some other matters, but for this knowledge of
the Scriptures, it is no great matter, they may be happy without that, let them
have their tradings and bargainings and houses and comings in stand that is
that which is suitable unto them) let them have their cables spread and their
dishes full, and for this Scripture and these points of Religion these are too
mean things for them: These men now despise knowledge, for so the word here
signifies, it is rejecting with a vile with a contemptible esteem of knowledge.
But I say when the Priests shall reject knowledge, the Priests that should have
labored to have filled their souls with knowledge, if they shall seek to live
bravely, to be gallant, to grow rich, to pamper the flesh, and care not either
to have the knowledge of God in their own souls or to bring the knowledge of God
unto the people, but look upon them as not worth the regarding, this is in a
more special manner a most grievous sin. How many are there amongst us at this
day that study to get preferment etc. and then sell away their books and never
after any more mind knowledge! And others if they have knowledge and learning and
prize it in some respect, yet in this they contemn it, they prize knowledge
merely as servicable unto their lusts. It is not for the beauty and excellency
of the knowledge of God that they prize it so much, that sweetness that they
find in the knowledge of Christ that they do search to know, but that they may
be accounted Scholars, understanding men, learned men. This is to despise
knowledge, when we seek for knowledge but in a way of service unto our lusts, and
such men may be charged for men that despise knowledge.

But further, These Priests and such as were eminent in Israel rejected
knowledge, because they had their houses and goods and comings in amongst the
ten Tribes. (I beseech you observe it for this concerns us) I say the Priests
that were amongst the ten Tribes, they were settled there and had their houses
and in comes and their estates there; but now there was this taught, that we
must worship God at Jerusalem, at the Temple, they rejected this knowledge
especially, they saw that if they did embrace that truth of worshipping God in
his own way, then farewell our incomes, farewell our livings, farewell our
houses, we must leave our brave dwellings and all our maintenance and go from
Samaria, and we must go to Judah, and how shall we live there? Upon this they
shut their eyes against the knowledge of that very truth that should have
brought them to the true worship of God; Rather than they would lose their
estates they would reject that knowledge; And that I think to be the meaning of
the holy Ghost here, They despised as other knowledge, Text opened.
so that knowledge of the true worship of God; so it is turned by some,
Scientiam illam, that kind of knowledge they rejected; For they knew that these
truths were suffering truths, Obser.
Now suffering truths are truths that will hardly go down with men nor with many
a Minister, they had therefore rather be ignorant of them; as the holy Ghost in
Ezekiel speaks of men that shut their eyes against the Sabbath, so they shut
their eyes against those truths that should have brought them to the true
worship of God. And in this case it is not enough for a man to say, God knows I
go not against my conscience, if my conscience were convinced that such and
such things must be in the worship of God, if my conscience told me than this
were the Word of God, I would obey it: But the reason they see this not to be
the Word of God, why their consciences tell them not so, is, Because they have
no mind to know it, they reject that knowledge, it is against their case and
preferment, and it is suffering truth, and therefore they shut their eyes
against it. This is no excuse, Mark the judgment follows upon this.

Therefore I will reject you.] You despise knowledge, I will despise you, so the
words may be read as well as re^ect you; God scorneth wicked men as much as
they scorn him, Psalm. 18.
with the froward he will deal frowardly, and with the scornful he will deal
scornfully, that is, he will laugh them to scorn: What do you look upon Gods
ways and worship as a vile thing? Are the thruths of God vile in your eyes?
You are vile in Gods eyes, God looks upon you and your spirits as base and
contemptible as you can look upon his Worship and his Saints and Ordinances.
You despise knowledge and I will despise you says God.

And I will r^ject you.] The word here translated reject, that is for
despising, (...) pro (...)
it has a letter in it more than it has in any other place in all the
scripture. It is a Note of Tremelius from thence, there is a letter in this
word in the Hebrew that is redundant, that is beyond the ordinary form of it,
and this is his note upon it in his Comment upon this Text, It notes says he,
the extraordinary manner of Gods rejecting them, Temelius.
he will cast them out of the hearts of his people; as he does apostate
Ministers, above all others God casts out apostate Ministers out of the hearts
of people: There is a peculiar way of Gods rejecting wicked Ministers, an
extraordinary way, Obs.
more than despising and rejecting any other, and there is that shame and
contempt cast upon them more than any in the world; That is his note upon this;
he will reject them with contempt: Yea for ever. You heard before in Luke 6.
that Christ pronounced his Disciples, faithful preachers, blessed when their
names were call out as evil, when they were vilified by men. But now mark, when
a Minister goes on faithfully in declaring the mind of God unto people, and
there be shame cast upon him, blessed be that Minister; but if the Minister be
wicked and there be shame cast upon him, that shame is a part of the curse, for
then he is cast out as unsavory salt and men tread upon it says Christ. Wicked
men would cast out the godly, but God and Gods Saint^ they embrace them, and
they bless God for them; but if you be wicked and men cast you out as unsavory
salt, then men contemn you, then you are trodden upon. Yea so rejected as never
to be received again. Ezekiel. 44.13. the Priests there that did forsake the Lord
when Israel forsook him, most never again come near unto God, no not so much as
near unto the Priests Office. A notable text that concerns you to know for your
direction about receiving in wicked persons that have been wicked in ill times.
Perhaps now they preach good Sermons, but you are to enquire what they were
when others were superstitious and evil; and although we are not utterly to
reject them, yet until there be further evidence of their repentance they are
not to be received. God threatens an utter rejection of those Levits that
forsook God when Israel forsook him.

Now the observation that I should have noted from hence is this, Obser.
That unfaithfulness in service provokes God to cast us out of service. I
cannot stand to set an edge upon it.

And then another Note is this, That it is a great judgment to be rejected from
the Priests Office, Obser.
from the Office of a Minister. I will reject thee that thou shall be no Priest
to me. To be rejected from any employment it is a great judgment, Neb. 5.13. So
God shake out every man from his house and from his labor that performs not
this promise. It is a judgment to be shaken out of our labor, but to be shaken
out of such an office whereby we draw so nigh unto God as to be the mouth of
God unto the people, and the mouth of the people unto God again, this is a sore
evil.

Again, whereas it may be said, Israel had no true Priests therefore it was no
judgment for them to be rejected out of that Office. But to be cast out of what
we seem to have, that is likewise a judgment of God, Luke 8.18.

-- Seeing thou have forgotten the Law of God, I will also forget thy children.
You have forgotten the Law.] You live so as you show that you never think of
the Law, of the holiness, equity and authority of it, and the threats annexed
unto it, for if you remembered these you could not go on so quietly in a sinful
way, but you have cast off all the remembrance of the Law, it is even worn out
of your memory. The book of the Law of God was lost for a long time in Judah,
surely in Israel much more.

I will forget] Eti^m Ego, even I. It is a sad thing to be forgotten by our
friends when we are in misery, (...)
Oh that such a deer friend, such a father or such a mother should forget me!
but how sad a thing is it for God to forget you!

Yea, I will forget your children] That is, there shall be no succession in the
Priestly office. This was threatened against Eli his house 1 Samuel 2.20. It is a
blessing for children of godly Ministers being godly to succeed them in the
Office; Observe.
and the contrary is a judgment. Your children shall not succeed you in this
Office, but they shall be forgotten by me. The families of wicked Ministers
thorough Gods judgment are many times forgotten. You have forgotten me, Obser.
I will forget you and your children. I will not here speak how the child may
suffer ^or the fathers offense, we often meet with it; Only now as it concerns
the posterity of wicked Ministers, they are thorough Gods judgment often
forgotten. But let not the families of Godly Ministers especially if their
children be godly too, Oh let not them be forgotten. It is a judgment threatened
upon these wicked Priests that God would forget their children, therefore
though men forget them it is not so evil; but if there be any that have been
faithful Ministers, God forbid their children should be forgotten after they
are dead. This City has been honored for their respect to godly Ministers, but
have you never forgotten their children, their families that have been left
behind? When they were with you and preached among you, you seemed to give
mighty respect unto them, but are there not many that belong unto their
families now with you that live in a hard condition, yea their children and
families that are godly, their widows too? how are they forgotten! If the
children of godly Ministers that are godly too, should go unto God and complain
thus, would it not be a sad thing? Lord thou threatnest Idolatrous Priests that
forget thee that thou would forget their children, but Lord my father in the
City was a faithful Minister, he remembered thee, and he was a faithful
remembrancer for thy people, yet we are forgotten, is this according to thy
Word? shall the judgment that is threatened upon the children of Idolatrous
Priests be the judgment upon us that are the children of faithful Ministers
that we are thus forgotten though our fathers forgot not thee? Look therefore
into the families of godly Ministers, look after their children, for their
fathers did not forget God, do not you forget them, let not the judgment that
is threatened upon the children of wicked Ministers be upon them but let there
be a distinction made between the children of faithful and godly Ministers and
the children of Idolatrous Priests.

Verse 7. As they were increased, so they sinned against me; therefore will I
change their glory into shame.


THe Lord is here further charging these ten Tribes, but especially their
Priests, he aims at them most in this his Charge. They had before rejected
the knowledge of the Lord, and the Lord threatened rejection of them. The
knowledge (...) that knowledge, Scientiam illam, that knowledge of God in the
way of his worship, that he was to be worshipped at Jerusalem alone, that truth
was a suffering truth, therefore that truth they did reject, they rejected
others but especially that; And in this seventh verse here is some ground of
their rejection of the knowledge of God, As they were increased, so they sinned
against me. God had increased them, they were grown first into a great
multitude, and as their number increased so their sins increased. But
especially that which I take to be the meaning of the holy Ghost here is, As
their prosperous condition increased; they were grown up to an height of
prosperity, and that was the thing made them sin against God and reject the
knowledge of God.

The first is not to be rejected viz. As they increased in multitude: (...): so
the Seventy turn it, according to their fullness. And it may be turned both
ways, fullness of number, or fullness of their prosperous estate. Obser.
It is a usual thing where there is increase in number to be increase in sin.
The more meat there is in the pot the more scum arises. simile
So in way, but ordinarily as they increase in number, when Churches grow to
any number, they begin to corrupt and increase in sin. They should increase so
much the more in godliness, but this is the corruption of man's heart, every one
bringing in some corruption, Therefore as there is an increase in number, so in
sin.

But because that is not the scope, but the second, to speak to that a little;
As they increased in their prosperous estate. For we are to know that at this
time the ten Tribes were in a very prosperous condition; they were grown rich
and great and so they were increast, and especially the Priests for they had
the favor of Jeroboam and of the Princes; For their main design was to uphold
their false worship, and the Priests served for their turns most, therefore
they countenanced those Priests of Dan and Bethel, the Priests of the Calves,
and they flourished at this time in the Court and in the Country, and were
much increast in their prosperous estate; And as they increast so they finned.
This is man's vile disposition, Obser.
that increase of mercies should be the increase of their sin, Thus was it with
the Church, when the Church was in a lower condition, then there was more
holiness and more sincere love to the truth, when it began to flourish in
outward prosperity it began to decay in true Piety. And therefore
Ecclesiastical histories tells us, that when the Church received their
donations from Constantine of great preferments, then there was heard a voice
in the air: Hodie venenum infunditur etc. To day poison is powered forth into
the Church; when great livings and great estates were given to the Ministers of
the Church, then poison was powered forth into the Church. It was a good speech
of Boniface the Martyr, Boniface.
when one asked him whether it were lawful to receive the Communion in wooden
Chalices, his Answer was, Time was when in the Church there were wooden
Challices and golden Priests, but now there are golden Challices, but wooden
Priests. And the answer of Aquinas Aquinas
was fit for this to Innocent the third, when he showed him a table of gold and
silver saying, we have no need to say as Peter once did, Silver and gold have
we none; Aquinas answered presently, neither can ye say, Arise and walk, as you
have more money than they had, so you have less gifts than they had, you have
not so much of the Spirit of God as they had. It was so in the increase of the
prosperity of the Church; And usually it is so in the increase of their
prosperity. simile spleen.
As it is with the spleen the greater it grows the less the body is, so the
more prosperity the leaner and lanker are the spirits of men. Deuteronomy. 32.15. Thou
art waxed fat, thou art grown thick, thou art covered with fatness, then he
forsook God which made him and lightly esteemed the God of his salvation. How
many when they were low and poor in their estates were more holy and gracious
and more spiritual than now they are? It is true in particular persons, in
Churches and Countries, but most true in Ministers. It was once a complaint
that was made to a Prelate here, that he had a kinsman that was a very zealous
preacher in the Country, well says he, I Will silence him, and his silencing
was this, he gave him two livings and that stopped his mouth; Jerome. Quando
Ecclesia ad Principes christianos venit, factam fuisse opibut pleniorem, sed
virtutib. minorem ait.
when he came once to have fatted livings then his zeal quickly abated. And
Hierome in the life of Malachus has this expression, when the Church says he
came to Christian Princes, and there had countenance, we may well say of it
that indeed it was fatted with riches but it was less a great deal in virtue
and godliness.

God threatens here that seeing they did abuse their prosperity, as they did
increase they sinned more, that therefore he would turn their glory into shame,
he would cast dirt into their faces. God does love to stain the pride, the
haughtiness of men. He would turn the glory of the people and the glory of the
Priests, but especially the glory of the Priests (for so it is meant, but we
must take in all) into shame; Either first he would in stead of glory bring
shame, or secondly he would make that wherein they did most glory to be their
shame.

First, That he would bring shame in stead of glory. So God uses to do. If any
one glory in beauty, God brings that which makes them contemptible many times
in stead of that beauty. That is a notable text for women that glory in their
beauty and in their bravery, Isa. 3.16.24. Because the daughters of Zion are
hauty etc. therefore there shall be destruction upon them; and ver. 24. There
shall be burning in stead of beauty, and instead of well-set hair, baldness,
and in stead of their brave dressing, sackcloth. If any will glory in parts,
the Lord justly brings shame upon them, blasting of their parts, Albertus
magnus nec literas sciret, ita ignoramus fuit.
as it is said of Albertus Magnus that great Scholar, that for five years
before his death he did dote and was so ignorant that he did not know letters,
he could not read. God can soon blast the parts of men that glory in them and
turn that to shame. If any glory in riches, God can soon turn that into shame
too, As histories tells us of an Earl of Exceter Earl of Exceter
that married the sister of King Edward the Fourth, and yet Philip de Commines
reports of him, that he was seen begging of his bread in the Low Countries
barefoot. God can soon take away the riches of men and turn that their glory
into their shame. And then if any boast in honor, glory in that, God can soon
turn that into shame, as in that example of Herod that gloried in the applause
of the people when they cried out the voice of God and not of man, and
presently he was consumed by worms.

And much shame comes unto men that glory in these things, Mark it, according
to the glory of men in external things so is their shame when God takes them
away. Here is the difference between the Saints losing these outward things and
wicked men. When the Saints lose these outward things there is not much shame
comes to them, because they did not much glory in them when they had them; but
carnal hearts because they know no higher things than these things are
therefore when they are taken from them there is much shame comes upon them,
for their glory was in them when they had them.

Secondly, God makes the very things they glory in to turn to their He does not
only take away their parts and bring ignorance and dotage instead of their
parts, but he makes their parts to be their undoing, he makes use of their
parts to bring them to shame. He makes their very riches and honors to be their
shame, and their glorying in their success, he makes that thing turn unto their
shame; As now, when men shall glory in this that they had such success such a
victory upon such and such a time, and upon this they gather an argument,
surely God is with us and blesses us and owneth us; in this they glory; well,
God turns this into their shame when he comes to be against them, and blasts
them that they shall not have success, that it shall appear unto all that
though they have outward means for advantage yet they go by the worst; now
where is the argument of Gods owning their cause, success
where is the argument of glorying with them if that were a good argument that
God was with them because of their success? Those that shall make that the only
or principal argument that God is with them, how does God turn their glory into
shame when he does apparently deny them success and that when they have most
outward advantages for success? The Saints shame is turned into glory, but the
wickeds glory is turned into shame. When the Saints suffer any shame for God,
they can glory; the Apostles they account it their honor, they rejoice that
they were worthy to suffer, that they had the honor to suffer dishonor, (...)
so the words in the propriety of them signify, they gloried that they bore
about them the marks of the Lord Jesus. Thus what the world accounts their
shame is their glory, Act. 5.41.
and that which the world judges to be their glory is their shame.

But it is especially meant of the Priests, for so the Prophet is speaking of
them. God will turn their glory into shame. The Priests though they did reject
the knowledge of God and their duty, they never regarded to do that wherein the
true glory of their office was; That blessed knowledge of God that might have
made them glorious indeed, that was despised by them, and the faithful
administration of their office, that was neglected by them; Yet they would
glory for all this, they would bear it out as if they were THE men; why, they
were countenanced at Court, Obs.
they had good livings and they could lord it over their brethren; and they
gloried in that. It is usual with wicked Priests if they can have but
countenance from them that are in public place, and can have but estates and
livings, though they be never so negligent of their office and never so
ignorant, yet to glory. How has it been amongst us thus of late? How have they
carried their heads on high and accounted themselves the triumphant Church, and
all must be made to come under them; The land was not able to bear the pride of
Prelates and Prelatical men. It is a speech of Cyprian, Ambitio et superbia
suaviter dormit in sinu Sacerdotum Cipr. de jejun. etc.
Ambition and Pride does sweetly sleep in the bosom of Priests; And there are
none indeed so much puffed up with vain pride as they are, and as such as are
most ignorant and do neglect that which is the true glory of their office. God
threatens to turn their glory into shame, that is, the glory of their Priestly
office, for that I think especially to be the meaning of the words, to cast
shame and contempt upon the Priests. And God does take much delight in this, to
cast shame and contempt upon wicked Priests and Prophets, therefore in Esa.
9.15. God says, The Prophet that speaks lies is the tail, he speaks
contemptibly of them; And Malac. 2.9. There fore I will make them (speaking of
the Priests that had been partial in the Law and had not kept the ways of God)
base and contemptible before all the people; And Rev. 3.16. I will spue them
out of my mouth, as loathsome. And Mat. 5.13. When salt has lost his favor, it
is thenceforth good for nothing but to be cast out and to be trodden under foot
of men, as a contemptible and vile thing. Thus God casts shame upon wicked
Priests. So much for that seventh verse. It follows.

Verse. 8. They eat up the sin of my people, and they set their heart on their
iniquity.


THey eat up the sin of my people] There is some difficulty in these words. To
eat up sin, to eat up the sin of people, what is that? There is much in this to
be learned.

The word here translated Sin, (...)
in Scripture has three acceptions.

First, It is used for that which is properly sin, the transgression of Gods
Law. That I need not give you any Scripture for.

Secondly, It is used for the punishment of sin; He shall bear his sin, his
punishment of sin. Christ was made sin. And

Thirdly, It is used for the sacrifice that was offered for sin, Levit. 10.17.
why did you not eat the sin in the holy place? so the words are to be read,
that is, the sin offering.

The observation from hence (by way of allusion at least) that one has is not
to be neglected: Audiant hoc sacerdotes etc.
Let Priests hear this, They did not eat the sin-offering in the holy place:
Let those Priests that spend their time in playing, in pleasures of the flesh,
in Taverns, and make their houses to be very sinks of vice, Let them hearken
unto this, They should eat the revenues they have by their Office in an holy
place, that is, by way of Analogy and proportion, their houses in which they
spend the allowance they have for their office, should be holy places; for the
offerings of the people were such as the Priests had in lciu of their office,
and they were to eat them in an holy place. So Ministers now should eat their
means they have coming in, in holy places, their houses should be Sanctuaries,
and not Taverns or stews, or sinks of wickedness and sin. (But that by the way.)

For the meaning here, They eat up the sin of my people.

Where lies the Charg?

First here, in that they did flatter them in their sin, and so got advantage
thereby: Greg. Cur pecata poopuli comedere dicuntur, nisi quia pecata
deliquentium etc.
So Gregory has it, Why or how are they said to eat up the sin of people, but
because they do nourish the sins of those that are delinquents for their own
advantage? So all your Court-flatterers and others, that flatter men in their
sin for their own advantage, they may be said to feed upon the sins of the
people.

Secondly, They eat the sins of the people in this regard, Because they were
negligent in their office, and took all the profits, the advantages that came
in by their office, but neglected their charge, and so let people go on in
their sin, and cared not what became of them in that regard, so that they might
have their tithes and means coming in they cared not: These Ministers may be
said to live upon, or to eat the sins of the people, and to wear the sins of
the people, their very backs are covered and their tables spread with the sins
of the people. A Writer upon this place relates a story of one in Charles the
fifths time, a Prelate, Ob hos cibes ego addicor gebenua poenis, and vos dapos
that inviting his friends unto his house and preparing good cheer, they did
not eat of it; What faith he, will you not eat of dainties that are bought at so
dear a rate? this meat which I have prepared for you and you will not eat, it is
like to cost me the pains of hell: He was convinced in his conscience of the
neglect of his duty, and so looked upon his very diet that was on his table as
the sins of his people, and that which was like to cost him eternal misery.

But further, to open it far more clearly, [They eat up the sins of my people]
That is, the Sacrifices which were offered for sin.

But you will say then, how is this so deep a charge that they should eat of
the sacrifices that were offered for sin? for God allowed the Priests to eat
the sin offering, as that place Levit 10.17. shows.

This therefore was the evil that was in it, Masses, and Pater-nosters, and
Indulgences, and Dirges they shall be delivered; and by this means they get the
wealth of Kingdoms and eat up the sins of the people. The Priests in those
times were images of the Papists now.

Again, They were glad when people did offend and sin against there were, Bern.
Populi mei peccata comedunt; quasi licat, peccatoru^ prelie exigunt, and
peccantib. debita^ sollicitudine non impendunt and rursum: Quam dabis mihi
numero prepositoru^ qui no^ plus invigiles subditoru^ ^acuandis marsupijs, quam
vitijs extirpancis
they rejoiced at long presentiments, all brought griest to their Mill. And
Bernard in his 77. Sermon upon the Canticles quoteth this place, (It seems
there were such then in his time) and says he, They eat upon the sin of my
people, as if he should say; they exact the price of their sin, but take not
due care for the sinners. And again, Give me (says he) any one of those that
are Governors in the Church that does not watch more to empty peoples purses
than to save their souls: How many Commissaries and Chancellours of late grew
extraordinary rich, and went up and down in their silks and sattins and in
their Coaches, and all this was the sins of the people.

It is then a most cursed thing to desire or rejoice in the sins of others
because of our own advantage. That is the special observation here. How many
are there that watch for the falls of their enemies, and rejoice in their sin?
I appeal unto you, had you an enemy to you, when you heard of his fall, though
it were a sin against God, yet if it tended unto his disgrace, did not you
rejoice in it? were you not glad of it? because the more an enemy is disgraced
the more you think your self justified and honored. Oh this is horrible! Oh be
humbled before the Lord for this, and seek unto God that if it be possible he
may pardon the thoughts of thy heart in this thing. What, to rejoice that the
infinite blessed God is dishonored because thou thy self have an advantage, it
is a most horrible cursed thing. How many are there that looking upon the
professors of Religion whom they think to be adversaries unto them, do rejoice
when they see them fall, why? because they think by their disgracing,
themselves to be thereby justified. This is to feed upon the sins of people.
You shall have vermin and swine rooting in filth and in dung, simile swine.
so there are many that feed upon the filth and dung of others, upon the filth
of their sins. It is a vile and cursed wickedness to be glad of the afflictions
of our neighbor for our own advantage, much more to be glad of his sin. When
thy neighbor falls into affliction thou should not rejoice at his affliction
though thou have advantage by it; but when thy neighbor falls into sin, to be
glad of it for thine own advantage, this is a most cursed thing indeed.
Chyurgion
For a Surgeon to be glad of another man's wounds and to prolong the healing
of them because he thereby shall have some advantage, would not every one cry
out of him? And truly this were wickedness. So for Soldiers to love war,
Soldier
and to lengthen out war, and care not what becomes of the lives of men and the
woeful miseries of a Kingdom so they may have long pay, (I say) for them
willingly to lengthen out war because of their own advantage, this you will all
account a great wickedness: But this is not so bad as to be glad of the sins of
people for our own advantage. Certainly as Surgeons that shall lengthen out
the affliction of their Patients for their own advantage may be said to feed,
upon the matter and filthy stuff of the wound; and Soldiers that shall lengthen
out war for the increase of their own pay may be said to drink the blood of
people; those cups of wine that go down so merrily and those dishes of meat
that they are so jovial with, may be said to be the flesh and the blood of
people; but this is not so bad as to feed upon the sins of others. Thou that
feedest upon the sin of thy brother do thou know that this diet of thine must
needs breed diseases, It is no wholesome diet to feed upon the sins of people, it
is such a diet as will breed Worms, breed the worm of conscience one day, and
thou will get such a surfeit as will need a strong purge of humiliation to purge
thee from that surfeit. It was once an expression concerning a Prelate that was
very fat, one being asked the reason why such a Prelate was so very fat? why
furely (says he wittily) he grows so fat by so often eating of his own words;
but no mervail though men grow to have fat hearts that feed upon the sins of
people. As this is the ordinary diet'of many, merely to feed upon the sins of
others, so especially of Ministers, and for Ministers to feed upon the sins of
people so as to keep them alive by their flatteries and connivence, that is
evil; but if by their faithful preaching they did first slay the sins of the
people and then receive maintenance for their work, this is allowed by God,
and this they may do; when God bad Peter arise and eat, he first bid him slay,
Arise Peter slay and eat; Allusion
so Ministers if first they would arise and slay the sins of the people by
their preaching, they may eat, that is, they may comfortably then receive
maintenance and allowance for their work; but if they keep their sins alive,
then their diet is ill diet for they feed upon their sins.

What, is there such wickedness in the hearts of men as to rejoice in the sins
of others for their own advantage? Conseg. ex opositio.
Oh how much more then should the Saints rejoice in the graces of God in others
for Gods glory? In Ezekiel. 8.17. Ezekiel. 8.17
you have an expression that seems hard to be understood. Opened
God charge the people there as with other notorious evils so with this among
the rest, that they did put the branch to their nose; In these words the people
are charged with a most notorious wickedness, this may be often read and little
understood what it is, I conceive the meaning to be this, It is a charge of
this people for Idolatry, that they worshipped the Sun, or Vesta the goddess of
the earth, either of both, because by them the sweet flowers and branches of
trees came forth from the earth, they attributed the flourishing of trees and
of the plants wholly unto the Sun whom they worshipped as a god, Sol and homo,
generunt hommem.
or unto Vesta whom they worshipped is a goddess, and when they worshipped
either of those in the acknowledgment of the honor due to them, they took a
branch and put to their nose, thereby showing their respect and their homage
unto them as rejoicing in that good and sweet fruit that was caused by the Sun
or by Vesta their god or goddess. So that God charge them here for so
rejoicing in these creatures as to worship the Sun or the earth as the cause of
it. To apply it to our purpose; As Idolaters because they looked upon the Sun
or the earth as causes of such flourishing of plants and sweetness of branches
and flowers, did put them to their nose and delighted in them and thereby
showed their honoring of the Sun and of the earth; simile
so should we take the graces of the Spirit of God in our brethren that are the
fruits of the Sun of righteousness, for the Sun of righteousness causes them to
flourish in the hearts of our brethren, and we should put them to our nose,
smell at them, account them fragrant and thereby do honor unto Jesus Christ as
the Author of them, this is quite contrary to this of rejoicing in the fins of
people. Thus much for that phrase they eat up the sin of my people.

And they set their hearts upon their iniquity.] The words are (...) not (...)
They lift up their hearts, every ones heart. Calu.
It may be interpreted either of the heart of the Priests or the heart of the
people, both ways, and according to the scope of the Spirit of God either way.

First the heart of the P^^ests, they lift up their hearts to the Deuteronomy. 24.15.
speaking of poor men He is poor says he, and sets his heart upon his wages. A
poor man that wants provision for his family, he sets his heart upon his wages,
Oh when shall I have my wages that I may provide for my family! now the word is
here in this text of the poor man, he lifts up his heart to his wages, Oh my
wages that it might come. And Jerem. 22.27. the land whereunto they desire to
return, thither shall they not return, that is, the land whereto they lift
their hearts; so the word is the same here in the text, they have an earnest
desire unto the land; And Ezekiel. 24.25. I will take from them the desire of
their eyes and that whereupon they set their minds, their sons and their
daughters; it is spoken of their love unto their children, they lift their
minds or their hearts to their children. So that then it notes thus much, the
earnest desire the Priests had unto the sins of the people, that they might
have the greater advantage by them; As it is noted of some who are of poor
servile spirits and whose greatest means comes in by burials, simile Sextons.
that they are glad and rejoice when they hear the bell ring, and they are
ready to desire the death of men out of respect to their own ^ees, because the
more die and the richer they die the more ad^^^^age comes in to them. So the
Priests at this time they (...) ^he multiplying of the sins of the people that
they (...) have ^he more sacrifices thereby.

(...) rather think, according to other Interpreters, the scope to be more
principally in regard of the lifting up of the hearts of the people, that the
Priests did lighten the hearts of the people, that is thus, that they might
have the more advantage by their sacrifice, they do make the sins of the people
nothing and encourage them in their sins, and lighten their hearts; they lift
up their hearts above their sins, persuading them that if they offer sacrifice
all should be well, they should be fully cleared, they need not be further
troubled: Whereas indeed the Priests ought to convinc^ men's consciences of the
evil of their sins, when they came to sacrifice they ought to have showed them
how they deserved death for their sins, whereas this poor beast dies, and you
are to lay your hands upon the head of it, know that your sins deserve the
death of your souls eternally; the sacrifice what it taught
and they were to instruct the people how the sacrifices typified the blood of
Christ, they were to tell them, you come now to offer sacrifice and to have the
blood of the beasts shed, this typifieth out the Messiah that is to come into
the world, the Son of God that is be made Man and to shed his precious blood to
pacify the wrath of God for your sins, and you are to exercise your faith upon
this Messiah that is to come: they should have told them that no sin could be
pardoned but by the blood of Christ, they should have loaded their consciences
with their sins, they should have made their sins heavy upon their consciences,
but they lightened their minds by putting such apprehensions into them that if
they did but offer sacrifice all would be well, they might take their liberty
then, and though they committed sin again yet still there was a sacrifice for
it, and so they lightened the sins of the people that way.

This was a most abominable sin of the Priests, Calvin upon this place brings
in Plato himself that Heathen, Calvin. Plato.
inveighing against the absurdity and ridiculousness of peoples offering
sacrifice thinking thereby to pacify their gods and then take liberty to sin
again, Even Plato thought it an abuse of an Heathen god for people to think it
enough to offer sacrifice. And yet is not this the distemper of the hearts of
many people amongst us, that they commit sin and take liberty to themselves to
satisfy the lusts of the flesh, and what will they do? They will pray to God
to forgive them, and some go so far that they will fast, and then sin again,
and then pray and fast again, and then to it again, thinking to put off God
with such kind of sacrifices as these are; It is true, we are all linners and
we must repent, and so tin, and repent, and sin and repent again, and so make
repentance that should be the death of their sins a means to nourish their
sins. The Priests here did abuse the type, the sacrifices, they lighten the
hearts of people by telling them that there was a sacrifice to expiate their
sin, and have you not at this day many that abuse the Antitype as much, that
tell the people with such kind of expressions as there, Sin at fast as you can,
there is a sufficient sacrifice for sin, it is but to believe in Christ, Christ
has shed his blood for the greatest sins of all, and sin as fast as you can
yet there is a price paid for sin. It is true there may be some truth in the
words some matter in them without clothing them with such absurdities, that
is, that there is a sacrifice for the greatest sin, but now to speak to people
upon this in such a manner, sin as fast as you can there is a sacrifice for
sin, for it is the manner, the Modus, that does either encourage or keep back
people from sin. I appeal unto you, whether have you not many that do reveal
Christ in such a way and manner and open the rich and glorious free grace of
God in Christ as is an encouragement to people unto sin. It is true when they
come to be examined they deny it, no God forbid, they do not encourage men to
sin, they only tell them of Gods free grace: Yea but they tell them of it in
such a manner without such cautions as prudent wise conscionable Ministers use
to do; And therefore you find that all your lewd and looser sort of Professors
close with them because they have such a way of preaching of free grace. It
appears that in Hierome his time there were such a kind of people, for he has
this expression of some in his days; Ierom against the abusers of Free Grace
when they saw any to live wickedly they would say thus to them, you sin and
offend, but God requires nothing else but only abide in the truth of the
faith, do but believe and that is enough. And again he has a further
expression, which faith if you do but keep God does not so much regard your
lives what they are, only looks that you do believe: And by this means faith he
men repent not neither are they humbled, but they walk up and down with a
stretched out neck; you shall find them by their very gate, they walk so
peartly abroad and cast up their heads, because they think they hold the true
faith and so take liberty to sin. The Church has been continually troubled
with this generation, and no mervail there be such men now amongst us, for
there being not yet a full Reformation (for we are but in the way tending
toward it) and all things cannot be reformed at once, therefore some kind of
liberty for the present is permitted to such men, and therefore I say no
mervail that we have such among us that are of such spirits to abuse the free
grace of God and lighten the hearts of men in their sin by telling of them
there is a sacrifice in Christ's death sufficient to pay for all. And so much
for this eighth verse.

Verse 9. And there shall be like people like Priest; and I will punish them
for their ways, and reward them for their doings.


THE Lord threatening of the ten Tribes, especially points his threats against
the Priests, as the great cause of the evil both of the sin and punishment of
the people, as ever they have been; Evil Ministers in a country have been a
chief cause of the sin and of the misery of the Country. Diverse of Gods
threats against them we saw before and still it follows.

There shall be like people, like Priest.] Here is a mixed threat, both against
Priest and people. They have made themselves like one another in sin, Obser.
God will make them like one another in punishment. They join themselves
together in sin and were alike there; God will join them in judgment and they
shall be alike there too. There is a likeness between people and Priest upon two
grounds, I mean in evil especially.

First, They are like in sin one to another usually from the Obser.
when their hearts cannot bear a spiritual and lively Ministry God in just
judgment sends unto them Ministers according to their very lusts; Ministers
that shall be suitable unto that very disposition of their hearts to harden them
in it. And this is a fearful judgment upon a people. They may rejoice and bless
themselves in it and think themselves now quiet and in safety, and say they
have got a very honest man, a brave man, a quiet man amongst them; but while
they are rejoicing the wrath of God is in a most dreadful manner let out
against them, in sending them a Minister according to their lusts; As God
threatens in Ezekiel. 14.4. If a man set up an Idol in his heart, God will answer
him according to his Idol; so when people set up Idols in their hearts, their
hearts are bent unto such and such lusts and wicked ways, God in his just
judgment will answer them according unto their own hearts and lusts, they shall
have such Ministers sent amongst them as will harden them in those wicked ways.

Again secondly, [Like people like Priest] In evil in regard because they come
to see that even their ministry is under their humors, and it is to please
their humors; upon this they look upon themselves and their lusts as above the
Ministry, and so despise any authority in it: They are pleased with the suiting
of it to their lusts, but they despise it in regard of any authority, for they
see apparently it is under their humors. In Revel. 19.10. Rev. 19.10.
When John did but fall down to worship an Angel, Opened
the Angel comes to him and says, O see thou do it not, why? for I am thy
fellow servant and have the testimony of Jesus. What you a Minister that have
the testimony of Jesus to fall down to an Angel; An Angel, what is an Angel?
The glory of an Angel it is to be a fellow servant with you and to have the
same testimony of Jesus that you have. A Minister must not in hi^ ministry fall
down under the lusts of any man living, upon this ground, bccause he has the
testimony of Jesus with him. It is true those that are Ministers in regard of
themselves should be willing to be under all, servants unto all for Christ;
they should I say be willing to put their persons under every man for Christ,
but they should keep their Ministry above every man. Their Ministry and the
authority of that is to be kept above the greatest and that for Christ too.

Like Priest like people, especially in evil, they have an influence there. You
know it almost in all places where you have malignant superstitious Ministers
you have accordingly such kind of people. Jerem. 23.10. The land is full of
adulterers (says the text) then in the next verse, For both Prophet and Priest
are profane, that is the reason. And again verse. 14. I have seen (says God)
in the Prophets of Jerusalem an horrible thing; they commit adultery and walk
in lies; they also strengthen the ban^ of evil doers, that none does return
from his wickedness. Here we ^ee how they harden others in sin, they walk in
lies, they tell people we need not be so strict, we may take more liberty, it
is but the fancies and humors of such and such men, they walk in lies and so
they strengthen men's hands in wickedness and none returns from his wicked
ways. And then verse 15. From the Prophet there goes profaneness quite thorough
the land; if they be profane and wicked they have an influence quite thorough
the land to make the whole country wicked and profane. And on the other side,
there is a great influence in the Ministry of the word upon people for good
many times. If Ministers continue painful, faithful, conscionable, it is very
rare but that they bring people to some kind of obedience or other. Very few
godly, conscionable, powerful Ministers that have lived any time in any place
but they leave some savor of their spirits behind them, that in their people
you may find the savor of such a Ministry. It was wont to be said, Da
Ambrosios et habebimus Theodosios let us have Ambroses and we shall have
Theodosius's. Let us have godly Ministers at Court and we shall have godly
Princes; that is the meaning; The reason why Theodosius was so good, it was
because he had an Ambrose. So we find it in 2 King. 12.2. that Jehoash so long
as Jehojada the Priest lived, did that which was right in the sight of the
Lord, so long as he had a godly Minister with him that instructed him, he did
that which was right in the eyes of God. No mervail then so much evil at Court
and other places because we know what kind of Ministers they ever have had. And
because of the influence that a Minister has upon people, hence it is that the
evil and malignant party ever desire to nourish these Ministers; and the force
of their rage and malice is against godly Ministers, for like Minister like
people they think; and indeed supposing their principles it is but that which
is prudential for their ends; for when they cry out and say that these
Ministers are the cause of al, they say true, and there is some kind of truth
in it, that is, they are the cause to discover to people their evil and wicked
ways, and to cause those to whom they preach to cleave to the truth, and that
is it their spirits do vex and rage at, that they see the Ministry of the Word
prevail so much upon the people as it does. Therefore I remember a pulicie that
I have read of Xerxes, that when he was in straights by reason of Agiselaus who
prevailed much in his country, he took this course, he sent men with good
store of money to corrupt the Towns in Greece, and they went and corrupted
Athens and Thebes, and so caused great disturbance in Greece, by reason of
which Agiselaus was sent for home to look to his own Country. They went
especially for the Universities Athens and Thebes and there corrupted the
Orators and so thought to prevail much. It has been the policy of our men in
these days to corrupt Universities much, thinking by Scholars and others there
to prevail most. There is a story of the Wolves that they would make a league
with the Sheep, but they would by any means have one article granted, that was
that their Shepherds must be delivered up unto them and then they would be at
peace with the Sheep and do them no hurt. I make no question but if our
adversaries should come to article with us, there is no one thing they would
stand more upon than the delivery up of the shepherds and then there would be
good peace between the Wolves and the sheep. Like people like Priest.

They are like in evil and they shall be like in punishment, they shall be
involved in the same punishment, I will make the Priests as contemptible and as
miserable as the vilest of the people; their places exalted them above others,
and their sin has made them as vile as others, and so they shall be dealt
withal accordingly. You will say, what great judgment is here threatened that
like people like Priest? Yes certainly to them the judgment was very bitter and
grievous, was most against the hair, for the Priests have at all times been
puffed up with their callings, so that they looked upon themselves as above the
people abundantly, looked down to the people with scorn and contempt. The
Pharisees in John, 7.49. This people (say they) who know not the Law are
cursed, this same vulgar sort are they that are accursed; so these Priests here,
though the truth is they were made of the vilest of the people (as they were in
Jeroboams time, for it is spoken of those) yet being once got up into that
place they were puffed up as if they had been of another kind of mould than the
people were. It is usual for wicked Ministers though never so base and vile
other ways either in birth or breeding, yet when they get up a little and are
come to preferment, to look upon others as very contemptible in their eyes.
This i^ a Master design in Popery, to advance Priesthood and make them to be
great above the people; and we know what a way they were going in of late; what
were your Gentry in the Kingdom but even slaves and vassels to every Popish
Priest in the Country, but especially unto Prelates; And we cannot imagine
(but we must look at the hand of God in his dreadful judgment besotting men)
why the Gentry should desire to have prelacy come in again, knowing how they
were contemned and despised of them before. There was scarce any Vicar in the
Country but if he were Filius Ecclesiae as they called him, a child of the
Church, a ceremonious man but he was able to vaunt himself above any of the
Gentry whatsoever; and it was an evident argument of the coming in of Popery
upon us, a too much extolling of their Priestly Office, although that wherein
the true honor of their office consisted, the faithful Preaching of the word,
was not regarded. I have read of some of the Papists, (to give you an instance
or two that you may see what way they went, ju^t as they did here of late) one
Riconius has this passage, the pride of popish Priests.
The Priest ex^elleth the King as much as a man a beast; yea as much as God is
above a Priest so is a Priest above the King; these very words he has. And
Pope Innocent the second, he would have Lotharius the Emperor painted in his
palace as a vassel lying down at his feet. And so Becanus he calls the Pope
the chief Priest their Shepherd, Emperors and Kings the Popes dogs.
and Emperors and Kings are their Dogs and Curs says he, and if they will be
faithful and be at the hand of the Shepherd well and good, they must be made
of, but if they will be lazy and troublesome, they must be removed. Is it
possible now that Kings and great ones should ever love Popery and think to
bring in that for their honor when as they do advance their Priesthood far
above themselves; only for the present they would puff them up to procure what
lies in them an Arbitrary government, but still that that Arbitrary government
of theirs must be Arbitrary under them, and then it suits very well with their
ends. There is a spirit of fornication (as follows afterward) upon men, or
otherwise it were impossible they should be so besootted as they are.

But though they lifted up themselves above the people thus yet says God, I
will make them in punishment like to the people, God is no respecter of
persons, to spare any for their place above another; So neither should we, we
should not say, Oh it would be a disgrace unto the calling, therefore it must
be past over; rather because he is a Priest or because he is a Magistrate, let
him be what he will be, let him be in place of Magistracy or Ministry or of
Parliament, yet proving to be a Delinquent and an enemy unto the State,
certainly he must be dealt withal and be made an example in judgment as well as
the meanest of the people, and for those that be under to be executed and for
them to be spared in that regard, God forbid ever such a thing should be. God
is no accepter of persons in regard of place neither should men be.

Like people like Priest, one would rather think that God should say, I will
make their judgment greater than the judgment of the people, for the sin of the
Priests is far greater than the sin of the people.

Levit. 4. compare verse 3. with verse 13. and you shall find that the same
sacrifice that was offered for the sin of the whole Congregation, it is offered
for the sin of the Priest, so that the sin of the Priest it is equivalent to
the sin of the whole Congregation: So there is a parallel here, like people
like Priest, that is, I will deal with the Priests as with the whole
Congregation.



And I will punish them for their ways.] The reading you have in your books of
punishing them for their ways, it is otherwise in the Hebrew (...) I will
visit them for their ways, and so it is I think translated in some of your
books, Super vias ejus: I will visit them upon their ways, or visit their
ways upon them, so the words are. God has his days of visitation wherein he
will narrowly enquire into the ways of men, Observe
and call to an account for sins long before committed; that is the Note from
thence. Exodus 32.34. In the day when I visit I will visit their sin upon them;
I will spare them for the present, but I have a day to visit, and then I will
come upon them even for this sin. God spares sinners now, why? because the day
of his visitation is not yet come, but when that is come then look to your old
sins; look that now your repentance be thorough, for otherwise you may be
spared a while, but when the day of visitation comes then all your old sins
shall be called over. In some men's visitations of late, the more conscionable
men were and godly, the more were they aimed at, and it always went worst with
them in their visitations; But it shall be otherwise in this visitation of
Gods, God will visit the visitors, and visit them for their visitations, and
then as Esa. 10.3. What will you d^ in the day of visitation? You knew what to
do in the day when you your selves did visit, but what will you do in the day
of Gods visiting of you? As Mic. 7.4. The day of thy watchmen and thy
visitation comes, now shall be their perplexity. Certainly those visitors did
begin to be in perplexity, for their day was coming, and we hope their day is
yet coming.

But in the day of Gods visitation men's own ways will come upon that is the
second Note. I will visit their ways upon them. Men may have shifts to put off
God for a while, but when God shall visit, then they shall see that all the
evil that is come upon them it is from their own ways; And that will be the
very torment of the damned in Hell, that they shall clearly see that all the
evil that is upon them it is but their own ways. simile
As it is reported of some birds that lime is made out of their dung by which
they are taken, so out of the dung of men's sins does God make his limetwigs to
take them withal, that is, the judgment that comes upon them it is no other but
their own ways, they have procured this unto themselves.

And reward them for their deeds.] The word that is here translated deeds, (...)
it signifies Cogitationes, studia, their studies, their thoughts as well as
opera, their works: From whence there may be these two Notes, First that God
will call men to account Thoughts.
you must look to your thoughts, they are not free before God; that is the first
point. Then, that studied

And reward them.] There is a great elegancy in these words that in your
English you pass over very lightly. Reward them their doings: We know that God
will reward every one according to their doings; (...)
but I say in the Original in the Hebrew it signifies Redire faciam, I will
make to return your doings, that is the propriety and elegancy of the word, I
will make your doings return back upon you. From whence there is this Note,
Obser.
Sin passes away in the act of it with much sweetness, but God will make it
return back again in the guilt of it with much bitterness. As Gideon said in
Judge. 8.7. unto the men of Succoth, When I return, (says he) I will tear your
flesh with the thorns of the wilderness and with briars; How many men and women
have past over the act of their sins very pleasantly, but within a month
perhaps or a quarter of a year, or it may be within a year or two or sometime
seven years after, God has made their sin return upon them, and it has
returned as Gideon did return upon the men of Succoth and has torn them with
briars and thorns that they have lien roaring in the anguish of spirit for the
horror that has been upon them for their sins. You sinners that have not
returned unto God in the way of repentance, do you expect that all those
pleasant delightful sins of yours will one day return upon you and that in a
dreadful way.

And from the propriety of this word Redire faciam, I will make to return, I
may give a hint of a meditation the other way too. Surely the good works of the
Saints shall return upon them, return upon them with comfort and peace. It may
be you have some troublesome afflictions in the flesh in some works and services
you are exercised in, yet know they shall return with abundance of peace and
joy. Do not think that what you do for God shall be quite lost and that there
is an end of it, If you venture any thing of your estates for a good use in the
cause of God, as never since you were born nor since your forefathers were
born, that there was a more full opportunity to glorify God than is at this
day; that which is called upon you to venture for the calling in of our
brethren the Scots into the Nation, Scots coming in
it i^ such a thing that has so much in it, such an opportunity of serving
God, that you never had nor never are like to have the like so long as you
live, For it is not the bringing in of so many men into the Kingdom, but the
engaging of a Kingdom for us; and not only an engagement, but the greatest
testimony of the goodness of our cause before all the Nations that are about
us; for though now the Nations about us know not which part to take there
having been such protestations on both sides, but when they shall hear that
such a Kingdom that heretofore did carry themselves so loyally though being
here in England with an Army yet went away in so much peace, so that the King
himself by proclamation declared they are his faithful and good Subjects, when
these I say that had such an opportunity in their hands, yet have shown
themselves so loyal and so faithful, shall now engage themselves on one side,
certainly this will be a mighty high witness before all the Nations about us,
and no question cannot but gain many amongst our selves. Therefore I say, it is
the highest and largest and fullest opportunity for the service of God and good
of your country as ever you or your forefathers had; And though you have done
some what and much already, yet you never had such an opportunity as this is
which you may bless God you are employed in. And do not think now that what you
do is quite gone and lost, Oh no, the Lord will make it return, you shall have
a good return for it. You that are Merchants are you not willing to venture
your stock at Sea upon expectation of a good return? you will venture the winds
and waves and seas and venture your servants that may prove unfaithful. You
never ventured any thing in all your lives that you could have such assurance
of a good return as what you venture in such a case as this is. It is not
adventured, God will certainly make your good works to return as he will make
the doings of the wicked return upon them. It follows.

Verse 10. For they shall eat and not have enough.


Some would carry these words, They shall still grow worse and worse in eating
the sin of my people, and so would refer to the eating of the sin of the people
in that sense you heard before, that is, they shall never think they have
advantage enough from the sin of the people; they desire the sin of the people
for their own advantage, well, they shall eat their sin in that respect, but they
shall never have enough, they shall never be satisfied, but still desire that
people may sin more and more that they may have more advantage by their
sacrifices.

But I rather take it thus, more plainly according to the words, They shall eat
and not have enough, howsoever they think to provide for themselves by that
which they get in such a base sinful way, yet they shall find no satisfaction
unto themselves in i^, they shall be deceived. The truth is, if they should
find satisfaction, it were a great matter, seeing they shall come to answer for
it after wards; but they shall not only be judged for it afterward, but for
the present they shall find no satisfaction in that that they promised unto
themselves satisfaction in, They will get an estate perhaps, get money and get
riches this way, and be brave in the world, but I will curse that which they
have got. Take goods that are lawfully got yet there is a vanity in them, a
vanity in goods got by good means, though we have them we cannot enjoy them
except God give us to enjoy them, God is the God of all consolation, it is the
mercy and goodness of God conveyed thorough creatures that can bring any
comfort in the use of them. If a man should think to fill his be^ly with wind,
it were a poor satisfaction; but it were worse it he should open his mouth to
fill his belly with air infected with the plague: When thou think to
satisfy thy self with goods never so well got, it is but opening thy mouth to
the wind, but when thou think to satisfy thy self with goods unlawfully
got, it is opening thy mouth to draw in pestilential air, there is no
satisfaction there. Ecceles. 5.10. He that desires silver shall not be
satisfied with it. Howsoever men think with themselves if they had such an
estate what brave lives should they live; but when they have it they find it
otherwise. Those that hunger and thirst after righteousness shall be satisfied,
but they that hunger and thirst after any thing in the world they shall find it
to be an empty thing unto them. It is true, there is a kind of satisfaction
that God gives sometimes unto wicked men, but it is a cursed satisfaction, a
fearful judgment of God. Prove. 14.14. Wicked men shall be satisfied with their
own ways, that is, they shall have enough of them; as when a man will go on in
his own ways and he suffers much for it, we say, what have you not enough of
it, enough of such a course, so he shall be satisfied, he shall have enough of
his ways, that is he shall find such plagues and miseries that follow them as
he shall be satisfied, he shall be filled with them. It is spoken of an
Apostate, a backslider in heart, one that will apostatise from God and think to
provide for himself better in the ways of his Apostasy, he shall be satisfied
but it shall be with his own ways.

And they shall commit whoredom and shall not increase. If we understand this
of bodily whoredom, then the sense must carry it thus, that God will cross them
in that, even in the way of their whoredom, they shall commit whoredom and not
increase. You will say what great judgment is that, Whoremasters do not care
for increasing? It is true now whoremasters do not desire increase, only to
satisfy their lusts, and in this thing they resemble evil and wicked Ministers
as much as in any thing; Whoremongers and plausable Ministers alike
as many Ministers desire only to please the fancies of their Auditors and
never look after begetting any unto God; they are like harlots or whoremasters
in this, they love to please the fancies of men and their own fancies too, but
to get children unto God, that they look not after; as whoremasters and harlots
when their lusts are satisfied, they have their ends, for to bring forth, that
they care not for. This is now, but in former times, in the time when the
Prophet did prophecy, increasing in a numerous offspring was a special thing
that all gloried in, therefore they sought it any way, not only by marrying
many wives, but by their concubine^ and whores too. But God threatens to send
out a curse upon them that they shall not increase. And for this it is very
observable (for you may take it more general) Gods curse upon a man in any
thing he undertakes unlawfully, he can never expect to prosper in it; Obser.
that is the Note from it, Whatsoever a man undertakes unlawfully he can never
expect to prosper in it. And that is very observable for this one particular
concerning Sol^^^o^ you know he had seven hundred wives and three hundred
co^cubines a thousand in all, yet we read but of one son that Solomon Solomon
le^^ b^hind him, and that son was but a foolish son neither, Re^ob^^m, whom
the Scripture calls a child when he was above forty ye^rs old, 2 Chronicles. 13 7.
When Rehoboam was young and tender hearted, he had a childish foolish heart
though a rugged and churlish heart. Solomon was not blessed with a numerous
progeny notwithstanding he gave himself liberty to satisfy his flesh so much
as he did. But on the other side, Isaac
of all the fathers in the old Testament we read of Isaac from whom came the
promised seed that were to be as the stars of Heaven and as the sand of the sea
shore for number, yet he had but one wife, he took not that course that many of
the Patriarche^ did to marry many wives, but contented himself with one wife
and yet from him came the promised seed so many as the stars and the sand for
number. From which we may infer that it is the best way for us to keep to Gods
Ordinances, have, to keep to Gods ways than to go out into our own sinful
ways.

They shall not encrease] The words are read otherwise by some, Hierom Hierom
has this Note upon it, they have committed whoredom and have not ceast, so he
reads it, his note upon it is this (I think that which has been delivered
unto you is the main scope, but I will only present what he notes upon it, and
it is of good use) says he, they have committed fornication and whoredom till
they have spent all their strength yet they have not ceast, their hearts are
still that way; just as it is with many old whoremasters they have committed
whoredom and spent their strength in their young time, yet they cease not,
they have unclean hearts, their lusts boil within them notwithstanding their
strength is spent. And if you read the words so and then either take it for
bodily or spiritual whoredom, they have committed whoredom and have not ceast,
that is, they still go on and on in the ways of Idolatry, Observe.
Idolaters seldom come in and return.

Tarnovius he has another expression in the reading of it, (...)
Non per rumpant eximent legibus aut paenis, they shall not break forth, for so
the word in the Hebrew does well carry it, that is, they think to take liberty
in their whoredom and idolatry, they break forth from Gods Laws and punishments
and think still to escape Laws and punishments, to break forth from al bonds
whatsoever, no says God, they shall not break forth, God will lay fetters upon
them that they shall not break forth. But I take the first to be the more
special, and so we shall leave that expression, they shall commit whordom and
shall not increase. Why?

Because they have left off to take heed to the Lord. There is a great de^l of
elegancy in this expression. (...)
They have left the Lord to take heed (so you may read the words, ad
custodiendum) to keep themselves within any bounds of the Commandment of God.
They run wild (as if the Prophet should say) and have le^t off ^o take heed of
God or any of his (...) Perh^ps the^ have not le^^ the Lord wholly, for they
will wo^^^^p God in some ex^ernal ways of worship, but God cares not for that,
they have left the Lord in this to take heed of him. Though we think to follow
the Lord in any external duties, if we leave to take heed of God in all his
ways, he takes no notice of it: that may be one Note.

But the special thing is this, [They have left off to take heed to the Lord.]
At first though temptation may prevail against a man, yet the Truth of God will
be working in his conscience (I speak to one enlightened and a professor of
Religion, as these were) Though at first a temptation prevail against a
professor of Religion, yet he having an enlightened conscience the Truth of God
will be working still in his conscience and in his heart; but now if he still
give way to that lust, at length his lust will so far prevail as that he will
wholly leave minding and regarding that Truth of God that is against his sin
and give himself fully up unto the ways of his own heart; and this man's
condition is very dangerous. Oh take heed of this, take heed of this not taking
heed; you that begin to decline and you find some secret lust prevailing in
your heart; Observe.
well, yet you have the Truth of God boiling and bubling in your hearts and will
not let you go on quietly, but yet your lusts strive against that truth, well,
if this lust be not mortified, if you give way to it that it continue a while,
you will come to be weary of that truth that is against that lust and you will
turn your eyes from it,

They have left off to take heed.] The way to keep the heart and life in order,
in ways of obedience, Obs.
it is, to take heed to the Lord, that is the special Note, to take heed to the
infinite glorious blessed Majesty of the holy and great God, to mind God in his
sovereignty, in his authority, in that infinite worthiness that is in him of
all obedience from all his creatures, to look upon God the only Jehovah, the
high and eternal God: This is the way to keep our hearts and lives in order, to
take heed of God thus, to have God in our thoughts and hearts and to heed him
diligently and his ways.

But yet there is a further note from hence and that is especially intended.
The evil that they are accused of is, That they did leave off to take heed of
God in point of worship, for that is the thing that God especially charged them
for, that they did corrupt his worship, and they did leave off to take heed of
God in things of his worship, that is thus, that kind of worship that they
thought to be most suitable to their own reason and politic ends, that worship
they set up; but now to take heed to God for the rule of worship, to look up
unto God, obser.
that whatsoever they had in his worship should be according to the rule he
sets, that they left off, they minded that no more now but altogether what
was suitable to their own ends. And that is an evil thing in any Kingdom that
men should leave off so to take heed; as it is almost come to that now. Luther
has about this, It is not says be so much in Religion to look at what is the
thing as who commands it; and he cites Seneca, Seneca says he gives this
rule, observe not who commands but what is commanded, but in the Church and
in Religion it is to be turned quite another way, it is not so much Quid but
Quis and Q^alis and Quantus, but the Devil says he changes this into quid
quale quantum, that is, he changes this who, and what manner of person, and
how great a one commands; into this; what, what manner, and how great a
thing. So that this is the reason why many despise some Ordinances in the
Church, why what great matters are there in these things? So they look to the
thing and not to the institution; whereas did we look to Christ the Institutor
which we should do, we should look more to the institution than unto the thing
it self. Let the thing commanded be never so low and poor, never so mean in it
self, yet the institution must be honored. Take heed to God especially in the
point of worship. So we have done with the tenth verse. It follows.

Verse 11. Whoredom and wine and new wine take away the heart.


Still the holy Ghost envyeth especially against the Priests; for their
whordom, their wine and new wine did take away their hearts. (...)
Take away, The words are translated diversely, either Take the heart, or, Take
away the heart.

Take the heart.] So I find some turn it, and there is a good sense of it, that
is, these lusts do take possession of their hearts. It is one thing for a man
to be overtaken with a lust, and another thing for a lust to take a man. It is
said of the godly that they are overtaken, but it is said of these that their
lusts take them; but now when it comes to this that you do not only yield to a
temptation but a temptation takes you, when you are taken captive, whoredom and
wine they have taken their hearts. So some.

But I rather think the other more proper, these lusts take away the heart. It
is true, of any one lust there is not one lust harbored in the heart of a man
but in time it will take away his heart, will eat out all the juice and
strength and vigor of any thing that is in him. That is the reason that many
professors grow so sapless, so heavy, so dull, so de^d in the way of Religion,
there is some secret lust or other that they have a haunt after and that does
take away their hearts, that now their hearts are like to dead beer, all their
spirit and life is quite gone and their lust has eaten it out; And that, man
is in a sad condition whose vigor and strength is gone and eaten out by some
lust in his heart.

But to speak of these lusts as they are here set forth unto us, these two
sins, whoredom and drunkenness. I shall not speak of the nature of the sins, I
have spoken somewhat of that in the beginning of the Chapter, but I shall only
speak of them in the expression of the holy Ghost here, to show you a little
how these take away the heart.

First, For both the sins in general, as they are sins of sensuality, Obser.
that they shall never have any other comforts but those. Let them have those
comforts says God, there is all the comfort that ever they shall find. So we
read in Romans 1. that when they did not glorify God as God he gave them up
unto unnatural affections and unclean sins.

Sensuality it is a besotting sin (that is the Note) sensuality either in
whoredom or intemperancy in drinking. Obser. Uncleanness.
You know how it took away the heart of Solomon Solomon
(who was so wise) as that his wives did trun away his heart from God, and
turned him to Idolatry. And so it did Sampson Sampson
who was so strong, when Delilah had first taken his heart then she took away
his heart, for you know in the story though she sought his destruction many
times, he saw it apparently that she sought his life, to give him up into the
hands of the Philistines, yet for all this Sampsons heart could not be taken
off from Delilah. The Scripture speaks of the sin of lust for this most fully.
Prove. 2.19. None that go unto her return again, neither take they hold of the
paths of life; None that go unto the whore returns, or as some would read it
interogatively, do any return that go unto her? It is a rare thing for any one
to return whose heart is taken with a whore, or ever to enter into the paths of
life. The holy Ghost speaks this, make of it what you will. And again 2 Pet.
2.14. 2 Pet. 2 14
Having eyes full of adultery, and that cannot cease from sin; Opened
when as eyes come to be full of adultery they cannot cease from sin; their
hearts are so taken off from all good. And Prove. 23.27 A whore is a deep ditch,
and a strange woman is a narrow pit; It is hard to get out of a deep ditch,
especially if the mouth be narrow too; those that are got in there are like to
Jeremiah that was put in the dungeon where there was no water but filth and
mire so that he sunk in the mire; and except the Lord send from Heaven long
cords of his mercy, it is unlike they should ever come out but they must die
and perish, and how many thousands do die and perish? Nothing ever deaded
David's heart more than that sin of adultery; Psalm 51. he cries out Oh establish
me with thy free Spirit, as if he should say, Lord I was wont to have more
power over temptation, but now I am weak and quickly overcome, Lord stablish
me. And as the sin of uncleanness takes the heart away from God and from truth,
therefore in that place of Peter verse 18. the professors were assured thorough
the lusts of the flesh unto much wantonness, even such as had escaped,
vertually escaped the pollutions of the world and from them who live in error;
So drunkenness, Drunkenness
that likewise takes away the heart, wine takes away the heart exceedingly.
When Solomon gave himself to wine, he took hold of folly at that time, Opened
Eccles. 2.3. Eccles. 2.3
though somewhat of his wisdom re mained, yet wine took way his heart in a
great measure. He gave himself liberty (as appears by that Scripture, though
we read not of drunkenness) yet he gave himself liberty to satisfy himself
with wine and then he took hold on folly. Those that give themselves liberty in
drinking wine and strong drink they are besotted in their very parts, simile
as you know by experience, they are as a snuff of a candle in a socket,
drowned in the tallow, a while since it gave a good light over the room, but
now being even drowned in the tallow there is nothing lest but a little smoke
and a stinking snuff and little or no light remaining; so many men when they
were young were like a candle upon the table that gave light to all about them,
but now having given themselves up to the satisfaction of that filthy and vile
lust of drinking, simile
all their parts are become like a snuff of a candle in the socket, almost
drowned in the tallow. Or rather they are become as a quagmire, we know if the
husband man should sow never such precious seed in a quagmire, what fruit will
it bring forth? Austin has this expression, just as when the ground has too
much rain it grows miery and dirty and is not fit for seed, so do those that
ingulge themselves in drink. Therefore in Ezekiel. 47.11. Ezekiel. 47.11.
it is said the waters of the Sanstuary did not heal the miery places and the
marshes, Opened
miery hearts are seldom healed by the waters of the Sanctuary. Basil, Sermon. de
Ebrietab.
Basil in a Sermon of his upon intemperancy, makes drunkenness as the Idols
spoken of in the Psalms, that have ears and hear not, and eyes and see not, and
feet and walk not, it takes away their standing and their understanding
likewise, their very parts are taken away and they are left at liberty unto all
kind of wickedness. How many are therethat were excellent when they were young,
yet being taken with that lust, how are they grown like Esau that sold his
birthright for a mess of pottage, so these will sell Heaven for a cup of wine;
yea they are more profane than Esau, for he was in a straight, he came out of
the field and be was very hungery and he thought he should die if he had not
the pottage, so that he sold his birthright for a mess of pottage out of a kind
of necessity, which he might plead; but these will sell their souls and Heaven
and all merely to please that humor, that lust, venture the health of their
bodies, the consuming of their estates, the loss of their friends, the shaming
of themselves, the ruin of their names and the damnation of their souls and all
for a little drink. Oh how does this besot men that otherwise have excellent
parts!

Well, But these two are applied here unto the Priests, and so we must make use
of them especially, That whoredom and Wine and new wine did take away their
hearts, for these Priests (as before we have heard) they did reject the
knowledge of God, and so left off the work they were appointed to do, to
instruct the people, therefore the people were brought up in ignorance; now
they leaving their office, their duty that they should perform in the place
they were set in, they gave themselves up to sensuality, to whoredom and to
wine. From hence this may be the note, That Ministers when they are negligent
in preaching usually they grow sensual. Obser.
We find it so in experience, we need not go about to prove it. Have there not
been many that in their younger time have been forward preachers, and when they
have gotten livings and preferment, never minded their study and preaching any
longer, but gave themselves to satisfy the flesh in uncleanness and filthy
lusts and grew to drinking? do we not know some that have had excellent parts
when they were young and having gotten preferment fell to drinking and
uncleanness? People are but in an evil case when they have such Ministers. Esa.
56.9. Ye beasts of the field come to devour, yea all ye beasts of the forest,
what is the matter? the 12. verse shows what kind of Priests and Prophets they
had, Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we will fill our selves with
strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day and much more abundant; such
kind of Priests they had, and then all ye beasts of the field come to devour,
you lie open to all kind of misery. Paul would have Timothy when he was weak
drink a little wine for his stomachs sake and often infirmity; he good man out
of conscience it seems would drink but water, though he were but a weak young
man, yet for fear least it might do hurt he would drink but water till he had a
commission from Paul; he was fain to exhort him to drink wine and yet it was
but a little, drink a little wine. Oh those in public places especially
should take heed of intemperancy. I have read of some Heathens that they have
made it death for a King or a Magistrate to be drunk. It follows.

Verse 12. My people ask counsel at their stocks, and their staff declares
unto them.


There is a little more difficulty in these words than in the former. Only
first from the connection there is this useful Note, Observe
That bodily and spiritual whoredom use to go together. Whoredom and wine and
new wine take away the heart, and then, they ask counsel at their stocks, and
their staff declares unto them. First they are besotted with these lusts and
then they fall to the most gross ways of Idolatry, for these words in this
verse seem to express the most gross and stupid Idolatry that ever was in the
world, to ask counsel of their stocks, and their staff to declare unto them;
but when they had given up themselves to the lusts of their hearts then they
grew most sottish in their way of Idolatry. Therefore we are not to mervail
though men that seem to be men of understanding yet will worship stocks and
stones, as your Papists; why? they give themselves up to their lusts and. then
they grow to be s^^ and the most gross Idolatry in the world will go down then.
I remember I have read of one that law one go to Mass and presently after go to
a house hard by where a whore was, he has this speech upon it: A lupanari
massam tantum esse passum: that is, there is but one step from the Mass to a
whorehouse. Spiritual whoredom and bodily go together, their hearts are taken
away by their whoredom, and they ask counsel at their stocks. Jewel Jewel.
in his Apology relates this that by very credible report search being made in
the year 1565. for harlots belonging to the stews in Rome, there was found in
Rome to the number of 28. thousand women of that sort. Thus bodily and
spiritual whoredom you see how they go to gether; 28. thousand of such kind of
women found in one City, Rome
in that City which we know is called the City of whoredoms, it is not only in
regard of spiritual whoredom, Idolatry, but of bodily whoredom likewise, for
those two as I said usually go together.

Now for opening this, They ask counsel at their stocks, and their staff does
teach them.

Their stocks,] That is their Images, God puts that contemptible name upon
them; they ask counsel of them. And that is to be observed too, My people,
there is the emphasis; Mine by profession, not wholly call off yet, yet these
ask counsel at their stocks, their Images, which perhaps they beautified with
Silver and Gold, yet God calls them their stocks.

And their staff teaches them.] Here is a peculiar way of Idolatry to be
taught by their staff. Vatablus and others interpret it thus, their false
Prophet upon which they leaned as upon a staff, and so they they think by staff
here is meant their false Prophets. But I rather think it is to be meant
literally, There was a kind of Idolatry which the Jews had and likewise the
Romans after this, a way to ask counsel by the staff, which the Prophet here
charged them with, which they called (...) or (...) Divinatio ex virgis,
Divinatio^ by staves.
divination by rods, or sticks, or arrows, or staves; And there were four
Nebuchadnezzar seemed to do Ezekiel. 21.22. Ezekiel. 21.22.
there Interpreters show that the business was, Opened
that Nebuchadnezzer being in doubt whether he should war against Philadelphia
or against Jerusalem he took two arrows and wrote the name of Jerusalem on the
one and Philadelphia on the other and so came to divine which way he should go.
And this is the first way of declaring by the staff. Li^uus, there they
quartered out the regions of Heaven, so much as was for their purpose, and when
they had quartered them out they did reach forth this staff (having first
offered sacrifices and prayers to their gods) upon the head of a person or a
thing they would divine for, and so they came to have good or ill luck to be
showed according to what at that time they observed in the Heavens, the birds
flying etc. when that staff was upon the head of the party. This the Romans
did, and it is like they had it somewhat from the Jews, they did ask counsel of
their staff.

By all this we may see what poor ways Idolaters have had to know the mind of
their gods. Obs.
When men forsake the right way of knowledge of Gods mind, what poor ways do
they go to know the mind of God.

Now follows the ground of all: For the spirit of whoredoms has caused them
to e^, and they have gone a whoring from under their God.

For the spirit of whoredoms.] Some would have it thus, that spirit of whordom
that is (say they) that devil that especially attended upon this sin caused
them to er. But I think this not to be the scope, the spirit of whoredoms has
caused them to er, the spirit, that is, that impetus of spirit that was in
them; there is an impetus an ardency, a vigor, an activity of their spirits to
such a kind of sinful way, it is that which has carried them on and caused
them to er. The Scripture often speaks of several sorts of spirits, as sometimes
the spirit of perverseness, Esa. 19.14. it is translated in your books, a
perverse spirit, but the words are Spiritus perversitatum, a spirit of
perverseness, there is an impetus of spirit that has caused Egypt to er in
every work thereof. So the spirit of uncleanness Zech. 13.2. it is translated
in your books the unclean spirit, but it is (...) the spirit of defilements or
uncleanness, so the spirits of lying, 1 King. 22.22. the spirit of error, 1
John, 4.6. He that knows God hears us, he that is not of God hears not
us, hereby know we the spirit of truth and the spirit of error, that is, there
is an Impetus, a strength of spirit that carries men on unto such an erroneous
way. strong inclinations of spirit.
and consider what spirit we are of, especially when we are carried with an
Impetus of spirit to a thing, that is, when we find an eagerness of spirit that
way, to such a thing we would fain have, let us then take heed to our selves:
when you find I lay your spirits very eagerly and strongly set upon such a
thing, examine then what spirit you are of, that it be not a spirit of lust, of
envy, of malice, as sometimes there is in men's hearts when they are carried
with a more than ordinary strength after such a way. There is many people when
they find themselves carried on with such an impetus, and ardency, and
fervency, they cannot endure that any body should cross them in it, no, but
they must have it; As they in Samuel that would have a King, when they heard
all the reasons that could be to persuade them against it, they would not
answer one reason but held to their conclusion, No, but we will have a King,
say they. So a man that has a spirit of such an evil, A spirit of envy, a
spirit of error, a spirit of Antichrist in him, a spirit of domineering in him,
a spirit of cruelty, a spirit of bitterness in him, first he will rush upon
such a thing without examining of it, and further, if there come any thing
against it, any truth, he slights it presently and casts it off and thinks
there is nothing in it, why? because he has a spirit that carries him that
way, and if the truth come more strongly that he is convinced by it, yet he
has a spirit that carries him on, and though he meet with many difficulties in
the way he will break through them all. Oh it is a dangerous thing when men
have a spirit of error, or a spirit of bitterness. You shall find some men
that have much remaining of Antichristanisme in them, do but speak to them of
any thing that concerns an Ordinance of Christ, of Christ's institution, of the
will of Christ in the word, as soon as it is but mentioned, you shall not hear
any answer to the argument, but you may perceive a spirit of bitterness, a
spirit of envy, a spirit of frowardness and passion presently to rise in them.
So in other things you shall find men, and some that have good things in them,
that if you do but discourse with them of some things that you know are
according unto the mind of Christ, yet they have been brought up otherwise and
have drunk in other principles, and they have a spirit of bitterness and anger
and vexation that presently will appear in them to cast off any truth that is
suggested unto them.

But let us labor on the other side rather to be acted by the Impetus of
spirit that carries them on. But take heed, the Spirit of Christ is joined with
much humility and holiness; do not say you are carried with the Spirit of
Christ and yet bitterness and pride is mixed with it; but if there be humility
and holiness, then perhaps though you cannot answer every objection of every
Sophister yet there is the Spirit of Christ in you; that as wicked men have a
byas upon their hearts that swaies their judgment, so the godly have a byas
upon their hearts, the truth and love of God does byas their hearts and carries
them on with strength in the ways of God; as the poor man, Fox Act. Mon.
the Martyr that said, I cannot dispute for the truth, but I can die for it;
There was such a spirit of love in him unto Jesus Christ that carried him on
and made him savor and relish holy things though he could not dispute for them.

We are to pray unto God that he would satisfy us not only Impetus of spirit
may be sanctified, for great things depend upon that Impetus, that force, that
activeness of our spirits; almost all (...) fell down under the dreadful
authority of those commands, then it was well with them, but now you have got
from under this, you do not fear Gods word as you were wont to do, you will not
tremble at his commands as'you were wont, now you run wild and frisk about in
your own ways; Oh poor creature whither art thou gone thou art got from under
the protection of the Lord.

Verse 13. They sacrifice upon the tops of the mountains, and burn incense upon
the hills under Oaks, and Poplars, and Elms, because the shadow thereof is
good; therefore your daughters shall commit whoredom, and your spouses shall
commit adultery.


In the former verse the Prophet in the Name of God had charged Israel for
having the spirit of fornication, and accused them for going a whoring from
under their God, And now shows to them wherein, Obser.
and in what particular. General accusations without particular specification
will not prevail with stubborn hearts. Observe.
Above all Idolaters must be convinced wherein they have committed Idolatry.
They will stand it out exceedingly if you charge them only with Idolatry in
general, of going a whoring from God, except you demonstrate wherein. It is so
with many sinners. Mal. 1.6. Ye have despised me, and yet you say, wherein have
we despised thee? verse 7. Ye offer polluted bread upon mine Altar, and yet you
say, wherein have we polluted thee? Stubborn hearts will stand it out with God
a great while until it be shown in particular wherein they have done such and
such evils. And it is wisdom therefore for all Gods Ministers not to leave
things in general, Use for Ministers
but if they would have their Ministry a convincing Ministry they must not only
charge people that they are wicked and naught in general, but they must
instance. Instancing preaching it is the most convincing preaching.

Now the Prophet does instance in that kind of Idolatry that seems to have the
most specious show and fairest intention of any thing in the world, and one
would have thought that there should have been as little evil in that which he
instanceth in as in any thing we can imagine. Why what great matter is it they
might say? You accuse us for going a whoring from under our God, what is the
matter? we offer sacrifice upon mountains, we sacrifice under trees, is that so
great a matter? It is sacrifice, and you cannot say but we sacrifice to the
true Judah was; the people Papists
Just as the Papists at this day, they will have their Images in every place
and their Crosses in every high way as they travail, that by them they may be
put in mind of God continually. What a specious show is this? Yet the Lord by
the Prophet charge them with going a whoring from under their God, and he
instanceth in this which they thought they had most plea for.

From whence we may note first, Whatsoever seems to be most And,

Secondly, That for a thorough conviction of people in their sin, for Min.
To come to people and to cry out of notorious wickedness that they themselves
cannot but acknowledge to be notorious, this will never so convince as
thoroughly to humble: but to come and close with them and to open the evil of
their ways in those things that they bless themselves most in, and show how
they make themselves abominable unto God even in those things, that is the way
to have our Ministry a convincing and an humbling Ministry indeed. Thus the
Prophet does, you sacrifice upon the mountains and high places and under the
shadow of every tree. Hierom Hierom.
upon this place has this Note, Israel, says be, loves high places, for they
have forsaken the high God, and they love the shadow, for they have left the
substance. It is thus with men, ordinarily when they have left the high God,
forsaken him, then they have somewhat or other that they set up high in their
hearts; they forsake the shadow of the wings of God and then they seek after
vain shadows to be their protector.

But to open this Scripture yet more clearly, to show wherein their sin lay
here, that they sacrificed upon the mountains and hills and under trees. For
that, we are to know that in former times before the Ark and the Tabernacle and
the Temple was built, it was lawful to sacrifice in any place, and God approved
of sacrificing in mountains, and did direct Abraham to go and sacrifice his son
upon a mountain, upon Moriah, Genesis 22.2. And we read of Abraham's planting a
grove when he called upon the name of God, Genesis 21.33. So that the forefathers
did sacrifice upon mountains, and they planted groves and trees by the places
where they sacrificed; there was no hurt then in such things. But afterward God
prohibiteth this, Deuteronomy. 12.13.14. Take heed to thy self that thou offer not thy
burnt offerings in every place that thou see, but in the place which the Lord
shall choose in one of thy tribes, there thou shall offer thy burnt offerings.
God would limit them the place of his worship. When the Ark was made and the
Tabernacle they were bound to come to that and sacrifice there and no where
else, and so when the Temple was built they were bound to come thither and to
sacrifice there and no where else. Yea then the Lord commanded them to pull
down the high place, and to cut down the groves and trees, Deuteronomy. 12.2. Ye shall
utterly destroy all the places wherein the Nations which ye possess served
their gods, upon the high mountains, and upon the hills, and under every green
tree. When once God had appointed a place of worship then they were to destroy
the other places where the Heathens were wont to worship their gods.

The Note is this from it, When once God chooses places or things, when God
once puts a stamp of holiness upon places or things, Obser.
then no men may choose places or things and put such a stamp of holiness upon
them as God has put. If God appoints a way of worship of his own, this stops
us from all other of our own. If God makes a place holy this stops us that we
must never make any place holy but that; so it is true of things, of
ceremonies, any thing, if once God sets a stamp upon a thing to make it holy,
we must confine our selves to that, and not think to immitate God in it, to
make any thing of the same kind to be holy as God has done. It was now a sin
for them, and God stands much upon circumstances we see in his worship. You
shall have many men plead why should men be so strict and scrupulous to stand
upon circumstances? what must we have every circumstance in the word of God
commanded? My brethren, that which is natural and moral and may be subservient
to religious things, may be left (it is true) unto prudence, but whatsoever has
any Religion in it, though it be but a circumstance, God stands much upon it,
and we must have a Divine rule for it. Natural circumstances, moral, civil,
circumstances, prudence is enough to guide us in, but any religious
circumstance we must have a rule for it. Here they are not accused for
sacrificing the things they ought not to sacrifice, no question but they
offered those sacrifices which they were commanded, sheep and beeve^ and the
like, but only in the circumstance of place, they did not sacrifice where God
would have them sacrifice, therefore God charged them in this thing that they
went a whoring from under their God. It is true, we read sometime of some
godly men's sacrificing else where, Gideon under an Oak, Judge. 6. and Samuel
upon an high place, 1 Samuel 2. and so David in the threshing floor of Araunah, 2 Samuel 24. Now to all those instances the answer generally is given by Divines,
that they could not be any way lawful for them to do thus but by some special
dispensation of God himself, some special revelation from God to give them
order to do it there or elf it could not but be a sin. For the Kings of Israel
and Judah they also are charged for their sacrificing in the high places; Even
Solomon himself in 1 King. 3.3. where when he is commended for loving the Lord
and walking in the Statutes of David his father at first, yet the text says,
Only he sacrificed and burnt incense in high places. And amongst other high
places we re^de in 2 Chronicles. 1.2. that Solomon went to Gibeon, that was a great
high place. And though some excuse him because it is said the Tabernacle was
there therefore he might go to Gibeon that great high place to sacrifice yet
for all that Austin in his Questions upon Judges he thinks Solomon is to be
blamed though the Tabernacle was there, Austin
for he it seems sacrificed in other high places besides, and though the
Tabernacle was there yet it seems he put a more than ordinary respect upon that
high place, wherefore else is it called the great high place? and he went there
not only for the sake of the Tabernacle, but became it was that great high
place, therefore he is to be blamed. So that we may go to Gods Ordinances, but
if we do go to the Ordinances of God where yet there are other mixtures, and we
do the rather go and esteem of them because there is some addition of man's
inventions, Obser.
this is a sin against God. And further, this is observable, though Solomon
were blamable for going unto that high place though the Tabernacle were there,
having some more than ordinary respect unto that high place, yet we find that
God revealed himself unto Solomon in a wonderful gracious manner even in that
place, and bad Solomon ask what he would. Solomon had very graci^u^
manifestations of God unto him when he went to that high place though there was
evil in it and he put more respect upon it than he should: So certainly many of
Gods people have found God so far indulge them that though sometimes they have
been in the use of Ordinances where there has been such mixtures as they have
sinned against God, that Ordinance has been polluted unto them by those
mixtures, yet (...) Lord has been so gracious unto them that he has accepted
of the uprightness of their hearts, and they have had many sweet manifestations
of God unto them even in these Ordinances: they can remember those times when
they have been at Sacrament, and they have known how they offended against God
by reason of some pollutions, yet they have found for all this God letting out
of abundance of mercy unto them, refreshing their souls with comfort and joy in
the holy Ghost. This was Gods me^cy. Do not you think therefore that there was
no evil in it because God let out himself so far unto you? Solomon's respecting
this high place so much, yet God let out himself abundantly unto him. Other
Kings there were that are exceedingly blamed that they did not take down the
high places, which were all one with these mountains here spoken of.

Yet there were some of the Kings that were very careful in this thing, As
amongst the rest Hezekiah and Jehosaphat. Hezekiah in 2 King. 18.22. where he
is charged by Rabshekah for taking down the high places, Is it not he that has
destroyed the high places and Altars of God says he? God approves of it well
though Rabshekah thinks he has done ill; Oh says he, Hezekiah, do you trust
in him? he has taken down the high places. He thought that Hezekiah had been
an enemy unto Religion and to the worship of God for taking down the high
places. Thus it is with ignorant people at this day that do not know the way of
Gods worship; because some in authority (as the Parliament) seek to take away
corruption in the worship of God, Parliam
abundance of people cry out that they are enemies unto all Religion, that they
will take away all Religion. Thus it is reported by your country people that
dwell far off, as in Wales and in other places, the people are there persuaded
that the Parliament are a company of vile men that seek to take away all
Religion out of the Kingdom. But this is so but in the understanding of a
Rabshekah that thinks the taking away of high places to be the taking away of
Religion.

The other King is Jehosaphat that is commended for taking away the high
places, and it is noted of him, that his heart was lifted up more than ordinary
in the ways of God when he did it; For this sacrificing upon the high places
was such a thing that the people were so set upon it, what say they, is it not
a brave decent thing that we should go up to a high place to offer unto the
high God? therefore when Jehosahhat took them away the text says, his heart
was lifted up in a more than ordinary manner. So it should be with Governors
when they see corruptions in Gods worship, though the people stick close to
them, yet they should have their hearts lifted up with courage and zeal to go
on in the work. Chron. 17.6. there you have it, His heart was lifted up in the
ways of God, Moreover he took the high places and groves out of Judah. Here is
two things that Israel is charged for, the high places, and the groves,
Jehosaphat took away, and he took them away out of Judah. He was of a lift up
mind and his heart took boldness for the ways of God, so the old Latin has
it. But mark, what course, what way did Jehosaphat take to remove the high
places and the groves? In the 7. verse of that chapter you find this, He sent
to his Princes to teach in the Cities of Judah. Mark here, Princes are become
Preachers; He sent to his Princes to teach in the Cities of Judah, Princes
preachers
and with them Levites and Priests, and they taught in Judah, and had the book
of the Law with them, and they went about all the Cities of Judah and taught
the people. This is the course to take them away. If he had only by an Edict
removed them he could not have done so much, but he took this wise course, he
sent faithful Preachers thoroughout all the Country, in all the great Cities
especially. He was careful they should have faithful Preachers and then the
work would be easily done. So that it appears it was because of the ill
Preachers they had before or because they had no Preachers at all that the high
places were so hard to be taken away. How easy would it be in England at this
day to make a Reformation, preaching the way to remove superstition
to take away corruptions from the worship of God, if in all Cities and Towns
there were faithful Preachers! For we see apparently that people that have been
brought up in ignorance they stick most to these things. Let a faithful
Minister come into a Congregation and take pains, so that the people may see
and be convinced that he takes pains, and expound the Scripture unto them, they
will begin to confess we get more by this than by all the reading of prayers
all this while, and this is more painful to the Minister. They would I say be
convinced of this if they had teaching. This was Jehosaphats way, and Oh how
happy were it if we took the same course? But there is one thing more
observable it is said in this 7. chapter that Jehosaphat took away the high
places; but in Chap. 20. ver. 33. 2 Chronicles. 17. with cap 20.33 reconciled,
it is said he took them not away; but how is it? It is put upon the people,
the text says, The high places were not taken away, for as yet the people had
not prepared their heart unto the God of the^^ fathers. The people were the
cause. Now for the reconciling of these two places, it seems Jehosaphat did
what lay in him, In chap. 17. therefore God accounts it as being done for his
part, but because when he had done what he could yet the people were so
stubborn and stout and would not yield to the command of the King, therefore in
this 20. Chapter it is all laid upon the people; As if God should say, they
were not taken away because the people had not prepared their hearts, but as
for Jehosaphat he did what lay in him for the taking them away. God will accept
of the intention of Governors, Let them do what they can in it and if it be
not done the fault will lie where the cause is. You may see by this that people
may hinder the work of Reformation much, their hearts were not prepared, that
is, they were not fit to receive such instructions as were sent unto them. And
truly in England many people are not yet prepared to receive the work of
Reformation. We never read (that is observable too) of any difficulty of any of
the Kings either of Judah or Israel to bring in any false worship, observe it
in all the stories of the Kings or Chronicles when there was any King that
would bring in any false worship there was never any difficulty in it; Obser.
But when good Kings did seek to bring in true worship and to cast out false,
it was too difficult a work for them. Thus men's hearts do cleave more to false
worship than they do to true.

And this is one thing further observable for the high places, that it is not
said here in the Text only that they sacrificed upon the Mountain^, but upon
the top of the mountains. There are two things very observable from hence.

Observe
to the top of the mountains and were not ashamed. Idolatry is brazen faced, it
is impudent and loves to be public. Revel. 14.6. Revel. 14.6.
there is mention of an Angel flying in the midst of Heaven having the
everlasting Gospel in his hand to preach unto them that dwell on the earth; Now
it is ordinary in the Revelation to set out the Ministry of the Gospel by an
Angel, and so it is a prophecy of the Ministry of the Gospel, that it shall
fly in Heaven, aloft, publicly, that all the world shall see it. And mark what
follows upon this, verse 8. And there followed another Angel, saying, Babylon
is fallen, is fallen. So that the Note from thence is, Obser.
That when the Ministry of the Gospel and the Ordinances of the Gospel comes to
be made openly public, then is the time for Babylon to fall, and so long as
Babylon stands and Antichrist stands so long is the Gospel fain to be preached
in corners, but when the time of Babylons fall comes then shall the Ministry of
the Gospel be in Heaven, above, in the eyes of all the people, in a public way.

Obser.
Idolaters they seek to rise to the height of their way of false worship, they
would do it unto the uttermost; they content not themselves with hills and
mountains, but the very uppermost of hills and mountains, if there were any
higher than other, if they could get up to Heaven they would do it. Idolaters
do not content themselves with a lower degree of false worship. less should we
in the way of Gods worship? we should not content our selves in a mean way but
get up to the top of godliness, and labor to gain the very height of the
worship of God; Not content our selves in one Ordinance, but get all
Ordinances, and get them in the full exercise of them as much as may be. That
place in Ephesians. Walk accurately, Ephesians. 5.15.
circumspectly not as fools but as wise, the word is (...) as if he said, walk
to the top of godliness, to the height, if there be any higher degree than
other labor to get to it, as Idolaters will get up to the tops of the
mountains. Thus for their sacrificing upon the mountains.

The next is, Their sacrificing under Oaks, and Poplars, and Elms. Why the
Heathens sacrificed under trees.
And these trees that are here named are such whose leaves are broad and did
abide longest upon them. But why did they seek to sacrifice under trees and
such trees as these? There are five or six reasons why the Heathens and these
peo-were so set upon sacrificing under trees.

The first was this, Populus Alcideo, graissima, viti^ Iacho, formofio myrtus
Veneri, sua Laurea Phoebo, Virg. Aeneed. 7.
The Heathens did consecrate many trees Herculus, the Vine to Bacchus, the
Myrtle to Venus, the Bay to Phoebus. They consecrated several trees to their
several gods and therefore sacrificed under those trees.

Secondly, They sacrificed there in imitation of the Patriarchs, as I showed
before, Abraham built a grove by the Altar he made; and so many of the
Patriarchs had groves and trees by their Altars, and in imitation of them they
did it, and so did the Heathens, for the Devil did strive much to imitate the
way of the true worship of God, but now when they came once to abuse the
ancient practice of the Patriarchs, God removes it.

Thirdly, They thought that dark and shady places, dark of the worshippers.
Even Heathens themselves when they worshipped their Idols they sought to have
the hearts of the worshippers to be filled with reverence. And,

Vi^g. Aeneed. 6.
Nulli certa domus, lucis habitamus opacis. So you have it in Virgil, that they
themselves have no certain houses to dwell in, but they dwelt in dark and
solitary places, in woods and groves.

Philo, and Sozamen in his history he tells us of this reason of their
sacrificing there, because of the filthiness that was there commmitted.



Now the holy Ghost says they did this, because the shadow of them was good.
The holy Ghost instanceth only in one reason; the shadow was good, that is,
they pleased themselves in their own ways, they thought there was more
solemnity in this way of worship than to go to the Temple to worship there. The
shadow was good, Oh it was brave to go to the open fields, and it was more
solemn they thought to go there than to worship in the City. The shadow was
good, they applauded and blessed themselves in this way. Usually superstition
thinks it has a great deal of reason for what it does, Obser.
that is the Note from hence. Therefore it is observable of the Papists, the
way of their worship it is most rediculous and absurd, yet they write whole
volumns of their Rational, of Divine Service to show reason for what they do,
as if it were a reasonable service, Rationale divinorum officiorum
and in Colos. 2. ult, it is spoken of will worship, that it has a show of
wisdom. Now the words in the Greek are (...) it has the reason of wisdom, for
so it may be turned, for is used for Ratio, it has the reason of wisdom. So
that word your Reasonable Service, it is (...). So that Idolaters think that it
is not only wisdom, but that they have the very reason the very quintessence of
wisdom in their way of false-worship, they can give such account of it, the
shadow is good; And especially in that very thing that they think their worship
is more sumptuous and brave and has more solemnity in it than the Ordinances
of God have: This is the vanity and pride of men's spirits, to think that the
worship of God appointed in his word has not solemnity enough in it: That is
the point naturally rising from thence. It is the pride I say of men's spirits
to think that Gods Ordinances are too plain, Obs.
too mean for them, they can find out a way that sets out the worship of God
thus and thus, they will show more reverence of and respect to God than others
shall. But certainly if it be not Gods own, whatsoever outward respect can be
given unto God in it, he ^bominateth it and abhors it. A Lady in Paris.
I have read of a Lady in Paris, that when she saw the bravery of a Procession
to a Saint, she cried out, Oh how fine is our Religion beyond that of the
Hugonites, that is such as those who in England they call Puritans! They have a
poor and mean and beggarly Religion, but we have a fine and brave Religion; so
your Papists with decking up their Churches and their Altars and their crings
and bowings, they have a fine and brave Religion, their shadow is good, there
is bravery and solemnity in it. Oh take heed of this in any point of Gods
worship, to think that any addition of man's makes it more solemn and more
reverent. It is the worst argument you can use, to say can we do things in Gods
worship with too great reverence? Is it that which you have warrant out of Gods
word for? does God enjoin it? Have you not either some rule or ensample at
least for it? If you think by your own addition to do it with more reverence,
this very argument spoils it, though it were lawful in other respects. Take
some gesture, suppose it were indifferent, suppose it were lawful some way; but
if you take it up thus, to think that by it you put more reverence and respect
upon Gods worship than there is, there you spoil it; upon some other grounds it
may perhaps be granted, but upon that ground you spoil it quite. Therefore the
Lord ^orbad his people when they were to make an Altar to him, to lift up a
tool upon it, for then says he, you pollute it: They might have said, Lord we
would fain have thine Altar not so plain as other things, simile
we would fain bestow carving and some cost upon it and so show some respect to
it: No says God, If you lift up a tool upon it, you pollute it. So if you
think to put more reverence and solemnity upon Gods worship by any invention of
your own, certainly you defile it. That was the sin of Israel at this time,
they would sacrifice here, why? because the shadow was good. So much for that,
for their high places, and their worshipping under trees.

Now follows the judgment threatened: Therefore your daughters shall commit
whoredom, and your spouses shall commit adultery.

You commit adultery in going a whoring from m^, you shall be punished in the
like kind, your daughters and your spouses shall go a whoring from you.

They shall commit adultery.] Take it first under this consideration, as a
judgment of God upon them.

Secondly under this, As that which they themselves were the occasion to
produce.

1 Observe.
First, It was the judgment of God upon them. Hence note, God sometimes
punishes sin with sin, he punishes spiritual adultery with corporal
uncleanness; Corporal pollutions are the fruit of spiritual filthiness. So Romans
1. They worshipped not God as God but in an Idolators way, after the s militude
of an Ox that eats gras^, therefore God gave them up to ^ncleanness. If men
be not careful to maintain purity in Gods worship, God care^ not for their
bodily ch^stity. If you ^ol^u^e my worship, be unclean then ^aith God. Not that
he does permit it as lawful but in ju^t ^udg^ent he leaves them unto it. What
care I for all your unclea^ness otherwise in your bodies if you pollute ^y
w^^s^ip. Roma Amor inversio. That is preposterous love because of the unnatural
filthiness there practiced. Johannes a Casa Arch Bishop of Bendnutu^, wrote a
Book in commendation of Sodomy.
And it is usual for bodily and spiritual adultery to go together. The word
R^ma, turn the letters and it is Amor, there is a deal of unclean filthy love
in Rome, as I showed before W^^^e th^re is most Idolatry there is most adultery.

But secondly, The sin of Parents is punished many times in the children and in
the family. Your daughters and your spouses, I will leave them says God, and
mine hand shall be upon them. When a parent or a husband sees the hand of God
against his child or against his wife he should consider, how does God meet
with me in this? is it not a s^gn of Gods displeasure against me in this
particular? It is observable, that of the woman of Canaan, Mat. 15.22. when her
child was vexed with an unclean spirit, says she, Have mercy upon me, O Lord,
my child is griev^usly vexed with a Devil; she did not say Lord have mercy upon
my child, but Lord have mercy upon me, for my child is vexed with an unclean
spirit, as if she should say, O Lord, my sin may be this unclean spirit, it may
be the punishment of my sin, therefore Lord have mercy upon me and forgive me my
sin that has caused such a thing as this, yea Lord it may be I have had an
unclean spirit, and this my child did imitate me in somewhat that was evil, and
so thy hand is come upon it, I am the Original, therefore Lord have mercy upon
me, for my child is vexed with an unclean spirit. So should you, when you see
the hand of God upon your children, not only outwardly upon their bodies, cry
out, Lord h^ve mercy upon me for my child has such a disease, has such
convulsion fits, has such pain and such extremity, Lord pardon my sin. And
does God leave your children in wickedness? do you see unclean spirits in your
children, the spirit of filthiness? Cry out, Lord have mercy upon me; perhaps
it was by imitating of you that they came to have such unclean spirits.

Obs.
Thirdly, It is a great reproach unto any family to have uncleanness committed
in it. Fornication and adultery is a great reproach unto a family, especially
when the daughter or the wife is unclean. It is a reproach unto a family if a
servant prove naught, especially to some families more than others, the family
of a Minister, or of a Magistrate, or a man in public place and esteem, Use
for Governors
to have a servant prove naught: which by the way should teach Governors to be
more careful of their families than they are, for many times thorough their
carelessness God sends such a judgment, puts this disgrace upon their families.
Many of you for your pleasure and delight can go to your country houses,
Country houses.
and while you are there your servants are doing wickedness. You should have an
especial eye over your families in this, lest God as a just judgment upon you
for your neglect bring this reproach upon your families. But especially your
children, your daughters and your spouses, and above all, the children of
Ministers, Levit. 21.9. Ministers daughters
it is said there, if the daughter of any Priest profane her self by playing
the whore, she shall be burnt with fire; Now fornication was not punished with
death in any other, though adultery was, but the fornication of a Priests
daughter was to be puinshed with death, she was to be burnt with fire.

Obs. 4
The fourth note is this, which is the note I specially aimed at from these
words. Our ill dealings with God, our unfaithfulnes toward God is made more
sensible when those that are near unto us deal ill with us, and are
unfaithful to us. Well says God here, you go a whoring from me, your spouses
they shall go a whoring from you, you have been unfaithful to me, your
children shall be unfaithful to you, they shall go a whoring too, and then by
that anguish and trouble that you have when you see this in your wife, or in
your child, you shall be made sensible how grievous this is to my Spirit, that
you go a whoring from me. You have many Parents if they should hear that their
daughters were grown strumpets and have played the whore, Oh how would they
beat their hands upon their breasts, and tear their very hair, and stamp upon
the ground and cry out, I am undone, I am undone, and though they had never
such great estates they would think they had no comfort in any thing but would
even look upon themselves and their family as ruinated and undon; And if you
should hear that your wife had played the whore, how would it be as a dagger in
your hearts. Are you so sensible of this? then by that extremity of grief you
would have in such a case, know such is the extremity of the grief of Gods
heart when a child of his goes a whoring from him. If his people go on in ways
of superstition and Idolatry from him, yea though it be in things that
otherwise seem to be but small (it is but a circumstance of place I told you
here) yet it goes as near to the heart of God to have his people set upon
superstitious ways in his worship, as it does to the heart of any husband or
father to have his wife or daughter play the whore.

And further, As in this particular so we may take occasion to make use of it
other ways. Do your children prove stubborn, stout to you? Oh how many times
does the father or mother get alone into their chamber and fall a bemoning of
themselves, Oh what a stout, Instances
stubborn child have we, nothing will reform him, no admonition! It may be the
mother goes Oh how grievous is it unto Jesus Christ to have his Church so to
him? And have you any friend that has dealt unfaithfully Obser.
Our ill dealings with God and our unfaithfulness to him, is made more sensible
when those that are near unto us deal unfaithfully with us. And thus much for
the words under that consideration. I will make you sensible says God of your
dealings with me, if nothing will do it, it shall be by this way of mine, to
bring this judgment upon you, your daughters and your spouses shall commit
adultery.

But the next is under the other consideration, as they were causers of it. Now
the people of Israel we^e the causes of the uncleanness of their daughters and
wives by this their way of false worship in two respects.

Calvin Calvin.
has this note upon the place, As it is in Popery when they go a Pilgrimage,
Pilgrimages.
that is the oportunest time for filthy places, places of bawdry to have the
most trading. So it was here, when they went unto the hills and mountains to
worship, then the unclean places had most trading. absent from the family
So when husbands and parents go up and down without any lawful call, then
their wives and families do often miscarrie. Therefore it should teach them to be
as little from their families as they can be, to abide at home until God calls
them out, if they have a lawful call they may trust God with their families, if
not, they may have some mischief befall them before they come home.

filthiness, and parents and husbands are exceedingly to blame for that, and it
is to be charged as a great evil upon them, Play Houses.
when they shall venture to carrye their daughters or wives into places that
are sit for filthiness. But this shall suffice for that thirteen verse.

Verse 14. I will not punish your daughters when they commit whoredom, nor your
spouses when they commit adultery.


This is as severe an expression as any we have in the Scripture, They shall
commit whoredom and adultery, yet I will not punish them. It is strange, God
has threatened whoredom and adultery with death, and threatened the Priests
daughters that committed fornication, with fire; and this is spoken here of the
Priests especially; but here says he, I will punish none of them when they
commit whoredom or adultery.

These words are read by some interogatively, Will I not punish and then they
carry another sense. But I think that is not the scope.

Others read these words comparatively, and that I confess I will not punish
them,] that is, I will not punish them in comparison of you, for your example
makes them such as they are, you should restrain them, and though the sin be
great in them, yet in comparison of you they shall not be punished at all.
Wicked parents they look upon their children when they are wicked, as swearers,
liars, unclean etc. they look upon them as those that it will go very ill
withal. Well, it shall go ill with them indeed, but if you be so too, it shall
be worse with you: Many wicked parents are loath their children should be
wicked: I have known some drunkards and whoremasters, have put their children
to be educated by Puritans; they are wicked, yet their consciences tell them it
is not good for their children to be so. But the truth is, if you be wicked and
your children too, though they may perish in their sins, yet you shall perish
with a sevenfold destruction.

I will not punish them when they commit adultery] that is, I will show my
wrath against you in this that I will even give up your children and your
wives, let them do what they will I will not restrain them by any punishment.
And this is many times a way of Gods judgment against wicked ones, that the
Lord will not restrain them in their evil ways, that is the especial Note from
these words, Obser.
That it is one of the most fearful judgments of God in the world, for the Lord
not to restrain men from their wicked ways but to let them go on and to have
their will in them for a while. Hierom Hierom.
upon those words in Ezekiel. 7.4. I will not spare. God does not spare says he
that he might spare, he has not mercy that he might have mercy upon people,
that is, when God intends any good then he will not spare, that is, he will
afflict and chastise, those that he loves he will chastise, but if you be
bastards and not children he does not care for chastising of you. simile
All the while a parent has any respect to a child and intends he should
inherit, he does correct him, but when once he has cast off a child and is
fully resolved he shall never inherit one penny of all that he has, he lets him
go on and take his course. A Physician does so with a patient, he will give him
potions and bitter potions all the while that there is hope, but if the disease
be grown too strong and there is no hope, Hom. 8. in 20. cap Exodus vis
indignantis Dei terribilem vocem audire, etc. Luther Vae illi ad quoru^ peccata
conni^eo Deus.
he lets him alone; thus God deals with sinners many times in this world.
Origin Origin
in one of his Sermons upon Exodus quoting this Scripture he has this
expression, Will you hear the terrible voice of a provoked God! I will not
punish your daughters when they commit whoredom nor your spouses when they
commit adultery, this is the most terrible thing this is the most extreme thing
of wrath and judgment that can be imagined, here is a terrible voice of God
indeed, I will not punish you. So Luther, Woe to those men at whose sins God
winketh. It is a fearful judgment to fall into the hands of the living God, but
it is a more fearful judgment to fall out of the hands of the living God in
this regard. Many men bless themselves in this that they can go on in the world
and sin and sin and still prosper and thrive, they do not pray in their
families as others do, they are not so scrupulous in their consciencces as
others are, they are not so strict to walk exactly as others, yet they thrive
in their trades as others, they are as rich as others, as healthful as others,
they have as fine bodies, as hansom children as others, and upon this they are
hardened in their sin. Oh but know, though thou may bless thy self in this
thing, yet it is the heaviest curse of God that can be upon thee unless he
should send thee quick unto Hell. There is no such brand of a reprobate as this
for God to suffer a wicked man to prosper in his sin.

Hierom has this Note upon these words, Hierom Quando videris peccatorem
divitijs affluentem jactare se potentia and sanitate abundare delectare conjuge
corona circundare liberorum, dic in illum comminationem compleri.
when thou see says he a sinner flow with wealth, when thou see him
boasting and braving of his power, when thou see him very healthful and hail
and have a lusty body, when thou see him delighting in his wife, when thou
see him to have a company of brave children, bravely arraied, then say the
threatening of God by the Prophet Hosea is fulfilled upon that man.

Thy judgment is very great in this, for the less punishment thou have now the
more thou art like to have hereafter. The less punishment the more sin and so
the more misery. Know that Justice will have somewhat and much too for the
forbearance of her act, of her stroke, and certainly it were better for thee
that art a wicked and ungodly man that thou should beg thy bread from door
to door. Perhaps now thou have much coming in, thou lie soft and farest
daintily, while others are put to miserable extremities and have scarce a rag
to cover them, or a bit of bread to put in their bodies, and in cold weather
have no fire to warm them, and yet thou art ungodly and wicked, know that it
were better for thee, and thou will one day say it and wish it thy self, that
thou had been in such a case as the poor beggar that has begged a farthing
at thy door, and it is Gods wrath upon thee that thou art not now as miserable
as they. Let us therefore stop the troubles of our thoughts in this, we see the
wicked how they prosper in the world and how vile men are exalted, and though
they undertake causes that we know are abominable in the eyes of God, and we
know their ways are loathsome before God, and they provoke the God of Heaven in
their wicked waie^ and tempt him to his very face, yet they prosper. They are
indeed ready to take this their prosperity as an argument that God approves of
their ways, and that God loves them. Oh let us not (I say) be troubled at
their prosperity, for it is so far from Gods showing it as an argument of his
approbation of their ways, that it is one of the greatest judgments that can
possibly befall them in the world, when God shall say let them go on and fill
up the measure of their s^ns, they shall have their hearts desire for a while
and so shall be fatned up to their destruction. This few will conceive of but
such who have spiritual eyes. Carnal hearts are ready to call the proud happy,
and to think those to be in the best condition that are most prosperous in the
world; but this text teaches us the contrary. It follows.

For themselves are separated with whores. For themselves.] Ipsi. Here God
charge the persons (your daughters and your spouses, for they are separated
with whores) per modum indignationis, so interpreters note upon the place, Text
Opened
God charge the persons by way of indignation. As when one man is speaking to
another and his anger rises, he turns from him and speaks to some body else,
so God seems here to have his anger so arise against his people, that he turns
as it were from them as if he did speak to some body else, though indeed he
means them; themselves are separated, or divided themselves,

Junius Junius.
reads it only so, they have separated; and so adds to it Res opimas, they
have separated fat and plentiful things, their choice and rich things that they
had at home, so he carries the meaning and not improbably, the best meat they
had or any precious thing they had at home, they would set it apart under
pretense of consecrating it to a religious use, and then when they went to
sacrifice they would eat that among their whores, and so deceive their spouses
at home, and say they would set this apart for their gods and so carry it and
spend it among their whores. That is the interpretation he makes upon the word
Separate.

Others I confess carry it thus, They have separated themselves first in
spiritual whoredom: and then from their wives in bodily uncleanness.

Or else thus, Separated: That is, gone alone in secret where

Thus God gives the reason why their daughters and their wives commit this
uncleanness, because they themselves do so. Thence the Note is, When parents
are filthy and unclean, Observe.
what can be expected from the children but that they should be so too? Take it
either in bodily or spiritual uncleanness. In bodily, David commits adultery,
and Amnon commits incest; and in spiritual, Jer. 7.18. The children gather
wood, the fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead their dough to make
cakes to the Queen of Heaven. If fathers and mothers be Idolaters children will
be so too; so it is at this day, in superstitious places, take any that are
superstitious that stand upon the old way, if the father and the mother do so,
the children will do so too, any that are Malignants, if the parents be so, the
children though young it is strange to hear in what a way they will speak,
because their parents are so. Which should be a good caveat unto all parents to
make them take heed what they do before their children, he that sins before a
child sins twice,

But this word translated Whores, and the other that follows Harlots, have a
further signification than our English here expresses it. According to most
Interpreters it has this meaning. It presents to u^ those women that worshipped
B^al Peor, or Priapus that unclean god. In 1 King. 15.13. it is said of Asa
that he took away Maachah his mother from being Queen, ne ^sse^ princeps in
sacris pri^pi.
now it is interpreted by some that he removed her that she might not be a
special Queen in the solemnity of that unclean god Baal Pe^r, which Idol she
had set up in a grove. So then those women that were devoted to the service of
that unclean god, in whose worship there was most abominable filthy
uncleanness, yet these people did separate themselves to those women, not to
ordinary whores, but to those that were consecrated to the service of that
unclean god, and so went to worship that unclean god, and committed uncleanness
with the women devoted to that service.

And the other word, Sacrificed with harlots, if we were to take it merely
according to our translation, harlots, then the Note is only this, Obser.
That those that are filthy and unclean, yet they will sometimes make some show
of Religion. Harlots and yet sacrifice? how can these two stand together? One
would think harlots should cast off all sacrifice. No, many times such as are
filthy and unclean will make a show of Religion, to think to satisfy al their
filthiness with some Religious action; as the harlot in the Proverbs she had
peace offerings, and the rather she had them, she made her peace offerings but
preparations for her committing of uncleanness. What horrible wickedness is
this! yet this is ordinary for many that are very devout in some Religious
duties, and upon that they think they have served God well, God has had his
turn and so they think they may take the more liberty to the flesh afterward;
It is true we are sinners, we cannot serve God always, we will serve God
sometimes and so take the more liberty because of that. It is an abominable
thing to join filthiness and sacrifice both together.

But this word translated harlots here, has a great deal further meaning I
suppose than our English can express or bear. The word (...) translated
harlots, (...)
it is meant of the Priests with the consecrated ones. This does more justify
the interpretation of the other word whores, for I told you by that was meant
those women that worshipped Baal-Peor, for there the word signifies the
consecrated ones, the holy ones. You will say, holy ones, how can it be
translated harlots then? per Antiphrasin. Lucus quia minime lucet.
Yes, merely by way of contrariety, for so the Scripture expresses things and
words, and so does other languages too, as wood is called wood by a name that
comes from light. So here, holy ones, that is, devoted to filthiness as others
do consecrate themselves to God and therefore are called holy ones in a quite
contrary sense, because they rather devoted themselves unto all manner of
filthiness. And that I think is the meaning of this place, the Priests of Baal.
Peor they are here those that are meant that this people did separate
themselves for.

Hierom upon the place has this Note, Hierom
he says that the Romans in disgrace of the French used to separate Priests of
that Nation for that Idol and to make them Evnuches, from whence all such
Priests to that Idol that they had (which was the like to that of Baal-Peor the
Jews had) they used to call Gallos, Frenchmen to put an ignominy upon that
Nation for some especial revenge they had to them, and they would have them to
serve that Idol being first made Eunuchs.

Take it thus then and it will afford us a very profitable instruction. These
people were grown so corrupt that they had forsook the true Priests of God and
the Prophets of the Lord and separated themselves from the Lord to join in
sacrificing with these filthy Priests of Baal-Peor, that unclean Idol that is
said in Scripture to be that shame.

But only here is a Scruple how can it be meant of Priests when the word in the
Hebrew is in the feminine gender? Aquila he turns it, Cum mutatis, Aquila
(...). sic vocal effeminatos.
so he calls those that were effeminate, they were changed from men into women,
and so the Scripture speaks of men that have lost their true fortitude and are
changed from it, they are called women or men of womanish spi^i^s; And so the
Heathen Poet Virgil, he calls the Trojans women not men, which he had from
Homer, Oxe^e phrygia, neq, enim phryges. Virg. lib. 9. (...). Hom.
because they were rather to be of the feminine than the masculine gender.
Women shall rule over the^, Isa. 3. vid. Hier.
Therefore the Priests here of that unclean Idol had the feminine gender put
upon them.

Or as Cyril and Theophilact and others think that these Priests seemed to be
men, but were indeed women. So that then by this text is meant such notorious
prostituted filthy ones that were consecrated to be as Priests to the service
of this unclean Idol. Now then here rises the Note from hence this was their
abominable vileness, to forsake the Priests of the Lord, to separate themselves
from them and to join with such unclean Priests as these Priests of Baal-Peor
were. Here were Separates indeed. Have we not many amongst us at this day (...)
vile and wicked, of as wicked spirits as these, whose hear^ ^re against the
faithful Ministers of God, against the purity of Gods Ordinances, and they
separate themselves to any drunken unclean filthy Malignant Priest? It was just
so here for all the world, there were the true Priests of God in Judah, they
had the true Ordinances of God there, and yet these men rather than they would
join with them in the true service of God, they will separate themselves to the
Priests of Baal-Peor, to these filthy and unclean and base Priests, and they
think there is more good to be had in joining with them than with the true
Priests of God. How has God of late discovered the filthiness and malignancy
of out superstitious Priests who cared not what became of our Liberties of
Religion, of our Liberties as men, of our Religion as Christians, so they may
have their lusts; yet how vile are men's spirits still that though faithful and
conscionable Ministers are sent amongst them who would reveal the mind of
Christ and the way of Heaven unto them, that they may now know more in one
month than before they knew in many years if they had hearts to hearken to
them, yet they will separate themselves and join rather with such as are
manifested to be of most vile spirits, not only malignant but filthy and wicked
in their lives, and commend them for the only men, these they love with their
very hearts. Heretofore when they had but some Sr. John that could only read
prayers sent by the Bishop, and godly Ministers were thrust out, yet if men did
then go from their parish Church to hear a Sermon, how did they cry out upon
such then, they were called Sectaries and Schismatics presently; but now when
men of vile and malignant spirits are by a better Authority put out for their
wicked lives, and godly and holy men are put in their rooms, yet these they
will not hear though it be in their own parish Church, but if a malignant
Preacher be in the City, to him they will flock: Who is the Separate or
Schismatic now? they separate themselves now to such men, and now they think
they may hear those men they can most profit by, that is those that preach
things suitable to their spirits. When the case come^ to be men's own how partial
are they in their judgments? I know nothing sets out the condition of these men
as these words do, though as they are read in your books there is no such thing
appears, but the words according to the Original signifies separating
themselves to unclean Priests.

Therefore the people that do not understand shall fall. This is the close of
the verse. Well might he say that they are a people that understand not indeed,
Observe
Idolaters are no understanding people, they do not understand, they are
ignorant people. You will say, ignorant, many of them are Scholars and learned?
But they are ignorant of the ways of God, even their Priests are and for the
most part the people are, and their very design is to bring ignorance into
places, that their Idolatrous ways may be the sooner embraced.

The people that do not understand shall fall.] Understand what? what did not
these people understand that was the cause of their fall? They did not
understand these things.

First, They did not understand the design that Jeroboam had and Poor simple
people they were led by vain pretenses, Jeroboam he pleaded this, that he was
for the true Religion, he was for the worshipping of the true God, only he would
not have the people so tired as to go up thrice a year to Jerusalem, that was
not so necessary. But the truth is, that the design that Jeroboam had under al
his pretenses of worshipping the true God and being a friend to the true
Religion, it was to bring them under his own government, to tyrannize over
them, and to keep them from that right way of government that they should have
had. Now this people they did not understand this, they were carried away with
fair words, if Jeroboam did but pretend Religion and profess that he did it
merely out of respect and love and in favor unto them, and that for his part
he intended to set up the worship of God as much as any, though his design was
another thing, yet this people were led away and did not understand. They did
not understand the design of Jeroboam and his Prince^

They did not understand that the acceptance of Gods worship did not depend
upon the outward pump and bravery of it, but upon the rule, according to what
God had required. They understood not this. They were led away merely with the
fair shows and pomp of Religion, but they did not understand that all the
acceptance of divine worship comes from having a divine rule. Most people at
this day understand not this, and that is a great evil.

That their safety did more depend upon the true worship of God than upon all
the politic wisdom that possibly could be. They understood not that their
protection depended upon Gods service and worship, but they thought to go
politickly on to provide for their own safety, and they thought their safety
depended upon their wise men that understood better than they. And then,

They did not understand, that whatsoever was commanded by their Governors or
taught by their Priests, yet if it was against the mind of God it would not
excuse them from judgment and deliver them from the wrath of God, though their
Migistrates did command it and their Priests did teach it.

They did not understand these four things, and for not understanding these
four things they shall fall. This was that which brought them down and did ruin
this people.

There are diverse degrees of not-understanding.

First, When people do not understand merely for want of the means of knowledge.
This excuses not wholly, but they shall even fall though they have no means.

Secondly, When men have means yet thorough their negligence in the use of the
means they do not understand.

Thirdly, When they are not only guilty of negligence but they oppose and shut
their eyes wickedly against that means of knowledge. Then they shall fall indeed.

Fourthly, When having knowledge heretofore, now they lose it by their often
resisting of knowledge and so come to fail in their understanding.

Lastly, When they so provoke God as that he has given them up unto a sottish
spirit so^^ at they shall not understand. Now these people fall deepest. Where
all these five are (as they are in many places) surely that people must needs
fall. My brethren have we not cause to fear our not understanding at this day
in these five degrees? Applic.
And in a great part even in those four Generals, The not-understanding the
vain pretenses of our adversaries of what our Cavaliers say.

First, That they fight for Religion, and they make such and such kind of
protestations, and they intend nothing but the liberty of the subject, many
people are led away with these pretenses and understand not that their design
is to bring them under slavery and to take away their Religion. And this want
of understanding is like to cause us to fall.

Secondly, People understand not that the worship of God must have the word of
God to be the rule, and that the government of the Church must be according to
the word. They think what shall be most suitable to the reasons of understanding
men that is best. Because men understand not this we are in danger to fall.

Thirdly, People at this day think there is too much to do about Religion, and
let us rather go in a way of policy to provide for our selves, as for that why
should we injure or trouble our selves so much? we have troubled our selves too
much already. People think not their safety is in Religion therefore they shall
fall.

Fourthly, people think if they be taught so by their Ministers that is enough
for them. Is it not so with us now? Therefore we have cause to fear that the
Lord intends us a grievous fall.

Yea as those four Ojects, so the four degrees of want of understanding.

In many places they have no means, many Towns and Countries have scarce a
Sermon in half a year.

In many places where there is most means there they are negligent of it, they
rebel and shut their eyes against it and are weary of it.

And others that have had knowledge heretofore, have resisted their light, are
grown sottish: yea it is to be ^eared that God has delivered many amongst us
over to a sottish spirit, it is impossible they should remain so ignorant as
they are if God in his just jugment had not delivered them up unto a sottish
spirit. To instance in this, Is it not a sottish spirit of men that after all
their oppression and misery that they have suffered, yet they will not
understand, but join with those that have oppressed them and lay all the blame
upon them that venture their lives to deliver them. Surely this is most gross
sottish ignorance, that when men shall come and spoil them of their goods and
ravish their wives and children, yet in the mean time they rather cry out of
those that venture their lives to do them good as if the cause of their misery
was from them. Surely these people do not understand, can it be expected but
that these people should fall, themselves and their posterity, into the depth
of misery to be made slaves for ever?

They shall fall.] Idolatrous people shall fall; that is the next note. An Angel
proclaims this, Babylon is fallen, is fallen. It is fallen already (my
brethren,) how ever Idolaters seem to lift up their heads high yet they are
falling, and fall they shall, God has pronounced it, and the time is at hand;
they have fallen off from God, and fall they shall by the hand of God, and the
prouder they grow the nearer they are to their fall; Pride goes before a fall:
while the Gospel of Christ and his pure Ordinances that are now so opposed,
they shall stand; and all superstitious ways, and persons, they shall fall.
That is observable that place before named, Revel. 14.6. Rev. 14.6 Opened
An Angel flye^ in the midst of Heaven and preaches the everlasting Gospel;
and within a verse. or two, another Angel cries out, Babylon is fallen, is
fall^n. When Babylon with all their Idolatrous ways shall be fallen, then
shall the everlasting Gospel be preached; the Gospel and the Ordinances of
Christ shall be everlasting, shall continue for ever when all superstitious
vanities shall fall. We find it so; how ever they thought to bear up all their
superstitious ways by all the means that ever the devil or wicked men could
devise to keep them up to perpetuity, yet have we not found that God has
blasted them, and many of them are fallen? and though God bring his people into
affliction, yet they shall rise, the ways of God shall rise, Zion shall rise,
Babylon shall fall: the people that understand not, they shall fall.

A word or two about the meaning of the word in the original: The word is from
(...) shall fall. (...)
It is nor often in scripture, very rare, and I find diverse translations of it.
Shall be beaten, so some. Shall be brought into captivity, so others: And
others again give this the meaning of the word, and so it does properly
signify, Shall be perplexed. The word signifies to be brought into perplexity
and doubtfulness of ones counsels, and ways, that they do not know which way
in the world to go; that is the propriety of the word: I say, by their
doubtfulness of their way, not knowing which way to go, being perplexed in
their counsels, thereupon they come to stumble and fall. This people that do
not understand shall thus fall. Indeed it is more proper and suitable to the
words before, they do not understand, therefore they must needs be perplexed in
their ways and not know which way to go, and therefore must fall; as a man
that is in the dark and knows not which way to go he must needs fall; so when
men have left the true light and are in the dark they shall fall, and when they
are fallen they shall be perplexed in that misery into which they ate fallen.
From whence these two Notes.

That it is a fearful judgment of God and a forerunner of a grievous fall, for
him to leave men to perplexed counsels. When men are perplexed in their
counsels, one is for this way, and another is for that way, and then carry it
back and then forward again, Oh this i^ a forerunner of falling into grievous
misery. In Esa. 19.14. the Lord threatens Egypt that he will send a perverse
spirit in the midst of them and they shall er in every work as a drunken man
staggereth in his vomit; they shall er in their counsels and this comes from a
perverse spirit. The Lord many times sends a perplexed spirit and a perverse
spirit in judgment upon men, and what then? then they reel and stagger up and
down in their counsels, first they will go one way and then another, and so
bring a great deal of sorrow and trouble upon a people. The Lord grant our
enemies these perplexed counsels, and deliver us from them.

That when they are fallen and are once down and have brought misery upon
themselves and others by their ill ways and counsels, then they shall be so
ensnared and most dreadfully perplexed that they shall not know which way to go
or what to do. Men that are Idolatrous and superstitious, and men that God
leaves to themselves they are in miserable perplexity when they are fallen,
they are as those poor blind men in 2 King. 6. that Elisha led to Samaria in
stead of Dothan, what miserable perplexity were they in when they found
themselves in Samaria among their enemies? simile
So when men are left unto themselves and God has brought them into those
perplexities, when they shall see the fruit of their perplexed counsels, how
grievous will it be? On the other side, when a man goes according to the rule
of Gods word, and in the uprightness of his heart desires to be directed
according unto that rule, though such a one should meet with trouble and fall
into affliction for his trial, he need not be perplexed, there shall be
quietness and peace to his spirit in the midst of his afflictions, why? because
he has followed God, he has gone according to his rule. It may be he knows
not Gods end in bringing him into affliction, he understands not the depth of
Gods ways, yet having endeavored in the sincerity of his heart to walk
according to Gods will, you that have done so, you understand much, though you
should fall into affliction yet you shall not fall into perplexity.

Verse 15. Though thou Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah offend, and
come not ye unto Gilgal, neither go ye up to Beth-aven, nor swear, The Lord
lives.


The close of this Chapter is a warning to Judah to take heed that she does not
do as Israel did, in regard of the vileness of their sin, the fearfulness and
suddenness of their judgment.

Though thou Israel.] Thou wretched, wicked, stubborn, stout hearted Israel,
that no means will reclaim, though thou play the harlot, yet let not Judah
offend.

The word translated Offend, that is from (...) it signifies desolare likewise,
because sin brings desolation. The Hebrews have diverse words to express sin and
punishment both in one, because they are so near a kin. Israel plays the
harlot and so is like to bring desolation unto her self, but let not Judah
likewise offend and bring the same desolation likewise upon her self.

The Prophet Hosea was especially sent to Israel, to the ten Ministers
Ministers should especially look to those whom they are bound unto by Office,
but yet so as to labor to do good to others as occasion is. And not only
Ministers but others likewise. We should all intend good, especially to those
that are under our charge, but yet neglect no opportunity to do good unto any.

Secondly, When we see our labor lost upon those we desire If this or the other
get not good by our Ministry, by our Admonition, by our Exhortations, by our
Counsels, yet it may be the Lord may bless our endeavors upon such and such;
let us try what we can do there.

Thirdly, Let not Judah offend] Let not Judah do as Israel did. Exposit.
There was a great deal of danger that Judah should be ensnared and polluted
with Isreal's Idolatry, and that in many regards, which are the ground of this
seasonable admonition of the Prophet. Though Israel do thus and thus yet let
not Judah do so, as if he should say, the truth is Judah is in great danger to
be defiled by Israel, and why so?

Ezekiel. 16.46. and indeed afterward it proved to be dangerous, one special
reason of the iniquity of Jerusalem is there given, Ezekiel. 16.46. Opened
Thine elder sister Samaria, she and her daughters dwell at thy left hand; and
thy younger sister that dwells at thy right hand is Sodom and her daughters;
That was an especial reason of the iniquity of Jerusalem, their elder sister
Samaria, that is the ten Tribes, were on the left hand, and their younger
sister, Sodom, were on the right hand, and so they came to be sinful. To be
near Idolaters and wicked ones is very dangerous; then much more to be in the
same Town, Obser.
in the same family where superstitious and wicked persons are, there we had
need to take heed to our selves, for there is much danger.

Obser.
If you have a kinsman, if you have one that is near to you, not only in place
but in nature or affection, that is superstitious, take heed of being defiled
by such. Oh how many have suffered shipwreck of their faith by this means, that
they have had some kinsman, some Uncle, some acquaintance that have been very
near unto them, and they have drawn them aside from the ways of God. Hence is
the reason of that severity that God would have used against a brother or a
friend that seeks ^o draw away from God unto Idolatry, because the Lord sees
there is so much danger in it, Deuteronomy. 13.6. Deuteronomy. 13.6.
If thy brother, or the son of thy mother, or the son of thy daughter, or the
wife of thy bosom, or thy friend which is as thine own soul, Opened
entice thee secretly to go from God, thou shall not consent unto him, neither
shall thine eye pity him, neither shall thou spare, neither shall thou conceal
him, but thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to death. Though he be
thy brother, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend that is as thine own soul
thou shall not pity him, but thou shall seek the very death of such an one if
he seek to draw thee unto ^aies of Idolatry. Because God saw what danger there
was in this; that is the reason of the severity.

Thirdly, Judah was in great danger to be drawn aside by Benjamin, those two
Tribes, little Benjamin together with Judah were but a few in comparison of
Israel. It is a great argument that Idolaters use to draw others unto the ways
of Idolatry because of the number of those that go that way. Obser.
The whole World admire after the Beast; the World does, the Nations do, and
that is a mighty argument to draw; the greater part of people they think that
^^is way of worship is the best way, there are but a few an^ considerable
number that are in another way. No question but it was their argument here, as
if they should say, what, do not ten Tribes know the mind of God as well as
those two? Is there any reason why we should think that the greater part of the
children of Abraham, of the Jews, ten Tribes should not know the mind of God?
It is the argument at this day (say many that are superstitious and would go on
in their old way of Idolatry) They that are against such ways they are but a
few, an inconsiderable party, but the chief, the great ones and the most of all
sorts you see which way they go. We are to take heed of this. Oh let not Judah
though Israel be the greater part follow a multitude to do evil.

Fourthly, Israel was rich and in a flourishing estate, therefore men will soon
be brought to close with; Obser.
and the way of Israel when Hosea prophesied did much thrive and prosper,
Israel prevailed mightily in the world, When Ephraim spoke there was trembling,
therefore it was a wonderful grace of God to keep Judah from following their
example. We find it by experience, let a way be persecuted yet let it be but
once countenanced in the world, men will cry it up; do we not see at this day
that those things that heretofore men would not profess, because of
persecution, that now on a sudden their minds are changed and now they cry it
up? The same thing that heretofore have been persecuted, if they once be but
countenanced by great ones and by multitudes, how will men cry it up! Things
that their hearts were against, things that they would argue and reason
against, yet now because they have more public countenance, their judgments
are changed; here is the deceit of men's hearts, that way that has most
countenance in the world, that way they will go on in, especially in the
worship of God.

Jerusalem, and we would have you worship at Dan and Bethel, and those Images
that are set up are but to put you in mind of the same God you worship. Obser.
The nearer any come to you in what is the right worship of God, yet if they
retain any corruption, there is so much the more danger that they should draw
you from that which is right; for Israel did come nearer to the true worship of
God than the Heathens did, now the Prophet does not say, though the Heathens be
Idolaters, yet let not Judah be so too, but though Israel play the harlot, yet
let not Judah offend. There was more danger that Judah should be drawn aside by
Israel than that they should be drawn aside by any of the Heathen. And so there
is more danger that we at this day should be drawn aside by those that join
with us in many things that are right than by Papists, they are hateful to us,
Applic.
we see their ways to be abominable. Papists and Heathens there is not so much
danger (especially for those that profess godliness) to be drawn aside by them,
but the danger is in this, to be drawn aside by their brethren, and that by
their brethren that join with them in many things that are right, and that come
very near to the true worship of God.

Well, Judah must not do so though Israel does. As there were many things
wherein Judah was in great danger to be drawn aside by Israel; so there were
many arguments why Judah should not do as Israel did. Exposit.
As

First, God had graciously differenced Judah from Israel David and to his
Temple, to be his own people.

Secondly, Judah had more means than Israel had, therefore Observe.
Oh those that enjoy Gods Ordinances in his own way and the Ministers of God in
a right way of calling they should take heed of doing as other people do. And
then,

Thirdly, Judah was not compelled by her Governors to Jeroboam and other of
the Princes was compeld to do what they did, and they might pretend that it was
for their own safety, to save their lives and to save their estates: but there
was no such necessity for Judah to do it, for God many times sent godly and
gracious Princes to Judah, and there was not such ways there to compel them,
they were not so necessitated to that way of false worship as Israel was, (if
we may call it any necessity to that which is evil. Obser.
) When people have liberty and are not forced but God does give them liberty
that they need not (except they will) be Idolaters, yet for them to close with
ways of Idolatry and superstition, when they need not, this is more sinful. It
is true, heretofore there might have been some excuse, we were forced to it, it
was as much as our estates were worth, we must have been cast into prison and
persecuted, and that made us do that we did. The Lord be merciful to us for
that we rather than we would suffer would join in those superstitious ways
that were amongst us. But now thorough Gods mercy we are delivered from that
bondage, we are not so compelled, yet that now for all this our hearts should
yet cleave to those old superstitious ways, this makes our sin so much the
greater.

Let not Judah sin, for what then should become of Gods worship? For God had no
other people upon the face of the earth but Judah and Israel to worship him;
well, Israel is gone from him, and will Judah go too? what will become of the
worship of God? A mighty argument to those that make profession of godliness to
keep them from the ways of false worship and wickedness in any kind. Obser.
If you depart from God too as others do, what honor will God have in the
world? what will become of the service of God in the world? Is not God worthy
of all honor and of all service from all his creatures? It is pity there
should be any creature in the world that should not honor and serve the blessed
and infinite God; But we see most do not, and there are but a few, a handful of
people that regard to worship God aright, and shall this few this handful
forsake God? where then shall God have any honor in the world? Shall Judah go
away too? then the Lord will have no Church, no worship, no service in the
world.

Fifthly, God had much mercy in store for Judah, more than

From hence these Notes are to be observed.

First, We must not do as others do, especially in point of simile
It Is true if there be a common enemy come into a City or Town, every one
desires to have a blow at him, and when men make this an argument for their sin
because others do it, they deal with God as those in a Town would deal with a
common enemy, that is thus, why such and such and such go on in such wicked
ways, they strike at God, therefore let me strike at God too, when thou
pleadest that argument and say because such and such do sin therefore I may
sin, thou do in effect as much as say such and such strike at God let me
have a blow at him too. Is there any force in this argument? For ever take heed
of pleading the example of others in ways of wickedness, and remember this one
expression that thou do in effect as if thou should say, others about me
they strike at God and I must have my blow at him too as well as they. In any
sin we must take heed of example, but above all in matters of worship. Hence
Deuteronomy. 12.30. Take heed to thy self that thou be not snared by following of the
Nations after that they be destroyed from before thee, and that thou enquire
not after their gods, saying, How did these Nations serve their gods? even so
will I d^ likewise. Take heed says God, thou do not so much as enquire how
these people serve their gods and say, I will do so likewise. God would not
have us use that argument. Take heed therefore of pleading thus, other people
do so and so and other Nations, why may not, we do as other Nations do? It is a
very ill argument to plead example in matters of worship, I mean that worship
that here Judah is forewarned of, that is, worship that is by institution, and
above all things the examples of men are not to be followed in points of
institution. In any thing in the world there may be more plea for example than
in instituted worship and the reason is this, Note
Because that other things have somewhat of them written in the Law of nature
in man's heart, all matters of morallity are in some degree or other written in
man's heart by nature, every man has somewhat of the moral Law written in his
heart, but institutions they are such things as depend merely upon Gods
revealed will and are not written in the heart of man: Therefore though we might
have a plea to follow the example of others in point of morality, yet there can
be no just plea to follow the example of others in point of Institutions, there
we must be sure to keep to the rule of Gods Word, to look above all things in
points of Institution, to what is written and never to make it an argument that
such or such people do so and so. And,

Yet let not Judah offend: Judah was the only people of God, the only true
Church of God that remained in the world. When Gods own people offend, Oh that
goes nearer unto the heart of God than when others do offend. As Christ said to
his Disciples, Will ye also go away? and as Julius Caesar said to Brutus in the
Senate that came with a dagger to stab him, What and thou my son Brute, what
thou amongst all others? so say God, when those that are professors of
Religion, that are his people, that are near unto him, when they sin against
the Lord, what and you also? will you also come and strike me?

First, There is more unkindness in the sins of Gods people than there This
grieves the Spirit of God, others do provoke God, do anger God, but Gods Saints
do grieve his Spirit, for grief is out of love, Note
and the more God loves any the more grievous is it unto his heart that they
should offend him. The more you love a wife, or a child or a friend, the more
does it go to your heart that such a one should do any thing that might justly
offend you.

Secondly, There is more unfaithfulness in the sins of Gods people What thou my
friend that has eat bread at my table, will thou lift up thy heel against me?
And Esa. 63.8. I said, they are children that will not lie. God confideth in
them, and for them to be unfaithful, for Judah to sin, this goes to the heart
of God indeed.

Thirdly, Gods Name is more polluted by the sins of his people than Others,
wicked ones offend the will of God, but they do not pollute the Name of God so
much as his own people do.

Fourthly, The excellency of the graces of the Saints and the excellency As
spot of dirt in a sackcloth is not so great an evil as spots of dirt and stains
in a piece of Cambrick or Lawn, simile
if you have fine clothes and fine garments and there be but a stain comes
upon them, a spot of dirt, then you will think that a great evil; but there are
some course garments (as your safeguards) that you make of course things, you
care not so much though they be solid and dirty; So the wicked they are of a
course thread, their spirits are little worth, therefore though they be sullied
and defiled it is not so much; but the spirits of the Saints they are renewed,
they have the Image of God upon them, therefore a spot in them is a great deal
worse; As a spot of dirt upon an ordinary Deal board is no great evil, simile
but if there be a curious Image and Picture drawn upon a table, to have that
besmeared is a great deal worse: so if thou art godly thou have the Image of
God drawn upon thy soul, and a sin, a spot in thee is worse than in others.
Therefore what ever others do, yet let Gods people take heed to themselves that
they do not offend.

Yea, the Saints of God they are the very salt of the earth, the very light of
the world, they are those for whose sake God continues the world in that way
he does, they are the supporters of all, and if they depart from God also what
will become of the world?

As the sins of the Saints go nearer the heart of God than the sins of others,
so they go nearer to the heart of the Saints. The sin of one Saint goes nearer
the heart of another Saint than the sin of any other man does. Offenses of
brethren amongst brethren they are the greatest of all. As Sampson said to
those that came to bind him, simile
do not you bind me, I care not for the Philistines so much, only do you not
bind me: so all the railings and persecutions of ungodly men are not so much as
the unkindness of the Saints. Unkindnesses from such as we look upon as godly,
go nearer to the heart of those that are godly than all the railings and
persecutions of ungodly men. If others of the Saints, such as are godly, should
suffer opposition, yea if it should come to this that they should suffer
persecution from such as they look upon as godly, Oh how would that cut their
hearts! Their complaints to their father of this would be sore complaints
indeed.

Applic.
The force of this, Though Israel do thus, yet let not Judah offend, if it were
applied unto us at this time, it would come to thus much, Though Prelates,
though such as were superstitious and corrupt, though they were bitter against
and did persecute my servants, yet let not such as have professed godliness,
let not such as have been painful and conscionable Ministers, let not such
whose consciences have been heretofore tender in many things, let not them
offend in any bitterness in any harshness against their brethren; This will go
more to Gods heart and to the heart of the Saints than any offenses of any
other that ever was heretofore. All the persecutions of all the Prelates and
Papists and of all your Popish Priests and such kind of men, they would not be
the thousand part so much as any bitterness or harshness from the spirits of
those that are looked upon as godly against the Saints; Especially such as
heretofore have professed so much tenderness of conscience, and have suffered so
much for the tenderness of their consciences because they could not do what
they were enjoined to do, and now if they after they have gotten liberty to
their own consciences should once come to be harsh and bitter against others
that are godly, Oh how sad would this be unto God and unto his people! Oh let
not Judah offend what ever Israel do.

Come not ye unto Gilgal, neither go ye up to Beth-aven. There are two things
to be enquired here.

1. What this Gilgal, and what Beth-aven was. 2. The reason of the prohibition,
why they must must not come to Gilgal, nor go to Beth-aven.
The words are ordinarily read and past over without any great observation, but
there is much of Gods mind in them.

For the first, Gilgal, Gilgal
it was a most famous place in the borders of Israel, famous heretofore for
many things. I know no one place that there are more glorious things spoke of
than of Gilgal, except Jerusalem it self. It was famous for these things.

First, There was that great Circumcision after Israel Gilgal. For we are to
know that all the forty years wherein Israel was in the wilderness, none of
their children were circumcised, God was so indulgent to his people for that
time, because they were to remove up and down according as God should require,
they knew not how soon, now if their children should then have been circumcised
they could not have carried them up and down so readily. But yet it see^s it
was an affliction, for God says he would roll away the reproach of Egypt from
off them and therefore commanded that they should be circumcised. Now when they
came over Jordan, as soon as ever they came to set foot upon the land of Canaan,
or presently upon it, then God required them to circumcise their children. And
if we observe it, it was a strange command, for they were now come into the
very mouth of their enemies, and all the people of C^n^an, all the Kings and
Princes of the Country were gathered together to fight against them, and yet
now they must circumcise even their fighting men, those that had been in the
wilderness so long, all those that were under forty years old must now be
circumcised, and though they were even in the very mouth of their enemies and
by reason of their forenes^ after their circumci^ion they could not be able to
stir out against them, yet they mu^^ come to it. Thus we see God will have his
worship regarded rather than our own safety when he pleases. Note
And upon this the place was called Gilg^l, the text gives the reason, J^sh.
5.9. This day (says God) have I rolled away the reproach of Egypt from off
you, wherefore the name of the place is called Gilgal unto this day. The word
is from (...) that signifies to roll, the Hebrew letter Gimel being doubled and
interposed, it is Gilgal. That is the first thing observable of this place,
that there was the great circumcision.

Josh. 5.10.

Gilgal there the Mannah ceased, and the people were fed with the bread of the
Wheat of the country of Canaan; there God gave them that first possession of
Canaan to eat of the fruit of the Land, that they should not have any need of
such extraordinary providence of God to feed them b^ Manna, but they should eat
of the fruit of the land; this was in Gilgal as appears Josh. 5.12.

Jos^ua pitch those twelve stones which they took out of Jordan for a memorial
and perpetual remembrance of that great deliverance given them by God in drying
up the waters of Jordan from before them until they were passed over, as
appears Josh. 4.20.

Fifthly, Joshua himself together with the Camp kept much Gilgal, and that after
Jericho was taken, after Ai was taken, after the five Kings were slain, yet
Joshua kept there, Josh. 10.6. Yea after the whole Country was possessed yet
still he kept at Gilgal together with the Camp, as appears Josh. 14.6.

Yea in the sixth place, At Gilgal the Angel of God appeared Joshua, Josh.
5.13. and told him he was Captain of the host of the Lord, and bad Joshua loose
his shoes from off his feet for the place whereon he stood was holy. The Angel
of God appeared to tell him that he went before as the great Captain of the
host of God to give them possession, and the place was holy.

Seventhly, At Gilgal Saul was anointed King and thither Samuel often repaired,
1 Samuel 21.15.

Eighthly, Gilgal was the place for sacrificing, the Tabernacle, Gilgal, as
appears 1 Samuel 10.8. and 1 Samuel 15.21. And verse 33. of that Chapter when
Sam^el hewed Agag in pieces, it was in Gilgal, and the text says, It was
before the Lord.

Ninthly, At Gilgal Elijah and Elisha came often, and there King. 2.1. and
chapter 4. verse 38. You see how famous Gilgal was, and yet though Gilg^l in
these Nine particulars was such a famo^s place, God gives his people a charge
that of all places they must not come to Gilgal. I will give you the reason of
the prohibition by and by, only I must first cell you what Beth aven was.

Beth-aven Beth aven
was no other than that Town which so often in Scripture was called Bethel,
which Bethel signifies the house of God, and it had that name given unto it by
Jacob upon Gods extraordinary appearing to him when he fled because of his
brother Esau, Genesis 28. This place was before called Luz, and it had that name
from the abundance of Almond trees which were there, which that word Luz
signifies; but upon Gods appearing unto Jacob it changed the name and it is
called Bethel, the house of God; And a very sweet Note Note
we may have from thence, and that is this, That Gods appearing to his people
in any place puts a more honorable respect upon it than all the pleasant fruits
that can grow in a place. A Garden or Orchard, if they were filled with Almond
trees and the most pleasant fruits that can be, yet they are not so delightful,
they should not be so delightful to our hearts, nor would not be if our hearts
were right, as the house of God, where God appears to us. If God appear to us
in any place though it should be a wilderness, it should have the honor rather
than the most pleasant Garden in the world where we have not the like
appearance of God to us. Gods appearing makes that place the house of God:
where ever God appears, there is the house of God, and that will make a place
far more delightful than all the beautiful and pleasant fruits in the world
possibly can do. Thus you see what both places were; but now they are charged
they must not come thither. Applic.
Beth-aven it is no other place than Bethel, and if you will know the reason of
the change of the name from Bethel to Beth-aven, I shall show you presently in
giving you the reason why they must not come to Gilgal nor to Beth aven.

Now the reason why they must not come thither, it was, Gilgal nor to
Beth-aven. So in Amos, 5.5. there you have the like charge almost in the same
words, Seek not Bethel, not enter into Gilgal; there it is called Bethel;
though (says God) it has the name from my house, and once there was a
glorious appearing of mine there, yet now do not seek to Bethel, do not so much
as enter into Gilgal.

That both these places were now very corrupt by Idolatry, I will make that
appear too. As I have showed you how famous these places were before, so I will
show you how corrupt these places afterward were made. Corruptions of Gilgal.
For Gilgal, that place was abominably corrupt, it appears plainly in Hos.
9.15. All their iniquity (says God) is in Gilgal, above all places there is
the greatest iniquity committed, and there I hated them says God. It was the
place where God loved his people and manifested himself unto them, but now,
there I hated them, I saw so much wickedness in Gilgal that made me hate them
now. And it quickly grew to be corrupt, for in Ehuds time the third Judge from
Joshua Idols were then begun to be set up in Gilgal; Judge. 3.19. the text
says, that Ehud turned again from the quarries that were by Gilgal, (...) of
dolor, sculpere.
now that word translated quarries (...) some turn it, he came ab Idolis, from
the Idols, and so the word may be translated; And it signifies to engrave, he
came from the engravings. There were Idols at Gilgal then. And the reason of
the corruption that there was in Gilgal was this, because it had been an
eminent place, and that place was accounted very holy because of the great
things that had been done there, upon which they set up their Images there, and
put much superstitious respect and honor upon the place. They took the rise of
their respect to the place from Gods much appearing there and the great things
that had been done there, and now they began to think that place was holy and
so abused it: Note
As men are subject to abuse places and to put holiness in places more than God
does because of some special things that have been done in those places; As we
see Papists do at this time, at the Sepulcher of Christ, Oh what a deal of stir
was there about going to visit the Sepulcher of Christ! And the very Cross
whereon Christ was crucified what a stir was there about that as if it were
more holy than any other piece of wood! One chip of it was counted worth I know
not how much; And the Sepulchers of the Martyrs and Cells of the Munks, men have
gone many a sore journey to visit those places. This is the old vanity of
spirit that was amongst the people of the Jews. Whereas the truth is that it is
not the place that can sanctify a work except it be appointed by Gods
insti^h^on thereunto, but if there be any sanctity in a place it is san^ ^h^^^y
the work, and not the work by the place; and if the work do sanctify it, it is
but for the present while the holy duties are in exercising. We may say this is
the house of God, where the Congregation meets for performance of holy duties,
but it is only in regard of the work, when the work is done there remains no
impression of holiness upon the place, as if Gods worship were not so well
accepted in any other place as in that. This was the vanity that was amongst
the Jews, they did therefore abuse the place, Gilgal, because there had been
don so great things there, and God hated it so much the more now, I charge you
says he, come not to Gilgal that superstitious place. They thought because it
was a place so eminent for many appearings of God, it was therefore the more
holy; I do therefore abhor it says God.

Come not to Beth-aven] The reason why they must not come to Beth-aven appears
from the change of the name, it was once Bethel, Corrup^ons of Bethel.
and now it is Bethaven, and the difference betwixt these two names Bethel and
Beth-aven is wide and great, Bethel is the house of God, and Bethaven is the
house of iniquity, the house of vanity, the house of labor, and the house of
affliction, for it signifies all these. That which was my house, which I did
once own, being corrupted it is no other but the house of iniquity, and vanity,
and the house that brings affliction. Bethaven was one of the places where
Jeroboam set up one of his Calves, one of the eminentest places for the Calves,
and he took the advantage of the conceit that the people had of the holiness of
that place to set up one of hi^ Calves there, and thought thereby to prevail
with the people so much the more: now God charge them that they should not
come there. There was indeed another Town as in Josh. 7. that before was called
Beth-aven, but generally that by Interpreters is made another Town, not that of
Bet^el, but this Town here is no other than that Bethel of which we have such
often mention in the Scripture. And some, as Aquila, Aquila
and Symachus, they turn the word B^thaven, Note
Domus inutilis, an unprofitable place, for indeed sin and Idolatry make places
unprofitable.

Come not to Beth-aven.] From whence we a^^ to note, First, We must take h^^d
of coming to places that ar^ew-goous to draw us into sin, Obser.
especially to false worship. Those places that are dangerous for bodily
pollution we must take heed of. Prove. 5.8. Remove thy way f^^ ^m^her, and com^
not near the door o^ her house. Do not come so much as nigh her door. Say not,
why ^^y not I go such a way? may not I go by he^ (...) mu^^ not go by her house
nor (...) house. This is a strange admonition you will say; Mark the very words
before the admonition, in the seventh verse, Hear me now O ye children, and
depart not from the words of my mouth; what are the words of his mouth? Remove
thy way far from her, and come not nigh the door of her house. Thus wisdom her
self counsels us, simile
As you shall see it sometimes in your houses, when you light up a candle, you
shall have some gnats and flies that will flutter up and down the light and at
first they will keep at some distance, and then get nearer, till at length they
singe their wings and lose their lives too; so it is with many, at first they
think, they will not do such a thing, Oh God forbid they should do so and so;
but they will come nigh a temptation, and be tampering with a temptation and at
length they are taken with it and destroyed by it. It is dangerous to take
liberty out of Curiosity to go to see places of Idolatry, with pretense only to
see Mass, Curiosity To see superstition the danger of it.
and to go abroad to see the fashions of the Country. Dinah went abroad to see
the fashions of the Country, but she came defloured home; so there are many
that will go abroad to see the fashions of Countries out of Curiosity; I speak
not of going when God calls us to it, but to go merely out of curiosity, it
is just with God that we should come home maimed and not whole as we went. In
the Lords prayer we pray that God would not lead us into temptation, How do men
mock God when they pray to God daily, Lead us not into temptation, yet they
will venture upon temptations, go to brothel houses, to many places where they
know there will be wicked company, yea even thrust themselves into wicked
company needlessly, only with this pretense, Oh they will take heed to
themselves, and they mean no hurt; Let not that excuse you, Play Houses.
when you have a temptation to go to wicked places, to play houses, to brothel
houses, to wicked company, satisfy not your selves with this, I mean no hurt;
but have you any call from God, can you approve it before God and say, Lord
thou have called me hither? Tertullian
I suppose you have heard of that story that Tertullian has of a Christian
woman, who being at a play was possessed of a Devil, and other Christians
coming to cast him out, asked the evil spirit how he durst possess one that was
a Christian? He answered, I found her says he in my own place; so if we would
take heed of the Devil, take heed of wicked places.

Rome heretofore has been a famous Church, as in Romans 1. Rome was spread
abroad thoroughout the world, and so they will yet plead for the glory of Rome,
because once it was famous. But it is no matter what it has been, what is it
now? suppose it has been the seat of Peter, what is it now? If once they are
corrupt in themselves they lose the honor of what once they had. Oh let us take
heed unto our selves in this. It is true, England England.
has also been a famous place for Religion, and Travelers that have come
hither have blessed themselves, and blessed God for seeing what they have done,
they never saw so much of God as in England: But if we shall corrupt our ways
and grow to be Idolaters and superstitious we may by Gods just judgment be made
at infamous and vile as any people upon the face of the earth. And so it is
true of particular persons, of persons that heretofore have had much honor
among the Saints, have been men of admirable parts and have been useful to the
Church, it may be temptation prevails so much with them, I have had such a
name, I have done such and such things, I now may be quiet, I cannot but be
esteemed of for what I have done. But let a man in his younger time or
afterward do never so worthily in the Church of God or Commonwealth, if he
decline afterward he loses all his honor both with God and men, and may be as
unsavory salt, and spurned out and trodden under foot of men; As Gilgal and
Beth-aven though honored before, yet now the people are charged not to come to
them. Some men one would have blessed themselves before to be in their company in
their families, but now grown so loose, so sapless in their spirits, so carnal,
so malignant, so superstitious, so vain, Note
that it is dangerous now to come into their company, so that now we may even
hear a voice from God calling to us, go not into such a man's company, as here,
go not to Gilgal. Thus you have these words opened unto you and what the mind
of God is in them. Come not to to Gilgal, neither go ye up to Beth-aven. It
follows.

Nor swear the Lord lives.] Swearing in it self is lawful, yea it is a part of
the solemn worship of God, when God calls for it; And it is such a part of Gods
solemn worship as sometimes it is put for all the worship of God in Scripture,
Psalm. 63.12. Isa. 19.18. Therefore oaths are to be esteemed so much the more
sacred; For as God puts an honor upon prayer, that sometimes all the worship of
God is called prayer, He that calls on the Name of the Lord shall be saved;
My house shall be called the house of prayer etc. So God puts this honor upon
Oaths, that all his worship has sometimes the name of an Oath. Therefore the
abuse of Oaths is much the more vile; and when swearing is called for, it
should only be by the Name of Lord, An Oath what it implies.
we should swear by the Lord when it is lawful to swear and no other way, for
by this we acknowledge the Lord to be the searcher of all hearts, the Judger of
the heart, the All-seeing God, fit to witness to al men's ways, and to be an
avenger of all their unfaithfulness, this we hold forth in an Oath. And here is
the reason that we must swear by none but by God, because in swearing (I say)
we do acknowledge him we swear by to be the searcher of our hearts, the witness
of all our secrets, and the supreme Judge if we be unfaithful; Now this honor
is only due to God whether secret or open. God accounts much of this his
honor and will not give it to another. And when we do swear by the Name of God,
the Life of God is the greatest title we can give to God in an Oath. It is the
greatest Oath of all, Living God what it implies.
God himself does often swear by his life, and the Angel swears by the living
God. God loves that his creature should acknowledge him to be the living God
for ever, that is to live to reward that which is good, and to revenge that
which is evil. And therefore Jer. 4.2. there is an injunction, Thou shall
swear, the Lord lives, but it must be in truth, in righteousness, and in
judgment. And indeed it is Gods mercy to us that he will grant us the use of
his Name, that he is willing to be called to witness to our affairs.

But then you will say, why does God forbid it? In that place of Jeremiah you
see it is, Thou shall swear, the Lord lives; and here, Ierem. reconciled with
Hos.
You shall not swear the Lord lives. How shall we reconcile these? Thus,
because God would not have his Name and this his solemn worship abused by
Idolaters; When they were before their Idols yet still they would make use of
Gods Name and would seem to honor God; Oh Jehovah lives, we acknowledge him and
honor him as a living God. This was the guize of those Idolaters, though they
forsook the true worship of God and his commandment, yet they would seem to
honor God much, the Lord lives, and we desire to honor this living God. Now
says God, what do you go on in such ways of Idolatry as these and take my
Name into your mouths? what have you to do to take my Name into your mouths
seeing you hate to be reformed? I will have none of this honor from you says
God, you shall not swear any more, the Lord lives. Applica.
Many superstitious people they will make much use of the titles of God in
their mouths, and have many expressions about God that carry much devotion with
them, they will cry out, our blessed Savior, our Lord and Savior, and the
blessed God, and honoring the Lord and the like, they will I say have many
titles of God in their mouths and expressions that carry much devotion with
them, but God cares for none of these all the while they worship him according
to the traditions of men, after their own inventions, God care^ not for all
their seeming honoring him, for all their devotion, let them appear to men to
be never so devout, God rejects those devotions when they reject his pure and
sincere worship. God loves not to have his worship mixed. Zeph. 1.5. there God
charge them for swearing by the Lord and by Malcham, that they would put both
together; what is the meaning of that? Malcham there signifies, a King, for so
the Hebrew word does, and it seems that this people, though it is true they
would sometimes call their Idols by the name of King, Honoris gratia, to give
respect unto them, yet there is some probability that in this place more is
intended, namely that they would worship God, yea but they would worship their
King too, they would swear by God and by Malcham, Zeph. 1.5 Opened
they made their honor of their King come too near the honor of God; that is
one thing (I say) that seems to be specially intended here, they would not
reject the true God, but they would set the honor of their King too too near
the honor of the true God. It is true, both are to be honored, but one is to be
honored more than the other, and the true distance between both in giving honor
is duly to be observed, and not to jumble them both together, to swear by God,
and to swear by Malcham, and not observe the true distance between them both;
Much less to prefer the will of their Malcham their King before the will of
their God. Note
God cares not for any honor that is given unto him if we make any Competitor
with him. It is true indeed God rejects not the worship of his Saints because
of some mixtures of evil, Caution
for there are none that do worship him so but they do mix some sin with it;
But now such as choose to themselves some way of sin, that set up in their
hearts and lives some way of sin, and then think it sufficient to give God some
outward service and to put off God so, while at other times they follow their
own ^usts, such worship God rejects, therefore says the Lord here to these
Idolaters, You shall not swear, the Lord lives. It follows.

Verse 16. For Israel slideth back as a backsliding heiser.


Here first Israel, the ten Tribes, is compared to a heifer, and to a
backsliding heifer. A heifer, Heifer.
that ^^red the wantonness of Israel. And here is one argument why Judah must
not offend a^ Israel does, let not Judah offend as Israel does, for Israel as
(...) back sl^ding h^ifer Israel through his sin has (...) to be a vile, a
wanton heifer, but the emblem of Judah is to be a Lion, Genesis 49.9. Judah is a
Lions whelp, he stooped down, he couched as a Lion, and as an old Lion; who
shall rouse him up? It is true that Judah should not refuse the yoke thorough
wantonness and perverseness, but through a magnanimous spirit, he should not be
willing to be brought under the yoke of bondage. Israel is as a heifer that
through wantonness does refuse to be brought under the yoke, but let not Judah
do thus, for Judah is as a Lion, and although Judah be a Lion, yet he should
come under Gods command, to be subject unto him; but when it comes to be in
bondage unto men and that in matters of Religion, Judah should have a
magnanimous spirit, a Lion like spirit and should cast off the yoke of men in
that regard, Let not Judah be like Israel; Judah is as a Lion, Israel as a
heifer.

And the word that is translated backsliding, comes of (...) (...)
It signifies perverseness as well as backsliding. It is translated in Scripture
stubborness, rebellion, as in that place of Duteronomy about the stubborn and
rebellious child, Exposit.
there is the same word that is here, and many other Scriptures might be shown
how this word is taken otherwise than here for backsliding: Israel is a
stubborn, a rebellious, a perverse people, therefore let not Judah be so. And I
find the Seventy translate it thus, (...). Israel, the ten Tribes, they were
like a stung Bullock, Juvenca oestro percita, as if so be they had by a kind of
witchery, or by the biting of some venomous thing been put into a fury or
madness; that is the force of the word according to the translation of the
Seventy, they translate it (I say) by such a word whereby they would signify
that Israel was not now like a Heifer only wanton, but like a Heifer that was
bit with some venomous thing, and ran up and down like a mad thing. There is a
great deal of difference between the wantoness of a beast, and a beast that
runs up and down in a fury and madness as being bit with a maddog. Thus this
people was. Ephraim goes on madly: As many wicked men go on in ways aparantly
against light and conscience, and against the Word, though they know it will
prove to be their eternal ruin and destruction, Conscience tells them so, yet
they go on in a madness violently in a rage even down to the pit. This was
Ephraims condition here

And that which made Ephraim do so, it was his prosperity. Ephraim was grown
prosperous and had plenty of food, was fed full and large, and that made them
go on in such a fury and rage in the ways of wickedness and sin. That was now
fulfilled of Ephraim that was prophesied of him Deuteronomy. 32.15. Thou art waxed
fat, thou art grown thick, thou art covered with fatness; then he fors^ok God
which made him, and lightly esteemed the Ro^k of his salvation. Note
Oh when a people is waxen fat and grown prosperous, then they kick and spurn
and forsake God that made them, and lightly esteem the Rock of their salvation;
God and his Truth and his Saints and his Ordinances, they are nothing with
them, they lightly esteem them, why? because they are waxen fat, they are in
their prosperity. Applic.
You shall have many men upon their sick beds highly esteem of the Ministers of
God and of the ways of God and of his word and worship, and then, Oh send for
such and such to come to us; but when they are in prosperity they lightly
esteem God and all that concerns God. This was the condition of Ephraim. Where
have you a man almost but if God let him prosper, except he come in with
abundance of his grace, but he grows wanton in his prosperity? Judah was almost
in the same way, though here the Lord would not have Judah to be like Ephraim
as a wanton heifer spurning and kicking with the heel, yet it appears in Jer.
2.24. that Judah was not much unlike them, Judah is there compared to a wild
Ass used to the wilderness, that snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure, all they
that seek her will not weary themselves, but says God, in her month they shall
find her; take her when she is full of spirit and strength and there is no
dealing with her, but in her month, when she is more weakened then they shall
find her; So many men, take them at some times when they are in the ruff of
their pride and prosperity, there is no dealing with them, but when God has
tamed them by affliction then you may talk with them and then they will hear
you.

Israel is as a backsliding heifer.] The word that is translated heiser here,
it is in the feminine gender, though it is spoken of the ten Tribes, because
being stubborn and raging mad in wickedness, though they did seem to themselves
and others to be of brave spirits, yet the Lord looks upon them as people of
base and effeminate spirits, of poor and weak spirits. There is none that are
stubborn and proud but they think themselves to be of more than ordinary
spirits, they are the only brave spirits; Obser.
but the Lord looks upon those that are stubborn and proud as base and weak
spirits, and therefore speaks of them here in the feminine gender.

Now the Lord will feed them as a Lamb in a large place. I find some, Mercer
and Vatablus, they would carry it thus: Laute ut Agnus pastus, mox mactatur. As
a Lamb when it has large food it is soon slain, so God threatens Ephraim here
that he will soon make an end of them, only he will let them prosper for a
while and feed them largely, but it shall be for the slaughter. Many men that
are fed largely and are in their prosperity, they think themselves blessed, God
intends them only for the slaughter; But I think that is not the meaning of the
place, Obser.
they shall be fed as a Lamb. But thus,

As a Lamb.] They are as a heifer raging mad, but I will make them as a Lamb, I
will bring such affliction upon them as that I will tame the pride of their
hearts. Have you not seen experiences of this kind? did you never see a
ruffianly, blasphemous, proud, stubborn spirit, when the hand of God was upon
them, tamed?

Fed as a Lamb.] Parce ac tenuiter, not fed as a heifer, that noted their
prosperity, but fed as a lamb, that notes their adversity, for the food of a
lamb differs from the food of a heifer, that which will feed a lamb will starve
a heifer. Now says God, they have been proud and wanton by their prosperity,
but now they shall have short Commons, I will bring them down, I will lay them
low, they shall be but as a lamb that picks up the grass in the wilderness.

As a lamb in a large place.] That is, dispersed among the Countries, amongst
the Assyrians and Medes in their captivity, which was a very large Country.
They, would not be satisfied with Canaan (which was a narrower Country) and
with that Sheepfold of mine that was there, they shall have more room says
God, they shall go into a large place, but it shall be into their captivity.

Or rather, which I conceive to be the full scope of the holy Ghost in these
words, I will feed them as a lamb in a large place, That is, as a lamb that
shall be alone; one lamb, he speaks of a lamb singly, because they shall be
scattered. They had society and might have made good use of their society where
it was, but they did not regard to make good use of it, to edify themselves in
the fear of God, they shall be scattered one in one place and another in
another, and they shall be as a lamb alone in the wilderness, succourless,
helpless, shiftless, bleating up and down in the wilderness, in the wide vast
wilderness, and none to have any regard unto them. simile
As now if you should see one poor lamb in a vast wilderness, in a mighty great
heath, and in a wilderness where there are a great many Wolves that are ready
to devour it, and there is no body near it, no shepherd to look after it, none
that regard it, but it goes bleating up and down alone and none takes any care
of it; what will become think you of this lamb? what a succourless condition is
it in? So says God, they have been wanton heifers, but I will feed them as a
lamb in a large place, their condition shall be just thus, they shall be
carried into captivity and there they shall be bleating and howling and crying
out, and in danger of Wolves, but there shall be no body to regard them and
succor them. It is a great deal safer for a lamb to be in the flock though it
be more pind in, than to be thus alone in a large place. We love our liberty,
Obser.
and we may have liberty enough, but this our liberty may prove to be our
misery. To keep within the compass of Gods commands is the best liberty of all,
as David professes Psalm. 119. Then shall I have liberty, when I keep all thy
commandments. As for all other liberty it will certainly bring us into
straightness, therefore Romans 2.4, 5. where tribulation and anguish is threatened
to be upon the head of every one that works wickedness, the word translated
anguish is straightness of place, they shall have straightness of place; you
would have elbow room and would fain get out of Gods limits: though God may for
a time let you have such liberty, yet the conclusion will be anguish of spirit.
Applic.
Oh my brethren there is largeness, there is room enough in God, our souls may
expatiate themselves in God, we need go no further for liberty, If we would
have liberty out of God out of his bounds, our liberty will prove our undoing
and utter destruction. society of Saints to be improved.
Let us make much then of the to society of the Saints while we are not yet
through Gods mercy scattered up and down in other Countries as some of our
brethren have been, though thorough Gods mercy some in strange Countries have
met with Gods fold, and have been in Gods fold there, but others have been
scattered about and have walked up and down in the streets and have known no
body, and have had none to help them in any strait; but now we may meet
together, we may be in Gods fold and have our hearts refreshed, we may go into
our families and pray together and sing together; Our condition is not yet as
it is here threatened against Israel, that they should be as a lamb in a large
place bleating up and down and none to regard them. If one should be in some
parts of Germany and there see an English man in some great straight, simile
wring his hands and making grievous complaints, and no body succouring of him
or helping him, there he remembers what he has been in England, in what
fashion he has lived, and now there is none regards him, this were a sad
condition. This is the condition here threatened, They shall be fed as a lamb in
a large place.

Verse 17. Ephraim is joined to Idols; Let him alone.


You have heard before that God gives warning unto Judah to take heed of the
sins of Israel, of the ten Tribes; And many arguments are used; some you have
heard, and others remain.

This 17. verse has two strong arguments for it.

First, Ephraim is joined to Idols, Ephraim engaging himself Note
As it is the way of Idolaters and the curse of God upon them, that when they
are once got into that sin it is very hard ever to recover them out of it. Take
heed Judah that you come not into it.

Secondly, As he is joined so, being strongly set upon his Let him alone. Oh
Judah take heed what you do then. So that these words are brought in as two
arguments to persuade Judah not to do as Israel has done, and indeed all the
remainder too of this Chapter is brought in this way.

To speak then of these:

Ephraim is joined to Idols] Ephraim, why Ephraim was dead long ago, Ephraim
was one of the Patriarchs, the child of a Patriarch at least, he was the
grandchild of Jacob, and he had a great blessing upon him, Genesis 48.20. In thee
shall Israel bless, and shall say, God make thee like Ephraim. Ephraim had a
special blessing upon him, such a blessing as that the rest of the Tribes
should say, God bless thee, and make thee like Ephraim (for Joseph's tribe was
in Ephraim and Mannasses:) and yet now it is said, that Ephraim is joined to
Idols.

Why Ephraim?

Because that the chief of the ten Tribes that were now joined to Idols were
the children of Ephraim, Exposit. 1
for Ephraim and Mannasses stood in stead of Joseph, that Patriarch, and the
children I say of Ephraim were those that were joined to Idols, which were the
chief of the ten Tribes. From whence the first Note is this. That

Children that are wicked they are great disgraces and dishonors unto their
parents. Obs. 1.
Ephraim that was dead long before suffers dishonor by his children that are
now joined to Idols.

Secondly, All the ten Tribes were joined to Idols, why then Ephraim named
rather than any of the other? The reason is this, because that Jeroboam and the
Princes were all of the tribe of Ephraim, and therefore all is put upon them.
He does not say the ten Tribes are joined to Idols, but Ephraim is, because
indeed the Idolatry of all the other nine Tribes was from the Idolatry of
Jeroboam and the Princes that were of the Tribe of Ephraim. From whence another
Note is this, That,

The Governors of people are usually the causes of the evil of the If
Governors be superstitious and Idolaters, if they will favor Idolatry, all
the people usually or the generallity of them will go that way. They contract
the guilt of the Idolatry of all the false worship of the people. Ephraim does,
Jeroboam and the Princes that were of that Tribe contracts all the guilt of the
Idolatry of all the ten Tribes, therefore it is said Ephraim only, as if only
Ephraim was joined to Idols. Governors therefore that are superstitious and
Idolatrous have woeful guilt upon them, and we have cause to lament their
condition exceedingly. We read in that second of Matthew where the wise men
came to enquire after the King of the Jews, they came from a far Country, they
said they had seen his star and they desired to know where the place was that
he should be born in: It was a mighty work, and such a work as did trouble
Herod, and al Jerusalem with him was in a mighty trouble what this should be, a
strange thing, that such wise men should come so far, from a far Country, and
tell us of a star that appeared, and that a King of the Jews should be born,
all the people were troubled together with the King, so as that they called a
counsel of all the chief Priests and the Scribes and such as were expert in the
Law, to know where Christ should be born, and this Counsel told them that the
place was to be in Bethlehem, and upon that the wise men according to their
direction or according to the star, Note
went to find out the place; But mark, you do not read of any one of all the
people of Jerusalem that went with the wise men; Although they were stirred at
it and thought it a wonderful work that a star should thus appear, and that
these wise men should come and enquire for the King of the Jews, and that their
own Teachers should tell them that he was to be born at Bethlehem and thereupon
they went to Bethlehem to search it out, yet (I say) we do not read that any
of the people went with them; No, they durst not because of Herod, Herod that
was then their Prince he did not frame that way, and therefore not one of the
people would follow after the wise men to search after Christ. So it is usual,
that when Governors discountenance the ways of God, the people generally do as
they do; And especially Governors that are in ways of superstition and
Idolatry, and together with those ways shall give people liberty to satisfy
their lusts, then they will cleave unto them indeed, as Jeroboam and the rest
of the Princes did, they set up a false way of worship and together with that
they gave libety unto the people to satisfy their lusts, as appeared partly
before and will further appear in this prophecy; And this was one special way
by which they gained the hearts of the people to them in their false worship
because they gave scope and liberty to their lusts. Let any Princes and
Governors set up and countenance any false way of worship, and together with it
give liberty to the people for the satisfying of their lusts and they will gain
enough unto them, there is no cause to wonder that such Princes should have so
many to cleave unto them, seeing the people know that by cleaving unto them
they shall have liberty to enjoy their lusts. That is a second Note.

Thirdly, Ephraim is j^yned to Idols. Expos. 3.
] The word is (...) and it signifies in the Par^iciple, Incantatus, such a kind
of joining as your Inchanters in the ways of their conjuration join their
unclean spirits to them, that is the propriety of the word; so Ephraim is
joined to his Idols, cleaves to his Idols, or (as some turn it) is glued to
his Idols, and that unclean spirit that carries him on to the ways of
Idolatry, he comes to be one with him; as it is said of Believers, that they
are joined to the Lord Christ, and so they are one spirit; so Idolaters are
joined to the Devil and are become one spirit, that is the meaning, they are
glued to that unclean spirit and so they come to be fastened to their Idols,
that is the propriety of the word. From thence the Note is, That,

Idolaters hearts are very strongly glued to the ways of Idolatry, so that it
is very hard for any to get off their hearts. Obs. 3
Jer. 8.5. They take fast hold of deceit; they will not easily be taken off.
And Jer. 2.10.11. Pass ^^er unto Kedar and consider diligently, and see if
there be such a thing; Has a Nation changed their gods, which are yet no gods?
Ked^r was one of the vilest places of all: Woe is me says David, that I have my
habitation in the tents of Kedar: yet says God, go thither and see whether
they have changed their gods. Those that are the most vilest Idolaters yet they
will not change their gods, their hearts are joined to their gods, let their
hearts be never so base and their gods never so vile; as the Egyptians, they
would worship Leaves, and Garlic, and Cats, base and vile things and yet they
would not be taken off from their Idolatrous ways. I have read of a people in
India in the Isle Zolon, that worshipped an Apes Tooth, and when it was taken
from them they offered an unconceivable sum of treasure to regain that their
Idol again, An Apes tooth.
they are set upon their ways of Idolatry though it be never so foolish, never
so sottish.

And especially if Idolaters have outward prosperity, to be as the glue and
cement, to join their hearts to that way of false worship, then they are joined
indeed. Take men that are superstitious and if they do prosper in their waie^,
this their prosperity is the glue and cement to join their hearts strongly to
those ways, there is no getting of them off from them. And though they have
been long in that way of false worship, they do nor like it ever a whit the
worse. I beseech you observe this note. Note.
In any thing that is false worship antiquity will make it venerable, and they
will plead for it by antiquity, and say, it is thus and thus ancient, and their
forefathers did thus and thus. But observe it, in ways of the true worship of
God men are quickly weary, and because they have had it a great while they
desire some novelty, some new thing. You shall have many people much affected
with the truth when it is first revealed to them, and when they com to hear
Sermons or such exercises their hearts are much taken with them, but within a
while they loath this Mannah and so fall off quickly from it! So that in the
worship of God that is true and right, there the continuance in it makes it to
be less esteemed; but in false worship the longer people continue in it the
more they esteem it, and there antiquity makes it to be venerable, they do
argue from antiquity to make it the more honorable. This is the wickedness of
the hearts of men.

But will Idolaters thus join to their Idols? will their hearts be glued to
them? are they willing to be one spirit with them: Oh how much more should we
join to the Lord our God, join to Jesus Christ, to be as one spirit with him?
Barnabus Act. 11.23. that with full purpose of heart they should cleave unto
the Lord, is a seasonable Exhortation even at all times. Oh let us cleave unto
God and his worship so as whatsoever arguments are used yet our hearts may
never be taken off from the love of the truth; but let us say as once that
Martyr did, Though you may pluck my heart out of my bowels, yet you shall never
pluck the Truth out of my heart. 2 Martyrs saying.
And the less there is between God and our hearts the more firmly shall we be
glewed to him. Those that are godly, gracious, they need not the glue, the
cement of outward prosperity to join their hearts unto God, but godliness
alone, the sweetness that they find in God alone is enough to join their hearts
unto him even in an everlasting covenant. Those men who seem to be joined to
God and his worship, yet if it be the glue and cement of outward respects that
joins their hearts unto God they will quickly fall off from it; But those that
are immediately joined to God they will for ever keep to him, when there is
nothing but God and their hearts together, nothing between God and them.

Ephraim is joined to Idols] The word that is translated Idols, it is by some
translated Angusti, and so indeed it signifies, (...) dolor officere. Expos. 4.
it signifies pain and trouble, for their Idols did in the conclusion bring
them to pain and trouble. There are two reasons why it signifies pain and
trouble:

Applic.
which should teach us not to account the worship of God tedious though it be
somewhat hard to the flesh; Idolaters would endure pain and trouble to the
flesh in the worshipping of their Idols.



But this is not the principal thing intended here, but the force of the
argument is, Ephraim is joined to Idols, therefore meddle not with him, do not
you do as they do. So that when we see people set up false ways of worship in
any place,

Let him alone] Demitte eum, Let him go says God, he is joined to his Idols,
let him go. First, This is a speech to Judah, let Ephraim go says God to
Judah. Ephraim, they indeed are the ten Tribes, the most of the people of the
Jews, but yet seeing they set up false worship, let them go, have nothing to do
with them, do not converse with them. It is a heavy judgment of God upon a
people when the Saints shall let them alone, Obser.
when they shall withdraw from them. If God had any Saints in the world they
were in Judah, and says God to these Saints of his, let Israel alone and
withdraw from them have nothing to do with them, though they be your brethren
and Country men yet let them alone. Many wicked men they make nothing of this,
and say when as Gods people that are the most strict, and holy, and gracious,
shall withdraw from them, and as heretofore they went out of the land because
they saw it so defiled with superstitious vanities, let them all go say they,
Applic.
we are well rid of them; And who knows but you may meet with such expressions
before you die? that you may have many that will be willing to be ^id of those
that are most godly and gracious. Well, whatsoever men think and say, let them
know it is a dreadful curse of God upon a Nation for the Saints of God to
withdraw and go from them, for so God threatens it as one of the most,
dreadful curses; Judah, let them alone, have nothing to do with them: so when
God shall speak to his Saints that they shall withdraw from others of their
brethren, (I say) it is one of the most dreadful judgments of God upon a people
whatever they think of it. You know that expression that you have of the most
fearful curse of God upon those that are wicked in the 1 Cor. 16.22. He that
loves not the Lord Jesus, let him be Anathema Maranatha. Anathema, let him be
accursed, Maran Atha opened
but Maran-atha the meaning of that is, the Lord comes; Maran it signifies the
Lord, in the Chaldee and Syriack; therefore in Dan. 4.19. and Dan. 5.23. there
that word is translated Lord, My Lord the dram be to them that hate thee, and
Thou have lifted up thy self against the Lord of Heaven, the word is Mari
there, from whence that word Maran in the Syriack comes; Daniel living in
Chaldea used that phrase for the Lord, And atha signifies to come, Deuteronomy. 33.2.
The Lord comes with thousands of his Sains, the word in the original there is
atha or you may take it as a Syriack word signifying to come.
So that you have in Scripture these two words Maran and atha; what then is the
meaning of that, Let him be Anathema Maranatha? That is thus, when men shall
forsake Christ and the ways of his worship after means have been used with
them then Anathema Maranatha, that is, let all the Saints of God leave them to
the coming of Jesus Christ, let them alone, do not meddle with them, when you
have used all means you can then withdraw your selves from them and leave them
unto the coming of Christ, and Christ will deal with them well enough; Let them
not only be excommunicated, them, they are then to let them alone, that is, to
let them alone to the coming of Jesus Christ; and even in their own hearts say,
well we see no means can do them any good, Maranatha, the Lord comes and he
shall deal with them himself when he comes.

Let them alone.] The Lord speaks to the Prophet, as if he should say, Hosea,
you can do n^ good upon them, it is in vain for you to meddle with Ephraim, Let
him alone; Just as Christ gave order to his Disciples when he sent them forth
to preach the Gospel, that if any place rejected them they should go away and
shake the dust off their feet, it shall be a testimony against them says he;
So says God here to the Prophet, let them alone, spend not your strength any
more upon them. The exhortations that come from the Saints, but especially from
Ministers of the Gospel, from Ministers of God, be they what they will be, they
are pearls and precious things, and God will not have them despised, he will
not have them spent in vain; Obser.
therefore there is a time even for the Ministers of God to let people alone.
In Exodus 33.7. we read that when the people had notoriously sinned against God,
Moses took the Tabernacle of the Congregation and pitched it without the Camp,
he went away from the people and did separate from them till they did repent,
and would not come amongst them, he took the Tabernacle and went away from the
Camp at a great distance from them, more than ordinary; So there is a time even
for the Ministers of God to hold their peace and let people alone. of God; you
may be rid of them perhaps, God may take them away and you may be let alone,
but yet know it is the brand of Gods wrath upon you.

Thirdly, This letting alone, it shows that God himself simile
It is as if a father that had used means to reclaim a rebellious child, and he
regards nothing that is said, at length says the father, let him alone: what
do you think is the meaning of this if the father should say so? it is as much
as if he should say, I have done with him, I will own him no more, I will
meddle no more with him: simile
If a servant should be stubborn and rebellious and after much means used to
reclaim him should not be reclaimed; the Master says, let hi^ alone let him
take his own course, I will have no more to do with him; So here when God
faith, Let them alone, it is as if he should say, let them take their own
ways, let them have their lusts to the full, let them join and join and join
to their Idols and satisfy themselves with their own devices, Let them alone.
From hence there are these two Notes that are of mervailous use.

First, That God has a time to give over men to themselves, to say Oh many a
man has felt the Spirit of God drawing, struggling, striving with him to draw
him from such and such a wicked way; he has felt (I say) Gods Spirit mighty
and strong, what will you still go on in this way of wickedness, uncleanness,
drunkenness, oppression, injustice, profanation, hypocris^e, self-seeking and
the like? but he has been striving against the Spirit of God and his lusts
have even gotten the victory over the Spirit, so that God says, My Spirt shall
no longer strive, I will not struggle in vain, but let him go on and have his
own ways; Oh it is dreadful when the Lord shall say of a drunkard, of an
unclean person, of an hypocrite, I have been struggling so long with them but
yet their hearts have been opposite to me, let them alone in that wicked way
and let them go on and satisfy themselves in their wicked devices, Psalm.
81.12. They would none of me says God, they would none of my ways, So I gave
them up to their own counsels. Oh this is a dreadful gift! Many men that will
set their counsels against Gods counsels, and will do it so long as that God at
length gives them up to their own counsels: You will set your thoughts against
my Truth, your counsels against mine, well, take your counsels, satisfy your
selves in your own ways. And you know that place in the latter end of the
Revelation, He that will be filthy, let him be filthy still: Says God, Let him
alone; will you be filthy? be filthy then. And that in Ezekiel. 24.13. Because when
I would have purged them they would not be purged, therefore they shall be
purged no m^re says God; I will let them alone, I will never seek either by my
word or by my works to do them any further good, they shall be purged no more.

And the reason of this is:

Because God has no need of men. God does this to show that he has no need of
you; Indeed he seeks by his Word to draw you to obedience to his service, and
you stand off and draw from him and will not come on; At length God will
manifest himself that he has no need of your service, he can honor himself
without you, though you perish as filth and dung everlastingly.

because he does know how to fetch out glory to his own Name from their sins.
You will go on in your wicked ways, you will be stubborn and stout says God,
do you think to hinder me of my glory that way? well, do you take your fill of
your lusts, I know how to glorify my self out of that sin of yours that you do
so much against my glory, therefore take your fill of it.

It is the most woeful judgment of God upon any people, upon any person, when
God shall say in his wrath, Let him alone, go on. The word is (...) and it is
as much as to say, Let him be quiet, and Tranquillus; that quiet will prove a
dreadful storm. You know what the wise man says, Woe to him that is alone, Oh
woe to him that God says, Let him alone, that is thus alone. Many men bless
themselves when they are let alone, and desire it, Let us alone say they: Oh
but when God shall say, Let them alone, this is a most dreadful thing indeed. It
was a fearful evil, it proved at least to be a fearful evil to Adam in Paradise
when God let him alone, when God left Adam to himself what became of him? he
undid himself what in him lay and all his posterity, when he was but left to
those natural abilities he had it proved in the conclusion dreadful enough. Yea
and when God shall but leave his own Saints, that have grace in them, shall but
leave them for a little while unto themselves, Oh what mischief comes of it! As
in 2 Chronicles. 32.31. Hezekiah was left to himself but a while and what a deal of
misery did he bring upon himself, when God did but leave him to himself to try
what was in his heart? What, are there such evil consequences upon Adam in
Paradise left alone, and the Saints left alone here, Oh what a dreadful thing
is it then when God shall leave a sinner alone, I mean one that has nothing
else but sin in him, a wicked wretch that has no grace at all in him?

First, This is a testimony of very great disrespect in God of

Secondly, The evil is great, because they are then let alone simile
but if you should see a man in a mad humor running to the water to drown
himself, and then to let him alone this were a great judgment. Though when a
man walks in the street in an ordinary way no man will meddle with him but let
him alone, but if you should see a man running into the fire, or running to
cast himself into a Well or a Pond, no one then would let him alone: But now
the Lord sees sinners running headlong into misery, in^^ the bottomless pit,
and even then God says, Let them alone.

Let them alone. When a man is in safety among his friends and you let him
alone it is not so much, but suppose you should know of one that were environed
round about with adversaries, or that them were wild beasts round about him
ready to devour him, and this message were brought to you, Oh there is such a
friend of ours in great danger and you should say, what if he be, let him
alone, l^^ him shift as well as he can: So we are to know that all sinners that
are going on in their evil ways they are in wo^ul danger, dangers on every
hand, and the Lord sees and takes no^^c^ that they are in the midst of dangers,
yet says God, Let them alone, they shall not have my protection and help. And
this is a just punishment of God upon wicked sinners that will go on in their
wicked ways.

Let them alone, he intends this as the making of way unto some fearful wrath
that is to follow after. Let my mercy and goodness let them alone but it is
that they may fall into my wrath, and that will not let them alone, that will
trouble them, howsoever they cannot endu^ to be troubled by my Word, by m^
Messengers, by my Spirit, but my Wrath shall trouble them afterward, that shall
not let them alone; as in that place Ezekiel. 24.13. before quoted, Thou shall not
be pur^^^ from thy filthiness any more till I have caused my fury ^o rest upon
thee; they shall not have any means to trouble them for a while, but at length
my fury shall rest upon them. When the Lord shall seem to be quiet toward men
and let them alone; it is but to make way for fearful wrath that is coming
after.

Let them alone, if God will not vouchsafe to speak unto them any more, he will
not then vouchsafe to hear them speak unto him any more. If God once shall take
away his Word from them. If once the Lord shall say, they would not hear me,
they shall never hear me more, Let them alone, God will then likewise say, I
will not hear them, let them cry in the anguish of their spirits I will let
them alone; that is certain; When God shall let sinners alone in regard of his
mercy then he will let them alone too when the greatest wrath shall be upon
them, As thus, when they shall come under the greatest affliction, the most
dreadful miseries and torments in this world and eternally in the world to
come, when they shall then be crying, and roaring, and yelling out in the
anguish of their spirits unto God, Oh that God would now have mercy upon us!
God will let them even then alone, I will bring them into the fire says God,
and then I will leave them there; Oh think of this when you feel that there was
a time when God was stirring and striving with your hearts, but now it is not
so as before, yet you are worse in your lives than before.

And then further, It is a dreadful sign of reprobation Let them alone.

For first, What is reprobation? Reprobation what
Reprobation certainly is not for God to decree to damn men, you mistake in
that, that is not the first act of God upon any man; but thus, reprobation is
this, for God to decree whereas there are some that he has set his heart upon,
he is resolved to do them good, there are others, he does not presently decree
to damn them, but he does decree to leave them unto themselves, that what they
Earn they shall have and no more, Earnings.
he will deal with them according to their works, he will do them no wrong, he
will not be unjust to them, Justice.
he will not damn them but for their sin. he never decrees to damn any but for
sin; but he decrees this, he will leave them to a course of justice, I will
give them what is sit for them to have in creation, I will make such a covenant
with them, and then I will leave them unto themselves, and what they work for
they shall have; this is then another kind of reprobation, and worse than that
first; Reprobation.
that is reprobation for God to decree to leave a man to himself when he had no
sin in him, as God did not make man with sin at first; suppose you were now
made according to the Image of God without sin, yet if God should decree to
leave you fully and eternally to your self, you were but a reprobate, but now
when God sees a man in the gall of bitterness and in the bond of iniquity, now
for God to leave him to himself, this is reprobation of the second Edition,
this is a most dreadful reprobation indeed,

Let them alone now, As if he should say thus, I have thought now of another
way to fetch out my glory from them, as he reasoned in the Gospel, when he
could not provide for himself one way, I know what I will do says he; so says
God, I am denied my glory one way, well I know what to do, I have another way,
that is, to glorify my infinite Justice and the power of my infinite wrath;
they have refused to give me glory by obedience and coming in to me, I will not
have my glory that way, but now I will rather choose to have my glory from
them in their everlasting misery, they shall be spectacles of my wrath and
justice, and it shall be known to Angels and men unto all eternity what my
infinite justice and power is able to do, therefore let them alone to that
says God.

Let him alone, it is a greater judgment than if he should inflict all the
outward judgments of this world upon them: Too many of you are afraid of
sickness, of being spoild of your goods, that God should let the enemy in upon
you and all should be taken from you, this were a great judgment, Oh but this
judgment here in the Text is a greater judgment than if you were stripped of
all the comforts in the world and brought into the miserablest condition that
ever any creature was upon the earth in regard of outward, you were not under
such a dreadful judgment as thi^, for God to say, Let them alone; better any
judgments than spiritual judgments; As the spiritual blessings of God bestowed
upon the Saints are the greatest blessings, Ephe. 1.2. Oh blessed be God the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ that has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings in heavenly things; so the judgments of God that are spiritual
judgments they are the most dreadful judgments of God in the world. Oh that we
could have our hearts possessed with a fear of those to fear spiritual judgments
more than all the judgments in the world!

And yet more, This is not only worse than all outward Note Worse to be given
up to ones self than to be given up to the Devil
Devil take him, possess him (as once he did possess many in Christ's time) it
were not such a fearful judgment as this, to say, let lusts take him and rule
him, let him be given up to his own hearts lusts, let him alone to them. And
that is apparent out of that place where the Apostle gives order for the
incestious person to be given over unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh,
that his soul might be saved: When one is given up to the Devil in
Excommunication or any other way, it may prove to the salvation of his soul;
but this judgment of God saying Let a man alone, it is for the destruction of
his soul, not of the flesh, it tends directly to the destruction of the soul
though it may be in the mean while the flesh may be saved. It is so with many,
There are many that God lets alone and that proves the destruction of the
soul, but perhaps the saving of the flesh; As thus, perhaps many that went on
in wickedness, God was chastising them and afflicting them, well this tended to
the destruction of the flesh though to the saving of their soul; yea but they
would rather live in prosperity and ease and have their sin; well says God,
you shall do so, you shall have ease and prosperity and have your sin, that is,
your flesh shall here be saved, but your soul shall eternally be destroyed.
Therefore it is worse than to be given up unto the Devil.

Let him alone, it is worse than to be sent down to Hell presently, or then to
be presently damned.
for when one is left alone to himself he will increase his sin most dreadfully
all the time of hi^ life, and as his sin does increase, so his torment does
increase; therefore it is a most dreadful thing to be let alone.

Let a man alone, you will say, God should pity him then, alas what can a man
do? No but his condition is thus, when he is let alone though he be without the
grace of God, yet he must answer for as much as he might have done if he had
had that grace which he has justly deprived himself of; And must answer for
all that the might have don, with the grace he might have had.
there lies the evil of it further; When God leaves a man alone he must not
think but he is to answer still for the motions of Gods Spirit though he has
them not, and for the means of grace though he enjoy them not, for he has
deprived himself of them; For look what means of grace we thorough sin have
deprived our selves of, we must answer for them; and there is none of your
reasons but may be convinced of it; I will give you a plain instance; Suppose
you send your servant to market to buy a commodity you give him money whereby
he may do it, simile
but he goes into an Alehouse or Tavern and drinks it away, he cannot bring you
that you sent him for, but you may justly require it, and punish him for not
doing of it; he may say, what would you have me do that I cannot? I cannot
bring it you without money; yea but the Master may say, I gave you money, it is
your fault you have bezelled it away: So God may justly require of these men
all that they might have done by all the means of grace they should have had,
God gave you that means you have bezelled it away by your sin^.

Again further, When God shall say, Let him alone; his Al means increase his
condemnation
that now all the means of grace are made unprofitable to him, yea cursed to
him, and they are turned to the quite contrary end; For the word will work one
way or other, either to be the savor of life unto life or of death unto death;
and so the Sacrament, either to be the seal of Salvation or the Seal of
damnation. Now all means are not only unprofitable, those means that do other
souls good; It may be the poor child of a wicked parent comes unto the word,
and there he finds God revealing himself unto him; and the Spirit of God
drawing his heart unto himself; but there is his parent of whom God has said,
Let him alone, he sits under the means and gets no good: So perhaps the Master,
he is one upon whom this judgment is past, Let him olone, he sits under the
means and gets nothing, and his poor servant he comes and his soul is
enlightened, his heart is enlarged because this judgment is not upon him.

Oh my brethren, upon this (because the point is of so great consequence I
could not pass by it lightly) you may learn from hence,

First, what poor creatures we are all. God need not say, Let them al^ne, we
are miserable presently, we are lost and undone presently, simile
As in nature, If God should say to any of you as soon as you are born, Let
this creature alone and let none help him, what poor shiftless sucourless
creatures had we been? So for our souls, take one that has the most excellent
gifts in all this Congregation, yea take one that has the most excellent
graces, if God should but say, Let him alone, he would quickly bring himself to
misery; It is through the strength of that grace in the Covenant that God will
never say to those that are members of his Son, Let them alone for ever.

Secondly, Oh let us fear and tremble at this judgment. Especially Word and the
motions of his Spirit; Oh that this day the fear of this great God may fall
upon them, lest God should say, Let them alone! Perhaps God has not said so
yet, but who knows but that upon the next wilful sin thou committest, God may
say concerning thee, Let him alone? and then thou art undon for ever; Oh fear
and tremble.

Perhaps some of you may say, God has surely said this of me already, Caution
I should not be so unprofitable under the means else, I should not hear such
powerful Sermons and get so little good, I should not have such and such
corruptions prevail over me; I am afraid this is pronounced already against me.

I am loath when I speak of this dreadful judgment (which is indeed the most
dreadful in all the Book of God) to let any poor soul go that has need of
comfort without receiving what is due to him.

To answer thee then:

It is a good sign that God has not let thee alone when thou art troubled in
the fear of thy heart lest God should have let thee alone. Commonly those men
that God has left alone they go on and are quiet and are never troubled about
it, but please themselves in their own hearts lusts.

It is a good means to keep thee from being let alone. Those that are afraid
lest God should leave them alone, and upon that can say in the uprightness of
their hearts, Oh I tremble under this judgment, I had rather God should give me
up to all the Cavaliers, to all the Devils in Hell than to my own hearts lusts,
it is a sign that this judgment is not upon thee, and it is a means to keep
it from thee. And,

If thou have yet a heart not to let God alone, God has not a heart to let
th^e alone. So long as thy heart keeps up to God that thou will not let him
alone, (you know it is the Scripture phrase, when Moses was so earnestly
seeking God in prayer, let me alone says God to Moses) though thou find not
God coming to thee as thou desire, thou attendest upon God in the word, and
in reading, and ^^ditation, and all the means thou know, and yet thou do
not find God come, and yet for all this thou art not weary of Gods service and
art resolved thou will not let God alone but if thou perish thou will let it be
thy last breath to be crying unto God and never let him alone, peace be unto
thee, God has not let thee alone so long as this frame of heart does abide in
thee. Those of whom God says, let them alone, usually they begin to be more
sluggish in prayer than before, to break off prayer in their families in their
closets, and then perhaps to fall objecting against it, why, Note
What is there for it to prove such things must be done and the like? and so by
degrees they will come to have no heart unto any holy duty; but if thy heart be
kept in quickness and activity and life to be seeking God and resolving not to
let him alone, surely God will not let thee alone.

Lastly, Ob bless God if thou find that he has not inflicted this Though
perhaps thou have many outward

And let us bless God in regard of the Kingdom. Surely the ways England. God
might have said unto England, England has been joined to Idols, let him alone.
One would have thought that some three years since and a little more that we
were in a condition fit to be let alone, but in this time the Lord has been so
stirring and working for England as it may appear evidently that God will not
let us alone, and blessed be God that he will not let us alone, that he will
scourg and afflict us sorely rather than not purge out our Idols. And that
people, and that soul that had rather have God purge them soundly than let them
go on in any sin, surely God does not let that people and soul alone. It is
true indeed, great chastisements are upon us, but still they al hitherto tend to
our purging, not our ruin, it is because the Lord will not let us alone. It may
be many think it would be better if it were with us now as as it was four years
since, then we had no such noise and rumors of war, there was no such spoiling
and killing as now; what is the English of this but thus much? Oh it was well
with us when we were going on in superstitious and idolatrous ways, going to
Rome as fast as we could, that God might have said then, Let England alone: If
God should have said let them go to Rome, let Idolatry be set up there, this
would have been a greater judgment than all the bloodshed in England at this
day: but in that the Lord is yet striving with us, though we be struggling
against him, let us bless his Name.

Verse 18. Their drink is sour: they have committed whoredom continually: her
Rulers with shame do love, Give ye.


Their drink is sour.] I find some Interpreters carry this word thus, Exposit.
1 faede crapulantur. Luther
as if it noted their excess in drunkeness and luxury, as if they powered down
drink till it sowred in them, and then they vomited it up; So Luther translates
the words, they do most filthily and vildly gormondize drink, and eat and
pamper themselves. I remember Luther upon the place has this note, says he,
Idolaters they love to pamper the flesh, they drink even to vomiting again, but
for the true worshipping of God, that says he, is cut more short in these
outward things, and it is hungry and cold. We find that the false prophets were
pampered at Jezebels table, when poor Micaiah was fain to be fed with bread and
water of affliction. So Luther and diverse other Interpreters carry the word.
But I think there is more in it.

The word that is here translated drink, it carries with it their festival
meeting, Convivium recess^t, that is, (...)
their feasts and their meetings, it is as wine that is sour and has lost the
spirit and savor of it; For drink they understand their drinkings, that is, the
comforts that they have in this world, that these Idolaters do so much satisfy
themselves in, as your superstitious Idolatrous people they always seek to
pamper their bellies and to be sure to have outward comforts: Now says he, all
this is sour. And indeed all the comfort of this world when God is forsaken, it
is but as sour drink, the sweetness and quickness, and life of all is taken
away when God and his worship is forsaken: So you may take their drink by a
Senechdoch, for all the comforts of this world, even al those carnal things they
seek to satisfy their flesh withal, it is all sour, for God is gone when his
worship is gone. Perhaps if you had had superstition and Idolatry set up
amongst you in England, Applic.
you might have had your drink and your wine at your tables more pentifully,
but if God and his Worship had been gone, all had been sour no sweetness in any
thing. I appeal to those that have proved Apostates though they have
apostatized to enjoy comforts to the flesh, how sour and unsavory have the
comforts of the flesh been unto them? whereas let a people keep close to God
and his worship and then their drink if it be but water it will be sweet unto
them; As in Acts 2. the Saints that believed they did eat their bread with
singleness of heart and with gladness. We were wont to say, Brown bread and the
Gospel is good cheer; let us have but bread and water so be it we may have the
Gospel and the Ordinances and the Worship of God, and it will be sweet unto us;
but let us have wine and all manner of drink at our tables, if we have not the
Ordinances and Worship of God, it will be all sour to us. The ten Tribes had as
good drink as Judah had, yet all the drink of the ten Tribes was sour.

Thirdly, Their drink is sour.] it notes thus much, Their C^^vivium their
meetings together for feasting and drinking notes many times communion and
converse and familiarity, as the drinkings of people together you know it is a
means to keep their converse and maintain familiarity one with another. So the
meaning is, that their converse one with another when they met together at one
another tables and were drinking together, what savor, what relish can any
gracious heart take in it? You may observe it of all your superstitious people
that have heretofore lived amongst you, how unsavory have they been in their
converse? Perhaps heretofore they have been forward in the ways of Religion
and then converse with them and there has been some life and quickness in
them, but when they have yielded once unto superstitious vanity, all their
converse is become unsavory. It would have been so with you if these times had
not come, perhaps you might have met together and have had brave cheer and
drinkings of all sorts and have had many merry meetings, but the truth is all
your merry meetings would have been sour and sapless, there would have been no
sweetness in your converse, and those of your brethren that had been gone from
you into the howling wilderness would have found more savor in their water
there than you could have had in all the drinks you could have devised to your
selves.

Their drink is sowr] That is, even all their worship and their sacrifices, for
so their drink is taken by others, for all their drink offerings, they were
wont to have feasts in their sacrif^ces, says God, all their offerings be
sour, the savor, and sap, and life of them is taken away. These are the four
hints by which we may come to understand what the scope of the holy Ghost is in
these words, Their drink is sour. It follows.

They have committed whoredom continually. continually they commit whoredom. Oh
what a shame it is for those that are godly that they should be weary of the
service of God when Idolaters are not weary of the service of their Idols? What
rebuke is this to you that if you come to a Sermon you are weary (perhaps some
of you) if the glass be but out a little; but if you were in company in a
Tavern to sit up al night you are not weary at all? They commit whoredom
continually, they are at the service of their Idols and satisfying of their
lusts never weary there, but they are soon weary of my service.

But I take it there is somewhat further meant, (...)
Fornicantur in furnicando, they commit fornication in committing fornication,
that is the propriety of the word in the Hebrew, that which they do they do it
intensively, in doing they do it. As the Apostle says of Elijahs prayer, Jam.
5. In praying he prayed, that is, he did pray intensively, he prayed strongly,
he prayed powerfully with his whole strength put out in prayer; So the words are
here, in committing fornication they committed fornication, that is, they give
up their strength to their Idols, they are mightily intent upon their Idols.
And therefore have nothing to do with them (still the argument goes on) Have
nothing to do with them for fear that fearful judgment

Their Rulers with shame do love, Give ye. The word that is translated Rulers,
it is (...) her shields, that is, their protectors, so the word in the Hebrew
s^gnifies. And there is a very special note to be learned from hence, it is
this, That Magistrates and Rulers they should be the shields of the people
where they live, for their defense; Obser.
And so in Scripture phrase they are called, Psalm, 47.9. The Princes of the
people are gathered together, the shields of the earth belong unto God; That
is, the Governors and Rulers of the earth (so I find Interpreters carry it)
they belong unto God: Psa. 47.9. Opened
they are in Gods stead, and they govern in Gods Name. Rulers, Governors are to
be the shields of the people, for they are to bear off al dangers; Al dangers
that may come upon the people they are to be willing to put themselves forward
to bear them off. Applic. The Parliament.
Have not our Worthies in Parliament shown themselves to be shields in this
thing? Have not they put themselves next us and our dangers, next us and our
harms? And do you not think if the Adversary prevail they will first swallow up
them, I mean those of them that are faithful? Whereas those that were before in
Parliament when they looked upon it as an honor to be Parliament men and there
was no danger, Oh they were brave Parliament men then, and they made brave
speeches, but when they saw things come to be hot and that there were darts
shot against the people, and that they must be the shields to keep off the hurt
of those darts from the people, away they go; they love to be brave golden
shields, enameled shields fit for no service, but when it came to service away
they go. We are therefore to honor these that still stay, and though they are
not perhaps so brave and gilded as those, yet they are proved to be shields of
good metal that will not break, but will keep off the darts that are shot
against the people. And indeed Rulers and Governors should be men of good
metal, willing to bear off much hardship from the people; And they should not
think to be honored only but they should take their honor as a burden also.

They say with shame, give ye. They love this, so it is in your books: And I
find that it is turned by some, they love to bring shame, they love not to say,
bring ye, but they love to b^ing shame; (...)
and if you should translate it thus it is, the words in the Hebrew only
altering the points of them, and so they may be read, they love to bring shame,
that is, they being of vile spirits themselves they do not care what becomes of
the people, they care not for putting the people upon any shameful ways, what
care they so they may have their ends, let them perish as dogs and let them do
that which shall be a perpetual reproach to them to all posterity, so they may
have their lusts satisfied.

Secondly, Others translate them thus; with shame they call, bring ye, that is,
with shame they call for pleasure to the flesh, Arias Montan.
so Ari^s Montanus, Let us have our pleasure, our tables furnished, let us have
our honors and what care we what becomes of the people, let us have our minds,
do you our service what we would have done, and what becomes of them it is no
matter. Such kind of Rulers and Governors had the ten Tribes when they were
such Idolaters; And it is just with God when people forsake the true worship of
God that he should send them such Governors as these are.

But I rather take the scope of the Spirit of God to be according They love
with shame to say, Give ye. They will not only take liberty privately but they
are grown so impudent that they will sell all the good of a Kingdom, the liberty
of the Subject all for their own gain. They say with shame, gi^e ye. It is a
great judgment of God upon a people when Magistrates and Governors are given to
bribery, to regard gift and the increase of their estates more than the public
good. Pro. 17.23 A wicked man takes a gift out of the bosom to pervert the
ways of judgment. It is a sign of a wicked man to take a gift though it be but
secretly, out of the bosom, but if he take it openly it is a sign of more
impudence. A wicked man takes a gift out of ^he bosom, he is loath to be seen at
first, and he does it to pervert judgment; these men that should be as shields
to the people, for b^se ends they will betray them. What, to subject such a
glorious thing as Justice to base end; Justice which is the glory of God, the
glory of a Kingdom, and the glory of a man, which he should be clothed with as
a robe, as a diadem, to subject it to base ends, for gain, to say, Give ye,
this is abominable. Justice stricken dumb with the apearance of angels.
For a Justice of peace to be stricken dumb with the appearance of Angels, Oh
it is an evil thing: For Jus^ices to be bound to the peace by a gift in a
basket, this is a most abominable thing. Exodus 33.8. A gift blinds the eyes
of the wise and perverteth the words of the righteous. Though men are of
excellent parts, men of understanding, that can speak exceeding well, yea
though they seemd heretofore very honest men and just in their ways, yet when
they come to high places a gift will blind their eyes, or as some turn it,
pluck out their eyes, irradiate their eyes that they cannot see. Gregor. Naz.
in distichis.
Au^o loquente, iners omnis oration, says an Ancient, Let gold be speaking in
the language of gold, and other speeches are to little purpose. Therefore
Magistrates of all men should be without covetousness, fearing the Lord. When
God would have Magistrates chose, this is one character of them, That they
should be men fearing God, and hating covetousness. In 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7. Take
heed what you do, for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord; wherefore let the
fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do it, for there is no iniquity
with the Lord, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts. Justice must run
down as a river, it must not be pal'd in as a pond for private advantages.
Magistrates they must shake their hands from bribery, and despise the gain of
oppressors Isa. 33.15. simile
As we read of Paul that when a Viper came upon his hand he shook his hand and
the Viper fell into the fire: So should Magistrates do, when any one brings
them gifts to pervert Justice, they should look upon it as as a Viper and shake
their hands of it and let it even fall into the fire, and say as Peter to Simon
Magus, Thy money perish with thee: They should look upon such as bring them
gifts with indignation, and even say, thy money perish with thee in this wicked
enterprise. Cecero Epist. ad Quint. frat
Even Cicero an Heathen in his Epistle to Quintus his Brother, a Magistrate in
Asia, he has this expression, That he should not only show himself an enemy
unto them that received gifts, but to them that gave them, he should account
them his enemies. And Isa. 5.23. Woe to him that justifies the wicked for
reward, and takes away the righteousness of the righteous from him. Many
righteous men come before you, some of you, and their cause is true and good,
but you will be speaking bitterly against them to give content to others from
whom you expect a reward. Deuteronomy. 27.25. There shall be a curse pronounced
against such as take gifts, and all the people shall say Amen. If any
Magistrate should love to take gifts in this kind, the curse of the people is
upon him, and God requires that all the people should say Amen. Law of the 12.
Tables
And I have read of the Romans that if it could be proved against any
Magistrate that he had taken bribes, he was to be punished with death, without
any deliverance. And Psalm, 15. in answer to that question, Who shall dwell
with God in his tabernacle? it is said, he that takes not a reward against the
innocent. If you would ever dwell with God either here in his Church or in
Heaven hereafter, you must not take bribes against the innocent. I have read of
that Saint which you call St. Edmond, in his life, That he was wont to have
this speech, There is little difference between these two words, to Take, and
to Hang, the words are even the same in the Latin, Prendere and pendere
signifying thereby, that those that would take gifts showed what their desert
is. Prove. 15.27. He that is greedy of gain troubles his own house; but he that
hates gifts shall live. It is not enough for a Magistrate not to take gifts,
but he must hate gifts, for the other troubles his own house, though perhaps
you may think to provide for your house by gifts.

Verse 19. The wind has bound her up in her wings, and they shall be ashamed
because of their sacrifices.


The word that is here translated Wind, (...)
it signifies also a Spirit, Hierom.
and so I find Hierom takes the meaning of the words to be, that the evil
spirit hurries them up and down and carries Deuteronomy. 32.11. God is said to carry
his people upon his wings; so the Devil here carries Idolaters who are set
upon their wicked ways, as it were upon his wings, in a violent hurrying
manner.

But rather we are to take the expression Metaphorically to signify the power,
the suddenness, the violence, the swiftness of Gods judgments, carrying them
into captivity and into misery. The wind has bound the people of Israel, the
ten Tribes up in her wings, that is, the judgments of the Lord shall come upon
them with power, suddenly, swiftly, vio^ently and take them away from their own
Country and carry them into captivity and misery. The power and violence of
the judgments of God are set out in Scripture by the wind, by storms and
tempests often times. There is a mighty power of the wind, 1 King. 19.11. A
strong wind that rent the mountains and t^re in pieces the rocks. Job. 38.9.
That overturneth the mountains by the roots. The winds are the voice of the
Lord, that breaks the Cedars, even the Cedars of Lebanon, and shakes the
wilderness Psalm. 29. Sabelicus Sabelicus.
tells us that Camtyses his soldiers being in a wilderness, in a sandy
place, suddenly a violent wind came and drove the sand with such force as that
thousands of them were buried in it. There is a great deal of strength and
power in winds. And here by the way we may have hinted unto us a very
profitable meditation. Oh how great is the glory and the power of the infinite
God then! Obser.
For the wind what is it but a vapor? and what more weak than a vapor? We use
to say, what is weaker than water? but many drops together will make the waters
terrible, and the Seas are called the mighty waters; But vapor is weaker than
the water, and yet the winds are nothing but a company of vapors joined
together, and many being joined together what a mighty power have they to re^d
the rocks and turn up the mountains by the roots? Oh then what is the power of
the Mighty God? for in him there is nothing but infinite, and nothing can be
added unto him. If a weak vapor being multiplied have such strength, what
power then is there in God that has nothing in him but infinite, so as nothing
can be added to him.

The wind is of great power and so is the judgments of God. The observation
from it shall be this, Obser.
That the judgments of God toward wicked men who have been spared a long time,
when they come they come swiftly, and violently, and suddenly, carries them as
it were in a Hurry-cane.

And they shall be ashamed of their sacrifices. So long as they prospered in
the way of false worship they were not ashamed, but they gloried in their way,
and the ten Tribes, Israel, rather despised Judah, and sought to cast shame
upon Judah who worshipped God in a right way, as appears plainly Amos, 7.12.
Go to Judah (says Amaziah there to Amos in a scorning way,) go your ways
thither, and prophecy there. They scorned and contemned Judah and gloried in
their own way of false worship. Obser.
Such as are superstitious and Idolatrous they use to look upon Gods Ordinances
as vile and contemtible, and their own inventions as the most glorious things;
But God has a time to honor his Ordinances and to cast shame upon their
sacrifices. That is the Note. The true worship of God is many times in such a
low esteem amongst men as that they that go th^^ way are exceedingly vilified,
and many are kept off from the ways of God because they cannot bear the shame
of it, there is so much shame cast upon it, none but a company of mean, poor,
unwise people that take such a course: But God has a time to honor his
Ordinances, to set up the beauty of them before all the world, and to cast
shame and dirt upon all ways of superstition and idolatry, They shall be
ashamed of their sacrifices; a time to make even those that did glory most in
them to be ashamed of them. Isa. 2.20, 21. They shall cast their Idols of
silver and of gold, which they have made each for himself to worship, to the
moles and to the bats, to go into the clefts of the rocks, and into the tops of
the ragged rocks. And Isa. 30.22. They shall defile the covering of their
graven Images of silver, and the ornaments of their Images of gold, they shall
cast them away as a menstruous cloth, and they shall say unto it, Get thee
hence. They thought they were curious ornaments, but the time shall come when
God shall make Idolaters see them to be filthy clothes, and cause them to cast
them away with indignation and say, Get ye hence. That place in Esa. 66, 5.
Isa. 66.5. opened
is notable to this purpose. You that tremble at my word (says God) your
brethren that cast you out said, let God be glorified; but he shall appear to
your joy, and they shall be ashamed There are a company of you that tremble at
my Word, and dare not do any thing in my Worship but what my Word requires;
others have more loose consciences and they can venture upon things that they
have no warrant for in my Word, but you tremble at my Word, and you are scorned
for nice scrupulous consciences, and your brethen cast you out because you will
not be of the same judgment as they are, because your hearts, your consciences
are more tender they cast you out from them, they would willingly be rid of you
and think it would be better with the land when you are gone, and they say, Let
the Lord be glorified, they have pretenses that they desire nothing but the
peace of the Church and the glory of God; they say, even your brethren that
cast you out, they say, Let the Lord be glorified, but God shall appear for
your glory, and for their shame, the Lord will honor you in that way of his
Worship that you take up which is according to his Word, though you suffer for
the present much ignominy and contempt for it, and though they may ruff it out
for a while and seem to carry al before them having that which is countenanced
more publicly, but the Lord will appear at length to their shame, the Lord
will make them ashamed of their sacrifices.

Causes of shame.
There are four things that principally cause shame.

Disrespect from those we desire honor from, that is shame: When one comes to
any, to a superior, and expects respect from him, and finds that he is cast
out, this is a great shame. So they shall be ashamed of their sacrifices, they
make account that I should honor their sacrifices, that they should have honor
from me by reason of their sacrifices, but I will cast shame upon them, they
shall have nothing but arguments of disrespect from me. In 1 King. 2.16. when
Bathsheba came to Solomon to ask a Petition of him, deny me not says she; the
old Latin has it, Ne confundas faciem meam: do not confound my face, do not
make me ashamed, and the Hebrew is, Ne avertere faciem meam, do not cause my
face to be turned, that is, do not make me ashamed by giving me such disrespect
when I expect such honor from thee. When God does cast off the sacrifices of
men and shows disrespect unto them, that causes shame, it does confound or
should confound their faces.

Secondly, When a man takes a great deal of pains and it comes that causes
shame; and so all superstitious ways will bring shame at last. In Colos. 2. it
is said of all superstitious ceremonies that they perish in the use of them,
there comes no good of them. Idolaters take a great deal of paint in their
ways of false worship, but all will come to nothing; when they shall stand in
most need all their ways of superstition and Idolatry will leave them
shiftless and succourless, and helpless, and so cast shame upon them.

Thirdly, Disappointment of hope brings shame. Psalm. 119.116. Let me not be
ashamed of my hope says David, If I hope for good and be disappointed, this
will bring shame. Diverse Scriptures we have to show this. So when those that
are superstitious and Idolatrous shall raise up their hearts with great
expectation of good from God in their ways of false worship and shall be
disappointed of all their hope, in this God will cast shame upon them.

Fourthly, When God discovers that to be worthless and vile that causes shame.
So Idolaters that glory in their Idolatrous ways, the Lord in time will
discover them to be base and vile and worthless things, for indeed they are all
but poor apish and beggarlie things, and they ate fitter to please children
than God. God will discover this.

If it be objected, Oh but they seem not to be such poor and weak things, they
seem to be more glorious and pompous a great deal than the ways of the true
worshipers of God; The true worship of God in it self seems to be a poor and
mean thing?

The answer is, That the institution puts a glory upon the ways of worship;
now they not having an institution upon them they are looked upon as apish and
foolish and beggarlie things. And then a word of promise and an engagement of
Gods presence in his Ordinances puts an honor upon them which the ways of
superstition have not.

Use. Admonitions to the defiled with superstitious worship to take shame to
themselves.
It is good for those who have been guilty in this kind of superstitious ways
of worship, even to prevent God by casting shame upon themselves; for if they
do not, God will cast shame upon them, he will make them to be ashamed. That is
our best way, to come in and to prevent God and to lie down in our shame, to
take shame unto our own souls and to lie down therein. God knows how we have
defiled our selves, even all of us, in ways of superstitious worship; and the
truth is, God is casting shame upon all those ways at this day, and does cast
shame upon them. Happy are those that before these times did take shame to
their own souls for all their defilements in the ways of false worship.
Howsoever, before God does yet further force it upon us it will be our wisdom
to take shame to ourselves. Ezekiel. 43.11. that text is a famous text for this
purpose, first in the tenth verse, Show them the bouse that they may be
ashamed, show them the true way of my worship that they may be ashamed. The
truth is, if we did but understand the beauty, the excellency, the true beauty
of holiness in the ways of Gods Ordinances, in the purity and simplicity of
the Gospel, that were enough to make us ashamed if there were nothing else, we
would even be very vile in our own eyes to think that while our hearts have
been taken up about such vain and vile ways of false worship, that such
glorious Ordinances of God, that beauty of holiness that is in his Ordinances
has been neglected by us; show them the way of my house that they may be
ashamed; But further, in the 11. verse. If they be ashamed of all that they have
done, show them the form of the house, and the fashion thereof, and the goings
out thereof, and the comings in thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the
Ordinances thereof, and all the forms thereof, (again) and all the Laws
thereof, and write it in their sight, that they may keep the whole form there^f,
and all the Ordinances thereof and do them. First show them my house, Ezekiel.
33.10, 11. opened
Let them have some kind of knowledge of my ways and Ordinances in the general,
perhaps that will make them ashamed: And at this day we know though there be
but a little light let out unto us, to show us a little more of the ways of
Gods worship than we saw before, we do begin to be ashamed of what we have
done: Note
But now if indeed we be thoroughly ashamed before God of all our false ways of
worship, of all our sacrifices, then mark what a promise here is, then says
the text, if they be ashamed of what they have done, then show them the forms
of the house, and the fashion of the house etc. Note
Thus here is one word heaped upon another to show, that this is the mercy of
God to people when they understand not only the way of Gods worship in the
lump, but they understand the form, and the fashion, and the Ordinances, and
the Laws, the circumstances and all the several ways, the exactness of the
worship of God. Note
For we must not look upon any thing in the worship of God as worthy to be
neglected, but we must have respect to all the forms, and fashions, and
Ordinances of Gods house, God stands much upon his worship in every
punctilio; and it is a great mercy of God to reveal to us every point of his
worship. It is true, man stands much upon form, and God stands much upon
form; Many deny the power of godliness, but keep the form of it, they are much
set upon their forms, and God is much set upon his forms. If you be set upon
form for worship, look upon Gods worship he is much set upon forms in his
wo^ship. And mark, then when we are ashamed of what we have done, then we shall
understand the Laws of the house; but first we must be ashamed and thoroughly
humbled for our former superstitious sacrifices, and then we shall come to
understand the right way of Gods worship in his own Temple, we must not expect
it before. Many people they cry out we are at a loss, we know not what to do,
we have rejected indeed false worship and in some measure we see that that is
vile, but we know not what way to set up in Gods house, what are the forms and
fashions thereof; and the hearts of people tremble to think what may come to be
determined, fearing lest things will not be found out, fearing dissentions and
disagreement. Would you but know how you should come to understand the right
way of Gods house in the worship and government of it? Be ashamed of your
sacrifices, be ashamed of what you have done.

And above all men those that are betrusted to find out the Laws, Ministers
and forms, and fashions, and Ordinances of Gods house, above all men they are
to be ashamed of what they have done, to be ashamed first of their sacrifices.
And that should be your prayer, that God would humble them for all their former
superstitious sacrifices that so they may come to have revealed to them the
form and fashion of Gods house, and being revealed to them they may reveal it
to you. There is a necessity that those men that have been guilty of
superstitious ways of worship, that they should be ashamed first of that
before they can come to understand the right way of the house of God; Let them
be men of never such excellent parts and abilities, Note.
yet except they be first ashamed for what they have done and thoroughly
humbled, they cannot expect to understand the ways of Gods house in the forms
and fashions and ordinances of it. In Ezekiel. 44.10, 11, 12, 13. there God
threatens those Priests that did depart from him when Israel dedarted, that
did depart from him to false worship, that they should bear their iniquity,
that they should never come near to him; seeing they departed in the general
departure and did not keep close to the true worship of God, they must bear
their iniquity, they must not come near unto God; only God would be content
they should be employed in some meaner out-services: Applic.
And therefore it may be that God will not use some men of choice parts in any
great work of his, to do him any great service, that is the meaning of the text,
that those that did depart from God when there was a general departure of the
Nation, when Israel did depart they would comply with them to save their skin,
and they would conform to those superstitious ways, then did the Lord swear,
lift up his hand against them, that though they shall be employed in some
meaner services, yet they shall not come near him. And (I say) it man be feared
that the Lord may do so against some of us. How ever except there be
extraordinary repentance and taking shame unto themselves; though they may be
men of excellent parts, the Lord may remember what they have done when Israel
departed from God, what their compliances were; And though the Lord may make
still use of them in some ordinary work, yet he may lift up his hand against
them, that they shall never be employed never blessed in any choice work he has
to do: God may justly leave them to such ways as that they shall cast
themselves in a great measure out of the hearts of the Saints because he does
not delight to use them in any special service and so their shame shall stick
upon them while they live; and the more honor they seek the more shame will God
certainly cast upon them. Jer. 3.25. says the Church there, We lie down in our
shame: Oh there is cause that such men should lie down in their shame, those
that are of discerning spirits, and observe the ways of men and the ways of
God, they cannot but see that those men should lie down in their shame, for so
long as yiedling to superstitious vanities and submission to false power was
useful to them to save their estates, their liberties and livings, they would
yield and they would submit, and then their judgments alter when times alter,
when other ways come to be countenanced publicly then they are of other
judgments than they were before: so long as they could not make use of another
way they were not of that judgment; now when they can make use of it, and there
is more countenancing of it, how soon is their judgment altered? yea and so
altered as presently to grow even bitter against their brethren of another
judgment. Note
Surely a great deal more cause there is that they and we, all of us, should
take shame to our selves, lie down in our shame a while and so carry things in
all humility in all meekness, in suspicion of our selves and of our own
judgments in love to our brethren, remembering that we our selves were of
another judgment and opinion not long since; And therefore our hearts (I say)
should be very low and gentle and very tender and meek even toward all with
whom we have to do.

And further, God has a time to make al carnal men ashamed of their
sacrifices. We will a little raise up our meditations somewhat higher, from
this, They shall be ashamed of their sacrifices. All sacrifices, not only
supersti^^ous and idolatrous but all other sacrifices that come short of the
rule will at length cause shame. As carnal men that tender up many services
unto God, and that lay such weight upon their services, as to lay their claim
to Heaven and interest in God upon their sacrifices, God has a time to make
them ashamed of all these sacrifices. Al now, when God shall discover the vanity
of their prayers, if God should but show to us al and to the whole company here,
each others hearts in time of prayer, when we have been offering up that
sacrifice unto God, and we have seemed to be very devout in our prayers, yet Oh
the vanity of our hearts, Oh the vile thoughts, unclean, wicked, ungodly,
foolish thoughts that have run up and down thorough our hearts in the time of
our prayers! If God should write our prayers before us and interline our
prayers with all our vain thoughts, and then bid us read our prayers, and bid
others read our prayers interlined with such vain thoughts, would we not be
ashamed of our sacrifices? the best sacrifice that ever we tenderd up to God in all our life we would be ashamed of it. God has a time (except al be pardoned
in Christ and covered in him) to make men that lay such weight upon their
prayers, to show them such an ugly form and fashion of them, as to make them
ashamed of them.



only by actual sin mixed with them, by base thoughts and ends, but our
services have come from unclean hearts, we have had very filthy and unclean
hearts, our hearts have been as sties and sinks of evil, and it is impossible
that out of such unclean hearts there can come any thing that is clean; our
sacrifices have been extremely defiled by our filthy base and worldly hearts.
And then when God shall show the infinite holiness of his Majesty and how
infinite just and righteous he is, and how infinitely worthy of other manner of
sacrifices than ever we have tendered up unto him, Oh then how shall we be
ashamed!

How will our hearts be overwhelmed with confusion and shame,

You will say then, What are those sacrifices we should tender up unto God that
we shall never be ashamed of? God will make superstitious people ashamed of
their sacrifices, and all carnal people shall one day be ashamed of their
sacrifices, this will be a dreadful thing one day when it comes; Oh then what
are those sacrifices the Saints of God shall never be ashamed of?

First, If you would offer such sacrifices unto God as you Be sure they be his
own, worship God in his own way; It is not what you think will please God what
you think is brave and excellent, but look to the word, be sure it is his own.



sursum Corda, then lift up your hearts indeed, be sure then your ends be high
and holy.



Romans 12.1. I beseech you by the mercies of God that you offer up your bodies a
living sacrifice unto God. God cares for none of your sacrifices except you
offer your selves to be a sacrifice unto him. That is a very observable place
in 1 King. 8. the latter end of it, there you shall find that Solomon offered
two and twenty thousand Oxen and one hundred and twenty thousand Sheep, here
was a great sacrifice to be offered at one time unto God, but mark, (though
this sacrifice was great) what God says unto him in the 9. chapter presently
so soon as the sacrifice was done, verse 4. If thou will walk before me as
David thy father did to do according unto all that I command thee, and wilt
keep my statutes and my judgments etc. God puts it to an If for all this, for
all these sacrifices If thou thy self in the constant obedience of thy life
wilt be a constant sacrifice, then will I do thus and thus, but verse 6. If
thou at all turn from following me, if notwithstanding all these sacrifices
thou at all turn from following of me, I will do thus and thus. Many of us
think when we have been in a day of fasting and spent a whole day in it, and our
hearts have been let out and we have been enlarged and have offered up a great
sacrifice to God, that we may take the more liberty afterward; No, though you
offer twenty two thousand Oxen and an hundred and twenty thousand sheep yet if
after this at all thou shall forsake me, all that thou have done shall be
rejected. Therefore those sacrifices that are not joined with offering up of
our selves as a sacrifice, are such as God will make us ashamed of; But if
together with our sacrifices we offer up our selves as a sacrifice, you shall
never be ashamed of that sacrifice. Therefore you that are poor people and weak
parted, and have but little grace, yet if you have true grace, though you
cannot offer up such large prayers, your heart is not so enlarged perhaps as
others are, and you look upon your sacrifices as poor and mean and as unworthy
to be tendered up unto the great God, but do thou then offer up thy self unto
God as a sacrifice? It is true my parts are weak and my abilities are poor and
mean, but Oh Lord what I am and what I can do I tender it unto thee, here Lord,
take soul, body, life, estate, liberty and all I do enjoy, I tender it up all
unto thee as a sacrifice; I say then peace be unto thee, those sacrifices thou
look upon as being ashamed of them, God will not make thee ashamed of them,
but he accepts of thy poor, mean, and weak services when together with them
thou offerest up thy self as a sacrifice unto him; whereas if thou did not
tender up thy self as a sacrifice, though thy services were ten thousand times
more glorious than they are, they would be all cast back as dung in thy face.

Sixthly, Be humbled after all your best sacrifices, take no have done the best
duty that ever you have done in your life; when you perform any duty that seems
to have any excellency in it, and perhaps others look upon it as having much
excellency in it, if your hearts be puffed up with it, the glory of it is gone,
and it is that which you must be ashamed of though

Lastly, Tender up all in Christ, in the worthiness of his infinite sacrifice.
Christ is that sacrifice that is pleasing unto God, and all sacrifices are
pleasing unto God only thorough the merit and worthiness of the sacrifice of
the Lord Jesus Christ, who has tendered up himself unto God the Father as a
Sacrifice to heal all our sacrifices and to take away all the shame of our
sacrifices. 1 Pet. 2.5. Ye also as lively stones are built up a spiritual
house, an holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices, how? by Jesus
Christ. Mark, you are as lively stones, and lively stones built up, not only
stones lying here one and there another, but lively stones built up in a holy
communion, that is the meaning, built up to offer sacrifices, and that
spiritual sacrifices: But mark, though our sacrifices be never so spiritual,
yet they cannot be acceptable to God but by Jesus Christ, by Jesus Christ that
great Sacrifice they come to be acceptable unto God, that is the sacrifice the
Saints shall glory in and bless God for to all eternity, and never shall be
ashamed of their sacrifices when they are tendered up unto God thorough the
merit of that sacrifice. And thus through Gods good hand of providence we are
come to the end of this fourth Chapter.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 1. Hear ye this, O Priests; and hearken ye house of Israel, and give ear
Oh house of the King, for judgment is toward you, because ye have been a snare
in Mispah, and a net spread upon Tabor.


IN this Chapter we have the summoning of all sorts unto judgment. The sum of
the Chapter
A heavy charge laid and condemnation pronounced against Israel, and Judah too
brought in as guilty and sentence past upon her also; And at last the good
effect that the judgments of God should produce is showed. That is the sum of
the Chapter.

This Chapter is the beginning of another Sermon of Hosea. Coherence
It seems to be preached (as some think) in the reign of Pekah son of Remaliah
king of Israel, that you read of in 2 King. 15. The time
and especially toward the end of his reign, which was the same time that Ahaz
reigned in Judah, when that horrible confusion was brought into Religion, much
defilement in the Worship of God, he having placed the Altar that he brought
the fashion of from Damascus in the house of God; therefore the Lord enveigheth
by his Prophet not only against Israel, but against Judah here.

The summons to judgment you have in the first verse. The accusation and
condemnation of Israel by themselves, Analysis
to the end of the 5. verse. The accusation of Judah, at the end of the 5th and
6th verses. Then Israel and Judah together, to the 15th verse. And at last the
close of the Chapter shows the issue of all, what all shall come to.

Sumo^ns
In the summons observe these three several words.

Hear ye. Hearken. Give ear. Hear ye Priests. Hearken ye house of Israel. Give
ear O house of the King.
Obser.
When God comes in ways of judgment he expects we should seriously mind what
he is a doing. We should not only Hear, but Hearken, and Give ear: God will
force audience Hear ye, Hearken, Give ear, for judgment is against you all.

There are Three sorts named here.

Priests. People. House of the King.
All sorts are cited to judgment, for corruption was gone over all, and
judgment comes against them all. From thence the Note is, That Obser.
Generality in sins is no means to escape judgments.

It is true, Generality of offenses with men may be a means to escape
punishment; One and all with men is a word of security. When Soldiers offend
if there be multitudes of them in the same offense and they cry, One and al,
there is no meddling then with any of them. But it is not so with God, God
regards not multitudes and generality of all sorts, when all sorts are involved
in the offense. Men think, I do but as others do, and I shall escape as well as
others: With men it is somewhat, but it is nothing with God; though all sorts
offend yet there is never a whit the more security thereby unto any. We have a
notable Scripture for that, Nah. 1.12. Though they be quiet, and likewise many,
yet thus shall they be cut down when he shall pass through. Though they be many,
yes thus shall they be cut down.

He begins here with the Priests, Hear O ye Priests.] They were the principal
cause of all the evil; first of the evil of sin, and then of the evil of
punishment, and therefore he begineth with them. They are called Priests, not
that they were true Priests, for they were not of the tribe of Levi, Observe
Priests.
but they were so reputed to be. The Priests have usually been the causes of
all the wickedness in, and judgments on a Nation. Jer. 23.15. Profaneness is
gone throughout the Land, from the Prophet and the Priests. Multitude of
Scriptures are evident before us that lays the evil of Nations upon Priests.
And has it not been so with us? and is it not so at this day? Applic.
There was never a more filthy sink of scandalous superstitious Priests in a
Kingdom than of late amongst us, as has begun and will yet further appear unto
you. There has been an accusation against our Parliament, that orthodox,
grave, godly Divines have been put out of their livings; See the first Century
of malignant Ministers ejected
I suppose you begin to see what those grave, orthodox, godly Divines were that
were put out, under evident and plain proofs it is made known to the world to
the satisfaction of them, and you have but the beginning of it, you will have a
great deal more afterward. Hear ye Priests:

And hearken ye house of Israel] that is the next. Exposit.
The house of Israel, by that is meant the common people. Priests first, the
house of Israel next, and the house of the King, that is last. And the house of
Israel is set between the Priests and the house of the King upon this ground,
because by these two, by the corruption of the Priests and the house of the
King all was swaied: the cause of the evil of the people came from them both,
partly from the Priests and partly from the house of the King: It came both
ways to the people and between them both the people were undone. Obser.
Let these two join in any sinful way in a Kingdom, the Priests and the house
of the King, let them join and set up what they will in worship, the people will
go that way they go. If but one of them be right there is a great deal of hope
of much good, but woe to a people when both of them are corrupt, when both
Priests and the house of the King too are corrupt. If the house of the King
should be corrupt, yet if the Priests and so the Ministers, if they kept up the
truth and vigor and life of Religion, things would go reasonably well in a
Kingdom, though Religion might be persecuted yet the life of it would not be
taken away. Whatsoever Laws Magistrates did enact against the ways of God
except Ministers be brought to comply those Laws will not be brought to prevail
with the consciences of people, nor with their practices. Jeroboam and the
other Princes saw it was in vain for them to think to prevail with the people
except they could get the Priests to be for them, therefore it was the great
de^^gn of Jeroboam to get the Priests of his side, which he easily did, for all
preferment came by him, he raised whom he would, and then because that their
means and preferment lay upon him they would join with him in what way he went.



Oh house of Israel; notwithstanding the Priests and the house of the King have
done thus and thus, yet you are not to be excused. A great many reasons may be
given why the people may not be excused though they be commanded thus and thus.
Arias Montan.
I remember Arias Montanus upon this Scripture, gives this reason why men are
not to be excused though they be commanded by the King; Kings.
for he lays down this for a rule, That no King can make any Law but by the
people, they cannot says he make Laws by themselves alone, the people must
consent to them some way or other; therefore the people are involved in all the
wicked Laws in a Kindom: It is not enough therefore for you to say such and
such Laws are made and we cannot help it; we are to know it is not merely the
will of a King that is a Law to a Kingdom, but Laws enacted is, where people
have their hands one way or other in them. This answer he gives, and he quoteth
an Heathen to show that people must have their hand in the Laws that are made,
especially some people, for some Kingdoms are otherwise governed than others;
Not alike Absolute as some in Scripture.
therefore there is no reason for people to say, in the Scripture such Kingdoms
did so and so: We know in one Country the Kings authority reaches so far, and
in another so far; in one Country Kindoms are by Election, in another by
Inheritance; in one Country the female inherits, in another none but the male,
therefore the power of Kings and their limits is not what has been heretofore
in such and such a place, but what is the constitution of that Kingdom of which
he is King, for many are limited in their power in one Country more than in
another; Therefore the people are not to be excused because of their evil
especially in these times.

Now this shows evidently that God would have every one examine what is
taught him and what is commanded him by his superiors. It is clear from hence;
The people art here cited to judgment, and placed between the Priests and the
Kings house, though the Priests taught them superstitious ways, though the
Kings house commanded them, yet they must be judged, then I say it is clear
that God would have every one examine what is taught him and commanded him by
his superiors, and himself to know the rule of his own actions. It is no
answer for God, to say I am taught thus, or I am commanded thus, you must know
the rule of your own actions your selves, for you your selves must give an
account unto God.

But you may say, Shall it be left to every one to judge of the truth of what
is taught, and of the lawfulness of what is commanded? If every one shall judge
of what he thinks in his conscience lawful, what order can there be?

For answer unto that, for we must answer unto God for our actions, therefore
we must know the rule of our actions; therefore, First, let the inconveniency
be what it will, the truth so far as it concerns his own act, he cannot judge so
far as it concerns the Magistrates act what is fit for the Magistrate to
command, Note
nor the Ministers act what is fit for him to teach, but he may and he ought to
judge so far as it concerns his own act; what I am to do so far as I must
answer before God, I must judge it so, but if I be taught and commanded by
authority one thing and I judge another, I go upon mine own peril, that is, if I
do not judge right I sin against God and incur punishment from God and I must
run the hazard; but to judge that which must be the rule of my act, that is a
certain truth belonging unto every man.

Give ear ye house of the King.] And there is put an Ob unto this besides the
other, Give ear Oh house of the King, for though it comes in last yet that is
the principal indeed, for what can superstitious and Idolatrous Priests do?
what hurt? except they be countenanced by the house of the King; Give ear
therefore, Oh house of the King.

Oh house] that is, the King himself with, all his Courtiers: Kings and Princes
must have sin charged upon them and be made to know that they are under the
threats of God as well as any. Obser.


For judgment is against you.] Mark it, he does not put all this evil upon ill
Counselors that got into the house of the King, but he puts it directly upon
the house of the King it self. Ill Princes may be as great a cause why there
are ill Counselors, Note.
as ill Counselors why there are ill Princes. Ill Counselors usually see what
the design of a Prince is, and what is suitable to his disposition, and they
blow up, nourish and help that with their evil counsel. But were it that the
design of Princes and their dispositions were right they might have Counselors
about them to further that which is right too. Certainly it is no excuse for
Princes to cherish flatterers and wicked ones about them, and then to say they
were advised to such a way; For if the teaching of the Priests, and the
co^m^nds of Princes do not excuse people but they must see a rule for what they
do, then Counselors about Princes connot excuse them, but they ought to see
the rule for what they do too. It is the unhappiness of Princes to have none
about them to charge them personally with their sins, I mean in the Name of
God, to show them the evil and the danger of their sins. It was wont to be said
(as heretofore I have told you) Da Ambrosios and plur. habebimus Theodosios.
Let us have Ambroses and we shall have Theodosius's, because of his freedom of
spirit with that Emperor; And besides to another Emperor, Valentinian, says
he, Noli te extollere Imperator, si vis diutius imparare, esto Deo subditus. Do
not lift up thy self Oh Emperor, if you will be Emperor longer, if you will
reign longer, be willing to be subject unto God. And we know with what freedom
of spirit the Prophets in former times spoke even to Kings houses. You know
that of Samuel, 1. Sam. 12. ult. If you do wickedly you shall perish both ye
and your King; So Elijah to Ahab, Thou art he that troublest Israel: So Elisha
to Jehoram, 2 King. 3.13, 14. What have I to do with thee? (and yet Jehoram
came to the Prophet in an humble way) what have I to do with thee, Get thee to
the Prophets of thy father, And were it not that I regard the presence of
Jehosaphat the King of Judah, I would not look toward thee nor see thee. This
he said to a great King. Great liberty have others had in the Primitive times
to speak thus unto Princes; And a great cause of the evil of these latter days
has been the flatteries of those that have been at Court, therefore says the
Prophet here, Hear ye Oh house of the King. Kings are great indeed above other
men, but what are they before the great God? Psalm. 76.12. He shall cut off the
spirit of Princes, he is terrible to the Kings of the earth. Psalm. 105.12. When
they were but few in number, yea very few and strangers in the land, when they
went from one Nation to another, from one Kingdom to another people, he
suffered no man to do them wrong, yea, he reproved Kings for their sakes; He
reproved Kings for the sake of his own people when they were but few in number
and went wandering from one Nation to another, and said, Touch not mine
anointed, that is, touch nor my Saints. He gave Kings warning that they should
take heed how they did so much as Tou^h his Church, touch his own people; Gods
people are there called his Anointed, and it is said unto Kings that they
should not touch his anointed that were so few and wandered up and down from
one Nation to another. Say thus even to the house of the King.

Expos. 2.
But yet further, The house of the King is named last here, is named after the
house of Israel, why so? Not that the house of Israel were more guilty than the
house of the King, but because the house of the King could least endure
reproof, that is one reason given of it, they could hardly bear reprehension,
therefore in wisdom so far the Prophet would go, he would begin with the other
and being in a way of reprehension with the other, then he comes in with the
house of the King. Obser.
Though they are to be reproved for evil yet some due respect ought to be given
unto them.

Judgment
Judgment is toward you says the Prophet. Judicium here pro actu Judicij, so
Junius, it was their part to judge out of the Law, and so he would read it
thus, Judgment is yours, Oh house of the you ought to judge the people in
righteousness. But I rather think that here it is to be taken passively, that
is, that God calls you to judgment, to suffer Judgment, judgment is toward you,
Note
or against you. And observe I beseech you the difference between the beginning
of the fourth Chapter and the beginning of the fifth. In the fourth Chapter it
was but a controversy, a strife that God had with them, Hear the Word of the
Lord, ye children of Israel, for the Lord has a controversy with the land:
But here you have another word, now it is come to judgment; that which before
was but a contending with them is now come to a judgment of them, to a passing
of sentence upon them, judgment is against you, sentence is out upon you. The
former was Gods pleading against them, and this now is Gods judging of them.
When God pleads against us (that is the Note from thence) let us not neglect
his pleas, Observe. Gods pleadings
for they will come to a sentence and then we are gone. If we neglect when he
begins to plead his cause with us, if we neglect it because judgment is not
upon us, it will proceed to a sentence. God has laid his plea against many a
man in his Word, and perhaps some of you see it and know it that God has laid
his plea against you; and God lays his plea against many a man in his
conscience, but he nelgecting this plea of God laid against him in his Word and
in his conscience, he has afterward received the sentence of death in his soul
which has sunk his heart into despair. Many a man has had God speaking
against him in his word and in his conscience I say, and there has been Gods
controversy, God has been laying his plea there, thou have gone on in thy
sin, and at length it may be there comes the sentence of death upon thy soul,
that thou do as it were feel, some have said it, The sentence of condemnation
felt
that they have felt God passing a sentence of death upon them, and ever after
that speech they have roared out through despair and so have died. There has
been such works of God heretofore, yea and many times continued that those that
go against their consciences and have had Gods plea against them often, they
have as it were felt God passing a sentence of death upon them in this world
and that has sunk them into despair; it has been a particular day of judgment
unto them, they have heard as it were God speaking from his Throne this
sentence upon them, thou art a dead man, a lost man. Oh take heed of neglecting
Gods pleas lest they come to judgments.

Judgment is against you; why? what is the cause?

You have been a snare upon Mispah and a net spread upon Tabor.

Mark, Expos. Obser.
God passes not judgment but he gives the cause for it. Men are rash and they
will pass judgment upon such and such that they know not: When you come
sometimes into a Tavern or Inn, or into a Shop you shall hear men railing upon
such and such, Ask them, do you know them? No: What have they done? they know
not neither, only there is a general noise of them that such men do thus and
thus disturb the peace of the Kingdom. But in this they deal not righteously.
God he passes nor judgment but he gives a full and sufficient cause why he
does it; You have been a snare says he on Mispah and a net spread upon Tabor.

There is much of the mind of God in these words. Some take that first, Mispah,
appellatively pr^speculatione, you have been a snare upon the watch, for so
(...) (Speculor) from whence the word comes signifies, and Speculatio they
take to be for those for whom they should watch over, as Congregatio pro
Congreg^ti^, Circumcisio pro Ci^cumcisis, so Speculatio pro Custoditis: As it
God should charge them thu^, You should have been Watch men you Priests and you
of the Kings house, but you have been a net to ensnare them, you should have
been Speculatores but you have been Venatores and Aucupes, you have been
fowlers and hunters of my people. Theodoret The^dor.
has it pro Speculatoribus, that is thus, you spread a net for the watchmen,
you superstitious Priests, you house of the King, and you people generally, you
spread a net for your faithful Watchmen, if you have any Watchmen that are more
watchful than others you seek to ensnare them what you can. So they carry it.

Mispah, therefore as the word Tabor is taken properly, not appellatively, so I
think is the word Mispah. Therefore we are to remember that both Mispah and
Tabor were the names of two mountains that were in the land of Israel. Indeed
the first signifies a Watch, and the other, Tabor, signifies a high place, and
because it was a famous and high mountain it is called Tabor by way of eminency.

Now both these Mountains, Mispah and Tabor were very eminent among the people
of Israel. Mispah.
Mispah, so Judge. 20.1. The children of Israel were gathered together unto the
Lord in Mispah, an eminent place. It was that mountain where Laban and Jacob
met Genesis 31.49. so some think it to be, and called Mispah by Laban, For (says
he) the Lord watch between me and ^hee when we are absent one from another.
That for the mountain, Mispah.

Tabor.
So Tabor, that was very ancient too, Psalm. 89.12. Tabor and Hermon are joined
together. Hermon was famous too, as C^nt. 4.8. Come with me from Labanon my
spouse, look from the t^p ^f Amana, from the top of Shenir and Hermon:
Therefore it is very ill turned in your meeter in the Psalms, (as there are a
great many ill places in the meeter in the Psalms, that are not only poor kind
of rhyme; The common singing Psalms, They are now much better done by Mr. Rowse,
that learned a pious Member of the H. of Commons in Parliament, and by them
Authorized for the Press.
but are turned against the very sense of the text, against the meaning, as may
be showed in many places, so in that one) in Psalm. 42.6. The little hill
Hermon; whereas the truth is, He^mon was an high and famous hill; A mistake in
the reading, for in the reading Psalms it is, I will remember thee from the
land of Jordan, and of the Hermonites, from the hill Mister, that signifies
small indeed; but they make it as if Hermon and Mister were all one: but the
Psalm i^ rather to be interpreted thus, I will remember thee O Jerusalem where
ever I am, in all quarters of the world, from Jordan, that was eastward from
Jerusalem, and Hermon, that was an high mountain in the North, and Miss^r, that
is, of the South, because the mountains of the South were small; As if he
should say, psalm. 42.6. illustrated.
whether I be East or North or South from the Te^^ble I will remember Jerusalem
where ever I am. that the meaning of that Psalm is not as if Misser and Hermon
were one and the same, as if it should be turned the little hill Hermon, for it
was a high and famous hill joined with Tabor, that famous mountain Psalm 89. And
Tabor was so famous, that it was a proverbial speech among them to say, As
Tabor am^ngst the mountains. It was the mountain on which Christ was
tran^figured, a most brave stately mountain every way equal. J^^^phus in his
4th book, cap. 21. of the wars of the Jew^, says it was 30. 3. mile and three
quarters
Stadiums or Furlongs high, and on the top, twenty; Now a Plin. lib. 2. cap. 23.
Stadium is 125. paces as I remember, or 625. feet; and on the top it was so
plain that there wa not one place of it higher than another, but it lay so
equal as if it had been made by the art of man; And a mountain that was very
fertile and full of trees, a very pleasant and delightful place.

Now God charge them, that they had been a snare on Mispah, and a net upon
m^unt Tabor. According to some these mountains are taken senechdo^hically, that
is, for all high places, and these Metenymically, for all their superstition
and Idolatry committed upon those high places, and then the

You have been a snare on Mispah and a net upon Tabor, that is thus; Mispah and
Tabor are two mountains where there is much hunting for fowl and beasts, and
the truth is, you watchmen and other people that join with you, have been
huntsmen that have laid snares for the souls of my people as they lay snares on
Mispah and Tabor; because they were eminent places for hunting, therefore God
charge them for laying snares for the souls of his people, and hunting them
and catching them in their ways of superstition and Idolatry. The Gospel is
called a Net in the Scripture, and the Ministers of the Gospel are to spread
it, but the cords and twists of that net are precious, they are the blessed
truths of the Gospel, the mysteries of the Gospel, and happy are those that are
caught in that net: But the net of superstitious Priests and Governors it is
made of other manner of stuff, they have their ness too that they spread and
catch the souls of the people in. And the net that is here meant they had to
catch the souls of the people (for at the first, Note.
Jeroboam and the rest of the Princes would not go on in a violent way to force
people to a false religion, but would seek by their cunning devices to catch
the hearts of people in their love of false worship, and they would spread
their nets for people before they were aware, and) the threads and lines it was
woven withal were these.

Method of Princes and Priests to delude the people about the worship of God.
First, The plea of Authority. Does not authority command you to do thus and
thus?

Secondly, The Priests, the Authority of the Priestly Office. Do not the
Priests, the holy fathers do thus and thus? and have you more wit than they?
more wit than all the Statesmen and the Kings house? and more wit than all your
Teachers too?

Thirdly, We worship God, we do not alter our Religion, we hope we worship
Jehovah that you worship.

Fourthly, The things required of you are not very much; it is but a
circumstance of place; you worship at Jerusalem, it is but worshipping at Dan
and Bethel here before these two Images, you shall not worship the Images, but
worship in this place.

Fifthly, We intend nothing but that which is for your good, all that we aim at
is for your benefit, for that was Jeroboams pretense, It is too much for you to
go up to Jerusalem, to go twice a year so great and tedious and dangerou^ a
journey, no says he, I tender the good of my people more, therefore let them
worship here.

Sixthly, Why should you be so curious and strict; The most, the ten Tribes do
thus, there is but only Judah and Benjamin that go another way, the multitude
go this way, and why should you when only a poor handful go another way desire
to do as they do?

Seventhly, We have prospered a long time in this way. Has not Israel
prospered as much as Judah? has not God been with us as much as with them?
Judah pretends he worships God in the right w^y, we are sure God is with us.

Eighthly, They would raise reproaches upon the true worshipers of God, as in
the 7. Chapter of this Prophecy, verse. 3. Cap. 7.3. Opened
They make the King glad with their wickedness, and the Princes with their
lies. That is, this was their cunning devise, to raise all the reproaches that
possibly they could, against those that were true, forward, and zealous
worshipers of God, especially against the Prophets and Ministers, and therefore
in Amos you shall find (and he prophesied at the same time) that Amaziah said,
the Land could not bear his words, they are a company of seditious men, that
the Country could not bear their words, but they were even enough to set the
people together by the ears, yea what are these men that oppose the Kings Laws
but such and such? These were the snares that they set to catch the people, to
make them out of love with the true worship of God. Thus they were a snare set
upon Mispah and a not upon mount Tabor.

Applic.
Thus it has been with us, how cunningly have men l^id their nets amongst us to
catch souls? Say they, it is but yielding thus far, to this thing and the other
thing; and authority enjoins it, if it were more it were no great matter, and
other learned and godly men they do thus and they think thus; yea, and why
should you hinder your self of the good you may do? It is but a matter of
circumstance, it is but for decency and order, and there is much devotion this
way, we may gain Papists in yiedling as far as we can unto them, there is none
but a company of simple pleople against it, this is ancient, the Fathers of the
Church have done thus, yea many Martyrs that have shed their blood did thus.
Thus many have been caught as a bird in a snare, with these lines and twigs
thus cunningly twisted together how have they caught souls? simile
and so caught them that they could not tell how to get out, but being once in
they were ensnared more and more; as a bird that is once caught in the net it
begins to flutter a while but at length it is caught so much the faster; so
men when they yielded to one thing they could not tell where to stay but at
last they have been so deep in and so far ensnared that they could not tell
what to do; and the truth is, at length they have even given up their
consciences to those things; as a bird that perhaps at first when the net is
but stirred it is shie of it, but being once got in it is ensnared all over, so
many men at first, being of tender consciences, have been shie of superstitious
vanities, but with cunning arguments and devices they have been caught, and
they thought they should never hear of them any more, but being once caught so
as that they have power over them, they have come upon them with more violence
than before, and so have been made to yield so far that at the last their
consciences have wholly been given up to those things; They have been vexed and
troubled with their consciences at the first, but at length they have been
resolved to trouble themselves no more but to yield to whatsoever shall be
enjoined. Oh how many have been thus ensnared! This was the plot of the
adversary, if possibly they could they would break the consciences of men. Oh
it was the most devilish plot that ever was in the world that was lately among
us. When they were together in their Taverns, or jocundly sitting together,
then they were plotting and studying what it was that such and such men did
scruple most at, and oh says one, this, no says another not this but this
will catch such a one; Let him have it said they. It may be the old ceremonies
filij Ecclesiae as they called them, but to crack their consciences at first.
Many men have found this to be true by experience, and we have seen it: For
otherwise what is the reason when they have come with all the flatteries they
could to some (that have stood out many years and perhaps God has done good by
their Ministry) to draw them but to any thing, and when they have but once
prevailed (they imagined that there was so much the more in it against their
consciences, they saw men look pale and trembled and were loath to yield, but)
when they had got them once, they concluded that certainly they did that which
was against their consciences, and now said they, we have got them, and then
they would heap all their injunctions upon them one after another until they
had broken their consciences all to shivers. simile
And as it is with some birds and beasts that when they are caught they are
presently fatted up, so it was with some Ministers and others, when they were
once got in their nets, presently they had livings and preferment and some got
to be Bishops Chaplains and the like; And as some other birds when they are
caught they are presently nipped in the head or their limbs are broken: so when
they had caught some others, they would deal ruggedly, severely, maliciously
with them, and would never leave until they had broke them all to pieces. These
were our men that have been a snare upon Mispah and a net spread upon Tabor;
But blessed be God that their snare is broken and our souls are escaped as a
bird out of the hands of the fowler, Note
Psalm. 124.7. My brethren when so many have been caught in such nets and snares
that were laid, do not you think you would have been all caught one after
another? It is likely every one of you would have been caught in their
superstitious ways, for see how they prevailed in a few years. But God looked
from Heaven and pitied the souls of his people and heard their groans and
sighs. Oh many a poor Minister has gone home to his wife, and having no other
way of maintenance he has out of fear of loosing his living yielded to their
superstitious injunctions, do but you think how he has wrung his hands and
could not sleep that night but lay tossing upon his bed with a dismal
conscience. Well, the Lord has heard these cries and broken our snares and our
souls are delivered. God forbid such a judgment should ever befall us again, as
that God should bring these fowlers amongst us to ensnare our souls as they
have done!

Mispah and Tabor were two eminent mountains (I take them in their own proper
sense, You have been a snare upon Mispah and a net spread upon Tabor, that they
did spread snares and nets upon those very mountains) that did stand between
Israel and Judah, between the two chief Cities, Samaria that belonged to the
ten Tribes, and Jerusalem that appertained to Judah and Benjamin. Now Jeroboam
and the other Princes his successors, they placed Watch-towers upon these two
mountains, and there they set men to watch, to be as Spies to see who went from
Israel to Judah. There were a company of precise people that would not be
contented with that worship that was set up by authority, but they must have
other manner of worship and they must now and then be stealing to Jerusalem at
the times appointed: Now the Priests they counseled those that were in
authority, say they, we shall never be quiet till we catch these men, they must
be going to Jerusalem, therefore let there be some device to apprehend them:
then comes another and says, most of them when they go they go by Mispah and
Tabor, and there are two convenient places, if you will set some watch-towers
there and place men in them they may take every one of them. Now this counsel
pleased the Princes very well, and upon it (as I find in Arias Montanus, Arias
mon.
who cites it out of the Jews histories) there were two Towers set upon these
mountains and were intended to this very purpose. This God charge them
withal, and judgment is against you for this. Oh you set snares upon Mispah:
They were convenient places for such a business, and so they did catch poor
people that sought to worship God in his own way. Oh this is that which
provokes God exceedingly and will bring fearful judgment upon a people when
Magistrates and Ministers will seek to catch poor souls that would worship God
in his own right way. And has it not been so in our late High Commission
Court? Applic.
when there was but a poor Reader in a Country Town, that could do nothing
else, and if there were any eminent Preacher near hand, poor souls that were
hungring after the bread of life would go to hear that Preacher, they would set
men on purpose with pen and ink to take notice of the names of such men, just
as Jeroboan did here. The Lord has a special eye upon poor souls that are
oppressed and are thus catched, to releeve them in due time; and blessed be his
Name He has done much for us this way, in releeving us and delivering us from
these men, and the judgment of God is this day out against those that have been
these catchers. What is become of those Proctors and Sumners and of all that
rabble rout that were catchers and hunters of such poor souls as were desirous
of worshipping God in his own way?

VER. 2. And the revolters are profound to make slaughter, though I have been a
rebuker of them all.


THE Lord by hi^ Prophet proceeds in his ^harge against Israel for their
Idolatry; And in the latter and of the 5. verse, he pronounces the sentence
against them.

1. The continuance of their charge. The revolters are profound to make
slaughter.

The revolters.] The Apostates, those who once worshipped me according unto what
I required in the way of true worship; But they are revolted. The brand of a
Revolter is an ignominious brand; Especially when God himself charge this
upon any; Once you were thus and thus forward in the ways of God, but you are
revolted, you are an apostates; there can be on blacker brand upon a people,
upon a man than this is, Exposit.
he is an apostate, a revolter. We must understand this their revolting
especially in reference to their falling off from the true worship of God to
their Idolatry: And so the next words.

(...)
They are profound.] Profunda verunt, they are grown very deep in this their
way of Idolatry. At first they began but with a little, but by degrees they are
grown into the very depth. When men begin in the ways of Idolatry they know
not whether they shall sink. They think perhaps at first to go but thus far and
thus far, but before they are aware they are sunk into the very depth.

Obser. beginings of false worship
It is a dangerous thin^ to venture upon the beginnings of false worship,
especially when the tide is flowing in. If a man stand upon the shore of the
Sea when the tide is coming in, and thinks the water is but shallow now, I may
venture to stand here, it is but a little depth here; The Sea still comes in
more and more, simile
he thinks it is not much deeper than it was: but if he venture too long he may
soon be swallowed up and sunk into the very depth of the Sea. Applica.
Thus it has been with many; They have been deceived in their ways of
superstition: They have thought they might yield thus far, and yield thus far;
but they little thought of the tide that was coming. It is true if the tide had
been going out, it had not been so much danger. Therefore they are deceived in
that their opinion of the first Reformers; First Reformers.
they would yield for peace-sake thus and thus far; but then the tide was
rather going out; and yet it was not without danger that they yielded so far as
they did: But of late times the tide was coming in; late Innovations.
and then the yiedling but thus far and thus far, has swallowed up many into
the very depths of those ways of superstition, they have even been choked and
drowned by them.

Secondly, Profunda verunt radices in sua malitia. Calvin in loc.
Their they are grown deep, that is, they are deeply rooted in these ways, so
that there is little hope ever to get off their hearts from them; They have
continued in them a great while, and now they plead their forefathers, and
custom; so they are deeply rooted in these their ways of Idolatry.

It is a dangerous thing for a people to be deeply rooted in superstitious
ways; Obser.
What a great deal of stir is there in dealing with them that are deeply rooted
in false ways of worship? By custom in them they grow to be deeply rooted in
them.

Thirdly, Profunda verunt, they are grown profound, that is, Esa. 31.6. there
is such an expression. They have deeply revolted, they have not only forsaken
somewhat of my wo^ship, but they have deeply, exceedingly, largely, very much
revolted from me. So in the 9th of this Prophecy, verse 9. They have deeply
corrupted themselves, They have exceedingly, very much corrupted themselves:

Fourthly, Profunda verunt, they are grewn deep, that is (as their invented
worship, than God punishes the breaking of his rules. Mercer. Rab. Jarchi.
So I find Mercer that learned Interpreter quoting Rabbi Jarchi as having this
expression, Qui non asscendit transgreditur, qui offendit occidetur. He which
ascends not (to the feast) transgresses; but he that offends (so) shall be
slain. God only accounts him a transgressor that comes not up to the feast at
the appointed time; but they say, whosoever does not come shall be put to
death. They will go further in the punishment of the breach of their
superstitious Laws, than God does in the punis^ment of the breach of his holy
Law. So they are grown deep. Yea they would seem to go further, to be more
zealous and earnest for their ways of Idolatry than God himself is for his
ways of holy worship.

Applic.
And have we not found this, that Revolters, superstitious Idolaters they have
grown deep thus? that is, they will punish the breach of their superstitious
ways more deeply than God punishes the breach of His ^aw; they will stand
more upon time, and will be more eager to have their Laws fulfild abundantly
than the true worshipers of God are eager to have the Law of God fulfild.

But (though I think the holy Ghost has a reference to diverse of the things)
the main and principal scope of the holy Ghost in this word I take to be this,
according as you have it in your translations, They are grown profound; that
is, They are very subtle in their ways of idolatry, they lay their snares deep.

We spoke before of the snares of Idolaters; now here the holy Ghost charge
them for being profound, that is, They are subtle, they lay their snares very
deep: As fowlers and hunters (to follow the metaphor) they will go into low
places and into ditches, that so they may deceive the fowls, and that the birds
may not perceive them: So the Holy Ghost here follows this metaphor: Exposit.
they are content to go deep, they are deep in their plots, they will deny
themselves in any thing almost, and will be content to lie very low so be it
they may further their own ends. You find it in many great Promoters of
superstition and idolatry, they will crouch and seem to be very affable and
courteous to gain people, Obser.
and in many things deny themselves, and all to further their own ends. Thus
they are profound in their subtilty; according to that expression we have in
Psalm. 10.9, 10. He lies in wait to catch the poor, Psalm. 10.9, 10. opened
he does catch the poor when he draws him into his net; he croucheth and
hambleth himself that thee poor may fall.

Oh it should teach us to be willing to deny our selves in our own end^ that we
may promote the true worship of God; Men o^ parts.
If there be any ability in any parts or strong wit that the Devil can assist
them withal he shall be employed in putting of glosses upon their false ways
of worship; and so they grow deep. The Scripture tells us of the depths of
Satan, Rev. 2.24. Satan in his instruments has deep policies and does go
beyond many poor weak and simple people. And sometime we have in Scripture
expressed, the devices of Satan, 2 Cor. 2.11. (...) the reasonings of Satan. And
then the methods ^f the Devil, Ephesians. 6.11. (...) the deep policies of the Devil;
and in nothing more exercised than in the maintenance of the ways of false
worship; and gravity
There they appear with their gravity and profound learning (seeming profound
learning) to countenance this their way of false worship. This was just the way
of Idolaters at these times, they were grown profound in thi^ their way.

First, Obser.
That the hearts of Apostates are the most deeply rooted in wi^^edness.

No men are so deeply rooted in wickedness as Apostates are. The ^evolters are
grown d^ep, that i^, are deeply roo^ed in this their way of wickedness, and
amongst other wickedness, above all in the ways of supersti^ion and Idolatry.
Apostates if they grow superstitious and Idol^trous they are the most de^ply
rooted in those ways, yea and the most profound and subtle in them. Hence you
might observe in your own experiences the practices of our Prelates, Applic
Prelates of late.
they would choose to themselves Chaplain to be their Agents such as had bin
heretofore Puritans, and so falling off and apostatizing from that strictness
that they seemed to profess in former times; they made account that these would
be their choicest and best Agents of all men; they thought their sit men
were such as did arise out of the as^e of a Puritan, as they themselves were
wont to express it: they knew that such men as those that were formerly
seemingly strict in their practice, were best acquainted wherein the
consciences of godly men were most tender, and that they knew their ways and
what would pinch their consciences most, and therefore these were the fittest
Agents for them.

Idolaters (especially Apostates) are profound and deep.

We had need therefore to beware of those that are superstitious the Spirit of
God searches the de^p things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10. reveals the mysterie^ of
Christ; Those that have that Spirit of God Spirit of God.
that searches those deep thing of God, they are the only men and women that
are like to stand out against the deep policies of Idolaters. mean gifted
Believers.
And the truth is, every godly man and woman though never so mean parted, yet
they are more profound than the greatest Scholar in the world that is wicked
and superstitious; for they have the Spirit of God that searches the deep
things of God: and this it is that ke^ps their hearts from being taken with
greatest profoundness of false worship.

Id^laters they are deep in their policies.

Christian policy.
When we would maintain God in his worship it should teach us to learn to seek
to out plot them; they are full of their plots, why should not the Spirit of
God teach us wisdom as well as the spirit of Satan teaches them? Why should we
not exercise our parts as strongly in the true worship of God, as they theirs
in the way of superstition and Idolatry? But we see it ordinarily otherwise,
That the men of the w^rld are wiser in their generation than the children of
light, they are deeper in waie^ of policy and so deceive such as are simple If
you take them upon the first presenting of things, the first show of things,
they will seem to come with such color of arguments as will certainly deceive
you. Therefore you should beg wisdom of God that you might not be deceived
through the subtilty of ^atan through these men.

I find diver^ of the Anci^nts have other intepretations of these word^; I will
not spend further time in telling you what those are, because I think already
we have had the meaning of the holy Ghost in these words; therefore we will
pass on. They are profound,

To make slaughter] To make slaughter! what does God intend by these words? By
these he does express their way of superstition and false worship. He means
by their making their sacrifices unto their Idols, and so by the sacrifice^
which was the principal part of their false worship he m^aneth all their false
worship they were deep in all their false worship, naming the chief for the
rest.

But why does He call their Sacrifices, making slaughter.

It is in way of reproach. to make slaughter. As if God should say, I look upon
all your sacrifices as no other than upon slaughter, your Temple no otherwise
than upon a butchers shambles, and your Priests no otherwise than butchers.
Thus contemptibly does God spe^k of the sacrifices of those that choose their
own superstitious ways. Isa. 66.3. He that kills an Ox, is as if he slew a
man; (says God) he that sacrifices a Lamb, as if he cut off a Dogs ne^k; he
that offers up an oblation, as if he offered Swines blo^d: and yet there, God
speaks of the sacrifices of Judah, not of Israel. Let the sacrifices be for the
matter of them, what God requires, and offered in the place that God has
appointed, yet when men make their sacrifice, their own right^^^sness and think
to put off God by them, says God, I rega^d them no more t^^n the cutting off
of a dogs neck. But these sacrifices of Israel had a twofold error in them.
First,

Obser. Will Worship.
From thence the note is, That whatsoever worship is tendered up to God, if it be
not his own worship, or if in that worship (though it be his own) we choose our
own ways, whatsoever s^ew of devotion there may be in it, God accounts it a
dispicable thing.

[making slaughter] God uses not only to show the contempt He has of all
their sacrifices, but by that He does secretly insinuate the cruelty of the
Priests and of the Princes to those that would not yield unto their Idolatries,
their grievous persecution of them, even unto blood. They are profound (says
God) they are grown deep in their Idolatry, they are grown to the depth of
malice, so as their hearts are enraged against those that will not do as they
do, even unto blood; no matter what becomes of them, no matter if they were all
hanged, a company of precise and scrupulous fools, that pretend conscience, and
do nothing else but trouble the State, Does not Jeroboam and the Council
command these things? The Kingdom can never be well till it be rid of them.

Though I have been a rebuker of them all.] Though I have been an instructor,
or corrector so the word may be turned as well as a rebuker. And have been, or
am, or will be, you may put it which way you will, it is not in the Text,
neither have been, nor am, (...)
nor will, but, Though I a rebuker, Eruditor, Corrector of them all. As if God
should say, they cannot plead ignorance, indeed were it that they never had any
means, then they might have some pretense for what they do, but I have been an
instructor and rebuker of them all.

This particle [I] has reference either to the Prophet, or to God Himself.

1. The Prophet, and then, either Actively, or Passively.


I have been a rebuker, or, I have been rebuked: (...)
So some turn it.

For the first, I the Prophet have been a rebuker: 1. Active.
From thence the note i^,

The Ministers of God they must rebuke sin. Obser.
They must not su^^er sin to go without rebuke.

2 Ti^. 4.1, 2. I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ (says Paul
to Timothy.) And among other charges, this was one, That he should rebuke the
offenders. And Tit. 1.13. Rebuke the^ sharply, (...), cuttingly, so the word
is. Tit. 2.15. Rebuke with all authority

This is the work of the Ministers of God, to rebuke with authority, to rebuke
cuttingly, when there is cause for it.

And indeed, the spirits of sinners are base and vile, and a Minister of God
coming in the Name of God, i^ above them, let them be what they will be;
Ministerial rebuke
And if the rebuke be administered in a gra^ious way it will make the pr^^dest
si^^er to shake under it; ^et them seem to be never s^ s^^ornful ou^^^rdly, yet
I say let a Minister of God come in G^d^ Name, and carry the rebuke in a
gracious way, and s^^^^ as the Oracle of God, he may make the proudest and
^^^^^est sinner to shake under his rebukes, for their spirits are vile. And
those that are under the charge of such, though i^ seems to be a hard work and
grievous for the present unto tho^^ th^^ are rebuked, yet they will bless them
af^erward, if God bles^ the rebuke and others will curse them that would not
^^buke them in their evil ways.

2. If we refer this Rebuker unto God himself, I have been a Rebuker, that is,
Not I the Prophet only, but I the Lord have been a rebuker of them all. From
thence the Note is, That God does rebuke people in his Word, in his Ministers.

Observe.
When the Ministers of God rebuke in a way of God, God does then rebuke sinners.
And if there be any means in the world to humble the heart of a sinner, Gods
rebukes. 1. by words.
it is this, To see that God rebukes him in his Word. You may put these two
note together. God rebukes in his Word: and, This is a great means ^f humbling
the heart of a sinner to see, that God rebukes him in his Word Thou come unto
the Word, and ^^ndest thy self rebuked for such and such evils that thou art
conscious unto thy self of: know it was God rebuked thee that day, and He will
call thee to account for those rebukes He gave thee there. Thou came perhaps
to hear what the Minister would say, but thou foundest before thou wentst that
thou were rebuked for such and such secret evils thou art conscious to thy self
of; Know (I say) God rebuked thee at that time, and look to it, God will call
thee to an account for His rebukes.

God rebukes not only by His Word, but sometimes by His works too; 2. by works.
When He does appear against sinners, when He suiteth His works so as He does
evidently show that he sets Himself against such and such sinners, then (I say)
God rebukes them for such and such evils, howsoever they will not see it. Isa.
26.11, 12. Lord when thy hand is lifted up they will not see, but they shall
see. God li^teth up his hand to rebuke wicked and carnal men, and evidently
sets himself against them, and they will not see, but they shall see.

Obser.
Again further, Hence note the stubbornes^ of men's hearts, especially of
Idolaters; they were profound to make sl^ughter in their ways of superstition,
though I was a rebuker of them all: they cared not for My rebukes, they
regarded not My words, their hearts were s^ubborn and stout against them. Verbi
contemptus, Idolatriae comes, says Mercer Mercer.
upon the place, The contempt of God^ Word, the spirit of Idolate^^ and
superstitio^^ person^. To hum^n writers.
is the companion of Idolatry. You shall find by common experience how your
superstitious false worshi^ers slight the Word of God: they are above it, they
spe^k jeeringly of the Scripture and of warrants from Gods Word; Oh you must do
nothing but you must have Scripture for it: They cry up Fathers and antiquity,
and such and such Writers, but for the Word of God they usually contemn and
scorn it.

Thus it was here, they regarded not what God said in his Word. Idolaters are
very stout against the Word of God and contemn it. There are no commands no
commands no rebukes of God in his Word, but they stand out against them; Poor
vile worms that they are! who are they that they should dare to stand out
against the rebukes of the infinite holy God? Know, howsoever thy spirit swells
against this Word of God, it will certainly cast thee. The Psalmist in Psalm.
76.6. says, At thy rebukes O God, the Chariots and Hors-men are cast into a
dead sleep; And so Psalm. 80.16. They perish at the rebuke of thy countenance;
And Psalm, 104.7. At thy rebuke they fled, And Psalm. 18.15. The foundations of
the world were discovered at thy rebukes. The rebukes of God they have a great
deal of power in them, and Heaven and Earth cannot stand before the rebukes of
God, how then can that stubborn heart of thine stand out against them?

Let us not be troubled my brethren, Revel. 16.9. They were tormented with the
wrath of God, but repented not to give Him glory. Many men are ready to think
that their cause is good because their spirits are so stout against all that
appear against them, and sligh^ them. Let not us have higher thoughts of them
because of this, for it has alwaie b^^ the course of Idolaters to stand out
stoutly against all the rebukes of God in His Word and Works, because the Lord
ha^h an intent to destroy them.

Observe, Sin after ^ebukes is very s^^ful.

It is too much (...) stan^ out against Gods commands; Observe Sin after rebuke
but to stand out against any intimation of God displeasure, is a greater evil.
God expects that the heart of sinners should mel^ before him upon an^
expression of his displeasure: And it was the commendation of JOSIAH, That when
the LAW was read, his ^ear^ melted; And indeed an ingenious spirit is soon
rebuked. But when the heart of a sinner is got above all rebukes then it
hardneth exceedingly and then it treasureth up wrath against the day of wrath.
We our selves cannot bear it in others to standout against our rebukes, we
cannot bear it in a child or in a servant; if we rebuke a child or a servant,
and they care not for it, and their spirits rise against it, how do we hate
such, how do our spirits rise up against them? Nay if we rebuke a dog and the
dog cares not for it, we cannot bear it. How shall the Infinite God bear our
slighting of his rebuke.

Pro 5.12, 13. At the last, when thy flesh and thy ho^y is co^sume^ t^ u st
(...) mourn and say, How have I h^ted instruc(...)i(...)n, and my (...)
^^spised reproof? The words are spoken of a gallant, a brave ^o^ing gallant,
that blu^^ereth it out in the world, and carries all before him and cares for
nothing that is said; but when the hand of God is upon him and his flesh and
body is consumed, then he falls a lamenting his condition, Oh how have I
despised reproof, and have not inclined mine ear to them that instructed me?
This is the aggravation of ^in indeed.

And that we may humble our souls for our standing out against Gods rebukes, ad
but this consideration to it, That God has such rebukes as will force us to
yield unto him in spite of our hearts. If we stand out against His rebukes in
hi^ Word and lesser chastisements, against his loving rebukes; let us know that
God has furious rebukes; so they are called in Ezekiel. 5.15. and 25.17. When
thou com^st to the Word, o^ when thy parents, or thy gove^nors or thy friend
rebukes thee for thy sins God rebuke^ thee in them, and th^se are loving
rebukes: but thou that art a child o^ a servant, or any wicked and ung^dly man
thou rej^ctest those ^^bu^^s; Know, God has furious rebukes for thee one day,
yea rebukes with flames of fire, so they are called Esa. 66.15.

I have been a rebuker of them all.] This (if you apply it to the Prophet, for
he must not be excluded, he is meant here as well as God) shows the Prophets
impartiality. And from thence the Note is, That

Prophets rebukes must not be like cobwebs to take small flies and to let the
great ones go thorough, Obser. Prophets rebukes.
they must be impartial rebukes. Oh how many Prophets have sharpened their
rebukes against those that have been most conscientious, and have sadned their
hearts even out of their Pulpits; but they let those that are loose go quiet
away, nay not only quiet but rejoicing. When the hearts of the Saints have been
sadned, they have sharpened their rebukes against these; but the looser of the
parish, or many times the great ones have gone away rejoicing. Thus if you take
the words actively, I have been a rebuker of them all.

But if you take the words passively (as some do) that is thus; They have
rebuked the Prophet; as if he should say, 2. Passive.
they have been profound in their Idolatrous ways, and I have been faithful in
preaching to them, and what has been my recompense? All of them have rebuked
me. All of them, not only their Priests have rebuked me, cried out against me,
not only their chief and great men have rebuked me; they indeed (their Priests
and their Magistrates) would bitterly inveigh against me for pleading against
their Idolatry; But all the people have done it too, I have been a rebuke to
all the people, they have all been bitter against me, and sharpened their very
tongues against me; Oh say they, here is one that likes not our way of worship,
he must have another kind of Religion, he tells us that we must all go up to
Jerusalem and worship there, and nothing will serve turn but that. Thus they
scorned him and rebuked him and even flew in his very face. From thence the
Note is this.

It is a hard thing for a few men to stand out against a State or multitude in
matters of Religion, in matters of the worship of God. Obser. Opposition of a
multitude


If there be but some few unto whom God has shown another way, and the
generality go a different way; Certainly those few are like to meet with hard
measure, and like to be a rebuke, not only to Ministers, but generally unto all
the people; they must expect to be under the rebukes of all sorts. Thu it was
with the Prophet and with all that went his way, he was a rebuke unto them all.

VER. 3. I know Ephraim, and Israel is not hid from me etc.


I know Eprhraim.] This is, Notitia judicialis, non approbationis. A knowledge
to judge, not a knowledge of approbation.

Exposit.
I kn^w Ephraim, that is, I know all his shifts, I know all his evasions, all
his cunning devices, all his plots, all his pretenses, all his base ends. These
may be hid from men, but I know them, they are not hid from me. Mark, first, I
know Ephraim, and then, I know Israel.

Ephraim
First, Ephraim. By Ephraim (as you have heard heretofore) we are to understand,
the Princes, the great ones amongst them, because Jeroboam was of the Tribe of
Ephraim. I know Ephraim, that is, I know the politic ends of all the great
ones amongst them: S^^^e Re^^gion.
They bear men in hand that they desire to worship Me, and they say, Oh God
forbid that they should change Religion, and they cry out of all men that
should raise up such suspicions of them amongst their good people. But I (...)
Ep^r^im says he, I know what his aim is, I know what hi^ th^ughts are, and
what his counsels are, and what was plotted at such a time, and what his
Chamber-counsels with such and such Priests were, I know what correspondence he
has with such and such that corrupt my worship, and all that ^e^^in to him and
all that favor him, I know them all, I know all their devices and depths. I
know what h^th been working these many years; ^^^dal reads verse. 2. there kill
s^crifices on heaps, to d^c^ive.
I know how he seems as it he would serve me, but I know that that he does is
merely to serve^ ^^^wn ends and no further. I know the poor people they are
d^lud^d by his fair and solemn protestations, they think he means nothing but
well, and there are none but a company of precise people that are jealous of
him, but I know what they intend and what their ways are whatsoever color
they put upon them. Ephraim, that is, the great ones, the Princes, they
persuade the people that Jeroboam and his successors aim at nothing else but to
reform things for the best, but I know that things are far otherwise, I know
Ephraim.

Israel Israel
is not hid from me] That is, the people, they pretend that they do but as they
are taught, and they do but submit unto authority, they could be glad indeed if
things were better, but some things m^^^ be yielded unto for peace-sake. It is
true, these Prophets and some others are good honest men, and they would have
us to do otherwise, but things are not clear yet, we cannot see but we may do
this and this in case of necessity; that way they would have us go may bring us
a great deal of trouble; Indeed what they say, seems to be like that which is
in the Scripture, but then these and these inconveniences will follow; we
should be glad if things were better r^formed according to the Word, but for
peace-sake we must be contented to yield to the judgment of such and such
learned and wise men; and though we yield to these and these things yet our
hearts are right for God. But says God, Israel is not hid from me.

Israel. That is, The base, cowardly, temporizing, revolting, superstitious
spirits of the people, they are not hid from me, their being loath to come under
my government, their love to their ease and estates, the lothness of their
carnal hearts to venture and suffer any thing for my Truth and Ordinance^.
Israel in these his distempers of heart is not hid from me: all these things
are plain before Me, he may blind men and battle his own conscience, but he
cannot hide it from me says God.

From whence the observations are these.

Fi^^^, That Gods eye i^ upon the se^rets of men's hearts, up n t^eir

Certainly therefore Hypocrites must needs be (...); deny God, as if God did
not see the secret turnings and windings, and plottings, and contrivances, and
aims, and ends of their hearts.

Patience of God.
Oh the infinite patience of God that can bear with men that color such vile
aims and ends with protestations and professions of Religion in such a sacred
way as they seem to do! Here is the patience of God that we must admire at.

for a man or woman to go on a long time in the profession of Religion and to
make conscience of all known duties, yet to perish at last for some sin that he
does not know in himself.

A hard s^ying.
You will say, This is a hard thing, what shall become of us then?

To molifie this therefore a little, take this along with it, that is, Caution.
Except thou have a heart unfainedly willing to know thy own heart, willing to
search into thine own heart, and earnest with God that He who knows thy heart
would make thy heart known to thy self: If indeed thy heart be thus upright
that thou can appeal unto God and say, Lord I know I have a vile and false
and hypocritical heart, and there may be much evil lie secretly in my heart
that I have not known all this while, and such evil as I may justly perish in
it; but good Lord make it known to me, let me know the worst of my self, let me
know the evil that is in me, and my purpose is to resist it; If thou have such
an heart, thou have no cause to think that thou shall perish for any evil that
thou do not know by thy self. But if thou have any secret evil in thy self,
and thou do not in the uprightness of thy heart unfeignedly desire to know it
that so thou may forsake it and get thy self rid of it, and can not appeal
unto God that thou art willing to have it made known unto thee, thy condition
may be dangerous notwithstanding all the duties thou performest.

But further, This that the Prophet says [I know Ephraim] is brought in to be
a means to humble Ephraim, to humble Israel. From thence the Note is, That

Gods eye upon our hearts and ways, Obser.
is a special means to humble us.

No more powerful means in the world to humble the heart than to behold God
looking upon our hearts and ways. The discovery of our evil to others may be
some means to humble us. O how would it abase men if God should discover to all
their friends and acquaintance all that evil that is in their hearts. And
hereafter at the great day of judgment when the secrets of all hearts shall
come to be disclosed, how will the wicked and ungodly be abased before men and
Angels! We read of the adulterer in Job, ^4.17. that the morning is unto them
even as the shadow of death, and if any one know them they are then in the
terrors of the shadow of death. Wicked men (especially adulterer^ for it is
spoken of them) they hate the light, and the morning is unto them as the shadow
of death, and if they come once to be discovered they are terrified as with the
shadow of death Now I argue thus, if the knowledge that me^ h^ve of ou^ sec^^t
wicked ways is so ter^ible unto a guil^^ con^^^^nce, what is it then when this
guilty conscience shall (...) apprehensions of the infinite God? He has s en
thee (...) ha^t been s^^n^ wretch in such an ^^n, in (...) T^^^^^ in such a
se^^^t place. He has seen wh^^ thou (...) and plotted, yea what thou have
thought and plotted. Look upon God thus seeing thee and try if it will not
humble thine heart. Oh labor to humble thy heart by this, How shie was I to
know such a truth, how glad was I when I got such a thing out of my conscience,
such a thing that would have put me upon that which I was loath to do? and
whatever I pretended, love to my self to my case, to my estate, made me decline
such a truth of God; and God saw all this. When we feel such base workings of
our hearts, such plotting and contrivings of them for our own selves and for
our carnal ends and aims, let u^ cast our eye upon God and consider that his
eye is upon us. Let u^ conceive ^s if we heard the voice of God from Heaven
saying unto us, I know what you are plotting, I know what your aims are, I know
the base workings of your spirits. Did we but apprehend God thus speaking from
Heaven unto us, as here He speaks by the Prophet, I know Ephraim, and Israel is
not bid from me, it would be a special means to humble our hearts for evil
present, and to prevent evil for the future.

For now, O Ephraim, thou committest whoredom, and Israel is defiled. Now]
There is somewhat in this word, it is a great Emphasis: Even still Ephraim goes
on in wickedness; he has gone on a great while, and even now when I am coming
against him, even now he continues in his wickedness. From thence the Note is:

Observe.
God will ^eal with men according to their present ways.

In what He finds them for the present, He will deal with them for that
especially. Not but that when he finds them in evil for the present, He will
call them to an account for all things that are past too; but He points Himself
at them as they are in their present ways.

Whatsoever thou wast before, though thou have continued a long time in thy
wickedness, yet if thou have but now a repenting heart to return unto God,
there might be hope and help for thee. Oh consider this thou wretched sinner.
As if God should say here, Ephraim has continued wicked a long time, but if he
had Now a heart to return unto me, it should be well with him, but Even now, to
this very moment Ephraim commits whoredom. So say I unto the vilest sinner
in this place, whatsoever thou have been, here is salvation if now at this
instant thou have a heart to turn to God; thou can not tell whether God will
ever give thee another Now; God gives thee [a Now A Now.
] now, if thou return now unto Him and repent and believe thou may be saved:
But if God come upon thee after this Exercise and find thee continuing in thy
sinful ways, and say, Even Now, yet for all this this sinner continues in his
sin, this will be a heavy thing indeed. So here he comes upon Ephraim, Now Oh
Ephraim! He makes an exclamation against him; O Ephraim after all the means
that has been used to recall thee, yet still, O Ephraim thou continuest in thy
Idolatry.

And, Ephraim, Thou committest wh^red^ms, Thou do it, thy sin is greater in
this continuing, for thou carriest the people with thee, and little hope there
is of reformation till the great ones reform; If Ephraim commit whoredom,
Israel must needs be defiled, so it follows.

Israel is defiled.] There is a Twofold defilement of the people of Israel.

First, Defiled morally; that is, by their wicked works: Defilement. 1. Moral.
as here, by their murders, and thefts, and adultery, that was before in Chap
4.

Secondly. Israel is de^ile^: that is, 2. Spiritual.
They defile My Worship and that d^fileth the^. They have de^^^^^ My Worship
and by defiling My W^rship they come t^ be defiled. And that I take to be
especially meant here. Israel is d^f^led, that is, among other ways of
defilement ^^ey mingle with Heathen, and they bring them in to d^^^^^ my
Worship. In Isa. 47.6. God threatens to defile His ^anctuary, and to pollute
His Inherit^^ce: That is when is suffers by His ^ust ^udgment, ^dolaters and
He (...) to come in^^ (...) Sanctuary, to mingle with His (...).

And then Israel is d^^^^^^ ^n^^her way: that is, Israel both mingleth his own
inv^n^^on^ with my Worship and Israel does bring in or suffer the Heathen to
come in to my worship and so my worship is defiled and they are defiled by
defiling my worship. From whence the Note is, That

Obs.
Defiled worship, exceedingly defiles the souls of people.

Nothing defiles the souls of men more than defiled worship. Defiled worshid
And among other defilements in worship, the mixing with wicked and ungodly men
in ways of worship, the mixing with such as God would not have come into the
ways of his worship.

Does the mixing of wicked and ungodly men defile the worship of God, or defile
others in it? Is the Sacrament of the Lords supper the worse if there be wicked
men partake and mix in that worship? Am I the worse for it, or is the Sacrament
the worse, is that worship defiled? How may we refer this defilement of Israel
to our defilement at this time? Is there any Church in the world but has
wicked ones in it? And will you say that they are defiled and that the worship
is defiled because there are wicked ones amongst them? Then we can go no
wherein the world but we must be defiled, and the worship must be defiled?

Many men think they have a good argument of this, to say, all Churches are
mixed, there is a mixture in the best Churches, therefore if mixtures make the
Communion defiled, then all are defiled. It comes fully in my way to speak a
word or two of this, and it shall be but a word or two.

Will not there be wicked men in the best Church? can have no strength in it,
for there is no man denies it, and therefore they that make it fight with a
shadow.

men there. I verily believe every one will grant this; I know none in the
world for my part, denies this to be a truth, namely, that the Sacrament is not
defiled to the right receivers of it, merely because wicked men are present
there. No man affirm^ the contrary to this, but all that I know of, that are
the strictest in the way of Church order and discipline will grant this to be a
truth, that the Sacrament is not defiled to true receivers merely because
wicked men are there.

But what then, you will say? How shall we distinguish mixture of communion, or
mixture of wors^ip?

Not merely because wicked m^n are there. But first, then viz to cast out those
that are unworthy then the Church comes to be defiled, when, and how, a
Church, and the communion of it, is defiled by the presence of wicked men. 2
Cor. 5. opened and aplied.
and their communion to be defiled. So that their communion is not defiled
because the wicked are there, but because they neglect their duties of casting
out the wicked from thence. For let a man be wicked, let him be a hypocrite, it
is not the duty of the Church to cast out that hypocrite until he discover
himself; but if that hypocrite discover himself, if then the Church perform not
her duty as it ought in casting him out, then it comes to be defiled. And the
example of the incestious Corinth, in 2 Cor. 5. is a plain place for it; A
little leaven (says the Apostle) leaveneth the whole lamp. What is that lump
there? It is the Church communion, and the leaven there is the incestious
person; and the Apostle gives order to cast him out; now says he, while this
leaven continues, if you do not do your duty to cast out this scandalo^s
person, your (...) up, your whole communion will come to be defiled. So Churches
come to be defiled. 2. How pa^^icular persons.


Again further, Not only Churches come to be defiled; but secondly, particular
persons and communicants come to be defiled in this if they neglect the duty
that belongs unto them as Christians. That is thus: Christ requires this, If
thy brot^er offend thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone;
but if he will not bear thee, then take with thee one or two more; And if he
shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the Church. Now if thou have done this
thy duty to all scandalous persons in the Congregation, then the sin be upon
the Church, thou may receive the Sacrament with comfort though wicked men be
admitted there. So that though the communion be defiled, that is, defiled to
those that are guilty, to those that have neglected their duty (wheresoever the
power lies in a Church, whosoever in that Church neglects their duty of casting
out those that offend, they defile the communion so far as in them lies, and
if any of you that are particular members neglect your duties, so far as in you
lies the communion is defiled by you:) but if you do your duty once, then,
though wicked men may be there, you may receive the Sacrament with comfort; For
though the communion may be defiled in respect of others that have neglected
their duty, yet it is not defiled in respect of you that have done your duty.
Now then, to conclude this with that place in Psalm. 119.1. Blessed is the man
that is undefiled in the way. Blessed are those men that in their way, in the
course of their lives keep themselves from defilement, and especially keep
themselves from defilement in the ways of Gods worship. Blessed is he whose
heart is cleansed from secret filth, that by the vain carnal plots reasonings
and cunning fetches of wicked men he does not defile himself in his way.

Again, A further Note from hence is this:

Obser. A defiled Nation near to ruin.
A defiled Nation, is near u^^^ ^^^n.

Israel is defiled (He spe^ srael that is ready to fall, for so it follows
verse 5. Israel a^^ Ephraim shall fall, and here just before he tells us, that
Israel is defiled.) When clothes are filthy and nasty and will not be purged,
are not worth the cleansing, simile
we usually cast them upon the dunghill; so when there is defilement and filth
amongst a people and they will not be purged, and are grown even rotten in
their filthiness, the Lord casts them upon the dunghill. While a Nation is
purging there is hope. simile
While God is indeed purging of a Nation (I beseech you observe it) there is
all that while hope of that Nation. As for example, though a piece of cloth be
very soul, yet if you see the servants of the house washing that cloth, you
will say, surely this piece of cloth is not intended for the dunghill: It is
soul indeed and it is noisome, but you see there is care taken and cost bestowed
upon it for the purging of it, and that is an argument that there is an
intention for the preserving of it. So while the Lord is taking care and
bestowing cost to purge a Nation, there is much hope that the Lord intends to
save that Nation. And we may comfortably hope that this is Gods intention
toward us. God knows we have been a defiled people, England.
and have defiled our selves; never a one of us but may lay his hand upon his
heart and say, I have been defiled and so may deserve to be cast upon the
dunghill. But behold, the Lord is bestowing cost upon us, and He is cleansing
and purging of us, and therefore we may hope that the Lord will not cast us off.

But no mervail that the Lord lets us and our brethren lie abroad in frosty
nights. Frostynights
Many complain of much hardship, our brethren many of them are sent from their
houses where they have had their beds and fire, and now are fain to lie in the
fields in the cold. No marvail I say, this Nation has been defiled. When
clothes are much defiled, it is not enough to wash them and rince them, but
you lay them abroad in frosty nights. Yea there are some defilements that
cannot be taken away but by fire, Fire
and if the Lord will not only wash us and rince us and lay us abroad, but put
us into the fire for to cleanse us at last, blessed be his Name. Israel is
defiled.

VER. 4. They will not frame their doings to turn unto their God.


HERE lies the evil. Though we be defiled, if God be about to cleanse us there
is hope; but if the words that follow in this 4th verse, be applied unto us,
then we are a lost people indeed. Israel i^ d filed indeed, but Israel may be
brought back again and reg^^ned to the true worship of God; Oh no sait^ God,
Israel is not only defiled, but he will not fram^ his doings to turn unto his
God.

(...)
He will not frame his d ings.] The word is very elegant, you have not such an
expression (that I know of) in all the Scripture besides. Some read, Hierom
and vulg.
Non d^bunt cogitationes, he will not give himself to think of such a thing, of
turning unto the Lord. And Mercer.
others they turn it thus, Non dabunt opera^. Castle.
Non dabunt operam, they will not do their endeavors to turn unto the Lord. And
others, Tiemel.
Non adhibent actiones, they do not apply any action or theirs any way to turn
to the Lord. And D^usius: non s^^unt, n^n permittunt. Pagnin, Non permittent
opera sua.
others, N^n permittunt opera, and facta sua; their custom in their ways of
sin will not suffer them to turn to the Lord. And The Septuag. Non dant studium.
Calv. Non adjicient studia sua.
others thus. (...), they give not their counsels, their stu^ies to turn to the
Lord. These several translations I find of the word. And by all these together
we may come to h^ve further light to know the meaning of the Spirit of God in
th^se words; F^r the words are some what strange, therefore we had need of
several expressions to find out the sense of them.

They w^ll not fr^me their doings.] They will not give their mind to turn to
^he Lord, they will not put forth themselves into any po^ture that way. Though
no ability to act but from God, yet sin lies in our wills, rather than in our
power.
It is true, we can do nothing without the Lord, but yet the sin lies in our
wills rather than in our power, therefore the will is charged by God. They
cannot turn unto G^d of themselves, but yet they may d^ somwha^, they m^^ bend
their thoughts upon it, they may think of it, they may attend upon ^he me^ns.
But says the holy Ghost, they will do nothing tending that way, they will not
so much as set themselves into any kind of posture of turning unto me. This is
to show what little hope of good there wa^ in them for time to to come. They
are far enough from turning unto Me says God, there is not so much as any
inclination in them of turning unto Me, they are fully bent another way; though
they cannot do it of themselves, yet they will not so much as give their minds
to think of what may be a means to do it. Israel will not frame his doings to
turn unto his God.

As thus, First, What a natural man may do toward conversion, by the light of
nature, of the Scripture, of the Ministry, and common works of the Spirit. 1.
Consider his ways.
He will not so much as set his heart to think of any thing that will bring him
unto God. Not so much as to think thus, Are my ways right or not right? What
if it should prove that my ways are not right, what shall become of me then?
This were one degree of a peoples or a particular souls turning unto God; if a
man did but thus frame his doings to turn unto God; if he had but such thoughts
as these, Lord, what am I doing? What is my way? Am I right or no? what if it
should prove that my way were not right, what would become of me? This were
somewhat. But says God, they are far enough from any such thoughts to make any
stop in their sinful course, they run on violently and he^dlesly, and will not
so much as frame their thoughts and studies to turn unto Me.

But Secondly, Though a man cannot turn unto God, 2. Willing to bear.
yet through the common works of Gods Spirit he (...) do this, he may be
willing to hear what i^ s^id for the (...) he may c^nsider whether there is
s^rengt^ in what is s^i^ (...): But says he, they are carried on with
pr^^udice against the ways of God let what will be said, they will (...) ^^me
themselves to hear any thing that is said for ^ods ways and against theirs.

Thirdly, They will not s^t themselves before God, 3. Wait in the use o^ means.
t^ wait upon Him in the use of means for His Gr^^e to turn unto Him. It i^
(...) we are poor, weak, and ignorant creatur^s, but if we ^ou^^ wait upon God
to know His mind, if we would s^^ (...) ^aces that way, it may be God will
reveal further of hi^ (...) ^^^o u^. In Jer. 50.5. When ^od intends good unto
(...) people, it is promise^, that they ^^^ll ^sk the w^y to ^i^n, wit^ (...)
thitherward. A true repenting people and a repe^^^^^ (...) will be enquiring
after the ways of God with his face standing thitherward. But says God, they
will not do so much as do this, they will not set themselves to enquire after
the mind and ways of God with their faces thitherward.

4. Apply ^he rule.
Fourthly, Thy will not apply the rule of the word unto their actions; but
whatsoever they see will make for their own ends, that they will follow: but to
take the rule and apply it unto their action^ and ways, they reject that, they
will not frame their doings so far.

5. Use the light and power they have in outward acts.
Fifthly, What light they have they will not use that, so as to do the outward
acts that that light does direct to do, and what they have power to do; As, not
to break off gross offenses, such things as they cannot possibly but see to be
evil. As a people though they cannot fully turn unto God presently, yet there
are some things that are so gross that they cannot possibly but see they are
evil: says God, they will not so much as break off from that; though they have
power to reform that which they are convinced to be evil, but says he, they
will not improve that light which they have, what should they have more light
for?

6. Join with the work or not oppose. But Romans 8.7. it is said, The carnal
mind is not subject to the law of God, not indeed can be.
Sixthly, They will not join with the work of God; When he is in his way toward
them, when he himself is about to frame them, when he has them in his hand
they will oppose Gods work, they will not join with it to frame themselves to
turn unto God. Therefore in 2 Chronicles. 30.8. Hezekiah exhorts the Priests and
the people, that they should not be stiffnecked, but yield themselves unto the
Lord; mark, the yiedling of themselves unto the Lord, is contrary to
stiffneckedness. But now this people are stiffnecked, they will not yield
themselves unto the Lord, though the Lord by his gracious works toward them be
a framing of them to turn them unto himself, they oppose Gods work, they riggle
and keep a stir and stand out against it: simile
Just as when you have a child that you would fain frame to such a gesture, and
you take him and put him into such a way; but now he is so far from doing of
it, that he riggles up and down and will not suffer you to frame him; why faith
God, I have been a framing of them my self, I have not only shown them what
they should do, but my works have been so toward them, that I have been framing
them, but they are stiffnecked, they will not be framed, they will not join
with my work in framing of them, they will break out in their wicked waie^ even
at that very time when I am framing of them to turn them unto my self; Hos.
7.1. opened.
According unto that expression you have in Hos. 7.1. When I would have healed
Israel, then the wick^dness of Samaria was discovered, that is, when I was
about to turn them unto me, then, even at that time they break out in their
violence and wickedness.

Seventhly, 7. Not adhere to things received.
Whatsoever means is used to turn them unto God, they will stick to their ^ld
customs, to their former ways, to what they have received from their
forefathers, to what they have been brought up in, those they will keep to; but
to frame themselves to turn unto the Lord, that they will not.

Lastly, What advantage they can have against the ways of God, 8. Not take
advantage against the ways of God.
that they will take and improve to the uttermost. Those people that are
against framing of themselves to turn unto the Lord when God is about to turn
the^, they discover it in this thing, if at that time there be any disadvantage
that their corrupt hearts can possibly take against the ways of God, they will
take that and improve it to the uttermost they can; just as a child that you
would frame to such a way, if it be an untoward child, he will take any
advantage to give you the slip and to run from you: simile
so it is with people that have no heart to turn unto the Lord, if they have
any advantage in the world, they will take it, to harden their hearts against
Gods ways. There is no preparation of their hearts, what then shall I do with
them says God? if their heart^ ^ere in any preparation it were somewhat, but
they are n^^ We read in 8 Chron. 20. 2 Chronicles. 20.33. paralleled
that the high places were not taken away because the people had not prepared
their hearts to turn unto the Lord. It is all one with this expression in the
text the people were not in a frame, in a teachable, Applic. to England,
in a convertible disposition. The Lord grant that this Scripture may not be
true of us at this day, that the reason why there remains so much evil in
Gods worship, is, because the people have not prepared their hearts, they do
not frame their doings to turn unto the Lord, they do not seem to be in any
posture that way. It was a charge upon Rehoboam, in 2 Chronicles. 12.14. That he did
evil, we ought to prepare our hearts see Anns. cas. comc. lib. 2. c. 4.
because he prepared not his heart to seek the Lord: But you will say, what
power had he to turn unto the Lord, he was a wicked man? Yea but this wicked
man though he had no saving grace, yet he is charged for doing evil in that he
did not prepare his heart to seek the Lord. God therefore expects that people,
though they are not able to turn unto him thoroughly, yet they should be in a
posture that way; And as a people in general, so every soul in particular.

Some that are not yet turned to the Lord, yet are in a way of turning, they
are in a readiness to receive what God shall reaveal. This is a happy
condition. If God shall see a Nation (though it be not fully reformed) ready to
receive what he shall reveal, Oh this is a happy thing. As the Scripture
speaks, Joh. 4.35. opened.
that the regions were white unto the harvest, that is, there was a preparation
in the hearts of people to receive the Gospel; if God shall see such a frame of
heart in a people; it is true this people are not fully reformed, but their
hearts are prepared, they are ready to embrace what the mind of God is when it
shall be revealed unto them, Oh that this might be said of thi^ people, they
are willing to entertain what God shall speak, they are listening to it!

God is about to bring us from a way of superstition, both the Works and the
Word of God tend that way; but there are multitudes of people that will not
frame their doings to turn unto the Lord, their spirits are perverse, they are
full of prejudice, froward, and they hang off, and then we know they cannot be
convinced. The Apostle Peter bids the Saints in Act. 2.40. save themselves from
that untoward generation. Oh let not this charge be upon us, that we are an
untoward generation, that God i^ framing of us for good, but we will not frame
our doings to turn unto the Lord: As we see a workman when he has a piece of
timber that is knotty and will not work in his hand, he casts it into the fire;
or as clay

If we will not frame our doings to turn unto the Lord, he may break us, break
that frame that we raise in our own imaginations: perhaps we are framing to our
selves a strange kind of Commonwealth, State-designs.
to enjoy our ease and honors and prosperity, and so we build Castles in the
air. Oh but let us rather frame our hearts to turn unto the Lord. If we will
not frame God may put us into the fire again. A workman you know puts the Iron
into the fire because it might be framed to such a work as he would have it,
simile
but still the iron is hard and it will not frame to his hand, then he puts it
into the fire again and then falls a knocking again: So the Lord has begun
to put us into the fire that we may frame our doings to turn unto him, and if
the fire we have been in will not bring our hearts to a framable disposition,
the Lord may put us into the fire again and again. And let not us complain of
the heat of Gods fire, but rather let us complain of the unframableness of our
own hearts, that we do not frame our doings so as to turn unto the Lord.

But yet through Gods mercy we cannot say but that there are many in
Parliament, many in the Assembly, Parliam. Assembly City, Country.
many in the City, and many in the Country that are framing themselves to turn
unto the Lord; and so far we are gone; Let us take notice of Gods goodness
therefore. As.

First, It is one argument of a people framing themselves, Notes of Framing. 1.
abolish what is sinful.
that they have abolished what is sinful. It was a great plea among us, first
let us know what we shall have, and then we will cast out this that we have.
This was a ple^ fomented by the Antichristian party; but certainly it was the
way of God; and we have cause to bless God for it that put it into the heart of
the Parliament and of the Kingdom, to be willing to put down and to cast out
(and that by a solemn Oath, by lifting up hands unto the most High God)
whatsoever was naught. The Covenant.


And further, In that the Parliament has called an Assembly Assembly
(such as I believe never yet was in this Nation, nor scarce in any other
Nation) men of more gravity, 2. Take advice.
and judgment, and holiness, such as they could possibly pick out and whom they
thought might best direct them in the ways of God, such they have chosen to
help them to know what is the right way of God; and they do profess that
whatsoever shall be revealed to be the way of God, they will walk in it. That
is a good frame of heart.

And then, That the Assembly has begun with a solemn day of humiliation, 3.
Humiliation.
to humble themselves before God that so the Lord might guide them in choosing a
right way to direct those that had called them together for their assistance.
There was never such a work in England before that was begun with such a day of
humiliation. Did your Convocation Convocation.
ever keep such a day unto God to beg of him directions in the work.

Peoples discontent.
Let not people run away with thoughts of discontent, or lay any kind of
slanders and clumnies upon them, because of some failings in particulars: for
you must know when God looks upon Kingdoms and States, God looks not at
particular failings of a State, but at the public work.
he does not so much look at particulars as at the public work; Now that there
is so much done in a public way, that there is so much framableness, though
there be much failing in particulars, yet we have cause to bless God. It is
true, those that would fain have a perfect Reformation they woul fain have men
thoroughly frame themselves presently, and set up all presently without any more
ado, Short spirits.
and banish all presently. I suppose thi^ comes from a good intention, from
love unto Christ and his Ordinances: but we must know it is not so easy to
reform a whole Nation that has been so corrupted and defiled; therefore though
there be not so perfect a Reformation at present, yet let us bless God for what
is done, that there is so much framing of the doings of the Nation to turn unto
the Lord, and not murmur and repine because all is not done that we desire.

And though perhaps they may never bring the work thoroughly to the pitch we
desire, Though no perfection, yet a foundation for posterity
yet I make no question but what the Parliament and Assembly has done, will be
enough to lay a foundation for another generation, if they bring it not to
perfection themselves. Oh that the Lord would yet further frame our hearts and
doings to turn unto him!

Has God at any time put into your heart a framable disposition to turn unto
the Lord? Applic. 2 to partic. persons. 1. Our selves
Has God begun to make you think of your ways? Has he begun to stir fear in
your hearts concerning your eternal estate? Has he wrought in you some desires
to know him, to attend upon him in the use of means? Make much of this framable
disposition, for it is very much pleasing unto God; God complains where it is
not, therefore he likes it where it is, and improve it: O happy had it been
with many had they improved that framable disposition that God has wrought in
them. Cannot you remember when sometimes you came to the word what a melting
frame of spirit had you? and in such an affliction you were as iron put into
the fire (and you know then it is in a framable disposition to be brought into
any fashion) and has it not been so with you? simile
But what is become of this disposition? Is it not worse with you now than
before? Have you not lost it? The time was when the word wrought upon you, and
you have had good desires and dispositions, and you have thought, Oh now I hope
God will turn me unto himself; Now I hope I shall never be at such a pass again
as I have been; and thou begannest to abandon such and such a corruption. This
was a good frame, and now if you had gone alone and sought God, and Oh that the
Lord would perfect this work and put it on, and so improved this framable
disposition, it had been well with you; but you have fallen upon other
business, and gone into company, and it may be upon the next temptation you
have bin overcome and your hearts have been hardened, Ir^n is h^^d^r afte^
quenching.
and iron you know, when it has been once in the fire and is grown cold, is
more unframable than before; so it is with many, after they have had some
workings by the Word and after some melting by affliction, they have been more
unframable than they were before.

And let us make much of it likewise in others. Is there any friend, or child,
or kinsman, or acquaintance of yours brought into this framable disposition?
does the Lord begin to melt them, to soften their hearts? Is the Lord by such a
Sermon or by such an affliction beginning to work upon them? Satan
Oh let me put it on as much as I can. The Devil does so, when he see, us in a
framable disposition to sin, he sets tempters on work to improve it; and we
know it was the way of Idolaters, Idolaters
when they saw England in a framable disposition to Idolatry, what abundance
were sent amongst us to improve it. Oh the mercy of God toward England, that
when we were framing our doings to return to Idolatry, the Lord comes and
puts the frame of England more from thence than before it was! Oh let not us
lose this framableness; though it is not so much as we desire, yet let not us
lose what it is. England would be in a lamentable condition if it should lose
what it has got from God already.

Yet further, They will not frame their doings.] The Note from hence is, That

Obser.
Apostates seldom have any inclination to turn unto God. No meltings of spirit,
no yeildings, but their hearts are hardened, and they depart further and further
from God (for so he speaks of Israel as an apostatizing people.) I dare almost
challenge you all; when did you ever know a notorious Apostate They will not
frame their doings.

To turn unto their God.] Their God: 1. By profession. 2. Their God who has
showed much mercy to them, and has done them much good. 3. Their God who is
yet willing to be their God. They will not return unto Him.

This is the aggravation of their sin, that they will not turn to such a God.
What, not turn unto Him whom they profess to be theirs, whom they flatter with
their mouths, and they say that all their good and happiness is in Him? Not to
Him that has done so much good as He has done to them all their days? Not to
Him who is yet willing to be reconciled unto them? O this is a sore and bitter
evil indeed that they will not turn unto this God.

But yet there is a furth^r thing observable here, [Their God] that is this;
That

True repentance, it is not only to leave evil and to do good, Observe. True
repentance to turn to as our God.
but to turn unto God as our God. To turn unto God as a God in covenant with
us; as a God in whom is our portion and happiness; as a God willing to be
reconciled. Here indeed is the very formality of repentance. A man may by the
terors of the Law turn from the practice of a sin, not to live wickedly so as
he has don heretofore; he may by the strength of natural conscience and self
ends, set upon good duties, but here is no true repentance. True repentance is
this, When we look upon God as a God tendering Himself unto us in the way of a
covenant in Christ, and so we turn unto Him. In Jer. 3.22. Jer. 3.22. explained
Return ye backsliding Israel (says the Lord) and I will heal your
backsliding. Now mark the answer of true penitents; Behold we come unto thee,
for thou art the Lord our God. Here is true repentance. When God shall call
upon a sinner, O wretched vile sinner, return, O return unto the Lord, for He
is willing to be your God in an everlasting covenant, He manifests His grace
toward you in His Son, and offers mercy there, yea He is willing to heal all
your backslidings, He is willing to be your portion, He i^ willing to be the
happiness of your souls: When a sinner shall answer unto this call of God,
B^hold we come unto Thee, for Thou art the Lord our God; True indeed, we have
sought after vanity, but here is not our happiness and our portion; Our good,
our happiness is in Thee; We come unto Thee the Lord our God. It follows.

For the spirit of whoredoms is in the midst of her. Here is the reason why
they turn not unto the Lord, The spirit of whoredoms is in the midst of her.

Obser. The danger of forsaking the truth.
It is Gods just judgment to give men over to the Devil to be blinded and
hard^ed, when they s^all forsake Him and His Truth.

Do not excuse thy sin by saying it is the Devil that tempts thee, for this may
prove to be the agravation of thy sin, that by the just judgment of God thou
art now given up to be under the power of the Devil and to be acted by him. As
in Ephesians. 2.2. the scripture speaks of the miserable estate that men are in by
nature, Dead in sin, the children of wrath, and amongst other aggravations of
their misery this is not the least, they walk according to the spirit that now
work^th in the children of disobedience. The word translated working, there,
(...), signifies the greatest activity that can be; the spirit, that is, the
unclean spirit, Satan's temptation may be an aggravation of our sin.
the prince of the power of the air that now works in those children of
disobedience. This is an aggravation of their misery and not any excuse unto
them for their sin. Thou have rejected the good Spirit, the holy Spirit of God,
and now the spirit of whoredom, an unclean vile spirit has possessed thee.

The spirit of whoredoms: A violent inclination of spirit unto uncleanness, to
spiritual and bodily uncleanness, that they have got by custom. We have had
this phrase before, in Chap. 4.11. The spirit of fornication; that impetus of
spirit, that violent inclination of spirit. So then, says the Prophet, they
will not turn unto the Lord, for there is a violent inclination of spirit, an
impetus with which they are carried on in the ways of wickedness, but there is
little hope of turning them unto God. The spirit of whoredoms, that is, that
efficacy that there is in that wicked disposition of their hearts that carries
them on so violently. In 2 These. 2.11. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.
the Scripture says, that because men love not the truth the Lord gives them
up unto the efficacy of error; God (says he) for this cause shall send them
strong delusions that they should believe a lie; so it is in your translations,
but the words, (...), signify the greatest active efficacy of errors, to
carry on with the greatest strength unto error that possibly may be. We find
sometimes men that are carried on to erroneous opinions, and come to speak with
them about them, and you shall perceive such an impetus of spirit, such an
efficacy of the error in them, Note
that it does so hurry on their hearts, that they cannot with a, ny calmness,
with any quietness of spirit hearken unto any thing that may take them off from
their error. That Is a spirit of error, God gives them up to the efficacy, the
spirit, the activity, the power of error, to believe a lie.

Is in the ^^lst of them] That is, Exposit. Difference of obss^ssion and
possession ay Satan in respect of sin.
it is come into them and sits as a King and rules in their hearts. An evil
spirit may beset the godly, may compass them about, but it gets not into the
midst o^ them, they keep it out from the throne, it does not come to reign over
them. The coming into the midst of them, notes the full possession that this
unclean spirit, that this Impetus and strong inclination of spirit has over
them. And therefore, you find in Prove. 8.20. Pro. 8.20. opened,
that it is said of Wisdom, I lead in the way of righteous^ess, in the midst
of the paths of judgment. [In the midst of the paths] that is, wisdom does not
only bring men to the verge of Gods ways, to be a little taken with the
outside of them; but brings them into the midst of the paths of judgment, that
is, they come wholly into them, so as t^^y are even possessed of them. So here,
the spirit of uncl ^nness is in the midst of her. So in the 1. Sam. 4.3. you
have the same word, Let us fetch the Ark unto us (say they there) that when it
comes among w it may save us, (...)
the words in the Hebrew are, that ^he Ark may come in the midst of us, and
there have the full opp^^ation to d^ us good and save us. They depended much
upon the Ark, and yet it failed them. By the way then, we may depend too much
upon a good cause, the cause may be good, A good cause may be lost by too much
depending on it.
and yet depending upon the goodness of the cause and neglecting our own
persons in reforming our lives we may fail as they did here: (But that by the
way.)

The spirit is come into the midst of them. Many men receive an evil spirit
quickly into the midst of them, when God knows the good Spirit of the Lord
stands knocking at the door of their hearts, and can have no entertainment so
much as into the outward room. It follows.

Exposit.
And they have not known the Lord.] That is, they know not My greatness, My
holiness, they know not what a jealous God I am. Idolaters have low and mean
apprehensions of God. The right knowledge of God will put the heart upon seeking
after the right manner of the worship of God: but when men know not God, see
not God in his glory and greatness and excellency, they think to put off God
with any kind of worship. Here is the reason that men do so stick to their own
ways, to will worship, to their own fancies and conceits, because they know
not the Lord, neither do they understand the glory and holiness of God, nor
what a jealous God he is. When once the soul comes to know what God is, such a
soul dares not tender up unto God any worship but His own.

Now from the connection of these words, The spirit of whoredom is in the midst
of her, and they have not known the Lord, the special Note is this, which
indeed is very observable.

Obser. strong inclinations blind the mind.
When men have an Impetus of spirit (that is, a strong bent and inclination of
spirit) in any evil way, it is that which blinds their minds.

The spirit of whoredoms is in her; and then follows, they have not known the
Lord: Whatsoever is said then against their way they cannot be convinced of it.
And men do not consider how they come to be blinded. We find it in ordinary
experience, when men are stirred in passion, they have a spirit to such and
such a thing that they have a mind to, their spirit is strongly set, and they
must have it, and I will, and I will, and I will have it; Come then and say any
thing to them and they understand nothing, they are blinded: When their spirit
is up, when there is an Impetus, a strong inclination of spirit to any thing,
say what you will they do not understand you. So it is true in other affections
(of love) when the heart is set upon a thing, to love by an Impetus, a strong
bent of spirit, though the love be falsely placed, come and say what you will
against their way, they do not understand it, their minds are blinded, they do
not know any thing. So it is true of fear, of sorrow, any affection, when it is
set with a strong bent and inclination to the object of it, it does much blind
the mind. Some have a spirit of sluggishness and they love their ease; a spirit
of covetousness and they must have their estates; a spirit of ambition and they
must have their honor and respect; a spirit of pride and self-love and they
must not yield themselves as ignorant and mistaken by no means; therefore they
cannot see the truths, the ways of God. But now let God humble these men that
have such a spirit of pride, self love, covetousness and the like, let the edg
of their spirits be taken off, A little hint of Truth prevails with a subdued
heart.
let God come and but mortify this their lust in them, and then they come to
see that which they could never see before, and that with far less ado; then a
little hint of any truth prevails with their hearts; whereas before all the
means of conviction could not do it.

Oh my brethren! Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, him will the Lord
teach in his way that he should choose. When a man humbling his soul before the
Lord, and being jealous of his own spirit, examineth a truth; and cries unto
God to subdue what is evil in him, and then comes with a teachable heart to
find out the truth; suppose that yet he cannot find it; let such a man walk
according to his light, whereunto he has attained, and he may have comfort,
God in due time will show him more. But that is the thing that is evil in Gods
eyes, and in the eyes of the Saints, when men are hindered from seeing a truth,
by a spirit of opposition to it. There is no gracious heart can take it ill, if
he see one that has a spirit subject unto God, a spirit wherein the fear of
God appears, so that he desires unfeignedly to know what the mind of God is;
suppose this man for the present I cannot make him understand what I would, he
is not of my mind; yet so long as his spirit is thus under God, I have no cause
to be provoked against him, but in all love and meekness and gentleness to deal
with such an one, and expect that God in due time will reveal himself unto him.
But now when any one comes and will make profession that they desire to know
the truths of God and what his mind is? but when it appears that there is a
spirit of opposition, pride, a vain glorious a vain spirit; Oh this is it (I
say) which is grievous, is tedious in the eyes of God and of his Saints. It
follows.

VER. 5. And the Pride of Israel does testify to his face.


MArk another connection here. As there is a connection of a spirit of whoredom
and not knowing God, so there is a connection of not knowing God and of the
pride of Israel. A double connexio^ of the Text. Obser. Ignorance and pride
companions
They know not the Lord, and the pride of Israel does testify to his face.
From whence the Note is this, That Ignorance and Pride uses to go together.

There is no men so conceited of their knowledge as many ignorant men are: For
the truth is, where there is knowledge there a man sees that he knows but
little, and he is able to discover his own ignorance; but an ignorant man is
not able to discover his own ignorance, and therefore usually he is proud. You
shall have many men and women too, that will pretend such abundance of
knowledge, and their hearts are puffed up, because they have got some
expressions more than others have, as if they were somebody, and had some
manifestations of things to them more than others have; yet come and examine
things at the bottom, and the truth is they are ignorant of the very principles
of Religion. 1 Timothy 6.4. 1 Timothy 6.4 applied.
He is proud, knowing nothing says the text, and yet he speaks of those that
are full of vain questions and janglings about matters of Religion, that will
come with such objections and curiosities of questions, yet the holy Ghost
says he is proud and knows nothing. And certainly the man that is there spoken
of is a man as much conceited of his knowledge as you can conceive a man to be,
as appears plainly in the text.

But now wisdom and humility, Use from the contrary.
they likewise go together too. Prove. 11.2. With the lowly is wisdom. If the
heart be brought under God, put in a gracious, humble, lowly frame, with the
lowly there is wisdom, the Lord delights to reveal himself to the humble.

The pride of Israel does testify to his face.] The Seventy they read the
words otherwise than you have them in your books. (...).
The injury and the wrong that Israel has done unto God, shall be brought
down, shall be humbled: for I suppose their meaning in that translation i^
this, that whereas Israel by his wicked ways has wronged God, has been
injurious unto God, he shall be humbled for it, he shall be brought down and
made to know what it is for him to wrong God so as he has done. And indeed
those that do corrupt Gods worship they are the greatest wrongers of God in the
world, Obser.
they do the greatest injury unto God that can be.

But we may safely keep unto that which is translated in your books, The
English reading.
as more suitable to the Original than that of the Seventy, and then the Note
is this, That

Idolaters are proud men, and Idolatry is a proud sin. Obs. Id^laters proud men.
For that is the scope of the Prophet here, chiefly to rebuke them for their
false worship; though he speaks of other sins yet that is the main; O the pride
of Israel does testify to his face; Israel they will have their own way of
worship and forsake God, O proud hearts that they have! Idolatry is a proud
sin. In all disobedience against God there is much pride: pride is not only in
clothes and in fine things, but in disobedience against God, there is the
pride of the heart; And as in all sin there is pride, so in a more peculiar
manner in the sin of Idolatry. As,

First, Idolaters in their way, 1. The despising the true worship of God.
they look upon the true worship of God as a mean thing, as a thing below them,
beneath them. Oh their way of worship is the pompous, brave, and gallant way;
but for the true worship of God that is poor, low and mean. All your
superstitious and Idolatrous people look thus upon the simplicity of the ways
and worship of God.

2. They put more on the creature than God has put. Places.
Secondly, And then there is pride in it in this, That a wretched worm should
dare to presume to put more upon a creature than God has ever done, to put
more upon places than God and nature has ever done. God has made them thus
and thus, but I will put them higher than God has done, I will put an
excellency, a spiritual excellency, a divine excellency upon them; for so
Idolaters take upon themselves to do, and this is horrible pride.

3. They prescribe God in worship.
Thirdly, It is pride, because they presume to prescribe God which way he shall
be worshipped. The worship of God is the dearest thing he has in the world; and
for any creature to take upon him to prescribe which way he shall be worshipped,
this is the most notorious pride in the world.

4. Honor their own because theirs.
Lastly, Herein appears the pride of Idolatry, that it honors what is a man's
own because it is his own, rather than what is Gods. Do not you see it
apparently in all superstitious Idolatrous people? As in that one thing of
days. God has set one day apart for the honoring of himself and for the
celebrating both of the birth, Lords. day.
death, resurrection and ascension of Jesus Christ and of the whole work of our
redemption. How is that day slighted, neglected, made nothing of! But what a
horrible wickedness is it accounted not to keep that which man sets apart by
himself, Holy days.
that day which is a man's own! Men will set apart a day for the honor of
Christ, and Oh Christ will be quite forgotten if that day be forgotten; and
Christ is much dishonored if that day be not regarded. I appeal unto you, Who
sets it apart? whose is it? Is it Gods or is it yours? Gods? Certainly if there
were such a thing so acceptable unto God as men take it to be, we should have
some little hint, somewhat in the book of God of such a thing. We have the
story of all the Acts of the Apostles, what they did in several places, and
there is not the least mention of any such thing, of their honoring Christ, by
setting a day apart for the celebration of his nativity: We have the Epistles
unto several Churches upon several occasions, and we find no notice that they
ever took of any such thing in any Church they established. Surely therefore it
is men's own, there is nothing in Gods Word for it how highly soever it is
honored. But we have enough in Scripture for Gods own day, the Lords day, and
it is appointed by God himself to be a day of thanksgiving for the birth,
resurrection, and ascension of Christ, and for the whole work of our redemption
altogether; But man, he out of his pride will have another day and so set his
post by Gods post; he thinks it is not honor enough unto Christ to put the
celebration of his birth, death, resurrection, ascension, all together in one
day; no, he thinks it is more for the honor of Christ to have several days,
one for his birth, another for his resurrection, and another for his ascension;
whereas God has put all into one, and would have his Son to be honored by the
observation of that one day.

The pride of Israel does testify to his face. Testify.] In the Original it
is, answers to his face, (...)
When any thing i^ returned suitable to its work, that is said to answer that
work: that is thus; when the ground brings forth Corn for the husbandman, then
it answers unto the seed and labor of the husbandman. Genesis 30.33. My
righteousness shall answer for me says Jacob to Laban, I shall have that which
is suitable to my righteousness. So here, the pride of Israel answers to his
face (so you may read it) that is, the fruit of Mic. 1.2. Let the Lord be
witness against you, (testify against you, it is the same word) or answer you
according unto your sins, in the way of punishment; that is the meaning. When
the Lord brings judgments suitable unto, and full up to men's sins, those
judgments do answer to men's sins; yea and they witness against them, they
witness to the faces of those men the guilt of those sins.

Well, but we will rather take it (and so it is to be I think) according to
what you read in your books, The pride of Israel that is, the pride that does
appear in Israel does fully te^^ifie that horrible wickedness, stoutness,
obstinacy that is in Israel, it testifies it to his face. Israel is a stout and
an obstinate sinner, and his heart is very wicked, vile, and abominable against
God; How do you prove that? His pride that manifests it self outwardly does
testify this his inward wickedness. It is true, you cannot see the heart; but
pride does use to discover it self; pride in the heart seldom lies there long
secret; for that is a sin that must be above-board; pride must vent it self; it
is the glory of that sin to vent it self; Now that coming and venting it self,
what does it but witness to the face of the sinner what vileness and wickedness
is in his heart? You could not see the vileness and wickedness that was in his
heart before; but now here thi^ sin [Pride] that is sent out (and pride is a
foolish sin it cannot keep in) and that coming forth it is a loud witness
against him of that filth, vileness, stoutness, and obstinacy that there is in
the heart of this sinner.

There is a secret pride, and a witnessing pride. Isa. 3.9. The show of their
countenance does wi ness against them, Isa. 3.9. opened.
and they declare their sin like Sodom; they manifest it outwardly in their
very countenance: It is taken from harlots, some harlots that are at first
departed from their husbands, they keep things very secretly, and you shall
perceive them very demure in their countenance, but at length they come to be
bold and impudent in their filthiness, and you may perceive adultery in their
very countenance; and they witness apparently in their words and countenances
what the wickedness of their hearts is. Pride discovers much sin within.
As that sin of adultery, so almost all sins are witnessed where pride is
discovered. No sin disgraceth men more than pride, and that is the curse of God
upon this sin; pride seeks for the greatest honor to a man, and there is
nothing that does more dishonor him; Why? because pride does testify that
there is a woeful deal of evil in that man's heart. As I will instance a little.

A man that differs in judgment from his brethren in diverse things; he
differs and he pretends this, he cannot see the truth of God which he would
fain see; he cannot do as his brother for his conscience binds him otherwise.
How to discern differing from others out of pride or conscience
But you will say, every man pleads conscience, how shall we know whether it be
the stoutness of his heart or the tenderness of his conscience? Thus, If this
man behaveth himself humbly, and the rather humbly in all other things because
he cannot see what his brother does in such and such particulars, and so is in
danger to be an offense to his brother, and therefore his soul is humbled: This
is a good witness that it is mere conscience and not stoutness that makes him
differ. But now if his behavior be high and proud when he differs from his
brother, he does not take it to be an affliction to him that he cannot see what
his brother or that his brother does not see what he does. This passage must be
understood, 1 Of lesser differences. 2. Not absolutely nor always, but in
things wherein one is not clear; for if he be, he cannot but think it is at
least weakness in that particular (though in others he may judge him stronger
than himself) that he does not see the same with him.
does, but censureth him and thinks that it is either through his weaknes^ or
through his wilfulness, that he will not see, and so carries himself high and
proudly before his brother, this witnesses to his face that it is stubborness
and singularity. Thus his pride testifies to his face the inward wickedness of
his heart.

And as in a Church, this is a principle and maxim, That though a man be guilty
of many and great sins, yet he is not to be cast out but upon obstinacy. You
will say how shall we know that, for obstinacy is in a man's heart? I know many
observe such and such rules for it, as, if you do not reform when such and such
learned men tell you what they would do etc. But we have another rule; if after
an offense and admonition there be a proud behavior of any one in a
Congregation, if he carries himself proudly; this his proud behavior witnesses
to his face that it is not out of tenderness or scruple of conscience that he
yeildeth nor to what his brethren would have him, but through the stoutness of
his heart. His pride testifies to his face.

O the pride of men's hearts witnesses much against them. I remember I have
read in Beda a story of a Synod, an Assembly of Divines that were in England,
Austin the Monk.
in the time of Austin that was then Bishop of Canterbury; And they assembling
together they go to a holy man, an Anchorite, to advise with him whether they
should yield to what Austin did impose upon them? (who was then the Arch
Bishop) This holy man answers Learn of me, for I am meek and humble in heart:
if he be an humble man, he is a man of God says he, and then learn of him. But
how Austin he sits in his chair in a proud imperious way and would not stir
to any of them: upon that they rejected whatsoever he said, for according to
the counsel of that holy man, his pride did witness to his face that he had a
vile and a wicked heart and did not come unto them in the Name of Christ.

Humility
Oh it is much that is to be regarded that comes from those that are humble and
lowly. Humility does witness to the face of a man that he does know much of the
mind of Christ; and pride witnesses to the face of a man that he is not
acquainted with the mind of Christ.

Expos. 2. (...) Livelius.
The word here translated [Pride] I find by a learned Interpreter, Livelius,
that because in it self it signifies Excellency, he thinks it to meant of God,
who swears by the Excellency of Jacob, Amos. 8.5. and so he carries it thus,
That God who is the Excellency of Israel, in whom Israel should glory, it is He
that does witness against them. And I find some inclinable to this. But the
other I conceive rather to be the scope of the Holy Ghost, taking the word as
it i^ translated for Pride, and the testifying to his face, for an open
witnessing, apparently witnessing, so as it may easily be seen. It follows.

Therefore shall Israel and Ephraim fall in their iniquity. Ephraim, is the
Princes of Israel, they were proud because of the honor they had: And Israel,
the People, they were proud because they had great men to bear them out, and
they could plead Authority for what they did. But they shall both fall, both
Ephraim and Israel. The Note is, That The fruit of sin is casting down. Obser.


It is rather here said, They shall fall, than that they shall be punnished, in
reference unto what went before; for before, he speaks of the pride of Israel,
and from thence a further Note is, That Pride goes before a fall. Obser.


God will cast down the proud, Pride before a fall,
and certainly when those that are proud fall they must needs fall very low
because a proud man lifts up himself so high, and you know according to the
height a thing falls from so i^ the fall of it: now a proud man lifts up
himself on high, Proud me^ fall low.
so high indeed as he lifts himself up above God, therefore he must needs fall
down very low: And upon that I remember Bernard has this Note, Bernards wity
speech
Here is the reason (says he) why a proud man can have no grace, from God;
why? God is the fountain of grace, and it is a rule in nature that the stream
that comes from a fountain, it ascends no higher than the top of the
fountain is. (You may find it in all Aquaeducts, according to the height of the
fountain so high may the stream be carried, but it will go no higher.) Now
says he, God being the fountain of all grace, surely grace cannot rise higher
than God himself; but a proud man lifts himself above God, therefore he is
above grace, grace cannot reach him.

1. A proud man goe^ from God, Pride goes 1. from God.
as if he could live without him: for that is the pride of men's hearts, when
they have outward prosperity they go from God as if they could live without him.

2. He goes against God, 2. against him.
as if he were able to resist him.

3. (...) and ^^m.
3. He goes beyond God, ^a^ if he made himself the end of all his actions.

4. above him.
4. He lifts up himself above God, as if there were more excellency in him
than in God. He lifts up his will above God, and that two ways:

1. Says he, My will shall be followed rather than Gods.

2. Whereas God is contented to have his will only in just and good things;
says a proud man, I will have my will whether it be just, But it is just
because God wills it.
whether it be good or no. Come and deal with a proud man and say, do you well
in this? Is this fit? I will have my will says he. This is more than God
challenges unto himself. God will have his will in nothing but in that which
is good and just; thou will have thy will whether it be just or no: thus thou
go beyond God and liftest up thy self above him, therefore surely thou shall
fall.

I need not show you any example of the falling of proud men. Applic.
This our age manifests it clearly enough. How has God cast dirt upon proud
superstitious men? You know what a height of pride they were grown to two or
three years since; and now two Kingdoms if not three have lifted up their hands
to the most high God to extirpate them. Their pride did testify to their
faces, and no mervail that they are fallen; and the Lord cast them so far down
as they may never be able to rise up in their pride again!

Ephraim and Israel shall fall in their iniquity. (...)
In their iniquity.] The Hebrew [Ba] signifies for, as well as in: fall for
their iniquity, as well as in their iniquity. But to They shall fall in their
iniquity. Surely they

to take such a course before their fall comes, that when they do fall they
may fall soft, fall into the bosom of their Father and into the arms of Jesus
Christ, and not fall in their iniquity; And if we fall thus, if our fall be not
in our iniquity, but in the cause of God, and rather for our grace than for our
iniquity, then we may be of more use in our fall than we were in our standing.
As it is with the Corn, simile
the Corn that falls into the ground does fructify, and is of more use when it
is fallen than it was when it was in the granary; Young men fallen in this war.
And so many godly men, many young ones that are fallen within these two or
three years, (but God knows it has not been in or for their iniquity, but in
the Cause of God and in the exercise of their graces) they are fallen, but they
are fallen into the arms of God, and into the bosom of Christ, and they are as
fruitful in their fall as they were in their standing, for no question but
there is much fruit to be reaped from their falls, and God has a plentiful
harvest for England that will come out of their falls.

Judah also shall fall with them.] Mark, Exposit.
first Ephraim shall fall and then Judah, for indeed Ephraim was first in sin;
the ten Tribes they first forsake the true worship of God and they brought in
Judah together with them, and the text says, that Judah shall fall with them.
This is here mentioned to aggravate Ephraims sin and the judgment of it, thus.
Oh this shall lie heavy upon Ephraim one day, that not only he has ruined
himself, but he has ruined Judah too, he has brought Judah into his sin and
involved him in plagues together with himself. From hence the Note is, That It
is a great aggravation for any one to think what misery be

If God do but enlighten any ones conscience; it may be Gods hand is upon thee
for thy sin: This is grievous: Oh but together with the sin have not I by my
counsel, by my example, by my countenance brought others into s^n? and I have
brought them into misery as well as my self: It may be there be many in hell at
this time that I have helped thither. It is true Gods hand is upon me, I am
falling, and whither I shall fall I know not; I see hell open and I may fall
into it; how ever I am afraid of this that there are some fallen into hell
already of whose sin I was the cause, and is it possible that I should be
preserved out of it? must I not follow them and fall thither too when they are
already fallen thither through my wickedness? You therefore that have been
Company-keepers and ringleaders to wickedness, and many of your companions are
dead and gone, without any manifestation of repentance; you had need to be
thoroughly humbled.

I will follow the example of others. If you will follow the example of others
you must perish with others. Judah follows the example of Ephraim and Judah
must fall with Ephraim.

Gods people suffer if they sin with others.
and defile themselves with their pollutions, they must except to fall with
them in outward judgments. Judah was the only people God had upon the earth,
and as Israel is a type of the Apostate Church, so is Judah a type of the true
Church, yet it seems that Judah though the true Church and the only people of
God that did preserve the worship of God in the greatest intirenes that was in
the world, yet I say Judah, they did very much comply with Israel, and
complying with Israel in false worship they must fall with them. Come out from
amongst them my people, lest being partakers of their sins you be partakers of
their plagues too. And this I make no question is the reason why so many of
Gods servan^s fall at this day, Use why so many fall in these times.
they have complied with the times and defiled themselves; though we cannot say
so of every one of them that fall in this Cause, yet it is to be feared in
many: And it may be (though we dare not determine of Gods ways, for the
thoughts of Gods ways in mercy, are higher than our thoughts, higher than the
Heavens are above the Earth, yet we have cause to fear) that many if not most
of this generation shall fall before God brings forth this glorious work of
his in saving Zion.

Chap. 1. 7. and chap. 5. 5. reconciled
But here is a difficulty; In the first Chapter you heard there that God though
he threatened Israel, yet he says, I will have mercy upon Judah; but here he
says, Ephraim shall fall and Judah also shall fall with him: Now for the
reconciling of that we are to know that, though Judah fall with Israel, yet
there shall be a great deal of difference in their falling. Israel, the ten
Tribes shall fall, be brought into captivity, so as never to return again, I
mean never to return from their captivity in that way as Judah did; Judah was
to return again after seventy years; so Judah fell with them, Observe.
but they fell not as they fell. Though the Saints therefore may be scourged
with rods, yea with scorpions as they are at this day, as well as wicked men,
yet the Lord does not, he will not, take his loving kindness from them.

There is yet one particular more to be observed, and it is from the Hebrew
particle Gam, Judah [also] shall fall with them; and I make no question but the
Spirit of God holds forth this Note from it, viz. That The falling of the
Saints together with wicked men it is of special consideration. Observe


There is much in it; some special matter to be considered of in the falling of
Gods people together with the wicked. Indeed it is that which in these days
puts us to a stand, we admire at the ways of God, his judgments are past
finding out; we must adore them in what we do not understand; That the hand of
God should be stretched out against wicked ones, against such as have corrupted
his worship by their own superstitious ways, it is no mervail; but that so
many of his dear Saints, so precious in his eyes, in all Countries about,
should suffer such hard things and fall together with the wicked; we are at a
stand, and we know not what it means. What, Judah fall also with Israel, when
God had no other people upon the face of the earth, surely there is some great
matter in it; It is I say of special consideration: And indeed there are many
things that God would have us to observe in the fall of his people together
with wicked men.

First, Reasons 1. Gods holiness,
He would have us take serious notice how holy a God He is. He spared not His
own Son, and He spares not His dearest Ones. He will give the dearly beloved
of His soul into the hands of His enemies. God had but one Son that never
sinned against Him; but He has not one Son that never was afflicted by Him.
And therefore we have no cause to wonder that the godly sometimes suffer, for
His own Son did.

2. None presume on former services.
Secondly, God would have us take into deep consideration this meditation, That
none must bear themselves upon any former services they do for God. When Israel
forsook God, Judah did cleave unto Gods true worship, and in that God was much
honored: But Judah must not bear himself upon that, Oh I have done service for
God, when others did forsake Him I did cleave unto Him; and so think to take
more liberty afterward: No says God, though Judah has much honored Me and
cleave to My worship when Israel the ten Tribes forsook Me, yet if Judah shall
afterward comply with Israel, Servants to the Public
have done good service for the Commonwealth; and afterward begin to be high,
and malipert and proud, and they must have what they will and none must
contradict them but every body must submit unto them; and so through their
pride though they have done good service yet afterward they fall? Let every one
take heed of this both in regard of God and also in regrd of man: you that have
been most forward in the public Cause, never think to presume because of what
you have done, but walk humbly now, and be serviceable still, 3 God not engaged
to any if they transgress
for otherwise you may fall notwithstanding your services as Judah did.

Again, Another thing that God would have us take into consideration is, That
he tieth himself unto no people, if they offend, be they what they will be, God
can be without them.

Judah also shall fall: By that God declares that there is no men though never
so useful but he can be without them. Perhaps you may think,

Lastly, God would have us take notice of this, 4 Admonition to the wicked
That if His own people fall with the wicked, what then may wicked men expect?
If such things be done to the green trees, what shall be don to the dry? If
judgment begin at the house of God, where shall the wicked and ungodly appear?
It follows.

VER. 6. They shall go with their flocks and their herds to seek the Lord.


SHall they fall? No they have a way to prevent it, they will passifie God with
the multitude of their sacrifices, their flocks and their herds, Expos. 1.
they are content to spend those all in sacrifices unto God, and shall this
people fall? They will make God amends with these, they will make up their sins
with these, with the multitude of their sacrifices. There is much to be
observed from every word here; the difficulty for interpretation is not much,
and the Observations I shall pass briefly.

They shall go] Ibunt huc and illuc, modo ad hunc, modo ad illum montem, as
Interpreters render it, They shall run up and down from one place to another,
from one sacrifice to another, in a kind of hurrying of their spirits. And from
that word there may be this noted, That Those who depend upon duties, Obs.
danger of dependence on duties.
are in a hurry and distraction of spirit, when they do not prevail with their
duties in that they desire.

They often change their duties, but they do not change their hearts. Many
think, Well, I have done thus and thus, yea but if I shall ad to what I have
done and do thus and thus, then I shall prevail: whereas those that do their
duties in obedience unto God, and go out of themselves and depend for their
acceptance upon a higher sacrifice, upon Jesus Christ; these go on with much
sweetness and quietness of spirit, though for the present they see not the
thing performed which they aim at in their duties: their spirits are not in a
hurry and in a distraction so as the spirits of others that depend upon their
duties are. This is to be noted from the clause, They shall go; Cursitando,
running up and down.

They shall go with their [flocks with their flocks.
and herds.] He means, with their sacrifices, but he gives them not the name
of sacrifices, but only their flocks and herds, for they are not worthy of that
name. From hence the Note is.

God contemns the services of hypocrites, of superstitious and Idolatrous
apostates. Obs.
Their Their.
flocks and their herds.] Mark, They make use of their own, according to their
own mind, in their own ways, to worship me as they list, and therefore God
does not call them His, does not own them as His, but he calls them their
flocks and their herds; What they do says God, what they offer, it is their
own, their flocks and their herds, I will not own them. From thence the Note is
this, That Obs.
It is a sad thing that what we tender up unto God, God will not own as His.

When in our sacrifices (that are typified by those legal sacrifices) in our
prayers, there we seem to tender up unto God our parts, our abilities, our
inventions, our expressions, our wits, our memories, and the strength of our
bodies: But now when we have done all, says God, All these parts and all that
is come from you all this while in your prayers, I do not own them, these are
none of mine, they are al your own. This is a sad thing.

There is no such way to put an excellency upon any thing we have, upon our
parts, and abilities, and estates, as this, To tender them up first unto God,
and if God shall please to own them, then to receive them again out of Gods
hands; we shall then receive them with abundance of sweetness and excellency.
But here, he calls them, Their flocks and their herds, though they were
tendered unto God in sacrifice, yet He will not say, they are His, but their
own. Thus it is with all Hypocrites and formal and superstitious persons in
what they tender unto God. What is done out of self-love is our own.
Self is the principle of what you do and therefore all your services remain
your own, you serve your self rather than God in them.

Herein lies the sweetness and true comfort of a man's estate, and of his
credit, and parts, or of whatsoever he has, when he shall consecrate and
devote them unto God so as they remain no longer his own. This is a sacrifice
that God is well pleased with. These are my parts says God, this is my estate,
here I give them back to you again: And when a man shall take what he has as
having first consecrated and devoted it unto God and taking it out of Gods hand
again, Oh this adds a sweetness and a blessing to his estate. All we have is
Gods as He is the first cause of all; but mark, God rejoices as well, God
delights most in his second right.
if not more in a second right that He has to what we have (namely by our
tendering up all unto Him in a gracious manner) than He does in the first right
of being the cause of all. I beseech you observe it, God has a twofold right
to the estates, parts, and abilities of His people. First, He has a right to
them as He is the cause of them; I gave them to you therefore they are mine.
But Secondly, There is a second right that God seems more to rejoice in, and
that is this, When His servants by an exercise of grace, shall tender them up
again and give them back again unto Him; Now says God, they are mine by a
second right; and this second right unto them, they being tendered up unto me
in a holy way, is the right that I rejoice in: and this will be most
comfortable unto you. Oh my brethren, let us not deprive God of this second
right to all we have or are or can do; for this will not at all weaken our
right of our own to what we have, we may enjoy our estates and parts and
abilities; but this will strengthen, and sweeten, and bless them abundantly.

They shall go with their flocks and their herds.] Another Note is this, That
Obs. Superstitious abundant in services.
Superstitious and Idolatrous people they are abundant in their services.

They are content to go with all their flocks and their herds to seek after
God; thousands of rams and ten thousand rivers of oil, any thing to offer up
unto God, but mark, it is in this, their own way of worship, and whatsoever is
men's own that they will be abundant in their worship, but what is Gods that
they will be scant enough in; Holydays
as might be again instanced in in regard of setting of days apart for God.

Reason.
Natural conscience tells us that when we have to do with God in our services,
that great things are suitable to a great God. Your Papists, Papists.
in times of straights, they have a kind of praying that they appoint for
forty hours together; but it is in their own way, they will be abundant enough
in that. Many of you think much to spend a quarter of an hour in a morning or
in an evening in seeking God in your families; Family Duties
when superstitious and Idolatrous people are abundant in those services, in
seeking God in their own way.

But observe it, though superstitious and Idolatrous people be abundant in
their services to their Idols, yet they are not infinite in their services to
them. But the Saints of God if their spirits be right, they are enlarged to a
kind of infinitness in Gods service. As thus, still they would know more of
Gods mind, they would do more, and are never satisfied with what they do. There
is no Idolatrous and superstitious person, but there are some limits that he
puts himself to, and he thinks that when that task is over, when the forty
hours is over, the work is done: But now here is the difference between a
natural work and a spiritual; A natural work is always a limited work;
supernatural works unlimited.
but a spiritual work has always an infiniteness in it; Thus, though I am not
able to do what is actually infinite, yet my heart is infinite in this, that it
is never satisfied, but it would fain have more, and if I were able to do ten
thousand times more than I do, yet my heart would be as eager to do more as it
was at first, I should not think I am any nearer to the end of my journey than
I was at the first day; for I am to deal with an infinite God, therefore let my
services be never so great and many, yet still, Oh that I could rise higher, Oh
that I could do more. Here is the supernatural work of grace which does go
beyond all Idolatry in the world.

Again observe, Obs. Superstitious spare no cost in worship.
Superstitious and Idolatrous people they will spare no cost in Gods service in
their own way.

They will go with their flocks and with their herds, bestow all their estates
upon the service of their Idols. How shameful is this for us to be so sparing
and scant in the true service of God?

They shall go with their flocks and their herds and seek the Lord. From whence
the Note is, That There is a time when vile and wicked men shall see need of
God. Obs. Wicked men shall need God


Though wicked men when they have all about them suitable to their carnal
desires, they slight and neglect God, yet there is a time when they shall be
brought into such a condition as they shall see their need of him. Oh let us
remember this in the midst of our prosperity! We find by experience that God
does bring men to times wherein they see need of Him, Oh therefore now the love
of God, now the mercy of God and pardon of our sins, and peace with God, how
precious should it be in our eyes! It is good to make God our friend whom we
are sure one day we shall have need of. We all conclude that it is a point of
wisdom to make such a man our friend of whom we can certainly say, we shall one
day have need of him: Oh let us be sure to make God our friend, for certainly
one day we shall have need of Him. Blessed are those souls who have an interest
in that God whom all the world shall see one day they have need of.

Further, They shall go with their flocks and with their herds to seek the
Lord; Thence this Note likewise, Obs. All pretend to seek God.
The most superstitious and Idolatrous and false worshipers, they will pretend
to seek God as well as any.

Whatsoever they do, Oh they do it for the honor of God, and for the service of
God, and out of respect unto Him; and why should not we do this and this, we
have good aims and good intentions, do we not seek to honor God in what we do?
When those Idolaters of Israel set up the Calf, they proclaimed a day unto
Jehovah, a day for the honoring of God, they pretended that what they did was
out of respect unto God and to honor Him. The worst men and the most
superstitious will yet pretend the honoring of God. So it is again in regard of
those days that men have set apart for God, Christmasse.
that it is for the honor of Christ; what (say they) shall we not honor the
birth of our blessed Savior? what a profaness, what a disrespect is this unto
Jesus Christ? well let others do what they will, for our parts we will do it,
for hereby we shall do honor unto our blessed Savior. So the Papists for the
adoration of Images, Images
say they, What not regard not to reverence the Image, the Picture, of our
blessed Savior, Holydays and Images have the same ground.
and of the holy Saints? And the truth is if it be duly weighed, there is the
same reason of Images of Christ and the Saints, and of days set apart for the
honor of Christ by man's invention; and there is as fair a pretense of honoring
Christ by setting up His Image before me to put me in mind of Him; as of
honoring of Him by keeping a day of mine own appointment. There is (I say) the
same reason of both, and whatsoever argument any man shall bring me against the
one, I dare undertake to make it good to be against the other. As now, simile
is not natural reason as strong to set up the picture of the King to honor him
(and you do it for that end) is not this as much as to keep a day once a year
to remember him? So the reason may be as strong to honor Christ by way of
picture, as to honor Him by observing any day set apart for that end by the
inventions of men.

We are (my brethren) to take heed of men that are pretenders to the honor of
God. Admonition.
These here will seek the Lord though in a false and superstitious way. But
those that are pretender^ to the honor of God they prevail much with weak
spirits and with such as are most conscientious: As your greatest Heretics
that have ever been in the Church, have been great pretenders to godliness; and
many there are at this day that out of pretense to honor Christ have leavened
the hearts of people with dangerous errors, and especially leavened young
converts; for your young converts as soon as ever God is pleased to work upon
them, Young converts and weak Christians soon deceived.
to convert them first unto himself, Oh they love Jesus Christ, their hearts
are taken with Christ and inflamed with love unto him, and they honor free
grace that has pardoned the sins of their youth of which they have such fresh
sense: Now false teachers they take advantage of this, and therefore if they
shall bring any thing unto them that has the Name of Christ, and the Gospel,
with pretense of Christ, Gospel, free grace
and free grace, they know they will greedily drink it in; and many dangerous
errors that are sweetened with such pretenses are strongly maintained. By this
means their leaders attain their own ends, and they see it not.

Again, Observe.
Superstitious and Idolatrous men in time of their afflictions and straights,
then above all they are abundant in their services.

They will go with their flocks and their herds, when the are in extremity; O
then God shall have any thing from them. Self-love drives men far and enlarges
them much. Men in a storm are content to cast out much of that which is
precious to them. Isa 29.16. Self-love. sinful. Isa. 26.16 opened.
They powered out prayer when thy chastening was upon them. They are straightened
in prayer before, it comes our by drops before, but when thy chastening is
upon them, then they power it out. And this is the baseness of our hearts that
we can find enlargment for God only then when it is suitable to our own ends.
Those whose hearts are more enlarged in adversity than in the enjoyment of
mercies, had need to examine their hearts.

Further, Superstitious formal professors, think to make God amends for former
and present evils of their hearts and lives, with outward performances. Obser.
If they bring their flocks and their herds, much sacrifice, they think that
will do it. But let us learn to take heed of this; take heed of this vanity, to
think to make God amends for former or present sins by any sacrifice thou
performest to Him thus. Some of you perhaps that are negligent in the duties of
your relations, you are wicked in your ways; servants, children, Applic.
stubborn, stout against parents and governors, and wives neglecting their
duties to their husbands, and so they theirs to their wives; and you think
though you take liberty in those things, yet if you pray much, and hear much,
and speak of good things, and be forward in the profession of Religion, that
will make amends for the neglect of your duties. Oh take heed of that for ever
you that are forward in your profession, and abundant in the performance of
holy duties: take heed of this deceit of your hearts, to think to put off God
with these things, and that that shall make up the neglect of your duties: Other
kind of people are accused for injustice and uncleanes and much wickedness, and
yet they think to put off all this, by going with their flocks and their herds.
Here is their sinfulness, they rest in the bare duties. But the Saints they
have a further sacrifice to offer to God, to be a sweet savor in His nostrils.
Saints.
They have first the sacrifice of Jesus Christ that these sacrifices typified.
And then they have their souls and bodies which they tender up to God as a
reasonable sacrifice.

But mark, They shall go thus with their flocks and their herds, but they shall
not find him. Observe from hence, Obs. God found no where if not in duties. The
Tabernacle a type of the Ordinances of Gospel.
First, If God be to be found any where he is to be found in his Ordinances, in
the performance of holy duties.

These sacrifices they were materially good, but yet they should not find God
in them. Exodus 29.42, 43. When the Lord appointed the Tabernacle to be erected
(a type of the Ordinances we now enjoy) says he, There will I meet with thee,
and there will I meet with thee again the second time. If God be to be found
any whereit is in the performance of holy duties.

But secondly, The end of all holy duties we perform unto God, it should be to
find God in them. Obs. 2. End of duties to find God in them.
It should be so. They pretended that end here. When either God is coming unto
us in mercy, or when we are drawing near unto God in duty, we must be restless
till we find him; Especially in the latter. Many men and women (I beseech you
observe this one thing) perform duties, but they do not look at finding God in
them. They do not examine after the duties are done, Have I met with God in this
or that duty? Have I met with God this day in the word? I have been in my
closet and there I have prayed, have I found God in prayer? Found God? what is
that? You should never be quiet in the performance of holy duties till you meet
with God one of these two ways. Either that you find God coming to you in the
communication of himself and the sweetness of his love and mercy to you; Or at
least till you find your hearts got nearer unto him. And either of these ways
we find God.

Thirdly, God will not be always found when he is sought. Obs. 3. God will not
be always found. 1. when superstitiously sought.


They shall go with their flocks and their herds, but shall not find me. As
thus. Men are never like to meet with God.

First, When they seek him in any superstitious way. These kind of formal
superstitious worshipers of God, they did much, they spent much time in Gods
worship, I appeal to their own consciences, and unto all men that knew their
lives, did any thing of God appear in them? It may be manifested in their
frothy, vain, and carnal conversations, that they never met with God in those
worshipings. When God is sought and not in his own way, he will not be found.

And then secondly, When we seek our selves rather than God, 2. when our selves
chiefly. 3. when not as God
then he will not be found.

And thirdly, When we do not seek God as a God; that is, when we tender him
only external services and not soul-services also; when we seek him not with
the uprightness of our hearts, when we seek him not with our whole heart, when
we seek him not with those high and reverent apprehensions of him, when we have
not that fear of his Name as is suitable to such an infinite God as the Lord is,
then God will not be found.

4. when too late.
And then lastly, When we seek him too late. There may be a seeking of God too
late. Seek Him while He may be found. Oh then we had need lose no opportunity
of seeking God, for He will not be always found. And this is just with God;
for God often seeks unto us when we will not be found, and therefore it is just
that He should not be found when we seek Him.

And then it follows, He has withdrawn Himself from them.

Exposit.
When the Saints of God seek Him in a holy way, He is presently found. Esa.
58.9. They shall cry and he shall say, here I am: Perhaps they do not take
notice of God, he is many times with us and stands by us, He is present and
we do not know that he is there; But now that we may know that he is there, he
makes that promise, that when we seek him as we ought to seek him, he will say,
here I am.

(...)
He has withdrawn himself. The word that is here translated [withdrawn
himself] may as well be translated, Divisit se; or Eripuit se; He has divided
himself, yea snatched himself from them: that is the propriety of the word; they
go to seek him and cry after him, God snatcheth himself from them, as one that
refuses their friendship, he turns his back upon That God has no delight in
the services of superstitious and formal professors. God delights not in formal
professors
But to the humble and contrite heart, he delights to be with them. The
flocks and the herds of the wicked are rejected and God withdraws himself
from them; but small things from the Saints are accepted. As you shall observe
in 1 Samuel 7.9. when holy Samuel there did but offer a sucking lamb for a burnt
offering unto the Lord, presently followed that the Lord thundered with a great
thunder on that day upon the Philistines and discomfited them, and they were
smitten before Israel. Here are herds and flocks and yet God withdraws
himself; but Samuel there offers but a poor sucking lamb, and presently the
Lord thundereth with a great thunder upon their adversaries. So you have it
Revel. 8.4. Rev 8.4. opened,
after the the Incense with the prayers of the Saints were offered up there
followed voices, and thundrings, and lightnings, and an earthquake. Great
things are done by small services of the Saints, when done in uprightness, but
the greatest services of Hypocrites and formal Professors God regards not but
withdraws himself from them.

And then observe, It is a heavy and sad condition when Sam. 28.5. when Saul
was seeking God, and God was departed from him, mark what Saul says, I am
sorely distressed, for God is departed from me. And in the 9. Chapter of this
Prophecy, verse. 12. Woe unto them when I depart from them says God. Oh that is
a sad condition. It is a sign,

First, of a dishonor that God puts upon a people (as I What greater dishonor
can it be unto a people, than for God to take more pleasure in their howlings
under his wrath than he does in their cryings unto him for mercy? And yet to
such a condition may a people, a particular soul be brought into, I say that
God may take more pleasure in your howlings under his wrath than in your
cryings unto him, and that in your Temples, if you do not reform as well as cry
unto him: and for that you have that evident place in Amos, 8.3. Amos. 8.3
opened.
In that day says the Lord, shall the songs of the Temple be howlings; As if
he should say, the songs of the Temple were loud, but I will take more pleasure
in their howlings than in their songs. And that place is very famous, Esa.
29.1. Woe to Ariel the City where David dwelt etc. and verse. 2. Yet I will
distress Ariel, and there shall be heaviness and sorrow, and it shall be unto
me as Ariel. The Text seems to be obscure at the first reading, therefore the
meaning is this. By Ariel, Isa. 29.1. opened.
is meant Jerusalem, the City where David dwelt, the place where the sacrifices
were offered unto God; And Ariel Ariel.
signifies an Altar of God, Gods Altar that did devour the sacrifices like a
Lion: Now says God, Thou shall be to me as Ariel, thou Jerusalem where my
famous Altar was, where so many famous sacrifices were offered, thou shall be
to me as Ariel, that is, you indeed offer many sacrifices unto me, and you
continue still in your hypocrisy, in your wicked lives, know says God, I will
make that City as an Altar upon which your blood shall be offered, and I will
take as much pleasure in the sacrifice of your blood offered upon this Altar,
as in all the sacrifices that were offered upon the Altar from whence the City
had its name, your name shall be Ariel, that is, your City shall be stained
with your blood as the Altar was with the blood of the sacrifices. God
rejects and casts out the services of such as are superstitious and ungodly.











The Saints had rather have Gods presence though angry, than God withdrawing
himself from them. When God withdrawing himself but a little, Oh they could
never be at quiet, till God returned again, O cast me not from thy presence
says David.

Applic.
My brethren, when we perceive God withdrawing himself in any degree from us, Oh
let us stir up our selves and cry mightily, as the Church does, Jer. 14.9. Jer.
14.9. opened.
O leave us not, the Church gives a shrike as it were, she saw that God was
going, as God is said, first to go to the threshold; God goes by degrees from a
people, and Jeremiah a holy Prophet, he saw God going from them; Carnal hearts
they do not percive how God withdraws himself from a people by degrees, but
those that are acquainted with the mind of God and search into the word, they
are able to discern God withdrawing himself from a people, and they cry, Lord
leave us not, if thou be gone all is gone.

Yea, but does not God withdraw himself from his Saints? how then is this a
judgment peculiar upon Idolaters and wicked superstitious persons?

The answer is this, It is true,

First, Though God withdraw himself from the Saints, yet simile a wife.
A husband may be gone abroad about his business from his wife a great while;
yea but if she be a faithful wife, she still retains good thoughts of him as of
her husband and loves him still. But another, when her husband is gone and has
withdrawn himself, she begins to have hard thoughts of him. So wicked men do
upon Gods withdrawing of himself, in judgments and afflictions, they begin to
have hard thoughts of God, and to say, I this is to serve God and to walk in
his ways, what good have we got by all that we have done? But now you shall
observe in the Cant. when Christ had withdrawn himself from the Church, she
still calls him her King, and her Beloved, still gives him honorable titles.

Secondly, Though God withdraws himself from his arms, that the child may cry
after her to come to her, and the mother loves it. So the Lord loves to hear
his children cry after him to come to him. The Lord shall hear none of our
cries in Heaven, for there we shall always be with him; but here he sometimes
withdraws from us that he may hear us cry after him.



Jer. 31.20. Is Ephraim my dear son, etc. I thought of him and my bowels yerned
says God, or my bowels were troubled. He has an eye toward them for much good
in all his withdrawings.



David prays, Psalm, 119.8. I will keep thy precepts, O forsake me not
utterly. It seems that then God had somewhat withdrawn himself from David, yet
mark, his heart was toward God, I will keep thy precepts, thou have forsaken me
in some degree, yet I will keep thy precepts still, O forsake me not utterly. If
thou can say thus, Indeed God has withdrawn himself from my soul, yet though
I have not that comfort in him that my soul desires, I will keep his precepts
as long as I live, I will do what I can to honor him: Thou may pray with
comfort, Lord do not utterly forsake me.

As those that are godly may depart from God, Saints departing from God.
but yet as in Psalm, 18.21. I have not wickedly departed from my God; they do
not depart from God as other men do. So God may depart from the godly, but yet
not so as he departs from the wicked.

Let us take heed of withdrawing from God, Admonit.
of withdrawing our souls from any way of truth. If we in prosperity withdraw
from God, and think we can live without him, he will make us know in adversity
that he can be blessed without us too. It is usual for men in prosperity to rub
out with God well enough, but when thou come into adversity, the Lord will make
thee know, though thou perishest as dross and dung from the earth, yet he will
remain a blessed God without thee to all eternity. God has no need of us. If
thou think thou can do well enough without him, he will show that he can do
well enough without thee. And thus much for this Sixth Verse.

VER. 7. They have dealt treacherously against the Lord; for they have begotten
strange children: now shall a month devour them with their portions.


IN the words before, the Lord threatens to withdraw himself from Israel. When
he shall be seeking of him with his flocks and herds, he shall not find him. A
dreadful sentence, that the God of mercy shall withdraw Himself in a time of
mercy from his creature that seeks unto Him for mercy.

But what is the cause of all? Why will God withdraw Himself from them though
they seek Him with their flocks and their herds?

There is reason enough for it, Conexio^.
They have dealt treacherously against the Lord.

The word that is here translated, Dealing treacherously, (...) significat. of
the word.
signifies Perfide agere, to deal perfideously, they have been perfideous.

Decipere, they deal deceitfully. And it signifies especially that fraudulent
dealing that there Mal. 2.14, 15.

Luther translate it, they have contemned the Lord, (and so according to some
it is diverse times translated, Sperno, to contemn God) And from thence Luther
has this note. What (says he) do they seek the Lord with their flocks and
herds and yet despise God how can this stand together? They seem as if they
would honor God exceeding much, yet here they are charged for contemning and
despising God? He answers it to this effect. Whatsoever men pretend (says
he) in honoring of God, yet if they do not obey and keep to his word, and that
especially in the way of His Worship, these are guilty of contemning and
despising God. We may be plentiful in outward services, and yet in the mean
time our hearts despise God, despise the Authority and Majesty of God.

English translat.
But the word ordinarily is used according to that we translate it here, they
have been treacherous, they have been false with me.

And mark the connection: They come to seek Me with their flocks and their
herds, Conexio^.
but I have withdrawn My self from them, for they have dealt treacherously.
Hence the Note is briefly this, That

Obser.
When ungodly men come to seek God, then God remembers all their wickedness
that they have formerly been guilty of, and looks into the wickedness of their
hearts as it is for the present. They have dealt treacerously.] As if God
should say, Here comes a company of wretches, base, false-hearted hypocrites,
treacherous, perfideous, ungodly wretches to seek Me with their flocks and
herds. Are they like to be heard? are they like to be regarded in all their
services? No, they are base, perfideous wretches, they have vile, wicked, and
cursed hearts.

Oh consider this you that have not yet done away your sins in the blood of
Christ, and made up your peace with God: Use of Admonit.
The guilt of your sin is yet upon you, and the filthiness of it yet does
stick: you will come to God in prayer, and seek Him, and cry unto Him for
mercy: Know that all the wickedness that ever you committed in all your lives,
is fresh in the presence of God; God looks upon all as if it were now present.
Here comes says God, a filthy old whoremaster, Prosopopoeia.
an unclean wretch, he comes now to pray unto me: and here comes an old
drunkard, a wicked scorner and blasphemer. When thou come to seek God, then
all thy wickedness is remembered before him; and upon this, God justly does cast
thy services back again in thy face. Thus it is here. Oh learn therefore to
cleanse thy heart in the blood of Christ by faith in Him and by repentance, and
then though thou have been vile heretofore, when thou come to seek the face
of God, thy sins shall not be remembered before Him. That for the connection.

But for the words Themselves, and first in that proper signification [They
have dealt trecherously;] the meaning is, they make a great deal of show of
Religion, but it is only for their own ends, and under that show of Religion
they do that which dishonoreth me, they betray my glory. Here is treacherous
dealing indeed, treachery against the God of Heaven; these are treacherous
spirits, to make profession of Religion, to make protestations, to make any use
they can of Religion, so far as it will suit with their own turns, but when it
will serve their turns no longer, to cast it off; yea if it prove cross to
them, to persecute it. This is trerchery against God in a high degree.

Again, Treacherous, in that they break their Covenant Treachery against God,
as our King Husband.

They did give up themselves to be the Lords, O but they have basely forsaken
the Lord and dealt treacherously with him. So that this treachery relates
either to the Oath of allegiance unto God as our King, or to the Covenant that
we make with him as our Husband. And from thence Note, That Obs.
The sins of such as are engaged unto God in Covenant, are sins of treachery.
They are sins of a more deep dye than other men's sins are.

Other men's sins are transgressions against God, they are disobedience to the
will of God; yea but they are not so properly treachery: but the sins of those
that are engaged unto God in Covenant have another stamp put upon them than the
sins of other men, their sins are treachery against God. And we know there is
nothing accounted more vile amongst men than treachery; Treachery the greatest
sin.
It is the highest expression of our indignation against a man that can be, to
say, such a man, take heed of him, he is a treacherous man. Certainly the sins
of those that have engaged themselves unto God, go nearer to the heart of God
than any men's sins do else; they are more dishonorable to him, they provoke the
eyes of His glory more than any sins whatsoever.



Take we heed of this evil of dealing treacherously with God, not only in
regard of the particular Covenants between God and our own souls; but in a more
special manner, let us take heed of breaking our public Covenants. England
has been guilty of great sins against God, but England was never so engaged
unto God as it has been of late; We never entered into such solemn Covenants
with God as we have done of late, therefore if we keep not our Covenants with
God now, Englands sins will prove to be greater than they were before, they will
prove to be treacherous sins. Do not account your entering into covenant with
God any at time to be a slight matter; do not dally, do not trifle with Him:
When you come to the Sacrament there you renew your Covenants; Perhaps in your
closets in the day of your affliction you renew your Covenants; but especially
when you come in a solemn way to join with the people of God, to bind your
selves in a Covenant with God to amend your lives, and to enquire after the
true worship of God, and to conform your selves according to his Word; Oh now
take heed what you do; now to walk as formerly you have done, Oh this is a
treachery against the God of Heaven. Certainly God expects much from us after
such a Covenant as we have lately entered into, the most solemn Covenant one of
them that ever was taken; for people to come and lift up their hands to the
most high God as they have done; And a National Covenant, and therefore more to
be regarded than a private: yea an uniting Covenant, that uniteth two Nations
if not three together; And a Covenant that is more for the Kingdom of Christ,
and more directly against the Kingdom of Antichrist, against the Antichristian
party than ever yet was taken since the world began. Antichrist quickly did
arise and there has bin much opposition of him; but for two Nations so
solemnly to lift up their hands to the most high God to oppose all
Antichristian government, it is that, which if it be kept as carefully as it was
made solemnly, is the greatest honor that ever yet Christ had in regard of his
government here upon earth. And we had need look to it, because it is such a
mighty work as should take our hearts, that ever we should live to see that God
should bring about such a strange thing in our generation. I appeal unto you,
was it possible four years since for any man in the world, yea for an Angel to
conjecture such a thing as this, that two Nations shall join together, the
Representative body of the Kingdom, and Assembly of Divines, in one day should
be lifting up their hands to the most high God, to do what lies in them to
extirpate Prelacy, that is, government by Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons,
Deans, etc. Now the more miraculous the work of God is in bringing this strange
thing about, the more bonds lie upon us, to keep that Covenant with God. Oh
therefore let us not now ad treachery unto all our former apostasy, our sins
now will prove sins of treachery.



hates his sin: Now let there be never so much danger to keep me from that
which I hate, I will never be sorry for that; as for instance, suppose there be
a deep gulf, that if I fall into it, will destroy me, I tremble to come near it,
well there is a fence to keep me off from that gulf full of shap iron pikes, so
that if I should but try to get over it, simile
they will gore and prick me; shall I be sorry that the sense is so full of
sharp things that will gore and prick me if I endeavor to get over, when the
fence is but set there to keep me from destroying my self? So a gracious heart
will never be sorry that it is engaged in the ways of God, and that if it
should break the engagement there would be an aggravation of his sin, for why?
this my engagement is but as a fence full of pricks to keep me from that which
I would be loath to come to, which would destroy me. And those that begin to
think their engagement to God and his ways, to be a hard thing and could wish
more liberty, these kind of men will certainly deal treacherously with God, yea
their hearts are even already departing from God. Take heed of this it is a
great degree of Apostasy (remember it my brethren it is an argument of
mavelous use) it is I say a great degree of apostasy for any man to begin to
be sorry that he is so deeply engaged to God and His ways. The (...) degree of
apostasy.
All that are the Saints of God, when they are engaged, they bless God that
ever they were engaged.

Again, They have dealt treacherously against the Lord.] Against Jehovah. This
is the vileness of man's heart. Though God be never so gracious, so merciful, so
faithful; Though He be never so blessed, so glorious in himself and worthy of
all honor, yet so vile is man's heart that it will deal treacherously with God
Himself. To deal treacherously but with a friend, with a fellow creature is an
evil; but to deal treacherously with the infinite and blessed God is a far
greater evil.

Thus much for this charge, For they have dealt treacherously against the Lord.
Next he shows wherein.

They have begotten strange children. Expos.
That is a further agravation, that they have not only sinned themselves, but
they have sought to propagate their sin and their wickedness: For it might
otherwise be said, It is true, Israel has sinned very grievous against the
Lord, but may there not be hope of another generation coming on? No, for they
bring up their children in the same way of superstition, Idolatry and
wickedness that they themselves walk in. That is the meaning, They have
begotten strange children; they should beget children unto God, but they beget
them unto Idols, and so this wickedness, this treachery against God is
propagated from one generation to another, there is a succession of it; as are
the old so are the young.

When any draw others to evil ways, they are said in Scripture to make them
children of the Devil, to beget them as children of the Devil. Mat. 23.15. Ye
compass Sea and Land to make one Proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him
twofold more the child of the Devil than your selves, you beget him to the
Devil. So parents, first by way of natural generation they beget children to
themselves, and then by educating their children in ways of wickedness they
beget them the second time to the Devil. ^eas.
And they are called strange children, because God will not own them, they are
none of mine says God, they are strangers from me, I will have nothing to do
with them.

The words being thus opened, the Notes are these.

Obser.
First, Parents, have by God committed to them the charge of their children.
That is employed here, That is, it is their duty to look to beget their children
unto God, and to take heed that their children be not begotten to the Devil:
For Ephraim here, the ten Tribes are charged, that whereas they should have
brought forth their children for God, and so they should belong to Gods
Inheritance and God should have owned them, now they beget them to their Idols,
and they are strange children. God certainly does not give you children to
beget them for the Devil and for Hell. It should be a sad thing to parents to
think here is a child coming from my loins, conceived in my womb, and what,
shall an enemy unto God come out of my loins? shall a firebrand of Hell be
conceived in my womb? Certainly it should go to the heart of a parent to see
his child to be estranged from God, though he were not the cause of it: But
much more when a parent shall come to be convinced, this child is thus wicked
and ungodly, and as he has received the seed^ of his corruption from me at the
first, so those seeds were nourished up by my example, and encouragement, I
have led him to such wickedness. Woe to such parents, and such children may even
curse the time that they were born of such parents, and rather wish they had
been of the generation of Dragons, and off spring of Vipers, than begotten of
such parents. God when he gives you children, expects that you should labor
that there may be a succession of godliness in the world, that not only you
should be godly, but that you should bring up your children to be so too. Psalm.
78.5. He established a testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel, which
^e commanded our fathers; that they should make them Known to their children,
that the generation to come might Know them, even the children which should be
born; who should arise and declare them to their children. This is the way of
God, He commands you to make known His Statutes and Laws to your children,
that the generation to come might know them, and not that you should bring up
your children in ways of wickedness and superstition. I have read of the
Romans, Roman Custoro,
that it was wont to be their way to sue such parents as were not careful of
the education of their children. The educating of children amiss bid bear an
Action amongst the heathen Romans. Therefore Cicero inve^gh^ng against Verres
has this expression, Quod filium tuum etc. You have not only done thus and
thus your self says he, but you have educated your son amongst those that were
intemperate in riotousness, in feasting, in drinking amongst wantons and
unclean persons, and by this means says he you have not only wronged your
child, but the Commonwealth. Thus he laid his action against him. Now how
might Heathens shame us in this thing, they account those men to deserve
punishment not only from God but from men that are not careful of the education
of their children? There is a great de^^ of reason for it, and it were very
good now that there might be a Law enacted to that purpose, upon this ground,
because the Commonwealth has a part in the children as well as the parent,
and the parent not being careful to bring up the child in the fear of God, he
wrongs the Commonwealth as well as the child, therefore to be punished by the
Commonwealth.

The second is this. That Obser. 2.
Children usually are as their parents are, and as their education is.

The parents they were Idolaters, they were ungodly and strangers from God,
their children are so too. In many families we see that the father is an enemy
unto God, and the son an enemy unto God, and his son is an enemy unto God, and
his son after him is an enemy unto God, and so there goes a line and a
succession of wickedness and profaness and enmity unto God. It is usually so.

Use for those that are well educated.
Therefore let those children that are born of, and brought up under godly
parents, bless God that they were not born and brought up by wicked parents. It
may be if thou had been born and brought up of Papists, thou would have
been a Papist thy self. If thou had been born of one that is a stranger to
God, of a Malignant, of a contemner of God, thou would have been so too.

And seeing this is ordinary for children to be as their parents, Oh then what a
mercy is it for any child that is born of wicked parents, 2. to those that are
born of wicked parents.
yet that God should work His grace in him. This is not any ordinary mercy.
There are some that are born of godly parents that do bless God that they are
kept from wickedness that way: but there are some that are born of wicked
parents, and so brought up by them in the family; yet so gracious is God unto
them, that in a more than ordinary way, He goes further in mercy to them and
works grace in their hearts notwithstanding. This is His extraordinary mercy, a
mercy that thou art to admire at unto all eternity, that notwithstanding thy
birth and education, yet God should reveal himself unto thee.

But how vile are they that being born of good parents, are wicked! It is
ordinary for such as are born of wicked parents and have wicked education, for
them to be wicked, to be strange children; but for those that have godly
parents, and godly education, for them to be wicked and strange children, this
notes a notorious height of wickedness.

The third Note is this, That It is a dangerous thing for children to follow
the Example of their parents in wickedness. Obser.


It is from hence that they are called strange children, they are strangers to
God. It is not enough for them to plead, I did as my father or as my mother
taught me. No, if thy parents be wicked and superstitious, and they bring thee
up in wickedness and superstition, and so thou art wicked and superstitious thy
self, know that notwithstanding this excuse, God looks upon thee as a strange
child, thou have no part nor por^ion in God, thou art an Alien, thou art
estranged from God.

Children therefore had need to examine their parents ways and actions: And
above all, Peter, one would think should be a Scripture for ever to stop the
mouth of that plea, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. We are not redeemed by gold and silver,
nor such kind of things, from our vain conversation, received by tradition from
our fathers; but by the blood of Jesus Christ that imaculate Lamb. Mark the
text; that the being redeemed, from our vain conversation received by tradition
from our fathers, is so great a mercy that it cost the blood of Jesus Christ. 1
Pet. 1.18. applied.
If God accounts it such a mercy as that He is willing to lay down the blood
of His Son to purchase that mercy for a poor creature, shall not this creature
prize this mercy? And yet you think it rather to be a mercy to go on in these
ways that you have received by tradition from your fathers, and you think it a
great plea because you have this by tradition from your fathers: Mark what you
do, I say those men or women, whether young or old, that shall plead for any
superstitious way upon this ground, because they had it from their forefathers,
they do in effect say, we look upon the blood of Jesus Christ as a common, as a
worthless thing. He shed His blood to redeem thee from that which thou think
is worth nothing to be redeemed from. Thou think it a good thing to go the
way of the traditions of thy fathers; and Christ says, I account it so great
an evil, that rather than any that does belong to Me shall go on in that way, I
will lay down My blood, My life to deliver him from it.

The fourth Note is this, That Obser.
When the succeeding generation is wicked, there is little hope of such a
people, of such an Nation

I have withdrawn my self says God, I have done with them, and afterward he
tells us, that they shall be desolate, and this is the reason, they have begot
strange children: The children, the generation that is coming after they are
idolaters too, they go as their fathers did, and what hope is there of them?
simile
When in a Vineyard or an Orchyard not only the old trees are rotten, but the
young trees, they likewise come to be corrupted and blasted by them, then there
is little hope of any great cost to be bestowed about it, but it is likely to
be dug up for the beasts to be let in up on it.

The way to divine what shall become of a Nation.
than this; look how the children are, how the young ones are that are coming up
in that Nation, and by that you may come to divine what God intends to do
with the next. We have much cause to bless God for His mercy toward us herein,
in that He has in a great measure (we hope) taken away that sign of His
dreadful wrath upon us in this particular. I say in a great measure; though the
truth is, we have a great many of the young generation extreme rude, abundance
of Apprentises and others that are fit, prepared, and ready to make riots and
tumults to maintain their Fathers, their Masters old superstitions; and if ever
there be any stirs in a Kingdom about such things (as seldom superstition and
idolatry can be banished from a Kingdom but some stirs will be) usually they
are begun by the young ones, What, stirs upon the putting down of supersti^ion.
they are begun by young ones usually.
if you take away their Holy Days from them, you take away their lives. I make
no question but so far as is fit, times of recreation will be allowed them, and
there is good reason for it; though such kind of superstitious days be taken
from them. But because they find liberty in those days, and their masters and
many of their parents stick to the old ways of superstition therefore many
young ones they do accordingly, and had almost rather lose their lives than
lose them, and being heady and naught they will soon be brought to raise tumults
and make seditions for them. But though there are many that are very vile that
way, and such as they are, are the saddest Omen of God^ displeasure against a
Nation; yet on the other side we should wrong the grace of God if we should not
observe His goodness toward us in the workings of His Spirit upon. Young
ones. Yea many whose parents have been superstitions, wicked and ungodly, and
their masters have bin so too, yet we find that the Lord has delivered a great
number of the young generation from those old superstitions, and they are not
willing to fully themselves with such vanities as their parents and masters
before them did; they do begin to know the Lord, and to enquire after God;
Young ones the hope of a Nation.
And blessed are you of the Lord, you are our hope, that God intends good
unto us, and that He will not let out the wild beasts to devour us, but will
rebuke them for your sakes. And although perhaps many of these gracious young
ones may perish, yea many have been slain already in this Cause, yet let not
others that remain behind be discouraged at it, for it is in argument that
there is some great and special mercy that God intends for us, in that He is
willing to venture such precious ones for the procuring of that mercy. We may
well reason so, that if so much precious young blood that might have lived to
serve God, be shed in this Cause, if God come to grant unto England mercy, He
will grant such mercy as will be worth al their blood; and that mercy must needs
be great that shall be worth all the blood of those that are so precious, which
might have lived to serve God so many years here in this world.

And seeing God makes use of them, it is because the mercy that is to come for
the next generation is so precious, that indeed such as have defiled themselves
with superstitious vanities are like to have no share in it; and as they are
not like to live to see it, so God will not make use of them to prepare that
mercy for the next generation: But because God has a love unto the young
generation that are godly, therefore He has reserved much mercy for many of
them that are like to see and enjoy it; and others of them that are not like to
see it, yet he will be so gracious to them as he will employ them in making way
for that mercy: And whether it is better to be made instrumental for the glory
of God and the good of another generation, or to live to see the fruit of this,
it is hard to determine. Certainly those that in one generation are made so
instrumental, as to lay the ground work of mercy for another generation, they
are as happy as that other generation that comes to reap the fruit of their
labors and sufferings; and those that do come to reap the fruit of their
labors shall bless God for them, and when they enjoy the good and liberty of
the Gospel, they shall say, Oh blessed be God that stirred up such a generation
of young ones to shed their blood, and now we reap the fruit of it, and blessed
be God for them; they will bless you to all generations. Therefore let there be
no discouragement to godly young ones though it pleases God to cut of many by
death in this Cause, for God has some excellent end in it beyond all our
reaches. Thus much for these words; Only one Note more, and that is this, That
Obs.
God takes it exceeding ill at men's hands, that they should corrupt young ones.

This Note is as full in the words as any other. God takes it exceeding ill, it
is a part of treachery against God for any to be a means to corrupt young ones.
Take heed what you do in corrupting of young ones. Those young people that are
coming on and beginning to enquire after godliness, take heed what you do, that
you hinder them not; Especially parents and governors; Oh let your consciences
fly in your faces when you begin to curb them for their forwardness: Many
times your consciences cannot but misgive you when you think, I have been
wicked and naught most part of my days, I spent God knows many of my years in
vanity and profaness, here are young ones that begin betime to enquire after
God, and yet wretch that I am my heart rises against them.

And as these people that hinder young ones are to be rebuked, so such as seek
to corrupt them by false opinions. Certainly it is that by which God is much
provoked at this day; and as on the one side there is hope of mercy in regard
so many young ones begin to enquire after God, so I know no such dreadful
argument of Gods displeasure against this Nation as this, That as soon as young
ones begin to come to know Jesus Christ, there are presently corrupt erro^^
infused into them, and that under the notion of honoring Christ and free grace
and the Gospel so much the more; whereas indeed they do no other than infuse
principles of libertinisme and looseness and such as will even eat out the heart
of godliness. Certainly the Lord has a quarrel against such as corrupt young
ones by their false principles: for there are none so ready to drink in false
principles as young ones, especially young converts, who begin to enquire after
the ways of God: and these men that are their corrupters, they have this
advantage, they come not to them to persuade them to profaness, but they come
to them with seeming pretenses of giving honor unto Christ and of magnifying
free grace, and in the mean time sow seeds in them that will eat out the power
of godliness. Oh to corrupt children and young ones and when they begin to
enquire after God and to know him, for you to do that which may estrange them
from God, this is that which God will have a quarrel against you for! And it is
a greater argument of Gods displeasure against us, A common evil.
that it is so common and frequent at this day, than any one I know; there is
not any one argument (that I know) that is a greater discouraging argument to
us of Gods displeasure, than this thing. But so much for those words, They have
begotten strange children. It follows.

Now shall a month devour them with their portions. Expos.
A month] I find Interpreters have a great deal of do about this expression.
Many think that God aims at one special month, and they tell u^ of one month in
the year which answers to our July, that there were many grievous things to
befall the Jews in that month in former times, and in latter times too, as if
that were a more Ominous month than any other. I will not spend time to speak
further of that.

But there is certainly somewhat else in this expression. I find an expression
parallel to this in Zech. 11.8. the holy Ghost there speaks of three Shepherds
that God will cut off in one month; these Idol Shepherds, says he, My soul
loathed them, and their soul also abhorred me, I will cut them off in one
month. There is the most exact description of your superstitious Idol
Shepherds, even such as we have at this day amongst us in many places, says
God, My soul loathed them, and their soul abhorred me. Who do more hate the
power of godliness than those kind of men, and against whom is the soul of God
more than against those kind of men? And I will destroy them in a month says
God. Wherefore by this Month I take the meaning of the holy Ghost to be in
these two things.

First, It seems to have some reference to the way of the Jews in those times,
they were wont to have their days of reckoning with their workmen and with
their debtors, usually at the beginning or ending of every month, and this
expression seems to allude that way of theirs; A month shall devour them, that
is, the time of their month shall come when I will reckon with them, and when
that fixed time shall come of my reckoning, they shall be undone, they shall be
devoured and destroyed.

So that it notes, First, That God has a set time to reckon with sinners.
Though Secondly, When God comes to reckon with wicked men, that is The time of
their reckoning will be the time of their destruction.

Secondly, A month shall devour them.] I find yet many Interpreters a little
short time shall devour them, it shall not be long, it shall not be an hundred
and twenty years, as it was when He threatened the old world, but it shall be
very speedy; As if God should say, when once I begin with them, a month shall
make an end of the work. And indeed what will a month do when God lets the
sword come upon a Nation? (for that (the sword) was the judgment here
threatened.) As in many parts of England, what a great deal of havoc have the
enemy made in a month? How many that were rich and had great estates, yet
before a month went about, into what a miserable condition were they brought?
so that God seems to have reference to the Assyrians that were let out upon
them, let them but once come says He, and they will not be long about the
work, a months time shall devour them.

Luther, Luther
has another Note, and so some agree with him,

And their portions.] I find the Seventy translate it, Cleros, (...)(...)
their lots. And it may be turned, their lots, upon this ground, because in the
division of the land of Canaan, that which they had for their estates, was
given unto the ten Tribes at first by Lot. Well says God, I did give you your
estates by such a special providence of mine, by lot; but though I did in
another way measure out your estates than I do measure out the estates of any
men upon the earth, yet a month shall devour your Lot, all that you had in that
way of my special providence it shall now be devoured. From thence then the
Note is this, and of exceeding use to us, That Obser.
The more special the providence of God is toward us, in bringing any mercy to
us, the more grievous is it after, if God be provoked in his judgment to come
and take that away from us.

That mercy that I had by a special hand of Gods providence, that I can relate
Gods providence how it wrought about from this passage to the other passage,
how strangely the Lord did work about His ends, to bestow such a mercy and such
a mercy upon me; Well, thou can speak of Gods providence and bless His Name,
thou do well in it, but take then heed thou do not abuse that mercy that
thou enjoyest by the special hand of Gods providence; take heed of provoking
God to come and devour that mercy. So it is threatened here, a month shall
devour their portion, their estates that they had by special lot it shall now
come to be destroyed because of their sin.

A month shall devour their portion, that is, all their portion that they have
here in their outward estates, all their riches, all their outward comforts,
what ever they have, that which they account to be their portion, a month, a
little time shall destroy it. And from thence there are these two Notes.

First, That all the portion of a carnal heart, it is the enjoyment of a few
outward things in the world. Carnalists portion outward.
Here is his portion, he has his portion in this world. And then,

poor condition of the worldly rich.
for why? his portion is no other, but a month may devour it. If thou had the
whole Kindom and many Kingdoms for thy portion, if this were all, thou had a
poor pittance for thee that have an immortal soul, who art made for eternity, a
month may devour it. That man is but a poor man that has no other portion but
that which a month may devour. But now the Saints they have God Himself for
their portion, that portion that neither month can devour nor time destroy, but
that portion which they shall enjoy fresh, and green, lively, and full, and
that unto all eternity; that portion which lives for ever, and that portion
which will keep them safe to live for ever too.

VER. 8. Blow ye the Cornet in Gibeah, and the Trumpet in Ramah; Cry aloud at
Beth-aven; after thee, O Benjamin.


THE Prophet seeing how little impression his words of threatening made in the
hearts of this people: Conexio^.
O these are but words of wind, that we should be devoured etc. therefore in the
Name of the Lord, he puts upon himself another person. He speaks now in
this verse rather as a Captain, as a General of the field, calling an Allarm
presently as if the enemy were now come to the gates; Blow ye the Cornet in
Ramah, and the Trumpet in Gibeah: as if he should say, you have often heard
that the Lord would bring the sword upon you, now it is come, it is come, the
enemy is even ready to break into your Cities, to riflle your houses, to ravish
your wives, to murder your children, Blow ye the Cornet in Gibeah, and the
Trumpet in Ramah, and howl ye and cry out, O ye of Beth-aven; after thee, O
Benjamin. It is a summoning of them, as if one should come to the City and cry,
The enemy, the enemy is come to the gates, Arm, Arm: So the Prophet here, that
he might strike into the hearts of those that are stupid and senceless, says
he, I have often in the Name of God threatened His wrath, that He will bring the
sword upon you, I see you are a stupid and senceless people; Know, that the
Lord is upon you in wrath, the enemy is come, now is the time come of your
destruction; Blow ye the Trumpet and resist it as well as you can, set your
selves in battle array as well as you can, for now wrath and misery is upon you.
That generally is the scope of the words.

Expos. partic.
But yet there are Three things to be considered for the further opening of
these words. (The Cornet and the Trumpet, those you know were instruments of
war, the one was made of horn, the other of brass.) But why in Ramah and in
Gibeah? that is the first thing: And then, why Cry aloud at Beth-aven? And
thirdly, what is the meaning of that, after thee, O Benjamin?

1. Ramah and Gibeah; 1. Ramah and Gibeah.
I find many take these words not as proper names for Cities, but to signify
the hills and highplaces of the Country. And the Seventy indeed translate the
words, (...).
Upon the hills, and upon the high places; for so Ramah does signify an high
place; and Gibeah does signify by way of excellency, an Hill. Now then they
would carry the meaning thus, (...)
as if the Lord should say to the Prophet, Go to the highest places that are in
the Country, the highest hills, and there let the Cornet and the Trumpet be
blown as an Allarm to awaken the whole Land. And then the Note would be this:

It is fit that it should be made known to them. Not only that they should go
to the Governors and those that are in high places of authority, but go where
they may make known the danger to all the people of the Land. It is true, in
the first place it is fit the Governors should be awakened, but if they be
awakened and not the people it will prove to little purpose. It is that which
many men of vile spirits of late could not endure, that Ministers should tell
people of dangers, or tell them of the forerunners of Gods displeasure against
a Nation; to preach such things in public Auditories, this their spirits
mightily rose against: But it is the way of God, in times of public dangers to
have the people made acquainted.

Ramah and Gibeah, they were two eminent Cities, and they did belong both to
the Kingdom of Judah. Indeed they were in the Tribe of Benjamin, but Benjamin
and Judah were joined in one Kingdom under the house of David, and the other
ten Tribes were rent away under Jeroboam. Now these two Cities (I say) were in
the Kingdom of Judah and eminent Cities, and it is likely they were fortified
Cities, and two of the strongest Cities in the Kingdom. Now God is here
threatening of judgment against Judah as He did before when He said, Judah also
shall fall with them. Therefore says he, Blow ye the Cornet in Ramah, and the
Trumpet in Gibeah, in the eminentest places of Judah, in the most fortified,
and let us see how they are able to resist the misery that is coming upon them.

And further, I find this to be the translation of the Chaldee paraphrase, that
they would import as if the meaning were because that Gibeah was the City of
Saul; and Ramah was the City of Samuel, therefore that God did threaten
judgment for their making of a King against his mind, and for their
disobedience to the words of Samuel. So they paparaphrase the text. But I think
that to be somewhat too far fetched. The other two I conceive are the mind of
the holy Ghost here, in the high places of the Country, and especially in
those eminent Cities that were the most fortified, that though they were in the
Tribe of Benjamin, yet belonged to the Kindom of Judah.

2. Cry out, O Beth aven.] Beth-aven 2. Bethave^
I find was another City different from that of Bethel where one of the Calves
were; But there are near ten Interpreters to one, that make it to be the same
City Bethel wherein one of the Calves were set, and this belonged unto the ten
Tribes.

Now this Bethel, which signifies the house of God, is called Beth aven here,
which signifies the house of vanity, because of the Idol that was there.
Therefore mark the emphasis, when he speaks of Ramah and Gibeah, says he, blow
the corner and the trumpet, but when he speaks of Beth-aven says he Cry aloud,
or as the latin signifies, howl out, O Beth-aven, (...)
for that was the great place of superstition. He names this City rather than
Dan (where the other of the two Calves was placed) because it was so near unto
the Kingdom of Judah.

3. After thee, O Benjamin. 3. O Benjamin
] That is, Benjamin was upon the back of this Beth-aven, it was next unto the
Kingdom of Israel. Now says God by the Prophet, the wrath of God shall come
out against Israel, Ephraim shall be left desolate, and Beth-aven shall howl
and cry out, and you Benjamin that are so near them, take you heed to your
selves, after thee, O Benjamin, thy turn will be next. You have reason to look
to your selves when your neighbors house is on fire; so says God here, Howl
Beth-aven, after thee, O Benjamin; Benjamin lived hard by Beth-aven, and when
Benjamin saw the wrath of God against the ten Tribes and in that City of
Beth-aven that was so near to it, Benjamin should look to it self. That Is the
meaning of the holy Ghost in these words.

Now for the Notes of observation from them. The first is this,

The Lord had threatened the sword many times by the Prophet, and their hearts
were secure, stupid; but now he comes and presents it as present and real unto
them, Blow ye the trumpet, the danger is now at hand, here it is says the
Prophet. There is a great deal of difference between men's hearing of wars and
rumors of wars, and the very reallity of the evil it self when that comes
before their eyes. This judgment of war, Use to England.
of the sword, it has been threatened against this Nation long ago. I dare
appeal to you, for a matter of twenty years since (you that remember the way
and the common strain, godly ministers preaching
almost of all the godly Ministers in the Kindom) was not their usual theme
about such an argument as this, to show what were the forerunners of Gods
judgments against a Nation? Ministers duty to search what sins bring public
judgment
Ever since I was a youth and took any notice of Sermons, I know no argument
that kept the sound in mine ears more than that: Usually it was the theme
almost of all the places in the Kingdom, of all your eminent Ministers to
search into Gods word to see what were the sins that brought public judgments
upon a Nation and apply them unto England; what were the forerunners of
destruction upon a Nation and apply them unto England: But this was ordinarily
slighted. Some indeed of our brethren that feared the Lord and feared his
judgments, and thought that they did foresee a storm, upon that they withdrew
themselves, and they were scorned and contemned for their labors. But now we
see the thing that was feared and threatened is come, it is upon many Countries:
and do we not apprehend it after another manner than we did when we only heard
of it? In those Countries where the sword has been raging, do not they
apprehend the evil of war in another manner than ever they did when they heard
it threatened in Sermons? O when it is come indeed and made real it works after
another manner than it does when it is spoken of. War.
Those men that continually have their ears filled with the noise of the Drum
and Trumpet, with the neighing of Horses and roaring of the Cannon, they will
tell you that war is a dreadful thing indeed. So it is in all other afflictions
that are threatened; how little are they regarded in their threats? but when
they come indeed, Oh then how do the hearts of men sink within them! Oh now God
is coming against me, now wrath is upon me says the guilty soul, how far it
may go out I know not; I heard often of such and such things, now it is come,
it is come. Oh the dreadful apprehensions that are in men's hearts of the wrath
of God when it is come! whereas before when it is threatened it is never feared.
Obs. The less a threatening is heard, the more the judgment is felt when upon
us.


And this is a rule, an everlasting rule, That the less a judgment is feared
when it is threatened, the more dreadful apprehensions there are of it in the
heart when once it comes to be executed. That Is the first Note. The second is
this, The Ministers of God they must make the things they are Sermons must
represent to the life what they press.


They should study all ways and means they can to make what they preach to the
people to be real to them, not to be as notions to them. So the Prophet here,
he had preached often times of the judgments of God, of the Sword, but this
would not do it, therefore now he strives to make what he had delivered to
appear in the most real way that possibly he could to the eyes and hearts of
the people, and he saw that to be the only way to do them good. It is not
therefore enough for a Minister barely to tell the people truths, to tell them
what danger they are in, but by all means of expressions that may be to make
this appear in the reallity of it unto them. We know how Ezekiel was wont to
do, he threatened their carrying away, and he went and made before them a kind
of siege to make it real to them. So Jeremiah and other Prophets. Now though
Ministers cannot do so as they did, yet they are to study all manner of
expressions that possibly they can to present things in the greatest reallitie
that may be. And indeed this is a great part of the skill of a good Minister,
not barely to tell truths unto people, but to be able to make things appear
real to them. Wherein especially consists the Art of preaching
The art of preaching I say lies especially in this, to make things appear real
to the souls of an Auditory. As now, when we come to tell you of the danger of
sin and of the wrath of God that is due to it; we tell you this and we quote
Scripture for it, this perhaps stirs not the heart; but now if we can so
present Gods wrath to you, to make it real before your eyes, to put you upon
this, to bethink your selves in what a case you would be if now all creatures
were taking their leaves of you, if now you were standing before the great God
to receive the sentence of condemnation, More good this way in a quarter of an
hour than in many years otherwise.
if God were now at this instant coming upon you: If I say we could put you to
it, and so preach as that you should apprehend these things as real before your
eyes, this would stick, and more good might be done in one quarter of an hour
this way, than perhaps in diverse years before. The power of a Ministry
consists much in this. And I suppose some of you know by experience what that
is that now I mean by the Ministers making things real to your hearts. Have not
you found sometimes some truths made so real to you out of the word, When a
Sermon works really.
to your consciences, that you have thought that you have even stood before the
Throne of God and you have thought that God was even pronouncing sentence
against you? Some have expressed it thus, and have said, such a time I went to
hear the Word, and me thought there I was summoned before the great God unto
judgment, I saw the Lord God Himself speaking to me, I had represented before
mine eyes the wickedness of my life, my danger, the wrath of God, and even the
very flashes of Hell fire upon my conscience, I felt this upon me. Now God was
in the Word indeed when the reality of things were presented to my soul. And
certainly it is the labor and endeavor of godly Ministers in their studies, not
only to speak an hour or two out of a text and to wear out so much time; but
they are thinking, what way shall I take (and so they pray that God would help
them to take such a way) to present such and such Truths in the greatest
reality to the souls of their Audience that possibly they can. This is apparent
from hence, that the Prophet does not only tell them of their danger, but
speaks as if it were at hand, and makes it thus real before them.

Another Observation is this, That though the Ministers of God are at first to
be the Ambassadors Ministers after their Embassy of peace is slighted must
denounce war.
to preach peace between God and people; but yet if this their Ministry of
Reconciliation do not take effect, if it prevail not; then they are to come in
the Name of God to proclaim the war of God against a soul.

For they know that God must have honor one way or other, either by peoples
subjecting themselves unto Him, or by Gods revenging Himself upon them. Honor,
God must have: howsoever you may think the Word of God will pass, yet those
that are faithful Ministers, they know God must have His Honor one way or
other; either willingly you must come in and give it unto Him, or He will force
it out from you: If the joyful sound of mercy be not received, the dreadful
sound of war must fill your ears.

Fourthly, What occasions of war soever there be in a Land, the For so it is
here, They have dealt treacherously, they have begotten strange children;
therefore a month shall devour them. Blow ye the cornet in Ramah, and the
trumpet in Gibeah etc. Upon this ground, because of their treacherous dealing
with God, and bringing up of their children in ways of Idolatry. It is true,
when danger is come to a Nation, the people of the Land are ready to lay it
upon those that are most free from it. Who is it that men at this day lay the
troubles of this Nation upon, but upon those that have all this while stood in
the gap to prevent dangers to the Nation, and that have with more prayers and
tears sought God than those that are so ready to charg them with it? But this
has been in all ages, the Saints have been made the troublers of a Nation: But
is it not Thou and thy fathers house, says the Prophet, speaking even to Ahab
Himself? The troublers of Israel lie not in the Prophets, lie not in the
Ministers as men cry out, that they preach sedition.

And it was wont indeed to be the title of Luther that great instrument of God,
they called him the trumpet of rebellion: and not a new thing therefore is it,
that the Ministers of God that first preach the word of Reconciliation, and
then seek to show people their danger, no marvel they be accounted the causers
of their troubles, because they will not let people go on quietly in their
ways, but in the Name of God oppose, and reprove them. But we know where our
trouble lies, it lies in those that are most superstitious and idolatrous, they
bring the sword: Do not attribute it to this and the other cause, it is the
provocation of the most high God that brought these wars in upon us,: If
therefore we be weary of war, let us be weary of our sins. I remember Polanus
Polanus.
upon this text has this Note, and indeed he hinted it unto me; says he, The
Jesuits they cry out of the Gospel in Hungary; a place which is near the Turks,
and the Turks you know have often made incursions upon those Countries, and
your Papists and Jesuits they cried out of your Evangelici, of your Gospellers,
as if they were the cause of the Turks coming in amongst them. But the Lord
knows where to lay the burden right.

Again, in the next place, from those words, [ Cry aloud at Beth-aven Beth-aven.
] According to that interpretation I gave you, it was the place where one of
the Idols were set, and a most superstitious and Idolatrous place. Now mark the
difference, it is but only blow the Cornet and Trumpet in Ramah and in Gibeah;
but it is cry aloud, or shrike out, and howl, Oh Beth-aven. From thence these
two Notes.

First, That superstitious places in the time of Gods judgment and so
superstitious persons. When Gods hand comes out against a Nation, it will fall
heaviest upon those that are Idolatrous and superstitious. It is true, Gods
hand has hitherto fallen heavy and very heavy upon many of our brethren, upon
Gods dear Saints; but has it not fallen heavily upon Idolaters and
superstitious ones? How ever, mark the end, stay till God has done, and you
will find that the hand of God will be heaviest upon them; Howl O Beth-aven.
Those places that have been the nests of superstition and Idolatry, those are
the places that His wrath will be most against. And indeed they do begin to howl
and cry out already: For though some of Gods people have felt hard things, yet,
Have two Nations lifted up their hands to the most high God to extirpate Gods
people? But they have lifted up their hands to endeavor to extirpate a
superstitious people amongst us; therefore Gods hand is heaviest against
Beth-aven.

Secondly, In times of greatest trouble those that are ungodly Instead of
repairing unto God by faith and repentance, all that they have to do is to cry
out and to howl. Howl O Beth-aven; they were far enough from coming to humble
their souls to the Lord, and in a gracious manner to accept of the punishment
of their iniquity; and to bear the affliction that God lays upon them; Oh no,
but their spirits were vexed and enraged, they could howl and cry out, and that
is all. Applic.
Is not this the way of many that heretofore, Oh how diligent were they in
their prayers and worshipping of God, yet when they come into affliction what do
they? but vex and rage, howl and cry out; but far are they from giving glory
unto God according to that way he requires; they howl upon their beds says
God, but they did not seek unto me. And God threatens this in Amos, 3.10. Amos
3.10 opened,
(and that Prophet was contemporary with Hosea) I will turn the songs of their
Temples into howlings: They had their singing service before, says God, I will
turn those into howlings, for it is no other, their crying out under affliction
and trouble, it is no other before God but as howling. The Lord accepts in
another manner of the cryings of His people under oppression; they cry unto God
and send up their prayers of faith, and the incense of a broken heart, and God
accepts of the sighs, and of the moans that they make unto Him, and they do
prevail exceedingly with the Heart of God. But for the crying out of wicked and
ungodly men under Gods hand, He regards it not, no more than howling. Thus it
is here, Howl O Beth-aven; much like those in Esa. 51.20. that in the time of
distress, are described to lie in the head of all the streets as a wild bull in
a net, filled with the fury of the Lord; howl and cry out, and that is all.

After thee, O Benjamin. Benjamin
] The meaning of the words I gave you. The Notes from thence are these.

First, That it is an ill thing to have ill neighbors. an il thing to have il
neighbors
Benjamin was near Beth-aven, therefore he must fare the worse for Beth aven.
Themistocles Themistoc.
a Heathen, that having a Farm to let (and their way was to publish it at the
Marketplace) and he added, there is such a place to let, and there are good
neighbors, thinking it were more comfortable for men to live near those that
are good than those that are wicked.

Secondly, which indeed is the main observation from hence and that which
concerns us nearly.

When the wrath of God is out against our neighbors, we had Though we have been
in security before, yet if Gods wrath come near to us we had need to stir. It
is high time to look to our selves when our neighbors house is on fire. The
truth is, Englands security.
we in England have been a long time in deep security, though Germany, though
France, though the Low C^untries, the Palatinate, Italy and almost all the
Countries about us have been on fire, the Sword has raged amongst them, and it
has been threatened that it is likely we were the next, and been told us that
the Sword takes its circuit and that the Lord is going about to judge the
Nations of the earth, and had judged the Nations about us; but because we felt
nothing, though it was near us, we had no hearts to prevent it: Therefore God
is now come amongst us, and come into the very midst of us. The truth is, we in
England did lie a great while as it were like a faggot upon the fire, you know
when many faggots are on the fire, A fit similitude
the under-faggots they are on fire and they flame, and the faggots a little
above they begin to be taken, and the next above those they grow black; but if
so be you would not have the uppermost faggot burnt, will you let it lie there
and say, though the neathermost faggots be burnt yet this is not touched? Is
not that faggot think you in danger? So I compare several Nations to faggots in
the fire; It is true, Germany was the under faggot and was in the flame, and
other faggots have been burning, and we in England lay as it were on the top of
all, and it was a good while ere the flame took us and though we were cried
unto to pluck our selves as a fi^e brand out of the fire, yet we through
security lay still, and now the flame has got us yea though we be now burning
in many places in the Kingdom, yet because we find that the heat of the wars
are it may be twenty, thirty, or forty miles from us, how secure are we, as if
God did not intend us at all, as if we had nothing to do to take notice of Gods
hand upon our brethren. Wrath is pursuing, but because it is not upon us, Oh
the security and desperate folly that is amongst us in the mean time! Just so
it was in Germany as travelers observed, that if the wars were but a Town or a
few miles from them, they went on in their trading as quietly and securely as
ever till at length it came upon them and devoured them. Has it not been so in
many places in England? May it not be said of many places amongst us, as here
in the text, Ramah, and Gibeah, and Bethaven, after thee, O Benjamjn? So may we
not name several Towns, Banbury and Worcester, after thee, O Exceter, O
Bristol? It may be those in Bristol and in Exceter when the wars were in
Shropshire and Coventry and other parts, they thought they were free, and they
were safe enough: And truly though God has delivered us all this while, yet if
we be secure, it may be as well said of us, Exceter and Bristol, and after
thee, O London.

But you will say, What shall we do upon this, when the hand of God is
stretched out thus near us?

First, Humble our souls before God, go forth to meet this mighty God with
repentance, cry mightily unto him that if it be possible His wrath may be
appeased before it fasten upon us. As in that Luke 14.32. Luke, 14.32.
it is said of those that are wise, when a great King comes out against them
with twenty thousand, when he was a great way off, they send Ambassadors to
desire conditions of peace. opened.
Mark, when he is a great way off; So we must not stay till God is come to our
gates, till he be just upon us, but while this great King, the Lord God is a
great way off, at a distance, we must send unto Him, and meet Him by repentance
and by humbling our souls and making of our peace with him. Let not us think
It Is true, the hand of God was against our brethren of Scotland, but they were
quickly delivered; but I may say, after thee, O England. We have not done what
our brethren did; For it is observed that though the generallity of that people
were notorious vile, wicked, and rude before these times, but yet partly
through the Covenant they have entered into and otherwise, (though no question
there is much evil there, and perhaps not the power of godliness so thoroughly
as in many of Gods people here,) but there is certainly abundance of
reformation more in the common people than there is amongst us at this day;
which speaks hard things to us: Oh let us go forth and meet our God by
repentance.

Secondly, We should rise as one man, sensible of our brethrens misery, and go
out and help them. For this has been our evil, that we have suffered the
Kingdom to moulder away, our brethren to be destroyed; Oh says one place, what
need we trouble our selves? and so the Land is destroyed by peice-meal.
Certainly it is the duty of the Kingdom and of those that remain, that when
they see their brethren though at a distance to suffer so much wrong, they
should all rile as one man to venture themselves for the releif of their
brethren, and not think themselves secure because it is not yet upon them.
Scots coming into England.
We see our brethren of Scotland do so, they were willing to come in with their
help, and though the sword is far from them yet no question some of them think
of this very text, now the Trumpet is blown in England, in the Northern-parts,
after thee, O Scotland, they think after our turn is over, theirs is next,
therefore they are willing to prevent it, though it be in such a hard season as
this, to help their brethren.

Thirdly, We should be so wise in a way of true prudence to our selves, as to
meet with our danger before it comes; not suffering our adversaries to make
our Country the seat of their war. It is easier to keep an adversary at a
distance than to repel him when he is closed with us. This has ever been the
policy of wise men, rather to go out to meet an adversary than to think to
have strength enough to repel them when they come. Thus in general.

And then, As Kingdoms, so particular persons they should lay to heart Gods
judgments near to them; As thus: Do thou see Gods hand upon thy neighbor,
after thee, O sinner; thy turn may be next: what is Gods hand stretched out,
upon your fellow servants, upon your brother, upon your deer friend? after thee,
O sinner, thou art guilty of the same sin, thy turn may be next: Is Gods hand
out upon thy companion, after thee, O sinner. Oh lay this to heart, think with
thy self, my turn may come to be the next, and it may soon come to be my turn.
The very thought of this, when God has struck some with sudden death in a
fearful manner, God has sanctified this to some; what (thought they) if God
strike me next? such a one is sent down for ought I know to his place, I may be
the next: the thought (I say) of this has been so settled upon the heart of
some, that it has been a me^ns of their conversion. The Lord make it so to
every sinner, that sees his fellow, his neighbor sinner struck before him.

VER. 9. Ephraim shall be desolate in the day of rebuke; among the Tribes of
Israel have I made known that which shall surely be.


IN the words before you heard that the Lord by the Prophet did not only
threaten war, but summon the Cities of Israel, Judah, and Benjamin, as if war
were at the gates. But what if troubles do come, we shall do well enough, they
will have an end, and blow over again, we shall wear them out: we have been
delivered out of great troubles and so we may be out of these. No, it is
otherwise now, Ephraim shall now be desolate, Ephraim (that is the ten Tribes)
shall be desolate; Leshamnne, (...)
the word signifies a most stupendous thing, the the hand of God shall be upon
them even to amazement, they shall come into desolation, in the time of his
rebuke, in the day of his trouble: The words are plain; the Notes from them are
these.

That the day of Gods peoples affliction, is the day of their rebuke. Numb.
12.14. Moses says: If her father had spit in her face should she not be
ashamed: When God afflicts His people, he does as it were spit in their faces:
and ought not they much more to be ashamed? what ever that wanton generation
think or say, that God never chastises his people for sin, there is nothing
more frequent in Scripture, than this, that God chastises His for sin. But
they tell us it was in the old Testament; Old Testament
and herein they show their weakness and a mere cavel, but that which seems to
have some show of strength is this.

They tell us, That it derrogates from the satisfaction of Christ.

But the force of this is nothing,

A second Note is, God has his set times of rebuke. As they have Isa. 10.3.
and what will you do in the day of visitation?

When wicked men stand out lesser judgments, and corrections, they had days of
lesser chastisements, but slighting them, God would try him no more; there are
times in which God will utterly pursue sinners to destroy them not for
instruction, but destruction: the Lord has his houses of instruction,
correction, and execution, when the first cannot effect Gods end, the third
shall, and yet the Lord be just and righteous, for the Lord has no need of us,
what is it to him if we should perish everlastingly, He could have his glory
from us in our damnation.

That is a dreadful time, when the Lord comes so to rebuke a people when the
hand of God shall be so upon them, as he is resolved never to take it off
again, even as it was upon Ephraim at this time, I intend not to mend him, but
to ruin him: this now is a most dreadful time; For

Romans 2.5. Now God lets out the floudgates of His wrath against such a people.

Exodus 32.34.
In that day I Will visit for this says the Lord God. It may be you are for the
present spared, but the time is coming that God will visit, and then look to it.

Psalm. 78.38. Many times Gods anger is coming against a Nation, family, or
person, but God calls it back again: but in this day of rebuke God will not call
it back again, but let it forth to the uttermost.

Ezekiel. 7.5. An evil, an only evil, behold, it is come. But that place is most
remarkable for this, Ezekiel. 22.20. I will bring you into the furnace, and there
I will leave you. God brings His people into great troubles sometimes, but
never leaves them there. But there are some whom Mercy leaves and forsakes in
their troubles, and this is a most sad condition, for by this God shows that He
will have no more honor by them in their servings of Him, but in their
sufferings. God says thus, Seeing they would not give Me My glory in a way of
duty, I will extract and force it from them in a way of suffering.

Jer. 24.9. I intend nothing but hurt to such a people in all My dealings.



Lastly, Because then all services are rejected, and God will David, Psalm. 6.1.
Lord rebuke us not in thy wrath: And as the Prophet in Jer. 17.17. Be not a
terror unto me O Lord. But now, because tender consciences are ready to think
when God rebukes them, or lays any affliction upon them, that it is to ruin and
destroy them; as the Israelites said, in Deuteronomy. 1.27. Because the Lord hated us,
therefore he brought us out of Egypt. In every strait they were in, they
conceited God hated them in it, though God had done them good so many times.
And has not this been the reasonings of our unbeleeving hearts, and the
murmuring of our spirits in our afflictions? Oh take heed of such unbeleeving
reasonings, they are very much displeasing unto God: There is a great
difference between the rebukes of God upon the godly, and the wicked, though
perhaps rebuked both in one and the same affliction: as the Apothecary breaks
Bezar stones to powder, but is very careful of it, simile
and will not lose the least grain of it. So the Lords people even in the
furnace are as dear to him and have the most experience of Gods love to them
then that ever they had. Jacob when he lay upon the ground, and had the stone
for his pillow, even then he had that heavenly vision from God.

But now the question is, How shall we know whether those rebukes that are upon
us are intended for our good or our hurt, our desolation, or our restoration?

It may be known thus: If Gods displeasures be such,

But you will say, This is as difficult as the other, How shall we know God
aims at our sins, and not our persons? Thus:

If His rebukes work us to a humiliation for our sins, a resignation of our
selves up unto Gods dispose, and to accept of the punishment of our iniquities;
this is an argument God aims at our sins, and not at our persons in His
rebukes, and so in them our good and not our hurt: But it is usual for wicked
men in their rebukes to cry out of their sins, 'twas their sins that brought
this upon them. But here the difference is thus discerned.

First, They cry out of their sins but per accidence, but of the judgment per
se, as we use to say, the judgment troubles them more than their sins the
cause of the judgment: but the godly cry out of their sin^ per se, and of the
judgment per accidence, their sin troubles them.

Secondly, A child of God more desires the sanctification of an affliction than
the removing of it; but the wicked care not for removing the cause of judgment
[even sin] so the smart the correction may be taken off. It follows.

Some conceive that these words are spoken as the aggravation of this peoples
misery; and if so, the Notes from them are,

That God smites not a people with judgment before he w^^ns them off judgment.
Among the Tribes of Israel have I made known this.

When God threatens He is real in His threatenings. That which shall surely be.

Ephraim thinks that God intends not him. Sinners think that when God warns
them he is not in good earnest, it shall not be, but God says it shall be, God
esteems more of His Word than Heaven and Earth besides, nay Heaven and Earth
shall pass away before the least jot or tittle of it shall fail and cursed be
that peace that has no other ground or foundation than this hope, that those
things are not true which the Ministers of the Word from the Word threaten
against sinners. And yet this is the condition of many people, which does
mightily provoke God, as you may see in Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20, 21. If notwithstanding
what is written in this book he bless himself, saying, He shall have peace; the
anger of the Lord shall smoke against such a man. Oh the bitter aggravating
circumstances in this Scripture against such a sinner as this.

1. God has not called such witnesses to His threatening word as to His
promising word, there are Three in Heaven and Three on Earth who are Witnesses
but not to the threatening word, sometimes in the general he calls the Heavens
to witness to His threatening. Hear oh heavens, and hearken oh earth, I have
nourished up a people and they rebel against me.

2. To the verifying of a promise there is not only Gods faithfulness, but it is
His faithfulness in Christ, all the promises are in Him, yea and Amen; there is
in Gods promising word, not only His faithfulness, but His faithfulness in
Christ, all the promises are made in Christ, so are not the threatenings,
Judgments have not such immediate relation to Christ.

3. More sure, because promises are not only Gods Covenant with His people, but
His Testament, and so more sure than a Covenant, for a Covenant may be broken
on the one party, but a Testament cannot, it being confirmed by the death of
the Testator; the promise on our part may be broken, but when we look upon them
as confirmed by the death of the great Testator Jesus Christ, we have strong
consolation: as it is a great evil not to believe the threats of God, so it is
also a great evil not to credit the promises of God. Christians, you wonder
when wicked men believe not Gods threatenings and His judgments to tremble at
them, Know Oh Christian, that not only men but Angels stand and wonder when
thou do not believe the promises of God when they be so confirmed that we
might believe them and walk comfortably.

The revealing of sin before a judgment comes, aggravates both the sin and the
judgment, the punishment will be so much the heavier, it aggravates the sin,
because then there is the greater contempt against God: If a father should
desire his child not to do such a thing, nay not only desire him but forbid
him, yea threaten him with punishment if he does it; now if he shall after all
this gainsay his fathers will, he puts a greater contempt upon his father, for
now he breaks through hedges and fences, which should have kept him in: so when
God shall forbid, yea threaten if we will break out it puts a great contempt
upon God.

1. The goodness of God is not honored by us, when the Lord for our good shall
give us notice of our sins that so we may prevent judgment the desert of our
sins, and we notwithstanding sh^l ^in, it dishonors Gods goodness.

2. The truth of God is not honored, when we do not obey, this is no other than
a venturing whether the word be true or no, whether Gods words are yea and nay,
Oh sinner do thou know what thou do, thou temptest God, saying, Lord there
are such and such threatenings against sin but I do not believe them, Lord I Will
venture it, I Will put it to the trial whether it be so or no.

3. As it aggravates the sin, so the punishment; the judgment cannot but be the
greater, thou can expect but little pity from the goodness of God which thou
have slighted, when it warned thee of those judgments which are now upon thee,
His mercy to remove them cannot be expected. God by His Ministers warned me in
such a Sermon, but I went on and would not reform, and now there is matter for
the worm of conscience to gnaw upon: that thou may say as Job, What I feared
is now come upon me, and this is that which aggravates our misery. Use. Engl.
At this time have not the Ministers of God for these twenty years, especially
in these latter seven years made this the subject of their preaching, to warn
us of judgments, and now the judgments of God are come upon us, God has
vindicated the word of His servants.

But these words though they may be thus understood, yet I conceive they bear a
further signification which is, this: I have declared among the Tribes what
shall be without revolk, without They continue Gods unchangable purpose for the
desolating of this people, and being thus understood, the Note from them will
be this.

That there is a time when there shall be no help to be delivered from
judgment, though they should call, cry, mourn, weep, fast, Obser.
and entreat, yet the judgment should not be removed.

As it is said of Esau, He found no place for repentance. Heb. 12.17. Heb. 12.17.
There is a great mistake by many in the interpretation of that place, from
which text many gather that there may be many tears shed, much sorrow found,
and yet no true repentance, but the meaning of the words is this, he found no
place for his father Isaacs repentance, though he cried and shed tears for the
blessing, yet his father repented not that he had bestowed it upon Jacob: so
that people may cry and humble their souls before God, yet shall find in God no
place of repentance, nay if that the Saints of God should all join together and
pray for such a people they should not prevail; Ezekiel. 14.20. Though Noah,
Daniel, and Job should pray for them, they should not prevail. Oh sinner take
heed this be not thy condition, thou have godly parents and kindred it may be,
and they set themselves to seek God for thee, but God will deny them, their
prayers shall not prevail for thee; this may be the case of Nations and
Kingdoms, that there may be true repentance found and turning to God, and yet
no deliverance from outward affliction. I deny not but that true repentance
shall deliver a soul from eternal wrath, from perishing in hell; but this I
affirm that there may be true repentance found and turning unto God and yet no
deliverance from a temporal affliction. And this I shall make good by two
famous texts of Scripture. The first is in Deuteronomy. 3.26. Moses had sinned, and
God says he should not go into the land of Canaan, which was a sore affliction
to Moses, upon this Moses he praid, and it is certain Moses had repented him of
that sin, yet see what he says, The Lord was wrath with me, for your sake, and
would not hear me, but let it suffice thee, speak no more of this matter. All
his prayers and repentance could not deliver him from that outward affliction,
and bring him into Canaan. The second text is in 2 Kings, 23.25. in the former
chapter we find the heart of the King melting when he heard the Law read, and
perceived the anger of the Lord against his people was provoked, yet the Lord
tells him that he should die in peace. And in the 23. Chapter, the King he sets
upon reforming the people, enters into a solemn Covenant with God, causes the
people to join with him, pulls down the groves, destroies Idolatry, and
although it be said in the 25. verse, that like unto him was there no King
before him, yet in the 26. verse God says, Notwithstanding all this, he will
remove Judah out of his sight. So that sometimes God is so set upon his
threats, that they shall come to pass, God will make them good whatever comes
of it; this I conceive to be the meaning of these words. And so Mr. Calvin
reads them, God may be so resolved against a man's eternal estate that he will
never show such a man or such a people mercy more; as we may see in those which
were bid to the Gospel-supper: therefore we had need to gather our selves
together before the decree bring forth, Zeph. 2.1, 2. Oh let us in this Kingdom
take heed; yet through Gods mercy we are not left desolate, but have many
points of mercy, even in this day of our rebuke, but what God will do one
cannot determine, therefore it concerns us to prepare to meet our God, lest the
wrath of God meet us, overcome and destroy us till there be no remedy, though
through mercy for the present we may say there is remedy, yea rather let us
tremble and be awakened, because God sometimes comes against, and is more quick
with a people that are not so openly, and notoriously vile as others are, than
he does with the most profane: So much for this ninth verse.

VER. 10. The Princes of Judah were like them that remove the bound; therefore
I will power out my wrath upon them like water.


BUT why is God so wrath with Israel? Conexio^.
Have not the Princes of Judah provoked Him also?

Yea, for God here speaks to them principally. It seems the people were not so
bad, so sinful as they, for in the next words he says, That Ephraim is
oppressed, and broken in judgment; because he willingly walked after the
commandment.

First, Princes must answer to God for all their doings: Though they are above
all men in power, and so are not so liable to give an account to man as others
are, yet to God they must, those actions which are least obnoctious to men, are
much to God.

The Princes of Judah are like to them that remove the bounds.

Are like.] That is, not so much in a similitude, as reality: as it is usual in
Scripture to put the word, like, for the thing it self, As thus, His glory was
as the Son of God. The Princes of Judah were those that removed the bound: by
the light of Nature, and the Law of God it was a wicked thing to remove bounds;
you may see it forbidden by the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 27.17.

It was a custom among the Heathens, and the Romans, That

The Princes of Judah broke down the bounds in a Fourfold way.

1. They took away men's estates that were none of their own. God appoints men
their bounds and estates, therefore it is not in the power of Princes to take
them away at their pleasure. It was not in the power of Ahab to take away
Naboths Vinyard, nay, nor to force him to sell it, though a King, he thought it
too much to take it by violence; and Jezebel, though a cruel woman, yet would
not take his Vinyeard without some coulor of Law. Therefore Princes have no
right to the Subjects estates, and liberty for to take them away at their
pleasures; though such principles of late have been infused into them by some,
for which we at this day suffer so heavily. In Isa. 1.23. Their Princes are
said, to be rebellious and companions of thieves. Now if all were their own
they could not break bounds: We would think that they of all men should not
break bounds, for what is it they may not have if they would? I have read a
story in Plutarch, concerning Cyneas and Pyrrhus who was mightily set upon war
with Italy, Cyneas speaks thus unto him; What shall we get if we overcome the
Romans? Says Pyrrhus, We shall subdue our great enemy, and be made possessors
of a brave Country. Cyneas asked him what he would do then? Says Pyrrhus, Then
we will subdue Africa, Carthage, and Sicila: And what then? Then says Pyrrhus
we will feast, drink and be merry. Cyneas answered, Why may you not do so now
without sheding so much blood, putting your self to so much trouble and
endangering your person. If Princes would keep within their bounds what hinders
but that they may enjoy themselves and their comforts with peace and quiet
without the sheding of so much blood.

2. They break all bounds: That is, They break all Laws and Liberties; they will
not be bound by Laws, saying thus, Laws were made for subjects, and not for
Princes. And thus these Princes broke the bounds. Hence we may see what
corruption there is in the hearts of men naturally, and this is furthered by
evil Counselors. I have read of Cambyses who had a desire to marry his Sister,
but questioning whether he might do it or no, he calls his judges together to
give him their advice, they told him, there was a Law against it; but say they,
Ye Princes of Persia may do what you will: They were so far from diswading him
from that wicked act, that they gave him encouragement to it. And has not our
time afforded such Counselors to our Princes?

2. They break the bonds of Religion. Therefore Interpreters conceive that our
Prophet Hosea prophesied in Ahaz his time, when he provoked God so by Idolatry,
setting up the abomination of desolation. And this is the great breach of
bonds, when people must provoke God. God has set bounds to His Word, for His
Worship and Service: Now take heed that you go not beyond those bounds for any
pretense of decency or comeliness, suitable to the state in which we live, and
such like. God has given great liberty in Civil things for men to use, but
none in hi^ Worship and ways. Oh what evil have Popish Princes done in this
thing, in removing these bounds! and this is the main reason which makes
Papists so to labor for the upholding and setting up an arbitrary government,
having thereby ^ull liberty to break all bounds in Religion.

Lastly, They brake the bonds of their own Covenants, and regarded them not:
These were the corruptions of these Princes, they brake all sorts of bonds,
Civil, Spiritual Covenanting bonds, nothing will keep them in.

But has God left no means to keep these in bounds,

To this I answer: Yea certainly. Trajan after he was made Emperor put a sword
into his Officers hand to defend him while he defended the Laws; but if he did
fail in his duty, gave the Officer leave to deal with him as a delinquent. It
will be worth our pains and cost if after all our troubles we can but get the
Kingdom settled in its true rights and liberties, though our workmen who are
making up our breaches through some negligence or miscarriage suffer the wild
beasts to break in, yet let not us murmur, and repine, but be content, and
bless God that we have means for to help our selves; few years since we thought
our breaches to be so wide, that none could help, or deliver us; now then that
God has raised up for us helpers contrary to our expectation, bless God for
them, and be content, let us stir up our selves and join with them for their
assurance. If the Sea should break in upon a Country, would you sit still or let
any rest quiet by you that would not stir to make up the breach? A Farmer is
contented to suffer Cattle, and see them to run up and down in his ground while
his workmen are making up his hedges, and fences for to keep them out: So our
workmen are making up the hedges, let us be contented to suffer a while
patiently. The truth is those most complain of confusions and disturbances who
have been most instrumental to make our breaches and distractions: and thus the
Princes of Judah were, like them that break the bound, and for thus doing the
Lord threatens in the following words, to power out his wrath upon them like
water. They have past their bounds in sinning, and my wrath shall pass its
bounds upon them; they kept no bounds in sinning, and my wrath shall keep no
bounds in punishing. The Hebrews use to express anger by a word that signifies,
(...)
going beyond bounds, noting thus much, that ordinarily in our anger we are apt
to go beyond bounds and besides the rule. The sense then is, I will power my
wrath upon them in great abundance, like waters. The judgments of God in
Scripture, are often set out unto us by this similitude of water, as in Isa.
28.17. Nahum 1.8. look as their anger ran like water, so my wrath shall run
upon them until they are consumed.

That Gods wrath is very hot against wicked Governors, such as break the
bounds of Religion, Laws, and Covenants: the Lord is much displeased against
great ones when wicked, Numb. 25.4. the people of Israel committed a great evil
in provoking God by their Idolatry, joining themselves to Baal-Peor, and the
Lord said, Take the heads of Israel. The people offended and it was by the
encouragement of the Governors, therefore their heads must off, the people sin
and the Governors must suffer because they reproved them not nor restrained
them, but countenanced them.

Hence we may note, That we had need to pray much for Princes. Fearful are the
examples which historiaans report of, concerning the judgments of God upon
wicked Princes.

Leander in the description of Italy reports of a cruel Tyrant, who persuaded
himself that he must give an account to no man, none could call him to an
account for what he did; at last God gave him into the hands of the people, who
stripped him naked, bound him upon a planck, and drew him through the streets in
the sight of all the people, then made a great fire by him, and heated tongs
red hot in the fire, when they had done thus, then proclaimation was made in
the Market place, that seeing he had wronged so many, that he was never able to
make satisfaction for the wrong he had done, therefore all that had suffered by
him should come and have a pull at his flesh with the red hot tongs.

Another fearful example we have of latter times, concerning Charles the 9th,
about the massacre in France, who at that time pretended great love and
kindness to the Protestant party, invited them to a great marriage feast, and
at that time by his Commission, calls in those bloody miscreants, who cruelly
murdered the Protestant party; there he broke bounds: but see how God met with
him, in a most grievous disease, through the violence of which there spurted
out blood from him in several parts of his body, so that he wallowed in his
blood before he died. God powered out His wrath upon them in blood who in their
life time thirsted after blood.

Secondly, The bounds of Religion and Laws, as they keep in obedience, Pure
Religion and good Laws as they are bounds to keep us in duty, so they keep
judgments and wrath from us. And we ought to look upon Laws in both these
notions, not only to keep us in order and duty, but also to keep out wrath; if
we break our bounds, we must look that wrath should break in upon us; therefore
we had need to do as men that live near the Sea, when the Sea breaks in upon
them, they presently leave all their other businesses, and go about that. Our
bounds are broken, and who is the occasion of it the Lord knows, and wrath is
broken in upon u^ at our breaches, therefore let us now as one man set about
the making up of our breaches.

God punishes according to men's sins. They break the bounds, God breaks in
with wrath upon them; are they resolute in sinning? God will be as resolute in
his judgments upon them; see that text Jer. 44.25. You have sworn and vowed to
your superstitions, and I have sworn to bring judgment upon you, and it shall
come to pass. Therefore when judgments are upon us,

VER. 11. Ephraim is oppressed, and broken in judgment; because he willingly
walked after the commandment.


WRATH in the former verse was threatened against the Princes of Judah, who
removed the bound: And here the Lord returns again to Ephraim, in this 11.
verse; and the 12. verse to Judah and Ephraim both together, they being both a
provocation to God, are plagued both together.

(...)
The word Oppressed, in the original is, Nashuk, translated by Hierom, Calumnia;
Ephraim suffered and was oppressed by false accusations and slanderings, (for
there is an opposition in men's names and estates) which the Seventy usually
translate by Sycophantia; The 70. (...).
and then we may render i^ thu^, Ephraim by Sychophants does suffer a great
deal of wrong. When there are false reports raised against men, they suffer
wrong by it: false reports are as a false Medium, which represents things in
another manner than they are: As put a staff into the water, simile
and it shows to be crooked, but take it out and it is not so. So the actions of
men in the reports of others may seem crooked, when in themselves are strait
and good. And thus was Ephraim, broken in judgment; though his cause was good,
yet 'twas made bad, if he were wronged he could have no releef for himself. So
that good causes by bad men are many times perverted: but the Sain^s may
support themselves with Paul's comfort, who passed not much for man's judgment.
In this signification the Seventy Translators do often take the word; but in
this place they express it by another word, thus, (...) English translation.
Ephraim has overpowered his adversaries, and so has trod down judgment:
they interpret it actively. But the words are well rendered in your books in the
passive participle, and so they are to be read, Ephraim is broken in judgment.

Concussus judicio concussio is a Law word, signifying such a kind of breaking
and oppression as threatens the utter ruin and undoing of a man by Law; As
many rich men threaten poor men when they do them any wrong, I Will be even with
you, I Will ow you a good turn: Or as Magistrates that are corrupt and wicked,
when they cannot bring poor men to say or do what they would have them, they
will threaten to undo them, or if ever it lie in their power they will ow them a
good turn; of which carriage Samuel cleers himself 1 Samuel 12.3. Crimea
co^cussionis. (...)
Whom have I defrauded? or whom have I * oppressed? (the word is the same here)
That is, used my power to threaten men to yield up their liberties, their
rights, their enjoyments by any power which was in my hands. This was the sin
of the great Princes here of the ten Tribes.

Broken in judgment] That is, Expos.
Not in Gods judgment upon them, but in the judgment of their own cause, they
were crushed in their estates, liberties and laws, and that not only by their
own Magistrates and Governors, but also by the Assyrian; by their own
Magistrates they were broken and oppressed, good men were discountenanced, just
causes betrayed, the whole Court was corrupted, and the Laws of the Land which
should have held up the bounds, were broken; they were so broken as a thing
which is broken, but not quite spoiled with the fall, some shreds of it may be
made use of; so the generality of them were so broken that there was little
right to be had for any wrong that was done; and as they were thus oppressed in
the Prophet Hosea his time, so also in the Prophet Amos his time, Hosea and
Amos contemporaries.
who prophesied at the same time that our Prophet did, Amos 2.7. They p^nt
after the dust of the earth on the head of the poor: What Is that? Thus, they
did not only seek to bring poor men under them, but even utterly to destroy
them, they sought to ruin them, and that by perverting of judgment. So in Amos,
5.11. their oppression grew to such a height that they took the poors wheat
from them, that if the poor had but gleaned a little wheat in the fields, as
they brought it home they robbed them of it, or if they carried it to the mill
they took it from them; this was the oppression which was at this time among
the ten Tribes, from their own Governors. But they were also oppressed by the
Assyrian, they calumniated and reproached them, saying, Where is now your God,
in whom you so much trusted? Thus much for the opening those words.

Expos.
The reason follows, Because he willingly followed after the Commandment.



The Command.
Yea, this was a great sin; for the opening whereof, take notice of these three
things.

1. Whose.
First, Whose Commandment was it they followed? it was the Commandment of
Jeroboam and his Princes, men which had authority and power in their hands, and
this provoked God so highly against them, because they followed the
commandments of men who had authority over them: this is very strange that
this charge should be against Ephraim for this, no question but they pleaded
thus, What, am I wiser than my Governors? must not I do as they bid me?

2 What.
Secondly, What commandment was it that they followed? it was to worship the
Calves at Dan and Bethel, he worshipped God but it was in a false way, and this
was the cause which provoked God so against him.

3 How soon followed.
Thirdly, He willingly followed the commandment, as soon as ever he was
commanded he yielded without any deliberation, or consultation with himself;
whereas he should have stood it out and have bid the worst, rather suffered the
loss of all, than yielded to their commands: as the three children, rather
suffer the fiery furnace, than fall down to the Image, and thus they should have
done; as there were some which did, though the generallity of them followed
after the commandment, yet there were some found among Ephraim who would go to
Jerusalem to worship, the place of Gods appointment: in 1 Chronicles. 11.16. those
which set their hearts to seek God they would go up to Jerusalem and not follow
Jeroboam to Dan and Bethel; though the most went with Jeroboam, yet there was a
handful that knew God would be worshipped in his own way and in his own place:
the generallity of the people liked well enough of the Commandment, because it
was will worship which pleases man's nature best, and then it was most for
their ease, and this was Jeroboams plea, I love my peoples ease, I would not be
so harsh to them, therefore come, we will worship the true God still, it is but
the circumstance of place and that is no such great matter: Vulg. Sordes, quasi
(...) 70. (...).
Now they willingly followed after the commandment, and thereby encouraged
Jeroboam in his wicked design, they willingly walked after the Command? the old
Latin expresses it thus, they willingly followed after dregs; and the Hebrew
word is very nigh the same, they walked after filthy dregs, and if this were
the meaning of it, it notes two things.

First, That Jeroboam was willing to have the people enjoy their lusts so he
might but enjoy his ends; he was willing to give the people their full swing
and liberty in their lusts, and upon this the baser sort of the people clave to
him: Jeroboam reasons thus, well I must rend the Kingdom from David, but how
shall I accomplish it? I must have the people to assist me in it, but how shall
I gain them? I will let them have their pleasures in sin, they shall have their
lusts without contradiction, and then the most will follow me, I shall be sure
of the rude multitude the profane in the Kingdom.

Secondly, Post sordes, that is, after their Idols: the Calves which he had set
up, and the filth which is in them, for the Scripture lets out the filthiness
of Idolatry, by the basest things in the world, to dogs vomet, the excrements
of men.

Thus much of the words in that sense: But they are more full as read in your
books and more agreeable to the Original, the Notes from them are many.

That it is a great judgment for a people to be under oppression: It Is a very
sad affliction for a nation, family, or person to be under oppression, and
broken in judgment, when good men, and good causes are crushed and slighted, and
wicked men and bad causes prevail and prosper, when a man's innocence shall be
no help to him. Solomon says this to be a great evil, in Eccles. 3.16.
wickedness was got into the place of judgment: God has promised to deliver his
people from this judgment, In righteousness shall thou be established, thou
shall be far from oppression, Isa. 54.14. But these times are not yet come, all
the world (for the most part) at this day is under oppression, it is sad to have
our estates and our liberties to be broken for conscience,
Cconscience-oppression is the worst oppression; and this was our condition not
long since, nay and is the condition of many of our deer brethren in many
places of this Kingdom, it was not long since that he which departed from
iniquity made himself a prey; was it not come to that pass that the meanest,
yea the basest persons in a City or Country had power enough in their hands to
undo the best Ministers in a Kingdom? Oh how was the Kingdom oppressed,
Parliaments broken, the edg of the Law turned against the godly party, witness
the banishing of men, Ministers were oppressed in their estates, in their
liberties, but especially in their consciences, if they would not be like the
fiddlers boy, be ready to dance after every pipe, in so much that when the Lord
gave us a little reviving, we were even as men in a dream: when we were under
it we were ready to say, O we shall never be delivered, how is it possible that
we should be rescued from the oppressors? how was heaven filled with our cries
and earth with our moans! thus it was; and worse now it is in many places of
the Kingdom with many of our brethren: but let them and us be comforted in
this, it was thus with Israel, when God delivered them out of captivity, but
for our adversaries that text may be verified of them, Isa. 30.12. Isa. 30.12
opened,
They trust in oppression; what is their language but this? we will get a great
Army and muster up strong forces, and then we will be master of the field, and
bring the Rebels under, so that they trust in oppression, and make cruelly
their arm of power, take away that and their cause falls to the ground: But
Gods people are commanded to the contrary in Psalm. 62.10. trust not in
oppression and for those that do oppress, they shall be like those in Isa.
30.13. Whose breaking and misery shall come in an instant, and you that have
friends in oppression send them these Scriptures to comfort them Psalm. 12.5, 6.
For the oppression of the poor and the sighing of the needy, I will arise says
the Lord and set him at liberty from him that puffs at him.

But you will say, it is true, God will arise, but not yet,

But mark what the Lord says in the 6. and 7. verses, The words of the Lord
are pure words; and this word among the rest, Psa. 12.5, 6, 7. opened.
that God will arise, and set his people in safety frow this generation to the
end; and if any of your friends be in danger of oppression send them that
Scripture in Isa. 51.12, 13. Where is the fury of the oppressor? nay God will
so work out things in His own time, that we shall be able to say, where is now
the fury of the oppressor? Now if God has made us to know the smart of this
sore and heavy burden he looks that we should have very tender carriages and
loving dispositions toward our brethren especially toward their consciences;
mark the charge of God concerning this, Exodus 23.9. You shall not oppress a
stranger, why so? Oh says God, for ye know the heart of a stranger; perhaps
there are some who walk close with God have tender consciences, which cannot
yield to what may be imposed upon them by authority, Oh take you heed of
oppressing these, God expects that you should use them gently and kindly.

A Second Note is this, That Idolaters are great oppressors. When was it that
Ephraim was oppressed? When he walked after the commandment of Jeroboam.
Changes in Religion brings people to opression. Therefore the Scripture sets
out Antichrist by Egypt, because the people of God were there most grievously
oppressed. The Woman in the Revelations is said to sit upon the waters, and the
Beast a top of her oppressing. That story is famous of a Bishop who would
oppress the people; one standing up and told him he could not do it by law: He
answered him, that if there were any Law against him he would carry it on his
sleeves. Likewise that opression of the Wallenses was very great, who desired
that they might but enjoy their liberty to worship God in woods and groves, but
it would not be granted them. And was not this our condition some few years
since? when the Saints durst not appear for God in public, but only in private
rooms and chambers.

God has a righteous hand in the delivery of men into the hands of unrighteous
oppressors: For they followed after the commandment says God. It may be your
enemies into whose hands I have delivered you, may deal unjustly and oppress
you out of measure; yet am I just in the thing.

We are often times ready to complain of instruments which oppress us; and
never look at the hand of God that smites us by them: we should look within our
selves, and find the cause there which provokes God, what sins we are guilty
of, and make our peace with God: And so likewise in the Kingdom, this is the
way to be delivered from our oppressors. I remember a story out of Cedrenus
concerning Phocas that murdered his Master the Emperor Mamicuis with his wife
and children, usurped the Empire, and opened a floudgate to all impiety; there
was an honest poor man at that time who was wonderful importunate at the Throne
of grace, to know a reason why that wicked man prospered so in his des^gn: he
was answered again by a voice, That there could not be a worse man found, and
that the sins of Christians, and the City of Constantinople did require it.
Sins unrepented of, gives strength to an enemies side.

A special cause of oppression is, Peoples following of false worship. Why the
10. tribes had never good King.
after they once began to follow the commands of Jeroboam, the ten Tribes never
had any good Kings after; Judah indeed sometimes had good Kings, because they
kept something of God amongst them, the Temple and some part of of Hi^ worship
among them. If we submit to wicked men in our consciences, no wonder if they
are quickly usurpers over our estates.

The giving too much to men God many times punishes, gods, Men made Idols
become Devils
it is just with God to make them devils to you. We should labor truly to inform
our selves in that obedience which we ow to Governors, yield them that but no
more; if people will give that to men which is Gods due, it is just with God to
make them the greatest plagues to us.

Here we may see the ill nature of wicked men. Jeroboam and his The wicked
boasts himself of his hearts desire, and blesses the covetous whom the Lord
abhors, Psalm. 10.3.

It is an old way of Satan to get false worship backed with the commands Satan's
chief design is to get his worship into the throne and for the effecting of
this, he labors to corrupt the pure worship of God, and presses his own upon
the people, backed with the command of authority; the Devil knows that there is
no way so prevalent as this to take with the people, that if authority commands
it, that overpowers al reason brought to the contrary; and this is the
aspersion which is laid upon the godly at this very day, that they rebel
against authority, Applic.
this has been the Devils old plot which in all ages he has used to get
advantages against the Saints; this was Hamans argument, that it was not for
the Kings honor to suffer the Jews to live in his provinces. Sanballet and
Tobiah would not suffer the people of God to build the Temple, why? because
they were factious people, disobedient to authority. So Paul himself was
accused of sedition: and the false Prophets tell the King, that Amos was such a
turbulent fellow that the Land would not bear his words he uttered.

That men's authority commanding us to do duty in a wrong manner is not
sufficient for our warrant: No evil may be committed upon pretense of the
commands of authority. Therefore the Papists blind obedience is too great a
burden and bondage for man, quis, Quis.
than at the quid, Quid.
but in the commands of men we must look at the quid, what it is that is
commanded, more than the quis, who commands: the commands of men may be such
that the best obedience is to disobey: the Pope writing to Bernard requiring a
thing of him which was unlawful, The Pope to Bernard
Bernard writes back again this answer, I as a child do not obey, and I obey in
disobeying. Gods authority is that which we must look at in all our actions.
Authority at the first was set up for the good of Commonwealths, and not for
their hurt, therefore it was no wonder that so many in former times did deny
obedience to the unlawful commands of Magistrates when the edge of justice was
turned against them; but now since authority is good, joining for God,
punishing sin and wickedness, who obeys more than those who formerly were
accounted disobedient to authority: Applica.
therefore it is a false reproach which is cast upon the professors of the
Gospel, that they are disobedient to Governors and contemn authority: who are
they which venture most in this cause, in their estates, liberties, and lives?
is it not the people of God? nay is not this used as an argument to godly
Soldiers to be content in the want of their pay, because they are the owners
of this war? it is for Religion and liberty they stand for, it is conscience puts
them on to show themselves active for God and venture largely for his sake,
though they verily believe they shall never see a return of their cost: let but
Law and authority go on Gods side, and then they will obey willingly.

It is true, Authority against God must not be obeyed;

I answer,

But in this case who must be judge?

It Is true, the Magistrate is to be Judge,

But may not a man judge of his own actions? It Is true, he may; but with a
twofold peril, that if it be right and sincere to put it to the venture, and if
it prove to be light and false then to lie liable to the Magistrates censure;
now if the Magistrate should command any thing which you in conscience think is
not right according to the rule, you must disobey them, observing but these
cautions.

1. With much suspicion and self-jealousie, thinking that

2. Pray and beg earnestly of God with much humility

3. Account it your affliction and trouble that you cannot

4. If in some things you cannot obey them, do it as secretly

5. You must be very modest in your not yiedling to them, not proud and
self-conceited, thinking your selves before them, or better than they.









Thus, observing these Cautions, you may with a good conscience disobey
Magistrates of Governors, in things which your conscience tells you are not
according to truth. And thus much of the Eighth Note.

the more Will, the greater Sin.
The more of the will there is in any thing, if it be evil, the worse it is; if
it be good, the better it is. Many men make this for their excuse, in things
done which are evil: It was against their will: but this does not excuse, for
rather than they would suffer etc. they chose this, now where the will goes
along with any thing, if evil, it is very evil indeed.

1. Now the will may be said to be in sin, when a man does those things which
produce sin, or sin follow upon it, or omits that which would keep him from
sin; a drunkard perhaps does not will to swear, strike, and abuse men, yet
being not himself, doing of such things, his will may be said to be those sins,
because he did not shun those things which occasioned them.

2. The will may be said to be in a sin, when a man shall in two difficult
things, in which he must either sin or suffer, rather choose to sin than to
suffer. This people here were commanded by Jeroboam to worship at Dan and
Bethel; but God commanded them to worship at Jerusalem; now for them to disobey
Gods command, and rather choose to obey Jeroboams command than suffer Jeroboams
punishment, was a sin of willingness in them: when a man omits a duty
commanded, for some hardships in it, he sins willingly in that omission of his.

The approbation and furthering Governors in that which is evil, willing
obedience in evil brings guilt upon a people.
This people should not presently have yielded to the Kings command, but
petitioned against, yea suffered punishment rather than yielded, then they had
done something; but no sooner was the command out but they as willingly
yielded. Governors they command that which perhaps is not good, and they do not
know it; but if they see their people stand out against it, they then will
begin to bethink themselves, there is much evil in this obedience; for by this
you mightily inrage them against those that cannot obey them, by reason of the
tenderness of their consciences. I have read a story in a French History of
Lewis the 11th. who being about to confirm unlawful Edicts, many of the
Nobility came to him in their scarlet Gowns to petition him not to do it, and
if he would proceed, that he would take their lives away, for they told him
they had rather die than live to see the confirmation of such unlawful
Commands; whereupon the King seeing their coming in such an unusual manner,
holds his hand, and stays the prosecution of them. Oh! how happy are Princes
and People in such Nobility! Had Ephraim done thus, they had done well in it,
and might have had comfort from it.

That commands for false worship do easily prevail with people: Commands of
superstition find obedience
when King Edward would have reformed the Mass, what Rebellion was there in
Cornwel? But whem Queen Mary set it up, how did people please themselves in
such abominations. So in our days, what was it that a Bishop commanded but he
was obeyed presently?

The duty of Christians willingly to obey God.
when Devils and wicked men have some that will obey them willingly? How do you
think to follow after God, and put off all thoughts of God till you come to lie
upon your death beds? Our hangings off from God does mightily hinder our
comforts.

Were we but assured that they were the commands of God, we would obey them.

Consequences.
from Scripture, we are to obey; otherwise how can we be said to obey with the
obedience of faith which we are commanded: Obedience of Faith.
Now how can we be said to obey with the obedience of faith if we must have
reasons for every thing?





[Post Sordes] we may observe:

Now surely that way which has so much of sin in it, cannot be the safe way
for men to walk in.

Therefore you that are so pleased with them, and take such delight in
superstitious vanities, much good may you do with them; for our parts that
truly fear God, we desire the pure Ordinances of Jesus Christ.

VER 12. Therefore will I be unto Ephraim as a moth; and to the house of Judah
as rottenness.


GOD made a great difference between Judah and Israel; Why Ephraim and Judah
coupled.
but they joined in the same ways of sin, and God coupleth them in the same
way of wrath: Therefore will I be unto Ephraim as a moth, and to the house of
Judah as rottenness.

Therefore] Why? wherefore? It has reference unto the words we spoke of the
last day [they willingly followed the commandement] Because they followed the
unlawful commands of Jeroboam and his Princes, Therefore will I be unto Ephraim
as a moth: That for Ephraim.

And it is like the same cause might be for the rottenness God would be unto
Judah. Had they resisted the unlawful commands of those that were above them in
power: They thought there might have been some disturbance in the State, Oh it
is better for us to obey, to be quiet, that we may be at peace; but in the mean
time while they, to free themselves from some disturbance and to enjoy their
own quiet, would obey unlawful commands, the secret curse of God was upon their
estates: Therefore (says the Lord) will I be unto Ephraim as a moth, and to
the house of Judah as rottenness. A secret curse there was upon that peace so
procured.

In the opening of these words, and presenting the mind of God unto you in
them, there are these Five or Six things to be done.

1. The reading of the words. 2. The scope of the words, what it is that God
aims at in them. 3. The reason of the difference of the expression, A moth to
Ephraim, and rottenness to Judah. 4. When this was, what time this refers
to, when was God a moth to Israel and rottenness unto Judah? 5. How and in what
respects God may be said to be a moth and rottenness to a people. 6. The
several observations to be drawn from it.
All this is necessary for the opening of this twelfth verse.

1. Reading.
For the first then, The reading of the words. The Seventy read the words a
little different from this reading of ours in the English, (...).
(...). Conturbatio ac stimulus, I will be a trouble unto Ephraim and a prick
unto Judah. I will trouble, prick, goad them, I will vex them. The blessed God
who is a rest unto His people; He is a trouble, a prick, and goad to vex His
enemies, to vex the ungodly. The old Latin, (...) sicut tinea, and sicut
putredo. Munster, Leo Judah. Drusius. L^^her Plini.
and so Hi^rom reads it thus, Ego tanquam tinea Ephraiim, I will be as a moth
unto Ephraim; he reads the first as we do in our books: but the second, Quasi
and putredo domni Juda. Others as Munster, Leo Juda, Drusius, render it, quasi
teredimis. Teredo is a worm that eats out the heart of the strongest wood.
Minutissimus vermiculus, says Luther upon the place; And Plini says it is the
worm that breeds in Ships at Sea, and eats out the heart of the strongest
Oake^ plancks at Sea: but yet often translated rottenness, because the worm
causes that wood to be rotten. Prove. 12.4. A virtuous woman is a crown to her
husband says the text, but she that makes ashamed, is rottenness to his bones:
There is the same word, a woman whose behavior is such in company as makes
ashamed, is rottenness to a man's bones, be they never so strong. That for the
reading.

2. Scope.
For the scope of these words, what it is that God aims at, which is, That
judgment should come.

1. Secretly, 2. Gradually, 3. Insensibly. These three things.

That wrath that I intend to let out upon Ephraim and Judah shall,

First, be very secret, as the moth does eat the garment secretly, Secretly.
so my wrath shall be, there shall be no noise of it for a while.

And it shall be gradually gradually
too, that is the second, I will go on by degrees; a moth and rottenness does
not consume the garment or the wood all at once, but one degree after another.

And then thirdly, Insensibly; insensibly
They shall not so much as perceive it, they shall not see for a long time how
My wrath is out against them, and yet it shall consume them. That Is the scope.

But what is the reason of the difference of the expression. 3. a moth to
Ephraim and rottenness to Judah. Reason of the difference.
that is the third? If God intended only to show his secret, gradual, insensible
judgment, then one expression might have been enough; a moth, or rotteness,
either of them. But the reason of the different expression is this, Israel was
to be destroyed sooner than Judah: Judah should hold out a time longer than
Israel should though both of them were to be destroy^d at length. As strong
wood, heart of Oak, it holds out longer though there should be a worm in it,
than a garment does when a moth is in it; so Judah held out above a hundred
years after this threat, after this rottenness began in them, longer than
Israel did; for the time that this moth was in Israel (of which we shall speak
presently) unto Isreal's captivity, it was but some two or three and forty
years; but it was one hundred and threescore years from the time of Gods being
a rottenness unto Judah.

But Fourthly, When was this time? 4. Wh^^.
To what time does this refer? when was God a moth unto Ephraim and rottenness
to Judah? For that, and to show the story of it, it would require some time, I
only refer you to the Scriptures that have the stories of both these, when the
moth began, and when the rottenness began. In the 1 King. chap. 15. from verse
8. and so on, to the end of the 17. chapter of the second book of the Kings,
there you may find, the time when God was a moth unto Ephraim: And for Judah,
in 2. King. chapter 16. there you may find how God was rottenness unto Judah,
and it was from Ahaz his time to the time of their being carried away captive
into Babylon, which was about an hundred and sixty years. And Josephus Josephus.
in his book (besides the books of the Scripture) in Lib. 9. chap. 12. and Lib.
15. toward the latter end, and Lib. 10. chap. 10. He likewise sets forth
the condition both of Ephraim and of Judah, when the Lord was a moth unto the
one and rottenness to the other.

5. What i^ is for God to be a moth and ^^ttenness
But that which will be more useful unto us, will be, to enquire the m^^ning,
What it is for God to be a m^th and rottenness to (...) people: ^ot indeed
there is the same thing sign^fi^d in both these expressions, only (as I told
you) the first signifies a quicker di^patch of Israel, and the second, a more
slow dispatch of Judah, but in the effect the same is signified. Now God is a
moth and rottenness unto a people many ways. As,

1. in the spirits of men. 1. weakness.
First, He is a moth in the very spirits of people. There is a secret way of
God^ wrath upon a people in their spirits which is not perceived in the world.
As thus: When the spirits of men in a Nation grow weak and cowardly. The
weakness and cowardlines of men's spirits shows a judgment of God upon them that
is a a^ moth to them: And so it was in Israel, as you may find it in that 2
King. 15 and so on, There their Governors did what they list, one killed another,
and another killed him, and the people laid down quietly and dared not to appear
in the least way to find fault with any thing done. And then a base sloth of
spirit that seiseth upon the hearts of people, 2. sloth.
a dullness, a sordidness of spirit, minding low things, not regarding any
worthy and honorable achievement; when men are thus then God is as a moth and
rottennes^ to them. When there is raising of jealousies one against another in
their spirits, 3. jealousies and divisions.
envying one another, and divisions in the spirits one of another, then God is
a^ a moth and rottenness: as we know a moth in a garment does make the thread
that it does not hang firm together, and rot^enness makes the wood that one
part does not unite together so firmly as it did: b^^ yet in a secret way; so
though open wars indeed devour in a public way, but secret jealousies in the
hearts of people that one dare not trust another, and secret divisions that
there are in their hearts, this is like to a moth and rottennes^. As a moth in
a garment and rottetnness in wood, so secret jealousies and secret divisions in
the spirits of men in a Kingdom consume and destroy them. 4. self ends. 5.
f^lsness in public trust.
And then base compliance for their own ends. And lastly, falseness of spirit
in the trust committed to them. When you see this prevail in the spirits of
men, especially of those that are put in public trust, then is God a moth and
rottenness unto that people. And that is the first, A moth and rottenness in
the spirits of men.

Secondly, A moth and rottenness in men's counsels. As first, 2. in councels. 1.
blindness.
In blindness, that they shall not be able to see the plots of their enemies,
they shall not know their own advantages, nor how to improve what they have:
They shall not hit upon the right means to cure themselves. There shall be a
perplexity in their counsels, a contradiction in their counsels, one
counselling one way and another counsel another way. They shall ensnare
themselves in their counsels: There shall be much folly in their counsels. 2.
blasted
And they shall be blasted in their counsels: Now God is a moth and rottenness
to a people: All this while God does not appear in an outward ho^ile and
terrible way, but there is a secret curse of God upon their counsels and so he
is a moth and rottenness to them.

Thirdly, God is a moth and rottenness to a people in their estates, 3. in
estates.
in their tradings; there shall be a decay of trading amongst them, and they
shall grow poorer and poorer no man knows how. There shall be a secret curse
upon their tradings and estates that no man can give a cause of.

Fourthly, 4. in the instruments of their good
God is a moth and rottenness in the chief instruments that they make use of
for their good: taking away chief ones secretly when no body takes notice of
them, one dropeth away after another; as in rottenness of wood one little piece
droppeth down after another, some dust of it drops down and no body take notice
of it; so in a State and Kingdom, chief instruments shall be taken away and no
body takes notice of it, some^imes one an^ then another and then another after
him, so they shall m^^^^der away by degrees: And those that are remaining shall
be blasted in their esteems amongst the people: Those t^^t God gives ability to
do them good and might be very useful and serviceable unto them, yet though
they live a^o^g^^ them they s^all be so blasted by ^eports one way or other,
that they shall not be able to do them much good. And when you see thi^
prevailing in a Kingdom, then God is a moth and rottenness to them.

is an argument of a gracious heart. As it i^ an argument that that flesh is
full of life that is sensible of the least touch; simile
so of a heart that that is full of grace when it i^ sensible of the least
fruit of Gods displeasure. But when men and women are in such a disposition,
that except God strike them in some terrible manner they are not sen^^ble of
his displeasure, this is a sign that they have brawny and hard hearts of their
own.

Though carnal hearts do slight and contemn Gods displeasure in little things,
yet this displeasure and wrath ^f God in little things, will eat them out at
last. It will bring them down, it will destroy them if it be neglected. You
know in Exodus 8.25. that judgment of the flies brought down the spirit of
Pharaoh more than all the other judgment^ before: he said before that he would
let the people go, but he never bad them go till then. God is able to bring
down the stoutest, the proudest spirit upon the face of the earth by little
things. He can eat out the heart of the strongest wood by this little worm, and
so by any little judgment of his, he can bring down the stoutest and proudest
spirit in the world.

God is slow in punishing. He punishes by degrees at first: yea his punishing
is as a moth, and as a little worm in the wood, it is a long time before they
do any hurt: This is to show that Gods wrath it is at first but slow. to be
slow to wrath; in our ways of wrath and displeasure against our brethren to be
slow as God is; not presently to fly in the faces of our servants or of our
children when they displease us: God does not deal so with us, He flies not
presently upon us; God is a long time before He bring any sensible evil upon
us. The R^mans used to have the Rod and the Axe carried before their
Magistra^es, to show that they began by lower affliction^ at first, they did
not come to the extremity at first but went on gradually in their way of
punishing.

God has secr^t judgments to bring upon a people, upon particular persons;
ways of judgment secretly that they little think of. In 2 King. 3.17. Thus
says the Lord, you shall not see the wind, neither shall you see rain, yet the
valleys shall be filled with water: There shall be a filling with water though
you see neither wind nor rain; you shall not know whence it comes yet the
valleys shall be filled with water. So, many times there is the judgment of God
against a people, against a family, against a particular person, and no body
can tell from whence it comes. A^ God has many secret blessings for his
people, so He has secret curse^ against the ungodly. Let us take heed of
secret sins, Use, beware of secret sins
for God has secret wrath to avenge secret sins. Many of you that find the
hand of God out against you and you do not know how; do you examine your own
hearts whether there be not many secret sins in you against the Lord. It was so
at this time when God came to be a moth against Ephraim, in 2 King. 17.9.
speaking of that very time that this prophecy does relate unto, wherein God
was a moth unto Ephraim, the text says there, 2 King. 17.9. applied
that the children of Israel did secretly that whih was not right in the eyes
of the Lord: Therefore just was God in this, to be a moth, to have His
displeasure to come secretly. Take you heed of secret sins, lest God consume
you by secret judgments.

Seventhly, Our corruption within us breeds our trouble and Whence comes the
moth but from the very cloth it self that it eats out? it is bred there: and
this worm it is bred in the wood that it does consume. A moth shall eat them:
it seems to be a proverbial speech amongst the Hebrews, when they would expres^
the perishing of any by their own counsels and their own ways; as the Latins
have proverbial speeches suitable; Fabrum constringi compedibus quas ipse
cuderat, The workman he is fetterd with those fetters he makes himself; And so
that proverb that we have, to nourish a Snake in a man's own bosom, is as much
as a moth shall eat them; that is, what evil comes to us it is bred within us:
that wrath that does consume us it is that which is bred out of the corruption
that is in us. So they say of the black bird, that of the dung that comes from
it the lime is made that your fowlers make use of to make their lime-twigs
withal; so from our own sins comes our own misery. From the uncleanness of a
Nation or a particular soul comes the evil of it; Therefore if we should read
the foregoing words (they willingly followed the commandment) according to the
old Latin, they followed post sordes, after the filth of Jeroboam, then the
elegancy of the expression would be more; It was those filthy ways of Jeroboam
that caused these moths to be bred. From our uncleanness comes our
consumption? simile
as from the uncleanness of the body many evils are bred, so from the
uncleanness of the spirit. Therefore we should be willing to take pains in the
work of repentance, yea though it be somewhat troublesome to the flesh, yet
better wear out our selves by washing, better wear out clothes a little by the
washing of them than to let them rot in the dirt of them: it is true, washing
of clothes wears them a little, but if you let them alone in their dirt, that
will rot them worse: so the work of repentance may put you to pain and wear you
a little, but if you let your hearts alone in the filth of sin, that filth of
sin will breed your misery. Take heed of letting any sin alone in your hearts,
it will breed a worm (for so this word rottenness signifies a worm) it will
breed a worm, the worm of conscience, that may prove the worm that never dies.

Gods wrath though secret yet many times eats out men's spirits and makes them
unuseful. Therefore it is compared to a moth and to rottenness, to a worm in
the wood: As the moth eats out the strength of the garment and makes it
unuseful for any thing; and as the worm eats out the strength of the wood and
makes that unuseful; so the secret wrath of God many times eats out men's
spirits and makes them very unuseful in the places where they are set. How many
have had excellent parts when they were young and were very useful; yet the
uncleanness of their spirits has bred such a worm that has eat out the
excellency of their parts, and before they have died they have been as a
moth-eaten garment and rotten wood: indeed there has been the same bulk as
before, yet if you come to make use of them there is as much difference from
what they were wont to be, as a moth-eaten garment from it self, and as rotten
wood that has the heart of it eaten out by the worm, differs from it self,
so are the hearts of many men different from what they were wont.

In the ninth place, Though (a sad consideration for those others go before
them yet they shall follow not long after. This Note is drawn from the
diversity of the expression, a moth to Ephraim, and rottenness to Judah. God
indeed will deal more quick with Ephraim and consume them in His wrath, but
Judah shall follow not long after. Germany and other Countries have gone before
us; Germany
we cannot prophecy as here the Prophet did, but yet except God comes to
prevent by an extraordinary hand we may follow not many years after, and who
knows how soon? And particularly, It may be such a friend of thine is gone, the
hand of God is upon him and has consumed him and eaten out his very heart, and
he is perished as filth and dung from the face of the earth; and thou art yet
alive; and is there not rottenness in thee? Is there not the secret wrath of
God eating out thy heart? He is gone a little before but thou art like to
follow within a little while after. What great matter is it though thy
companion be struck dead and gone to Hell and thou left alive when thou shall
follow not long after? It is in this case as it is with travelers that travel
together, perhaps one rides before another and so comes to his Inn a quarter
of an hour sooner than the rest of his company, simile
but before he is lighted off hi^ horse, or gone up into his chamber, the other
are come in also: So perhaps Gods hand strikes one dead and sends him to Hell,
yet within a while the rest will follow after. Therefore consider when God;
hand is upon any to strike them dead, Oh I may follow not long after. A moth to
Ephraim and rottenness to Judah.

What a poor cre^^ure is man, yea a Kingdom, when as a

VER. 13. When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah saw his wound; then went
Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent to King Jareb etc.


WHEN Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah his wound.] The word translated
Sickness, (...) Aegerfuit. (...) aliecuere and comprimere atque colligare.
is from a word that signifies Doluit Aegrotavit etc. that signifies grief and
sickness. And the word translated Wound, from a word that signifies Colligavit,
he has bound up, either because of the corruption of the body that is gathered
together, or because of the binding up of it with clothes.

Now Judah saw his sickness, and Ephraim saw his wound: that is, God at length
made them to see what a crazy condition their State was in, their Civil-State
and Church State too; in what a very crazie condition it was, and how wounded
it was, and how like to perish, ready to die. And especially of this first,
this sickness of Judah: we have a notable story (for it is referred to these
times) in Isa. 7.1. and so on; There you may find the sickness of Judah, and
how Judah saw it: When Rezin King of Syria, and Pekah son of Remaliah came
against Judah, the heart of the King, and the heart of his people were moved,
as the trees of the wood are moved with the wind; as we use to say, they did
shake like an Aspen leaf, they were so troubled. Here Judah say his sickness,
the dangerous condition wherein he was. And how Ephraim saw his wound, that we
shall see further presently when we shall see what help they sought to get
against it.

Wrath was out against Ephraim and Judah some time, and had almost consumed
them before they would take notice of That by occasion of the pride and
stoutness of man's heart, he will not easily be brought to see and acknowledge
the hand of God. Isa. 26.11. Isa. 26.11
Lord, when thine hand is lifted up, they will not see: They will not own the
hand of God against them, they think it would be a shame to them, they rather
would bear the world in hand that all is well with them: So it was for a long
time with Ephraim, and Judah, but at length they saw their sickness and their
wound.

Secondly, God will force men to see and to be sensible of His hand He will
make them to see their sickness and their wound. Mic. 6.13. Mic. 6.13.
I will make thee sick in smiting thee says God; I will smite thee, opened.
and I will make thee sensible of My stroke: so in that forenamed place Esa.
26.11. Lord when thy hand is lifted up they will not see; But they shall see
and be ashamed says God; I will make them to know and to be sensible of My
stroke, the sickness shall so grow upon them, the anguish of the wound shall be
so great, that they shall be sensible.

Thirdly, They see their sickness and their wound, but here is nothing This is
usual with carnal hearts in their afflictions, to look at nothing but their
wound and their sickness; they regard nothing but to get that heald; seldom you
shall hear them cry out of their sin. Thus it was with Israel and Judah. And
this is the way of carnal hearts.

Then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent to King Jareb.

Men use not to seek for help till they see and be made sensible of And this is
true spiritually; till the soul comes to be made sensible of its sickness, and
till God wounds it, it seldom, yea never sends out for help, but when God
comes to wound the conscience, then it sends out for help. And many times it
is with soul affliction as it is here in outward affliction, they seek out for
help, but for help in a false way. They went to the Assyrian and sent to King
Jareb.

You will say, When did they do so?

For the showing the meaning of this we must refer to the story of the Kings,
Hosea in your books placed in a great distance from the book of the Kings, yet
this Prophet and so others did prophecy in the time of the Kings, and
therefore the history of the Kings will much help to understand the meaning of
the Prophecy. First then for Ephraims beginning to send to the Assyrian and to
King Jareb, you have it in the 2 King. 15.19. When they sent to king Jareb.
There you shall read that Menahem who was King of the ten Tribes, gave Pull
that was King of Assyria a thousand talents of silver, that his hand might be
with him, to confirm the Kingdom in his hand. Mark, that his hand might be
with him to confirm the Kingdom; It seems this King that was the King of
Israel, he saw his Kingdom to be in a crazy condition, he saw his sickness and
his wound, therefore he sends to the King of Assyria whose name was Pull, and
gave him a thousand talents of silver that he might confirm the Kingdom in his
hand; and in the 20. verse, you shall find that the Subject was fain to pay for
it, he exacted the money (says the text) of all the mighty men of wealth in
Israel. Subjects suffer for Princes lusts.
Oh what things do Subjects suffer many times for the satisfying the humors of
those that are above them: And in 2 King. 17.4. you shall find that Hoshea
another King of Israel, he sent messengers to So King of Egypt to help him. And
for that which is named here, Jareb, Jareb
I find most to understand it to be but the very Jareb was a principal City in
Assyria; Assyria: Jareb signifies Desensorem, the defender, or avenger:
Therefore when as Gideons father spoke to the people concerning his sons
casting down the Altar of Baal and cutting down the Grove that was by it, says
he, Will you plead for Baal, will you save him? if he be a god let him plead
for himself: and thereupon they called Gideons name Jerub-baal, the same word
that is here. So that Jareb, signifies a defender or an avenger. So that they
sent to the King of Assyria as to one that should be a defender or an avenger
of them: They do not seek unto God, but they sent to King Jareb says he, to
their defender; as many times in scorn we call men by the name of that they
would undertake to be; so because they trusted in the King of Assyria as their
defender or avenger, therefore God in a kind of contempt calls him Jareb, they
sent to their defender, but they little thought of me. That for Ephraim.

And then for Judah, though he be not particularly named, because Ephraim was
the most forward and the first that sent for help, yet no question Judah Judah.
he reproved it as well as Ephraim; for in the 2 King. 16.7. Ahaz that was then
King of Judah sent to Tiglath-Pileser King of Assyria to come up and save him
out of the hand of Rezin and Pekah, Kings of Syria and Israel that did rise up
against him. And in 2 Chronicles. 28.16. you shall find Judah again sending for
external helps, unto the Kings of Assyria. The words being thus opened, the
Notes are these.

First, Obser.
It is the way of carnal hearts to shift out to the creature for help in time
of straites.

They saw their sickness, they saw their wound, what did they then? They went
to the Assyrian, and sent to King Jareb. They look to no higher causes of their
trouble than second causes, therefore they seek to no higher means for their
help but second causes.

We see the way of carnal hearts at this very day. Applic.
What helps do they send for but creature helps? Therefore (my brethren) let us
not fear them much; Let us not fear our adversaries much, for their strength is
in the arm of flesh: and we know they take no other course but to strengthen
themselves in the creature; they know no other help; they little mind God in
all their ways; Let them have what they will, yet pray they cannot, they have
little heart to go unto God; they curse and swear, yea and tell us, that it was
never worse with them than when they prayed most: Therefore all their help is
on this side Heaven, therefore not much to be feared: They have that carnallity
of heart in them as was here in Ephraim and Judah, when they were a people to
be destroyed, then they were given over by God to seek out for help only in the
creature, to go to the Assyrian and to send to King Jareb.

Use. 3. Admonition to those in spiritual distress.
As it is in outward, so it is sometimes in spiritual straights. When God
strikes the souls of men with sicknesses, and wounds their consciences, what
course do they take? They seek not to the Lord that smote them, but they seek
out to the creature for help, they go to their companions, to their trading, to
their shops, to their pleasures etc. and seek to have case to their souls that
way. This is the way of carnal hearts, both for soul and body to seek out unto
the creature for help when they are smitten.

Obser.
But secondly, There is much guilt contracted by resting upon creature helps. It
is that which increases men's sins and provokes Gods wrath very much, when they
neglect him and seek to shift for themselves in the creature. Thus it was with
Israel and Judah; they contracted much guilt unto themselves that way. And we
find that God is much provoked with such as do so. 2 Chronicles. 25.27. a notable
example for our times.
In 2 Chronicles. 25.7, 8. when Amaziah King of Judah in a time of danger, hired an
hundred thousand men out of Israel, which were Idolaters; the Lord would not
have Amaziah to make use of them, but bids him send them away; Let not the Army
of Israel go with thee (says God) for the Lord is not with Israel: Yea but
what shall we do (says the King) for the hundred talents which I have given to
the Army of Israel? Be content says the Prophet, rather to lose the hundred
talents than to make use of such wicked men as they that have forsaken the true
worship of God. Question whether we are to make use of wicked men's help. Pet.
Mar.


It is a great question that many make, whether it be lawful in any cases to
make use of wicked men, especially in public affairs of Kingdoms? to send for
their help in time of public danger, to think to strengthen our selves by
ungodly men? Peter Martyr, in his Comment upon the book of Judges, Chap. 4.
ver. 17. handles this question, how far leagues may be made with Idolaters and
wicked men? And there he gives two reasons why Idolaters should never be sent
for to help us in any of our straights. 1. They will infect
The first is, for then says he, there will be by this means danger of mixture
of Idolatry, for they joining with you, they will come secretly to cause their
Idolatrous ways to have an influence into you. But secondly, he gives
especially this reason, if you send for their help says he, how can you join
together in prayer to God to bless you? 2 they cannot pray not give thanks.
and when you have gotten victory how can you join together in praising God?
And indeed this is as great an argument not to make use of the help of wicked
men in public affairs of a Kingdom as possibly can be, for how can they join
together in prayer? And truly they are unfit to join together in fighting that
cannot join together in prayer and in praising of God. And yet this is very
natural to most men, yea good men are sometimes guilty of this, to seek out too
much unto wicked men for help in times of straits. That was the blame that was
laid upon Asa, though otherwise a godly King, in the 1 King. 15.19. that he
sent to Benhadad the King of Syria to help him; And in 2. Chron. 16.7. Hanani
the Seer told him that he ought not to have done it, and that he had done
foolishly in doing it, for says he, why will you do it, you need not send for
such help, for the eyes of the Lord run to and fro thoroughout the whole earth
to show himself strong in the behalf of those whose heart is perfect toward
Him. So that it was an argument that in this thing Asa's heart was not perfect
with God, because he sought for help from wicked men so much as he did, and did
not rely upon the Lord. And it is very observable of this King, though a good
man, and it seems, a Soldier, yet he was very angry with the Seer, the text
says, verse 10. that Asa was wrath with the Seer and put him in a prison
house, for he was in a rage with him because of this thing: what! shall a
Prophet contradict him in his warlike affairs? I must have Soldiers, old
Soldiers about me; let men talk what they will of good men and that God will
be with those that can pray, I must have those that can fight, those that are
Soldiers. I would it were not so at this day, Applica
tha^ if a man did but speak against evil Officers in an Army and wicked men
that are about them, that their hearts did not rise in a kind of indignation,
and let be said what will be yet such and such they will have about them. Isa.
30.1, 2. Woe to the rebellious children says the Lord, Esa. 30.1, 2. opened.
that take counsel, but not of Me, and that cover with a covering, but not of
My Spirit: Wherefore do they this? That they may ad sin to sin. This i^ a
strange charge, woe to the rebellious children that take counsel, they go on in
their own ways and take counsel, but not of Me, and they cover things over
with vain pretenses, but not by My Spirit, there is none of My Spirit in it;
yea and all is, that they may ad sin to sin: And what is all this? It follows
presently, They walk to go down into Egypt to strengthen themselves in the
strength of Pharaoh, and have not asked of My mouth says God. They think to
strengthen themselves by Pharaoh and never ask counsel of Me. This is
rebellion, this is to follow their own counsels, this is to cover over things
but not by Gods Spirit, this is to ad sin unto sin, to seek for help from
wicked and ungodly men.

Revetus on the quest.
Revetus upon this text has a large tract about this very case or question, of
being in league with Idolaters and wicked men; And thus far at least he
confirms it and says, That for whole Kingdoms to call in the help of ungodly
men against those that are of the same Riligion, upon any pretense whatsoever,
he concludes that to be unlawful and sinful, though possibly in some cases he
thinks it may be allowed: but it will ask a great deal of time to handle fully
every case in this and to give all the Cautions that possibly may be given in
it: But certainly this is an argument, that men and their cause have little to
do with God when they seek for such helps as they do and trust so much in them
as they do, when they send for Papists, King's party.
for Irish Rebels, for Atheists, if there be any in the Country, what care they
who they have so be it they may drive on their own designs and deliver
themselves from the hand of God that is out against them. They cannot but see
and take notice that the hand of God is against them, and riggle and keep a
stir they do, and send for all the help, that possibly they can get. Parliam.
And on the other side, this is an argument of the faithfulness of others, who
are a party low and ready to be trodden down, yet have been so far from seeking
help from, or protection of wicked men, that though they have been sent unto
and have had fair offers of enjoying what they desire, yet they have resolved
to venture the loss of all in a good Cause, whether they get any thing by it or
no, whether they have what they would have, Liberties, or not Liberties, yet
they are content to venture their estates, their lives, and all in that Cause,
and not to provide for themselves by the help of such as they see to be evil,
and whose ways and designs they see are not with God.

And if to seek unto wicked men for help and protection be so sinful; Use,
Admonition to those that seek to Satan. See Peter Martyr on 1 Samuel 22.23.
what is it then for men in times of straights to seek to the Devil for help?
Surely that must be much more sinful; to use those ways that are in themselves
directly evil, as lying, swearing, cheating, and cozening etc. In times of
straights for you to think to help your self by those ways, it is as much as
if you should say, I see God does not help me, I will try what the Devil will
do. Certainly by iniquity shall no man be established, Prove. 12.3. Art thou in
a straight under any affliction? never think of seeking out to unlawful means
to help thy self, for thou can get no good that way; And that will appear
more in the words that follow.

Yet could he not heal you, nor cure you of your wound. The Assyrian could not
help, Jareb could do no good; yea indeed they were so far from helping of
Israel and Judah, that they made the wound greater; for Israel was afterward
carried away captive by the Assyrian to whom he sent for help: and for Judah we
read in 2 Chronicles. 28.20. that when Ahaz sent for help to Tilgath Pileser King
of Assyria, he came unto him indeed, but he distressed him and strengthened him
not. From whence we may observe.

First, That creature comforts avail little in the day of Gods wrath. runs
into a man's hand th^n any way releeveth him. So the Scripture says of riches,
that they avail not in the day of wrath. All the creatures will then say to
you, if God help you not how can we help you? They are but as a tree in the
time of a storm; you may run under the tree, and perhaps a few droppings may be
kept from you for a while, but if the storm be great and continue, what good
can the leaves of a tree do you to keep you from it? The creature may refresh
you a little, but if Gods wrath continue what good can the creature do?

But the word which the Seventy translate [he could not heal you] (...). Non
sedabit dolorem vestrum, he shall not so much as ease or mittigate your grief,
or give you a little refreshment. It Is true, sometimes by seeking to creature
comforts a man may think he has some refreshing, but the truth is, it ends
in trouble and sorrow. A man in this case that seeks for help to the creature
when God has struck him, simile
is as a Deer that is shot with an Arrow, the Deer runs up and down from one
bush to another to seek for case, but the blood falls all along, and perhaps by
and by his bowels run out; what ease can bushes do to a poor Deer when the
arrow sticks in his body? God many times strikes his arrows into the sides of
people, and they run up and down to the creature, to this bush and to the other
bush for help, but little or none can they have form any.

I confess sometimes for a little while (as I say) there is a little case. I
find it so in the case of Ahaz, when he was in straits, his heart did melt (as
you heard before:) Now that story in Isa. 7. has reference to the 2 Kings, 16.
aforenamed: When Rezin and Pekah came against him, you shall find that Ahaz had
a little help for the present by Tiglath-Pileser King of Assyria that he sent
for, but afterward (as we shall show you when we come to another point) it did
him little good, for Gods hand was out against Judah so much the more
dreadfully.

So of all things that men rest on for help, wicked men are most like to prove
helpless. They leave you in your straits as the Scribes and Pharisees did
Judas: When Judas was brought into straits by his sin, and in the anguish of
his spirit came and said, I have sinned, in betraying innocent blood. What is
that to us say they, look thou to it. There was all the comfort he could have
from them. They were forward to draw him into the sin, but when he had done it,
then Look you to it.

Yea, We are not to rest upon the best men of all in time of straits. The best
not to be depended on.
God has given us experience at this day, that every man is vanity; so the
Scripture says, Verily every man is vanity: Cease from Man for wherein is he
to be esteemed? Had we no other rest but upon man what should become of us?
Therefore neither unto the Assyrian, no nor unto any living are we to send for
help, so as to look higher upon them than as on an arm of flesh. God
pronounces a curse upon him that trusts in man and makes flesh his arm, and
says, he shall be like the heath in the desert and shall not see when good
comes, but shall inhabit the parched places in the wilderness, Jer. 17.5, 6.

But why is it that the Assyrian can do Israel no good? It follows:

VER. 14. For I will be unto Ephraim as a Lion, and as a young Lion to the
house of Judah.


THat which i^ here translated in your books, a Lion, the Seventy translate it
by the Panther, which is the most swift and fierce creature one of them in the
world. ^
Gods wrath for strength is compared to a Lion, and for swiftness to a Panther.
Panther
To a Lion, because though he is most strong and terrible, yet Historians say,
that if you fall down and submit unto him he will show mercy. God is a Lion,
Lion.
and strong and fierce in his wrath, yet merciful to those that submit unto Him.

(...) the ordinary word is (...) of (...) to tear, or (...) validus. Gesner
the Lion
The word here translated, Lion, it is not that ordinary word that is for a
Lion, but Shacal, that signifies a fierce Lion: And so you have it in Joh,
4.10. the roaring of the Lion, and the voice of the fierce Lion, Shacal. So
that God threatens here to be a fierce Lion. This creature is very fierce, and
therefore Gesner in his History of living creatures says, That nature has so
ordered it that because the Lion is so fierce of himself, that always he has
a kind of a quartan fever or ague upon him to mittigate or refresh his
fierceness. And it were well with many if it were so with them. Many that are
fierce and of Lyon-like spirits, for their lusts, and for the satisfying of
their own humors, but are sheepish enough for the cause of God.

But mark, God was before a moth and a little worm, but now He is become a
Lion. I will be a moth unto Ephraim, and a little worm unto Judah (for so you
may translate it) And now I will be a Lion to Ephraim, and a young Lion to
Judah. Why a Lion? that is, He will appear in the fierceness of his wrath
against Ephraim.

The different expression of the text.
But what is the reason of the difference of these expressions here? As he said
before, He would be a moth to Ephraim and rottenness to Judah; so here he
says, He will be a Lion to Ephraim, and a young Lion unto Judah. Here is a
different expression, and the reason is the same here that was there: As there
it was to show that God though He intended the destruction of Ephraim and of
Judah both, yet Ephraim sooner and Judah later: so here, though God would be
terrible in His wrath to Judah, yet He would be more terrible in His wrath to
the ten Tribes: For we find, that though Judah was carried into captivity, yet
that captivity lasted but for seventy years, and Judah returned again; but
Israel, he was torn in pieces so as he was never made up after. They were both
sinners, but Judah retained somewhat of Gods true worship, therefore God would
spare them a little: Though wicked men will spare the Saints so much the less
because of their godliness, and will take so much the more advantage of their
frailties because they are professors, yet God will pity them.

The observations from hence are these.

First, When Gods lesser afflictions work not, Obser. 1.
there God will be most terrible. You heard of the moth and little worm before;
they are lesser afflictions, and it seems the moth and little worm did not work
their hearts to repentance, to bring them unto God, therefore God does turn to
be a fierce Lion and a Lions whelp unto Ephraim and Judah. Gods wrath is as
Elijahs cloud that at first appears but as a handbreadth, but within a while
after the whole Heavens were overspread with it: It is as the thunder, that when
you hear it first it is Levit. 26.18. If you will not yet for all this says
the Lord, hearken unto me, then will I punish you seven times more for your
sins; and again, seven times more, and seven times more. God will go on in His
wrath from a little unto a great deal of wrath; From being as a moth and as a
little worm, to be like a Lion. Such degrees there are in Gods wrath. You had
need look to it when the hand of God is stretched out but a little against you,
though it be but as a moth and as a worm yet if you look not to it, there may
be such a gradation of Gods wrath upon you; For as great a difference as is
between a moth and a fierce Lion, such a difference may be between wrath now
and that which is to come. Thus the Lord is many times unto men's spirits: Many
men have gripes and nips of conscience, Admonit. to those that are a little
touched in spirit.
and God causes secretly that worm of conscience to be gnawing upon them, and
there is some kind of trouble, but notwithstanding they go on in their sins;
and at length God comes upon them as a Lion, tearing their spirits. Did you
never see a sinner lying upon his death bed in the torment of his soul, Gods
wrath like the paws of a Lion preying upon the very caul of his heart, A dying
and terrified conscience.
when he lies roaring out he is damned, he is damned! and now he sees, yea
feels the heat of the wrath of God against him. Thus God comes as a Lion to
prey upon those that will not regard the gnawings of the worm: When the worm
was but little and small, they slighted it, and that caused God to bring the
greater judgment. So it is with families; God comes upon families sometimes in
a little sickness, in a child or in a servant, and that is not regarded;
afterward God comes with plague of pestilence or some other dreadful judgment.

So in Kingdoms, the Lord comes first with little judgments, and then with
greater. As in Ireland, Ireland.
for many years together, there the Lord was as a moth and rottenness, but of
late how like a Lion has he there appeared? How has He torn and rent that
Kingdom in a most dreadful manner?

Yea the truth is the Lord had been to England England
as a moth and rottenness; And this very text I make no question but some of
you have heard many years ago applied unto England, when as those Ministers
that preached upon this text did little think that ever there should be such a
hand of God against many parts of England as now there is at this day. In many
parts of this Kingdom the Lord is at this day as a Lion. We all hear the
roaring of the Lion, and who can but tremble! Oh it is time for us all to fall
down to the ground before the Lord. It is true God has not yet come to this
City as a Lion to tear and rend it as other places in the Country; London.
but yet we have heard the roaring of the Lion abroad, and God calls us to
fall down before Him that He may not be so to us, that he may not come and tear
us likewise. Certainly, the Lord will have glory of His creature; God has
sworn by Himself and the word has proceeded out of His mouth in righteousness,
that every knee must bow to Him, and every tongue confess His Name: Every
creature must submit unto Him, and if lesser judgments will not do it, God will
lay every sinner upon His back, He will come as a Lion to tear him in pieces.

Secondly, Mark what is between these two, being a moth Lion; between these two
it is said, Ephraim saw his sickness and his wound, and he went to the Assyrian
and sent to King Jareb, and now says God, I will be a Lion unto Ephraim. Hence
Note,

That seeking out shifting ways for our selves in times of affliction,
provokes God very much and makes our affliction to be very great. Obser.
The Lord looks upon this with indignation; what, when I appear in My
displeasure, do they seek to shift me off by sending to the Assyrian and to
King Jareb? upon this the indignation of God rises high, Antiq. lib. 12. cap.
6, 7.
and He becomes a fierce Lion to them. Josephus reports in the factions that
were in Jerusalem, Antiochus being called in by one party who proved the ruin
of both. This is the honor God expects, that in our affliction we should not
fly from, but humble our selves before Him; if we do not, His anger, His
jealousy arises to a feaful height, He will pursue in the fierceness of His
wrath. The way is not to fly from God, but to fall down before Him, to lie at
His feet. simile
If a Lion should come roaring upon us, the way is not to run away shreeking,
but to fall down before him. simile
There is no man can abide the slighting of his anger; if a parent or a master
should be slighted by the child or the servant, this makes him more angry: so
when men make light of the anger of God and think that there is power enough in
any creature to pacify Him, this causes the wrath of God burn more fiercely
against them: you have as not able a^ example as any in the book of God; in
Isa. 7.17. Isa. 7.17. opened.
if you compare the story there with the 2 King. 17. you shall find that Abaz
in the time of his distress sought unto the King of Assyria, and though God
offered him a sign by the Prophet that he Himself would deliver him, yet he
sends for help unto others: But mark, upon this the Lord threatens that he
would bring upon him and upon his people days the like whereof had not come
since the day that Ephraim departed from Judah: such days God would bring upon
them, more dreadful th^n ever yet came upon Judah, and that because at this
time when they were in straights they sought for help from the Assyrian. And as
it provokes God in a dreadful manner against those that seek unto others for
help in outward dangers; so if a man shall seek for help in the straights of
his soul; Does God wound thy spirit, does he make it sick, and do thou seek
for unlawful means to help thy self? do thou go to thy company, to music, to
good cheer to help thee? Oh this provokes God against thee! This is just as if
a man in a fever should drink a draught of cold water from the conduit; it is
true for a while he may have a little ease; but O what a scalding fit does this
bring him into afterward! simile
so those that in trouble of conscience seek for carnal helps, it will bring
them to a dreadful fit afterward. It follows.

I, even I will tear.] The main thing wherein God expresses the dreadfulness
of His wrath here in this place, is the tearing of them as a Lion, we may take
in pieces that which we intend to mend and to make use of: but when we tear a
thing we intend to make no further use of it. God expresses great severity of
his wrath in this expression, Psalm. 50.22. Consider this ye that forget God,
lest I tear you in pieces. Now this tearing here, refers to the letting in the
Assyrian upon Israel, and the Babylonian upon Judah. And the main observation
from it, and which is indeed seasonable for these times of ours, is, That,

Obser.
When God in his wrath causes war in a Kingdom, then God teareth.

I will send the sword amongst you, I will send the Assyrian against you and
then I will tear you. The judgment of war it is a tearing judgment. Gods wrath
never appears more dreadful than in letting out the wrath and rage of
provoked enemies upon a people. The Teeth and Claws of the Lion, and his mouth.
The teeth and claws of this Lion is no other than spears and swords and
poleaxes, the mouth of this Lion is no other than the roaring Cannon, from
whose mouth proceeds fire and smoke and sudden death: Here you may see
thousands stout and strong ones struck down to t^^ ground in a moment; Here one
man's arm is torn from his shoulders, there another man's leg is rent from his
body; here one lies wallowing in his own blood giving up the ghost, there
another weltring in his gore all mangled and wounded, Every battle of the
warrior is with confused noise and with garments rolled in blood, death
reigns in the field and is sure to have the day which side so ever falls;
And when report of what is done in the field comes home, as in 1 Samuel 4.17.
when there was a great slaughter among the people, one brings Phineas his wife
news that her Husband and her Brother-in-law was dead; so when news comes home
to the poor fatherless children and widows, your husband is dead, and your
father is dead, Oh what tearing of hair, wringing of hands, rending of clothes,
lifting up the voice and crying until the noise thereof reach up to heaven. My
brethren, war is a tearing judgment, it is Malum complexum, a compound of
sorrow. The cup that is now in the hand of God, Psa. 57.8. opened.
is full of mixture, full of bloody ingredients, of fire, famine, pestilences,
murders, rapes, cruelties, and all miseries; the Lord teareth now indeed: Oh
how is the husband rent from his wife, haled to prison by cruel and bloody
soldiers! How are men's estates and whatsoever is comfortable unto them rent
and torn from them in tumultuous outrages! Their pleadings and cryings are
rejected with scorn and contempt, and the bodies of their wives and children
and their own too, abused in the rage and malice of the insulting adversary.
And of all wars, Civil wars are most dreadful; Civil war most dreadful.
there God teareth most indeed; there the brother contendeth with the brother,
and the father goes about to tear out the bowels of his son. Thus the Lord has
been a Lion in many parts of the Kingdom. Alas our brethren abroad they cannot
say as they in Jer. 4.5. Arise, Let us go into the fenced Cities, they stand a
far off, and are afraid to come out of the Land of their captivity because of
the oppressing sword. Yea here is tearing indeed in this heavy judgment that is
upon us, 2. tearing of Gods Name.
never was Gods Name so torn as now it is by bloody Oaths and hideous and
unheard of blasphemies, And what do our adversaries desire but to tear the
Saints and to trample them under their feet?

My brethren, time it is for us all to rend our hearts, even to tear and rend
our very hearts within us, because the Lord is come out against us as a tearing
Lion, rending and tearing this way and that way. The Jews were wont when they
heard the Name of God blasphemed to rend their garments presently. We hear of
the dreadful blasphemies of our adversaries, rending and tearing of the Name of
God, Oh how should we rend our hearts rather than our garments! It is dreadful
to hear of the tearing of men's estates and bodies, but much more dreadful
should it be to us to hear of the tearing of the Name of God. It Is time then
for sorrow to be in our hearts, and not ordinary sorrow neither, but rending of
our hearts now; and now we should even be ready to tear the heart out of our
bowels to see that we have been no more affected hitherto than we have. And the
rather because we have escaped for the present and our estates and bodies are
yet whole. Our sins have had an influence into the miseries of our brethren;
our sins have been those claws and teeth that have torn our brethren. Thus the
Lord is raised from a moth and worm even to a tearing Lion.

I will be as a Lion to tear them.

Hence another observation, That God has a righteous hand in the worst actions
of men.

We cry out of men that they are thus and thus, Oh never such vile and wicked
men. But you must look upon God, He has a hand in all. The most horrid
wickedness that ever was done in the world, the betraying of Christ and the
crucifying of the Lord of life, Act. 2.
the Scripture says, it was done by the fore-determined counsel of God.
Therefore let those that have been sensible of the tearing of their estates,
and have had their husbands and their children torn from them by wicked men,
let them not only cry out of such vile and ungodly men, but let them know that
the Lord has had a hand in it. Though men be wicked, yet the Lord is
righteous, let them justify God in all: This is Gods glory, that He can have a
hand in the most hideous wickedness in the world and yet remain righteous
notwithstanding: Therefore He says here, I, even I will do it. He does not
only own it, but He would have people to take special notice that He has a
hand in all. Oh the use that we might make of this to our selves, if in all
those dreadful judgments that are upon us, if in all those tearing judgments
that some of our brethren have felt; we could but take notice that the hand of
God has done it. I, even I I, even I,
have done it, here is the Emphasis in this; And in this one verse here is I,
four times together; Let the thing be never so hideous unto you, yet know that
I am the great orderer and disposer of all, and I have some great thing to
bring to pass in all this that is come upon you. And certainly though the
misery be great that some parts of the Kingdom endure, yet because Gods hand is
so much in it, therefore we must know that God has some great thing to bring
to pass by this that He has begun to do amongst us.

What the wicked Assyrians and cursed Babylonians did, that God is said here to
do. Hence observe, That God has a righteous hand in the worst actions.

As in the sin of Judas, the most horrible that ever was Act. 2.23. God does
not only permit, but order all, and so far as an evil of punishment works in
it: and so far as any natural action is in the sin; as in opening the mouth the
natural act of speaking; drawing the sword (the natural act toward fighting)
etc. This is Gods glory, and yet to be free from the evil of sin. Many knots
there are about this, that men exercise their wits to untie; but cum veneit
Elias (as the Hebrews use to say when they are gravel'd, when Elias comes we
shall understand, there is a time when all difficulty shall be easy to
reconcile) let us look to Gods hand, not cry out on such and such wicked men.
You whose estates have been torn from you, and it may be many of your dearest
friends, consider that it is God that is the Lion tearing.

From the duplication of the words, we may observe this Note, That the hand of
God is more imediate in some judgments than and the more imediate the more
remarkable, there shall not only come judgments upon you, but I will bring
them, they shall be such, that you shall see, that I am in them. In some
judgments upon men, God makes so much use of the creature, that sinners can see
little of Gods hand in them, but in some others, they can easily see the hand
of God in them; Belshazzer trembled at the handwriting, and his thoughts were
troubled within him, why so? the hand struck him not at all, only he saw it to
be the hand of God, the hand of the Deity was in it, Dan. 5.5, 6. and this made
him to tremble. Genesis 6.17. Behold, I, even I do bring a flood: And that wrath
which is out against us at this time, especially our adversaries, is the hand
of God in a special manner, God may well say to us, Applic. England.
I, even I will tear ye O England, O how has God manife-fested Himself to us in
these latter years since the wars began. As we ought to take notice of Gods
tearing and rending Kingdoms, so also in familes, and particular persons, God
would have us take notice, that it is He; as a godly heart takes notice of Gods
hand in mercies; and then they are most sweet; so on the contrary, he takes
notice of Gods hand in every judgment to be humbled under it: I will establish
my Covenant with you: Genesis 9.11. and Isa, 43.19.25. I, even I am he which
blotteth out thine iniquities: Mercies are then most sweet when we see them
come from Gods immediate hand, in a special providence. Gods hand-remarkable in
judgments must be taken notice of. For,

It humbles.
not devils nor men, but God, that God upon whom I live and enjoy every mercy
that I have; this it was that troubled Christ, more than all the wrong which
the Scribes and Pharisees did to him, when he considered that it was His God,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? When the Saints see Gods hand
against them in any thing, this trombles them and humbles them more than any
thing else.

Psalm. 39.9. It quiets.
I was dumb and spoke not, because thou Lord did it. See it in Ely, It is the
Lord, let him do what he will with me: and in Christ himself, shall not I drink
of the cup which my father shall give me? Is God my God, and does this come
from my Father? I will take it, I am sure it will do me no harm but much good.

3. By this means the soul is put upon the inquiry, why It puts up on search
what the cause of this trouble may be; when we see nothing but man the
instrument of an affliction, we look not so much at it, it never puts us upon
soul-search and trial of our selves, but when God is seen in a cross, the soul
begins to consider, what have I done? what is the matter oh my soul? Thus did
the Church: Mica. 6.9. Hear ye the Rod, and who has appointed it: There are
letters written upon Gods rods which the man of wisdom can read.

4. It causes the soul to receive content and satisfaction in Causes the soul
to make out for God
to get him our friend; when we look upon judgments only in the second cause,
we are apt to think that second means will make up the breach again, which sin
has made; as they in Isa. 9.9, 10. The bricks are fallen down, but we will
build with hewn stone; for all this his anger is not turned away: why so? in
the 13. verse we have the reason, For the people turned not unto him that
smites them, neither do they seek the Lord of hosts: They would not see the
hand of God, nor give glory to him, for if they did, they would say as this
people, in the next chapter, Come, let us return unto the Lord, for he has
wounded us, and He will heal us. Thus much for the doubling the expression. It
follows.

I, even I will tear you and go away. The Lions when they tear their prey, they
are not afraid of what they have done, Expos.
but walk majestically before the dead carkiese as it were bidding defiance to
al other creatures, they run not away as the Fox does, but walk as it were in
state, for so the words in the original carry: I, even I will tear. (...)
As if God did challenge all the creatures in Heaven or Earth for to grapple
with him, I will tear them. It implies how God will deal with Judah, He will not
be afraid of them, what He does it shall be in an open way, He will not come
against them in secret but in a public way.

Applic. enemies of Engl.
The judgment at this time upon our enemies is not in a secret, but an open way,
the Lord does not deal subtly and by craft with them, as they do with his
people; and though the Lord deal as a Lion with them, tearing and rending them,
yet they will not see him, neither are they able to resist him, nor can any
rescue them out of his hands: Let the means be never so weak in Gods hand, yet
when he is in a way of wrath there shall be no delivery out of his hands; Isa.
26.6. opened.
Isa. 26.6. The feet shall tread it down: tread down what? the lofty City: by
what feet? even the feet of the poor, and the steps of the needy. Jer. 37.10.
The Lord tells them, that though they had smitten the whole Army of the Caldeans,
and there remained but wounded men among them, yet should they rise up every
man in his tent and burn their City with fire. When God intends ruin and
desolation to a people, it is impossible for any to deliver them out of his
hands.

Obser.
Further we may note, That when God comes against a people, He takes them to do,
when they are the strongest, and greatest in power, and most confident in an
arm of flesh, that none at that time may deliver our of His hands. Isa. 24.21.
And it shall come to pass, in that day, that the Lord shall punish the host of
the high ones, which are on high: When he is in his greatest pride, gets the
greatest victories, conquers and obtains the greatest Cities of refuge, and
Towns of harbor. And it is very observable, Applicat. for Engl.
that since our enemies got their greatest advantages they have lost the most,
God then pulled them down when they were most proud, God will go on in his work
though men are never so proud and strong, therefore it is our wisdom to give our
selves into Gods hands, yea though into his afflicting hand, although no power
can rescue out of his hand, yet there is a way to change the operation of his
hands by humbling our selves, falling down before him, willingly submitting to
him, and this way now God has his will upon us in the most acceptable way that
can be: God had rather have men voluntarily give him his glory, than to compel
him to force it from them.

I now come to the last.

VER. 15. I will go.


GOD repeats it again, which notes, 1. Expos.
The glory of the work, that he is not ashamed of what he has done, (Gods
people ought for to be like God in this, let their actions be warrantable, such
as they may with comfort own and stand to, yea suffer for, if it so come to
pass, not like the proverb to set a Town on fire, and run away from it, leaving
others to quench it) 2. It notes the Irresistibility of Gods work, as if he
should say, let any try whether they can oppose me. 3. And chiefly it implies,
I will bring them into captivity and there I Will leave them.

Whence note, Obser.
That it is a heavy judgment for God to tear and wound a people, and then lo
leave them: God says if they return not, I will rend and tear them, make them
very miserable and in that condition will I leave them, I Will be a stranger to
them, and will not own them. Ezekiel. 22.20. I will gather you in mine anger and
in my fury, and I will leave you there. God in another place promises to be
with His people in the fire and in the water; but there is a time that Gods
people may so provoke God, that he will bring them into the fire and there
leave them: when the Philistims fell upon Saul, it was a sad time to him,
because God had left him: Oh how terrible was it when God left Christ upon the
Cross but for a little while! This we all deserve, and this is the portion of
the damned in Hell: While the Judge is present upon the Bench the Malefactor
has hope, simile
but when the Judge goes off the Bench, then they cry and take on: Therefore
the Church prays, Lord, leave us not; Thou art our hope in the day of evil.
Jer. 17.17. God is said to be the strength of his people in Psalm. 37. and Psalm.
39. Now if their strength be gone, they must needs be weak. Christ rebukes his
Disciples for fearing when they were in the Ship, and he was with them: but
when God leaves a people, Oh what cause of fear is there then! The Church
implies so much, Jer. 14.9. thou art in the midst of us, leave us not, we are
in a sad condition already, yet oh Lord do not thou leave us.

Now if we would not have God to leave us, let us take heed we do not leave
God, How to keep God with us.
would you have God be for you in adversity, then be you for God in prosperity,
nor forsake him when he is afflicted, which is when his people and cause
suffer. Many will be for the Saints and own the Cause of God when all things
goes well, and their side prospers, but in trouble when they are in disgrace or
sorrow, then they forsake them, as if they knew no such people; know that in
thus doing thou leavest God, and God may justly leave thee in thy affliction:
But now, it is God^ promise to his people, That he will not leave them, Psalm.
31.7, 8. Psalm 34. 17, 18. God may bring thee into their power and jurisdiction
that are evil, but wait thou on the Lord and he shall deliver thee. We use to
say when we are in any trouble, to our dear friend, What will you also leave
me? will you not now own me, and stay by me? A^ Christ himself said to his
Disciples, Will you also leave me, simile
and go away? but God will never leave his people in this manner. The Shepherd
may suffer his dog to hunt the sheep, to bark at them, to fetch them together,
but never suffers him to worry and kill them: so God may suffer the wicked to
hunt the Saints, and perhaps to fasten upon them sometimes, but then God will
call them off again, for his promise is not to leave them, as he does the
wicked in their afflictions; Heb. 13.5 five negatives. (...).
as Heb. 13.5. I will never leave thee nor forsake thee: in which words we have
in the Greek five negatives to affirm the truth of this conclusion: that God
will never forsake his people, I will not, not leave you, yea but the people of
God might say, but Lord we seem to the eye of the world to be forsaken, no
says the Lord, I will not, not leave you; there it two negatives to leaving,
and three to forsaking; from whence we may see how strongly God has engaged
himself for his peoples security.

And return unto my place. Expos. Gods place. Deus est habitaculu^ mundi, non
mundus habitaculum eius.


These words are something difficult, What is Gods place? Is God contained in
any place? God is rather the place of the world, than the world his place; but
here it is meant Heaven, I will return unto my place. That is, I Will go to Heaven
again, not that God is there only containd, but that is the place from which he
reveals himself most, there the holiness of God shines in most glory. There is
but little of God in this world to what there is in Heaven, the glory of all
the world is but as a dungeon to that place of Gods presence, we are like
children born in a dungeon, who think there is no better place because they
never saw better: but Heaven is our Fathers place, and Christ who is our elder
brother is gone thither before us to provide mantions for us, let us therefore
have conversations in Heaven answerable to the holiness of that place: this
world is like unto the out-housing, stables, or kennels, belonging to some
palace, or stately building, even as these are very inferior to the rooms in
the house, so is the pomp and state of this world unto Heaven, God has given
the world unto worldly men for their portion, but the Saints have a better
inheritance reserved for them, even in Heaven.

I will return to my place.] When was God from His place? Expos.
when did He come from thence? Thus: when he did rend and tear them, appearing
against them as a Lion, and as a young Lion, then it was as if God should come
down to rectify and set in order things which were amiss, and out of their
place; as we may see in the case of Sodom, Genesis 18.21. I will go down and see
whether they have done altogether according to the cry of their sin, the sin of
Sodom fetched God from his Throne. So in Isa. 26.21. Behold, the Lord comes out
of his place, to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their cruelty and
wickedness, the earth also shall disclose her blood and shall no longer cover
her slain. God compares himself to a Prince upon his Throne, who goes from his
place of State into Countries to quiet mutinees and rebellions among his
people. The Note from hence is,

That sin desturbs He even and Earth. God cannot be quiet in

In times of public judgment God does in a manner leave his Majesty and
Roialty in Heaven, to set things in order here on earth. And surely it will be
to their cost when God thus comes, do but view the terribleness of Gods coming
down: in Psalm 18.9, 10. Darkness and coals of fire were under his feet: God
seems to speak as a father to his children, what must I come to you, will you
force me to come among you, if I do, it shall be to your cost.

Revertar ad habitaculum sanctitatismeae Chald. paraphrase.
I will return unto my place.] When I have afflicted them, I will go to Heaven
and there will I sit, and my administrations shall be such toward them, as if
I regarded them not: as a Prince that goes from the poor subject to his seat of
dignity and minds not the poor prisoner.

The administrations of God sometimes even to His own people may be such as if
He regarded them not: they may be so left in the hands of the wicked that they
may think God has forsaken them, and given them over into their hands, and
Gods people may conclude so and think that God is gone and has now hid Himself
for ever; as a poor child in misery in one Country, and his father in another,
thinks thus, I am in trouble and sorrow, simile.
and I have a father, but he is in another Country, and I know not when he will
come again: so God may go to His place, and the soul may seek Him but he is now
gone, He is in another place, the Saints should be encouraged notwithstanding
to look up to God, and know though God be gone, yet there is a way to bring Him
down again, Psalm. 18.9. Psa. 18 9. opened.
God was shut up in the Heavens, and His people cried to Him in their distress,
then the Lord bowed the Heavens and came down; Let me make have says God, I
must go to the help of My people, therefore that I may make speed, let the
Heavens bow before me. So in Isa. 64.1, 2. the Church there cries out, Oh that
thou would rend the Heavens and come down, it is true Lord thou art in Heaven
and there is thy Majesty and glory, Prayer.
but oh that thou would come down, and help us, Prayer as it will rend the
Heavens to get up to God so it will rend the Heavens for God to come down to
man, Lord if thou will go to thy place, then what will become of thy glory? In
the world thou had service and honor done unto thee by the creature, thy
Sainss offered sacrifice to thee; though sometimes God seems to answer, I
care not for this, I can and will have honor to my self in some other way.

Further we may observe, When wicked men are in perplexity, 18.4. When they are
in wrath and sorrow, and God has not that service from them in external
worship which he has had; but I care not, I will return unto my place, and
enjoy my self in my glory: and in this is the misery of the damned in Hell,
D^mned.
we are herein eternal torments and horror, but what does God lose by this? He
is in his glory and enjoys Himself in perfect rest.

But how long will it be before God return? Expos.
will he always absent Himself?

No. Till they acknowledge their sin. From the Connection of these words with
the former, we may observe;

That God sometimes turns his back upon sinners, until they return And this is
the best way for God to deal with some kind of men, let them but feel a little
of the smart of trouble, and then they will consider: as many men who are
wilful they will do so and so, their wills shall be their law; now the best way to
tame these men is, let them see what will come of it, and the evil which will
follow upon their wilfulness will be the best convincement to them. So says
God, My Prophets and my Messengers can do no good upon them, therefore let them
alone, According to that 1 King. 8.47. If they will bethink themselves and
repent. And this is a most prudential way, to deal with men who are wilful and
stubborn.

Till they acknowledge their sin] Note, That when God comes He humbles Himself
to behold what is done upon the earth; it is a kind of self-denial in God to
meddle with man at all: As it is a mighty condescension in a Prince to com from
his throne to visit and comfort poor men in dungeons and prisons: simile.
Surely such prisoners need honor such a Prince, for he coms from his throne to
visit them: how much more then had we need to honor God for his love toward
us?

Expos.
But to come more close to the words in the original, they are, Till they become
guilty in their own hearts, and acknowledge themselves to be so. (...)
It sign^fies, to offend, to be guilty, to be desolate, and to sacrifice for
sin; all these significations this word Asham will bear.

Until they become guilty.] Were they not guilty before? Would God have them
more guilty? No, but God would have them convinced of their sin, to be guilty
of it, to accuse themselves for it, and clear God in all, and to behave
themselves as guilty persons with sorrow and shame; and lastly, to acknowledge
themselves as guilty persons before God and men: It Is true, as soon as ever the
sin is committed the person is bound over, being guilty, but then in special he
is said to be guilty when he acknowledges himself to be so.

When was this disposition wrought in them? has it ever yet been? or is it
still to be fulfilled and accomplished?

Daniel (chap. 9. verse. 5.) in the name of the whole Church speaks after this
manner, We have sinned and done wickedly, and have rebelled, even by departing
from thy precepts etc. What heaps of expressions has he there to set out their
turning? Also Ezra. 9.13. and 15. it was fulfilled: and in Nehe. 9.16. all
these 3. Prophets prophesied after Hosea, though in our Bible placed before
him. This text is fulfilled again in Jer. 31.18. Ephraim was then guilty when
he was found bemoning himself. Again, it was fulfilled when Christ was
preached, Acts, 2.37. When they heard this they were pricked in their hearts.
Calling of the Jews.
And certain it is this Prophecy had an aim at Christ. But this Scripture shall
principally be fulfilled at the calling of the Jews, then they shall become
guilty; Zach. 12. They shall look on him whom they have pierced etc.

That so l^ng as they prosper in their sins, they will even contest with God
Himself: Malac. 3.7. But ye said, Wherein shall we return? Is not this the
speech of many proud spirits? being taxed about any crime, they presently
answer, Wherein have they done such and such things? Remarkable is that of
Saul, 1 Samuel 15.13. when he told the Prophet he had performed the commandment
of the Lord; then Samuel labors to convince him of his sin saying, What means
the bleating of the sheep and the lowing of the oxen? yet in the 20. verse he
is at it again, I have obeyed the commandment of the Lord. It was otherwise
with David when the Prophet came to him, I have sinned against the Lord, 2 Samuel
12.13. it is a good sign of a soul truly humbled when it can join issue with the
word. Affliction sanctified brings men to see their sins and to acknowledge
their guiltiness. God in afflictions marks men out, and then Conscience will
prey upon a man, as Simeon and Levi fell upon the men of Shechem, for then they
were sore and unable to resist; in time of affliction then thou shall find
conscience hard enough for thee; what pangs of conscience have men in their
sickness? saying as he in Prove. 5.12. How have I hated instruction and my heart
despis^d repro^f? Oh what a deal of guilt is opened and discovered in an
affliction? afflictions are to the soul as earthquakes to the ground, which
open the graves and discovers abundance of filth.

It is a sign of a very hard heart not to confess in affliction when Gods hand
is upon us, Pharaoh would do thus: and it is that which God r^quires. Joshua
bids Acan, Give glory to God my son and confess; Conf^ssi^n give^ glory to God,
and when thou stand ou^ in this thing, thou opposest God in his glory.
L^timer reports of a man in his time who was to be executed at Oxford for some
villainy, being brought to the place of execution, much means was used to him,
that he would confess the act, but none could prevail, being turned off, and
after a space hanging he was cut down, and when he was cut down, they pe^ceived
he was not quite dead, they carrying him to a fire, and by means used came to
himself, and then he confessed all of himself to the full. This example may
show us thus much, not always to conclude men are not guilty, when they
confess nothing, there is that stoutness in the hearts of men, that they will
rather venture damnation, than yield to men.

God will have his glory from us; If we do not acknowledge our guiltiness by
lesser judgments, he will continue them, and ad more to them till we confess and
give glory to him: This is the reason that we are so long under trouble because
we will not confess when we are called for to do it; David took, and how he sped,
Psalm. 39.2, 3, 4. I was dumb, I held my peace, I roared and was vexed, but I
said, I would confess my sin, and shame my self for them, and then thou
forgavest the sin of thy servant. Mark here, there was some sin which lay upon
David's conscience, and he could not get peace in again, what course takes he? I
(said he) did but say, I would confess; and then thou forgavest my sin, thou
did then seal a pardon to me. Oh take this course, and thou shall have the
like success. God comes to thee in a sicknes^, and says, sinner, Guilty, or
not guilty? give God then the glory of an humble confession. It Is true, to
confess offenses against men to men, there may be danger in it, making us
liable to trouble: but confession of offenses against God never causes trouble.

Expos.
And seek my face,] that is, my Favor, my Son, and my Ordinances, for in the
general, Gods face is nothing else, but Gods manifestation of himself, in his
Love in his Son, in his Ordinances: and it is a most blessed thing thus to
behold Gods face, Revel. 22.4. this is that which David so earnestly praid for,
Lord lift up the light if thy countenance upon me: one sight of God is better
than all the world. To see God any way is sweet, but to see him in Christ this
is most excellent: In the world we have nothing of God but his very footsteps,
but in Christ there is the chief manifestation of the wisdom, mercy, and love
of God to poor lost man; and in the Ordinances there God chiefly lets out
himself in an especial manner, These are the Three things which show unto us
the meaning of those words. [And seek my face.] The Notes from them are these.

It Is not enough to acknowledge our sins, but we must seek Gods The heart in the
work of humiliation must be active: Confession without reconciliation
insufficient.
that soul which is truly humbled before God, must be lively and active after
God, else our humiliation is worth nothing in the sight of God: When the heart
is sullen, lumpish, and sinking in its humiliation God looks not at it, Ezekiel.
33.10. we read of some who are said to pine away in their sin. Many men when
God begins to afflict them with their sins, Dullness under affliction an ill
sign.
and put them into some trouble of spirit, they pine away in their iniquity: it
is a very ill sign when humiliation makes men dull, sullen, and unserviceable,
hindering them from duty, when men lie down under their trouble discontented
and melancholy; therefore here is the trial of our trouble of conscience
whether it be right or no; if from melancholy it duls the heart puts it out of
all spirit and activity, disabling it wholly from service; but if true, it
enlivens the heart, and puts activity into the spirits though naturally dull,
and lumpish, it puts the soul in ways of activity for God, when they have to
do with God; this is a very good sign that such trouble for sin is right and
good. simile
The melting of Lead consumes the Lead, but the melting of Silver does but
refine and purify it: so the trouble of a carnal heart melts and consumes it,
but a gracious spirit will abide the fire, and comes out purified and bettered;
therefore repentance is set out by a word of activity, Isa. 55.1, 2. Come, buy
wine and milk. Mat. 11.20. Come unto me: The frame of a true repenting heart is
in an active coming posture, fitted for any service.

God leaves in his people at his parting impressions to seek him.
When God leaves his people, he leaves something behind him, which causes the
heart to make after him; The soul has her eyes upon God, looking after Him.

Therefore much are they to be reproved, who are so full of their sad
conclusions, and desperate speeches, from such as these the Lord is gone, and
he will never return again, I am undone and lost for ever, there is no hope, to
Hell I must go: but a gracious heart in the darkest night of sorrow and trouble
can see some glimps of light and comfort, saying as that good man, Ezra. 9.2.
Yet there is hope in Israel concerning this thing, and as the Church in Isa.
42.24. Who gave Jacob for a spoil and Israel to the robbers? did not the Lord?
he against whom we have sinned? What then? yet O Israel fear not.

Use 2. consolation.
Let us lay up this for sad times to support our spirits withal, we know not
what sad and black days we may see, yet know that we cannot be in a sadder
condition than Ephraim was in here, to have God to be to us as a moth and as a
Lion to tear and devour us: many make their conditions worse by their desperate
conclusions. Austin Austin.
says, that David prayed earnestly that he might not be cast out from that
face which he had offended: Is God angry with us or the Kingdom? let us not run
away from him, but earnestly seek him.

True repentance, is not so much to seek our own ease, as Gods face; the face
of God is more in the heart and thoughts of a true penitent, true repentance
seeks not ease, but favor.
than its own ease, 2 Chronicles. 7.14. If my people humble themselves and seek my
face, then will I hear in Heaven. We may seek our own good, but we must go
beyond it, it is God and not our selves only which we must seek after in our
seekings after God: This has been the practice of the Saints, Psalm. 63.1. Oh
God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee, my soul thirsts for thee in a
dry and barren land; not for water in a dry land, but for thy face. So Isa.
26.8. In the way of thy judgments, O Lord, have we waited for thee. We seek
God in our days of humiliation and that earnestly; but what are our ends? Is
it that we may have our peace, our ease, our estates, and our lives? Indeed we
may desire and seek for these, but is it the face of God we seek more than
these? if it be, we have hopes of speeding in our requests.

But what is Gods face? Vt amplecterentur verbum and cultos in verbo
propositos, hec propriem est facies Dei, qua se revelat, and nobis
conspicuendum offert: It is the word, and Gods worship propounded in the word
etc. says Calvin, Calvin
as upon this place, so on that, Seek ye my face. Whence observe,

Gods Ordinances and Worship are his face. The soul never

Again, observe, Repenting hearts are very solicitous about Gods As soon as
they begin to know God and themselves, they begin to disrelish those ways of
worship, that went down with them well enough before.

In times of public calamity, the main thing we should The Worship of God, His
Name and His Ordinances. Though our sufferings are great, yet we should pray,
Lord, take a care of thy great Name, Ordinances, and Worship, which are dearer
unto us than any thing in the world, therefore O Lord, whether we have peace or
no, liberties or no, estates or not, take care of these and it suffices;
Applicat. for Engl.
Let England enjoy but thy Name, thy Ordinances, and the government of thy Son,
and we have enough, Lord, thou know our peace, our lives, and estates are
dear unto us, and we desire them all, but thy Gospel, thy Presence, and the
manifestation of thy Face above all, and seeking of peace is all in order to
this. Oh that this frame of spirit were found in us! then how soon would the
Lord return and heal all our breaches, destroy our enemies, and settle us in a
sure peace? See 1 King. 8.44. If they in their afflictions look toward the
Temple. So Psalm. 78.7. All my fresh springs, they are in thee. It follows, In
their affliction they will seek me early.

Hezekiah sends to the Prophet, Isa. 37.3. and tells him that it was a day of
trouble, and of rebuke, and of blasphemy, as it is with us at this day;
therefore says he, Lift up thy prayer for the remnant which is left: and says
my text, In their afflictions they will seek me early. We have many rumors of
peoples gathering together, and each discovering their poor spirits being
dejected and cast down with every rumor of fear, my text says, Come, let us
return unto the Lord, for he has torn and he will heal, he has smitten and he
will bind up, therefore let our conversations be as becomes our text;
providence at this time has cast us upon a very seasonable word the Lord make
it as suitable, The words are the beginning of the sixth chapter in the
Septuagint translation, and Hierom begins the sixth chapter with these words,
and join (come let us return) with them: the words are a prophecy of what the
Lord will work in his people Judah, God says that he will return unto his
place, till they acknowledge their sin; and here they say, Come let us return
unto the Lord: this was Gods aim in tearing them, and he had his end in it, now
from the Conexion of these two, Gods wounding, and their returning unto him
again, observe.

That what good God aims at in his administrations to his Elect he will have
it. In my tearing them I aim at their good, and I will accomplish it; and those
means which God uses to effect this God will see that it shall perform it: God
in the Ministry of the Word, does both to Reprobates and Elect what is
sufficient and fit for him to do
God uses many means, his Word, his Works, and his Encouragements, and all
these are of very great force and power to effect this, yet in the ungodly it
does not, but to the Elect it shall; God leaves not them to the means, but he
will see the means to effect that good upon them which they want. When God
sends the Gospel to any place, there are two sorts of people, Reprobates and
Elect; now God does to them all that is fit for him to do, now if they do not,
or will not receive it, he goes his way and leaves the Reprobates to
themselves, but to the Elect he follows them on with the means and
accomplisheth the good he aims at: some express it thus, A man has his servant
and his child sick of the stone, he provides a remedy for both; An apt
similitude.
brings the Surgeon to his servant, tell^ him that he is willing to be at
the cost, but the servant refuses, rather choosing to endure the misery and
pain: the master seeing his refusal goes away, and comes to his child, the
child refuses likewise, but now here the father goes not away, but commands
his child to be bound, and will see the Surgeon to perform his office: so
God offers the means to all, the Reprobates refuse it, God lets them alone, the
Saints they refuse it also, but God will not take it so from them but sets the
means home upon them by his almighty power.

But touching the words themselves, They will seek me early; (...) of the
morning before light. In Kal it is, denigraere nigrum esse: in Pihel,
manequaerere. 70 (...)
the Hebrew has but one word to express all these by, and it is this,
Jeshachruneni, as if he should say, they shall morning me, they shall come in
the morning of their time and seek me. For the further opening these words.

What time does this seeking of God refer it self unto? when did the Jews thus
seek God?

1. This refers it self unto these three times; as first, when the seventy
years were at an end, and this was fulfild in Dan. 9 Ezr. 9. and Nehem. 9. than
they sought God early, when their sorrows and oppressions were greater than in
Egypt as Jeremiah in the Lamentations expresses it.

2. Under their captivity and oppression by the Romans, which was when Christ
came into the world, at that time when three thousand were converted at one
Sermon which Peter preached to them, Act. 2. And multitudes came in daily. Act.
21.20.

3. At the calling of the Jews, who are now in a most sad and deplorable
condition, and at their calling shall this be principally fulfilled.

How did they seek God in any of th^se times early? Quaere 2 How?
for in Daniels time, he says, All this evil is come upon us, yet made we not
our prayers before the Lord, chap. 9. ver. 13. they never prayed to God in all
the time of their captivity with any seriousness till the end of it came: Then
for the second time how did they seek God early when Christ came, when the
Scripture tells us, John. 7.11. That he came unto his own, but his own received
him not; they crucified him, and were very bitter enemies to him, even to the
death. And for the third time, at the calling of the Jews, how did they seek
him early? for it is two thousand three hundred years since this prophecy was
spoken, and yet they have not sought God, how then is this fulfilled, that they
sought God early?

Cyrus his time, and upon a sudden in Peter's Sermon, and hereafter, the coming
of the Son of man shall be as the lightning: this time seems to be called the
day star arising in their hearts, 2 Pet. 1. The calling of the Jews shall be
suddenly, therefore in the 2. of the Revelation 28. they are promised to have
the morning star to arise, that is, some beginnings of a day of grace, those
which overcome shall partake of the good of that day, and then shall be the
time in which the people shall seek God early.

Seek me early.] that is, seek me diligently, Prove. 7.15. Therefore came I
forth to meet thee, diligently to seek thy face, and I have found thee: I came
forth to seek thee early in the morning, the word is the same with this in the
text, and thus this was fulfilled in the time of their captivity, Nehem. 4.17,
18, 19, 20. they built the walls diligently, or inflamedly, having their
weapons in one hand, and their tools in the other: so the spouse she sought
Christ diligently; and in the Apostles time Acts. 2. they cry out, Men and
brethren what shall we do? They were wonderful solicitous in their seekings of
Christ, and when the Jews are called it is prophesied of them, that they shall be
as doves flying to the wind^ws, Isa. 60 8. Hence observe.

In the forest and greatest aff^ictions which befall the people of God, God
intends their good in them. I will return unto my place, that they may seek me
early: in all this that is come upon them, I intend them no hurt, but every way
much good, Isa. 27.9. By this the iniquity of Jacob shall be purged, and this
is all the fruit, the taking away of their sin, Isa. 16.14. Isa 26.14.
compared with the 9. opened.
and there we may see Gods different dealing in afflicting the wicked and the
godly, in the 14. verse we have Gods dealing with the wicked, They are dead,
they shall not live; they are diseased, they shall not rise. The wicked they
are dead, and being dead, shall never rise: but in the 19. verse, when he
speaks of the Saints he says, Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead
body shall they rise. Gods word shows a great deal of difference between the
anger of God, and the anger of men, men when they are angry seek the
destruction sometimes of those with whom they are angry; but God loves them in
his anger; the spring of Gods anger to his people is love: the outward
administrations of God both to the wicked and the godly may be one and the
same, yet the root from whence they come much different, they may be love and
kindness to the one, but wrath and hatred to the other.

We may note, the little honor which God has in the world: simile
and think they serve themselves more than respect you.

Oh how ill may God take it then from us,

Times of afflictions are times of seeking of God: this is the Apostles Is any
afflicted? let him pray, James 5.13. and Isa. 26.16. They powered out a prayer
unto thee when thy chas^ening was upon them, and in their affliction they
visited thee: they powered out a prayer to thee, it was not dropping, now and
then, but it was violent, and it was a pouring, and it was continual, a prayer
(not prayers) in the singular number, noting that they made their prayers, but
a^ one continued act, the word prayer in this text signifies enchantment, (...)
as in the speaking of three or four words there is much efficacy being an
enchantment: so here, their prayers, were very powerful to prevail with God.

Luther Paul's Epistles.
are then removed. Luther says, that many of Paul's Epistles could not be
understood but by the cross. Men in prosperity can dispute against the Truth,
and grow wanton with it, but let God but lay his hand upon them, how easily will
they yield? Afflictions awaken the conscience so that the Truths of God come
with more power, Job, 33.16. and Job, 36.10. Job, 36.10.
He opens their ears to discipline, and commands that they return from
iniquity: He commands them in another way to return from iniquity then. opened
Did not God command them before? but not with that power and efficacy, the
voice of prayer is very pleasing to God when fervent.

When the Lord is pleased to work grace in the heart, that heart is taken off
from all creature helps; they dare not go with Ephraim to King Jareb. (How are
they then to be blamed who seek to the Devil for help in distress?) they dare
not go to Councels or to Armies for releef, but to God; it is too much to rest
upon men, much more upon the Devil: Do any of you go to Inchanters or Wisards
to find God? you may seek him but shall not find him.

We are not to be discouraged in our seeking of God, though our afflictions
drive us to it. This people sought God, but their afflictions did drive them to
it, yet God accepted them.

Jeptha said to the people, Do you now come to me in your distress? So God may
say, do you now come to me in your sorrows and miseries, and cast me off in
your prosperity? Caution.
I confess it is very dangerous venturing the putting off our seeking of God
till then, but if then God be pleased to work upon your hearts, be not
discouraged but seek him still. So Joel says, That in his affliction he sought
the Lord: But did the Lord answer him? Yea, his requests were granted.

Note, That every seeking of God is not sufficient; it must be early Early
seeking acceptable.


Now men are said to seek God early.

When?

1. It is, in the morning of their years; 1. In youth.
when young ones shall make this text true in the letter of it, it is wonderful
pleasing to God: It may be God laid his hand upon thee in thy youth, and then
God revealed the knowledge of Himself to thee, thy misery by sin, thy remedy in
his Son, so that the Churches prayer, was thine, Psalm. 90.14. O satisfy us
early with thy mercy: How many sins are by this prevented? Your father, or
master (if godly) would give a world (if they had it) that they had begun
sooner to serve the Lord, and to seek him early; therefore bless God who has
put it into your hearts to seek him: John was the young Disciple, and he in his
youth began to know Christ; and of all the Disciples none had that respect
showed them as John had: for it is said that he lay in Christ's bosom, and
Christ loved him.

2. As this is acceptable in the morning of our years, 2 At first enlightening.
so in the morning of Gods revealing Himself; as soon as ever God begins to
discover Himself, we should then seek Him early, when the soul says as Paul
said, Acts, 26.19. I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision, neither
consulted I with flesh and blood. Has God set up a light in your consciences?
and has it discovered to you your misery? and have you hearkened unto the
voice of your consciences? What have you done since? Is sin reformed? Are you
changed in the inner-man? Is Christ formed in you, and exalted upon his throne
in your hearts? Is your will subjected to the will of God, and your whole man
delivered up to the government of God? This were happy if it were so: But
contrariwise, is sin let in, and liked of as well as ever after these stirrings
and convictions of consci^nce? Then are you far from the number of those who
are early seekers of God.

3 With fervency and diligence.
3. When we seek Him with diligence, and with fervency, not in a formal way.
When Gods hand is out against us, He then looks that we should seek him with
intentiveness of spirit; See how the Church seeks God with diligence, Isa.
26.9. With my soul have I desired thee in the night season; yea, with my spirit
within me will I seek the early. When was this? In a grievous night of
affliction, when they were in great troubles, then to seek God early, with
their spirits within them, this is most emphatical. So, Acts, 12.5. prayer was
made by the Church for Peter, without ceasing, it was continued prayer, prayer
stretched out; even so ought our prayers to be, lifted up with fervency: true
prayer is active and working; the fervent prayer of the righteous prevails much
with God Jam. 5.16. Lively working prayers are prevailing prayers.

But what is it to seek God diligently?

with all other things under our feet, when all other things are sought in
order to this. Contemn all for God.
The soul is carried after the seeking of God with a panting and longing
desire, as the Heart after the water brooks.

to seek him with our whole heart; The heart is not divided in the work, With
our whole heart.
every part is employed; as Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20.23. feared and set himself
to seek the Lord, he gave his whole self to the duty.

When the soul bears down all difficulties in seeking of God, when nothing
shall keep him off his wook: Vanguishes all difficulties.
as Jacob wrestled with God, and would not be put off without the blessing,
Genesis 32.24. So the woman of Canaan, how earnestly did she seek to Christ for
her daughter? and would not be put off by difficulties, Matt. 15.22, 23, 24, 25.

When no means is neglected to be used, whereby that may be had which we seek
for; No means neglected.
The soul tries this means, and the other duty, and follows God in all his
ways that it may find him; as the poor woman which followed Christ from place
to place to touch the hem of his garment, Christ could not be hid from her.

Resolve to die in persuit of him.
5. Resolutions for to die seeking of God, is earnest seeking of God: it is our
constant practice living, and our resolutions dying: as Jacob, the nearer the
dawning of the day approached, the more earnest was he. How contrary are the
practices of too many, who at the first seek God early and earnestly too, yet
after a while leave off and grow cold: Oh that it were not thus with us at this
day; Use. England.
the Lord has brought us low at this time, yea how sad is our condition at
this time! It Is true, there is a spirit of seeking abroad in the Land, but now
God calls for a quickening of this, we should now put an edg upon our seeking of
God; Be fervent in spirit serving the Lord, (...) Seeking
in the original it is, boiling in spirit; let us so seek him now, that
hereafter we may praise him; Psalm. 22.26. Ps. 22.26
they shall praise the Lord that seek him: your hearts shall live for ever.
illustrated.
How sweet are those mercies which are won by prayer, and worn with praises?
Therefore now stir up the gift that is within you: you that never prayed
before, pray now; and you that have prayed before, quicken up your diligence,
and double your care: How much better it it to seek God than men? to cry to God
for mercy, than to cursed men? God might have made your condition to have bin
the condition of your brethren; How many are this day running for their lives,
and begging of their lives at the hands of barbarous, merciless, blood-sucking
monsters! and you are yet in peace seeking your God, for your selves and them.

But it may be asked, Why should we seek God? Can we do any thing to move God?
Will God be ever the sooner entreated by us.

I answer, No, that is not the meaning of the words,

THE CONTENTS
CHAP. VI.
VERSE. I.
Observe. 1. WHen Gods time of mercy is come, He puts a spirit of seeking into
men Page 531 Obs. 2 A joint turning to God is very honorable Ibid Obs. 3 Times
of mercy are joining times Page 532 Obs. 4 A true penitent heart seeks to get
others to join with him. ibid Obs. 5 A penitent heart retains good thoughts of
God in time of suffering ibid Obs. 6 A penitent heart is not discouraged Page
534 Obs. 7 When God intends good to a people, he leaves them intimation of his
love Page 536 Obs. 8. Apprehension of mercy causes the heart to turn Page 537
Obs. 9 The Saints make their healing not a fruit of their returning but of Gods
mercy ib.
VERSE. II.
Opened Page 538 Obs. 1 Gods own people may lie for dead in their own eyes.
Page 540 Use 1 Do not draw dark conclusions from Gods dealing ibid Use 2 Be not
impatient in prayer Page 541 Obs. 2 Gods reviving his people is not long in
Gods, nor the Saints eyes Page 542 Obs. 3 Faith makes Gods reviving real in the
saddest condition ibid Obs. 4 Mercies after two days death are reviving
mercies. Page 544 Obs. 5 The real sight of deliverance puts the soul upon
returning Page 547 Obs. 6 The apprehension of the death and resurrection of
Christ is a special help to faith in affliction Page 549 Obs. 7 When God grants
mercies he would have his people to be of lively spirits Page 549 Obs. 8 When
God is reconciled to a people his face is toward them ibid Obs. 9 The eye of
God upon his people is their safety Page 550 Obs. 10 Gods peoples life consists
in Gods favor ib. Obs. 11 Faith raises the soul high ibid Obs. 12 It is the
care of the Saints to walk as in Gods sight Page 551
VERSE. III.
Obs. 1. True penitents turn to God that they may know God. Page 554 Obs. 2 No
man can turn to God but as Gods face is toward him Page 555 Obs. 3 The
knowledge of God is a very comfortable thing to the Saints. ibid Obs. 4 The more
men turn to God the more they shall know of him ibid Obs. 5 Those that know
something of God desire to know more. Page 556 Obs. 6 A gracious heart endeavors
strongly after the knowledge of God ibid Obs. 7 It is a blessed thing for a man
to take notice of Gods revealings Page 557 Obs. 8 Those that follow on to know
God shall know more of him ib. Obs. 9 One mercy makes way for another Page 558
Obs. 10 The times of Gods delivery is in the morning Page 561. Obs. 11 The
Church has no afflictions but there comes a morning after them ibid Obs. 12 It
is Gods presence that makes the morning to the Saints ibid Obs. 13. Gods
mercies to his people are prepared and decreed Page 562 Obs. 14 The Saints in
affliction comfort themselves that morning is coming ibid Obs. 15 The Saints
night is darkest a little before their deliverance ibid Obs. 16 Gods delivery
is by degrees ibid Obs. 17 Gods deliverance is like rain to the corn. ibid Obs.
18 Gods mercies to his people are seasonable and suitable Page 563 Use, Let us
be seasonable in duty Page 565 Obs. 19 When God has begun with mercy to his
people he will go on Page 566 Use, Let us do so with God in obedience ibid Obs.
20 Gods mercies to his people procure much good ib. Obs. 21 Gods peoples
deliverance comes from heaven ib. Obs. 22 Gods peoples deliverance cannot be
hindered Page 567 Obs. 23 We should make a spiritual use of Gods works in his
creatures. ibid
VERSE. IV.
Obs. 1 God does not willingly grieve men Page 569 Obs. 2 We should not think
much to lose our pains with others ibid Obs. 3 It it a speceal means to humble
men to consider what means has been used to do them good Page 570 Obs. 4 God
many times seems to be in a straight what to do with men ib. Obs. 5 The
condition of people is sad when no means will do them good Page 572 Obs. 6 It
goes nigh the heart of God to see men perverse ibid Obs. 7 For a man to make
good beginnings and let them fall, is grievous to God and dangerous to a man's
self Page 581 Grievous to God 1 Because God is holy Page 582 2 He is
unchangable ib. 3 It stifles the conceptions of the spirit ibid 4 Such people
cannot be trusted ibid 5 There is no fear of God before their eyes ibid 6 It
pollutes Gods Name. ib. 7 Religion is looked upon by such, as a thing
indifferent ibid 8 They never had good beginnings ibid
Dangerous to a man's self. 1 Because we lose many opportunities Page 583 2 We
shall never grow to any eminency ibid 3 It hardens the heart. ibid 4 It
aggravates sin ibid 5 It spoils the acception of our services ibid 6 It damps
our hearts in duty ibid
Means to persevere. 1 Trust not in sudden flashes Page 584 2 Get your hearts
off from earthly engagements. Page 585 3 Take heed of secret sins ib. 4. Take
often account of your hearts ib 5 Never trust your hearts after reviving ib. 6
Humble your selves after good desires Page 586 7 Rest not in beginnings Page 587

VERSE. V
Obs. 1 When God comes against false Prophets, he looks the people should not
be led by them. Page 588 Obs. 2 Inconstancy in Religion provokes Gods anger
Page 592 Obs. 3 Many men's hearts are like knotty timber Page 593 Obs. 4 Gods
Ministers are hewers ibid Obs. 5 When Ministers hew, God hews Page 594 Obs. 6
Gods Ministers are Gods tools Page 595 Obs. 7 Gods Ministers are Gods mouth
Page 596 Obs. 8 The Word of God is of great power ibid Obs. 9 Gods judgments
lie dark when men go on in a prosperous way of sinning Page 597 Obs. 10 God
has his time to punish openly ibid Obs. 11 God will have his time to convince
men ibid Obs. 12. Gods judgments are gradual ibid Obs. 13. The more powerful
the Ministry is, the more sharp shall the judgment be if despised. Page 598
VERSE. VI.
Opened Page 600 Objections answered Page 601 Obs. 1 Carnal hearts are very
cruel in their dealings Page 614 Obs. 2 Carnal hearts think to satisfy their
consciences by observing outward Ordinances ibid Obs. 3 God and men's
consciences will not be put off ibid Obs. 4 The Lord has an highesteem of
mercy Page 615 Obs. 5 It is a Christians skill, when two duties come together,
which to choose ibid Obs 6. If Gods Worship may be forborne in case of mercy; how
much more men's Institutions. ibid Obs. 7 God will have mercy rather than
desputing about sacrifice Page 616 Obs. 8 Mercy must be preferred before our
own wills Page 617 Objections answered Page 619
Obs. 9 The duties of the first and second Table are joined together ibid Use,
Instruct your children and servants in this knowledge Page 620
Obs. 10 Men may be very diligent in worship and yet very ignorant ibid Obs.
11. Soul-worship must be preferred before all other. ibid
VERSE. VII
Obs. 1 It is Gods goodness that He enters into covenant with such poor
creatures as we are Page 623 Obs. 2. God is constant in His Covenant with men.
ibid Obs. 3 Man's nature is very weak Page 624 Obs. 4 The apprehension of our
obligation should keep us within covenant ibid Obs. 5 Breach of covenant is a
grievous agravation of sin ib. Obs. 6 God expects that of His people which
every one cannot do. Page 625 Obs. 7 Men may do many services and yet be
Covenant breakers ibid Obs. 8. The sins of Saints which break Covenant are sins
of a double dye ibid Obs. 9. The want of the right knowledge of God is the cause
of breach of Covenant ib. Obs. 10 There can be no Covenant kept where there is
no mercy. Page 626 Obs. 11. We should be humbled because we break Covenant with
God ibid
VERSE. VIII.
Obs. 1 Through man's wickedness the best of Gods Ordinances ar corrupted Page
628 Obs. 2 We must not judge of places as they have been heretofore ibid Obs. 3
Places of Religion, if corrupted, are the worst of all others ibid Obs. 4 It is
abominable to be a worker of iniquity ibid Obs. 5 Clergy men (if wicked) are
the worst of all others ib. Obs. 6 Wicked Clergy men overthrow whole Nations
Page 629 Obs. 7 False worship and tyranny are joined together ibid Obs. 8 None
so cruel as Clergy men ibid
VERSE. IX.
Obs. 1 Wicked Ministers are most outrageous against those that leave them Page
630 Obs. 2 Wicked Ministers wait to do mischief ibid Obs. 3 Many men are
nearest undoing when most secure ibid Obs. 4 Wicked men abuse the esteem others
have of them ib. Obs. 5 Judges are least called to an account for wrongs ib.
Obs. 6. None plot mischief so much as Clergy men Page 631 Obs. 7 Plotted
wickedness is most vile ibid
VERSE. X.
Obs. 1 Idolatry is a horrible sin Page 632
VERSE. XI.
Obs, 1 The sins of the people are seeds for a harvest of judgment Page 635
Obs. 2 God has a set time for judgment ibid Obs. 3 In judgment the Lord
remembers mercy for his people ibid
CHAP. VII.
VERSE. I.
Obs. 1 In great Cities there is all manner of evils Page 637 Obs. 2 The sins
of a Kingdom are the sores of a Kingdom. Page 638 Obs. 3 The Lord is the healer
of a Kingdom Page 639 Obs. 4 God does not will things according to his
omnipotency Page 640 Obs. 5 Much wickedness lies hid many times in a Kingdom
Page 641 Englands wickedness. 1 Bitterness against the power of godliness Page
641 2 A sordid spirit. Page 642 3 A trtacherous spirit ibid 4 A blasphemous
spirit ib. 5 A bloody spirit ib. 6 A spirit of division ib. 7 An oppressing
spirit Page 643 8 A spirit of envy ib. 9 A spirit of superstition ib. 10 A
wanton spirit ib. 11 An unmerciful spirit ib.
Obs. 6 It is a forerunner of mischief when people are false in their relations
Page 647 Obs. 7 There is much secret wickedness in men of false Religions ib.
VERSE. II.
Obs. 1 It is a good thing to be often speaking with ones own heart Page 648
Obs. 2 God remembers wickedness a long time. Page 649 Obs. 3 Wicked men
consider not that God remembers their wickedness ib. Obs. 4 When God punishes
sin be manifests that he remembers it Page 650
VERSE. III.
Obs. 1 Wicked people are easily led aside by their Governors Page 655 Obs. 2.
Governors ought not to be obeyed when their comands are unlawful. ibid Obs. 3
It is a vile wickedness to flatter Princes Page 653 Obs. 4 It is a vile thing
to be made glad with wickedness Page 654 Obs. 5 That King is in a sad condition
when his ends must be accomplished by wickedness ibid Obs. 6 Idolatry is a lie
in Gods account Page 656 Obs. 7 Idolaters further their worship with lies ibid
Obs. 8 It is an evil thing to make men glad with lies. Page 657
VERSE. IV.
Opened and applied Page 658
VERSE. V
Obs. 1 Festival days are usually distempering days Page 662 Obs. 2
Drunkenness is an old Court sin Page 663 Obs. 3 Drunkenness breeds diseases
ibid Obs. 4 Sensual Courtiers are for the most part great scorners Page 666
Obs. 5 Times of feasting are times of contemning Religion ibid Obs. 6 The right
way of worship is slighted by carnal hearts. ib. Obs. 7 When Kings hearts are
against Relegion, they shall never want pestilent wits to further their designs
Page 667
VERSE. VI.
Obs. 1 God will be hot in judgment as men are hot in sin. Page 668
VERSE. VII.
Obs. When Governors set up false worship it should quicken our prayers Page
670
VERSE. VIII.
Opened Page 673
VERSE IX.
Obs. 1 The hearts of wicked men work strongly after their lusts
VERSE. X.
Obs. 1 God expects we should turn upon afflictions Page 679 Obs. 2 Afflictions
if not sanctified never turn the heart ib. Obs. 3 Not to turn in Affliction is
a great aggravation of sin ibid
VERSE. XI.
Obs. 1 Men are not excused though seduced by others. Page 680
VERSE. XII.
Obs. 1 It is just that those which go out of Gods way should be ensnared Page
682 Obs. 2 God may for a time let wicked men prosper in their ways Page 685
Obs. 3 Sinners had need regard what they hear out of Gods Word Page 684 Obs. 4.
When judgments come upon impenitent sinners, it is an humbling consideration
ib.
VERSE. XIII.
Obs. 1 Gods redeeming mercies are great aggravations of our sins Page 687 Obs.
2 Such as sin freely after deliverance give God the ly. ib. Obs. 3 For a man to
urge another to a false opinion is a lying against God. ibid Obs. 4. The great
evil of sin is that it is against God ibid Obs. 5. The more directly a sin is
against God, the greater is the sin. Page 688
VERSE. XIV.
Opened Page 689 Obs. 1 The vilest men will assemble to prayer in public
miseries Page 691 Obs. 2 When hypocrites assemble, it is for themselves, not for
God ibid Obs. 3 Hypocrites seek God more for sensual things than for others
ibid
VERSE. XV.
Obs. 1 It is God only can bind up broken arms Page 693 Obs. 2 To be sinful
after mercies is a great aggravation of sin. ibid Obs. 3 It is an excellent
thing to glorify God after strength is restored ibid Obs. 4 A true repenting
sinner should have God always before his eyes Page 605 For then: 1 He would be
serious ibid 2 He would abhor himself ib. 3 He would see the infinite evil of
sin ibid 4 There is no standing out against God ibid 5 God is worthy of all he
can do. ibid 6 Slight sorrow will not serve the turn Page 696 7 God has power
to raise the soul ibid 8 There is enough in God to make him blessed. ib.

AN EXPOSITION Of the PROPHESY of HOSEA.
CHAP. VI.
VERSE, I. Come, and let us return unto the LORD, for He has torn, and He will
heal us; He has smitten, and He will bind us up.


IN this Chapter we have these things considerable. First, Parrs of the Chap.
The work of Isreal's true repentance, from the first verse to the third now
they were returned to him. To come to the first verse.

Come, and let us return etc. These words are an excitation of the mind (not
the body) to return to God; as also they show the mighty spirit which came upon
this people at this time, what a turn there was in them, as if they had said,
Well, our Princes have deceived us, and our Prophets have deluded us and led us
aside, we have been false in our worship, wrong in our practices, for which God
has been displeased with us; but now, Come, and let us return, we are resolved
to fall down and humble our selves, He has smitten us, and he will bind us up.
The Seventy Translators and also Hierom take these words from Chyrurgions which
use to put deep and long tents into great sores, Septuag. Hierom. (...). But
the common Septuag. says, not this word but (...), the former is in Hierom.
simile.
who intends not to skin, but thoroughly to heal it, by eating out the corrupt
flesh and filthy matter: so that these words note Isreal's dangerous disease,
and their great corruptions, and that in their afflictious; but God would not
let them die of this disease, or perish under his hand in the curing, but he
would heal them and that thoroughly. A woman whose breasts are sore must be
thoroughly tented before it be healed, and she bids the Chyrurgion cure her well
and thoroughly though it be long and painful: So says God, this people are
very sorely wounded, but I will take them in hand and heal them, but their
cure will be very long and teadious, sore and painful. Now says this people,
seeing it is thus, Come, let us return, it matters not though our healing cost
us dear and it be painful, it is enough that God will heal us; Let our disease
be never so grievous, Come and let us return. A man that has a mortal wound
about him, what pain will not he be willing to endure in healing so he may be
sure of cure? This people conceived themselves so wounded that if God had not
taken them to cure they must have perished, but in that God had undertaken the
cure, they were confident they should be healed.

When Gods time of mercy is come to a people He puts a mighty Gods time was
come for Isreal's deliverance, and now God put an active stiring spirit into
them, therefore they say, Come, let us return; before their spirits were dull
and lumpish like unto men in a Lethurgie, but now they have a spirit quickened
for God, like unto those in Isa. 2.3. And many people shall say, Come, and let
us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob. The
like prophecy we have Isa. 60.1. and 44.3.5. they shall come off very
willingly and cheerfully and subscribe themselves by the name of Jacob: simile.
As a Ship which is filled with a full and strong wind in the sails goes
against all oppositions of wind and storms: there is such a spirit put into
them, as the Apostle prays to be in the Colossians, chap. 4. ver. 12. that ye
may stand perfect and complete in all the will of God? Now is reformation like
to go on to some purpose. Fall of Antich.
At the time of Antichrists destruction God has promised to put such a spirit
into the hearts of the people that all his tyranny shall not be able to stand
before them: God will blow upon the spirits of men, and they shall be very
powerful.

Now considering Gods power, let not us despair, concerning the great Works
adoing in our times. Luthers time? But when he came, what a spirit was raised
in the people? And what a spirit has there been raised amongst us and that on
a sudden? To consider what bondages we were in, and greater like to fall into,
and that we were not made for slavery, to be slaves and vassals subjected to
the wills of some Twenty or Thirty men: And what a spirit did God raise in our
brethren of Scotland, when he was about to do them good and to break the neck
of the yoke of their tyranny? Oh then what a cursed thing is it for any to
quench, keep under, or resist such a spirit as this when it arises in people?

A joint turning to God is very honorable to God. Come and let return. It is
much honor to God when but one soul is turned to him, but when many are
converted there is much glory, a multitude of praises then are offered up to
God; a^ in Revel. 5.11. And the number of them which stood about the throne was
ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands. And so Revel. 19
6. The multitudes of voices saying, The Lord God reigns; Allelujah to the
highest.

Times of mercy are joining times. Oh it is very sad when men will go every one
their own way; but when men join together in an unanimous way, saying, Come and
let us set about the Lords work with one shoulder, every one encouraging each
other, then there is hope the times of mercy are nigh that people: Use a sad
presage to
But this is our misery, the divisions and the rendings that are amongst us,
being di^-joynted each from other, Oh the wantones of men's spirits now among
us! for which God is much displeased, and certainly is one great stop in the
way of mercy, that notwithstanding God has us in the fire and threatens even
our consuming, yet that we should not join and unite together.

True penitent hearts seek to get others to join with them. Oh how glad are
they to see any coming on to seek the Lord with them, and how careful are they
to give encouragement example, they persuade them with all gentleness, saying,
Come, let us go up to the house of the Lord, we have found the Lord very
gracious to us, Oh come, he is good still, yea and good to you, if you will come
into him: if the husband have found God good to him, he will persuade the wife,
the child the servant to come to Christ. Thus much of their resolution to
return: the reason follows; For he has smitten us, and he will heal us.

Hence observe:

That in times of the greatest sufferings a true penitent heart retains good
thoughts of God. God has torn, wounded, and smitten us, what then? run away
from God? think hardly of him? No, think well of him and bless his Name, even
when you God in former times have practiced, Nehemiah, Ezra, Ezra. 9. Neh. 9.
Dan. 9 Psalm, 44.
and Daniel, in all their miseries how careful were they to acquit and clear
God to be just in all that was come upon them? yea the Church in the time of
her desertion retains Christ as a King and calls him so, so that they have as
high esteems of God now in their low condition as in their prosperous estate;
and as they dare not entertain hard conceits of God, so neither of his Cause,
nor his People, they are not sorry that they have been so far engaged for them.
Many people are like bad servants, simile Use of reproof.
who while they have every thing fitting that becomes them, can give their
masters family a good report, but let them be crossed of their minds and go away
in a discontent, Oh how vily do they speak of it; and as sturdy beggars, while
they find releef and succor, they can give good words, and they are their
masters and best friends, but let them be sent away empty, and then what name
is bad enough for them? so when things goes well with the cause of God and his
people they will be on Gods side: Oh take heed of being sorry that ever you
were engaged so far as you are, or thinking to draw back, that it had been
better you had not been so forward as you have been, this is a base and vile
spirit, see but how low the Church was in affliction, and yet with what a
gallant spirit she carried it out, Psalm. 44.12, 13.15, and 17. verses, in these
times how is this text fulfilled in the 15. verse, how do they complain that
men do blaspheam, deride, and scorn them, and in the 17. verse, All this is
come upon us, What then? Is not God good, and his Cause good that we maintain?
No, God forbid such a thought should enter into us: Although all this evil be
come upon us, yet have we not dealt falsely with thee in thy Covenant: Oh let us
lay up this truth, and it would be a mighty comfort and stay to us in these
times, and it would be a very good rise to prayer; for mark in the 23. verse,
Awake, why sleep thou? Oh Lord, arise and help us: Those can pray to purpose
who in the sorest afflictions can manifest the most fear of God, and exercise
the most love toward God and his ways notwithstanding.

A repenting heart is not a discouraged heart. It is such a heart as sinks not
down in discouragements, saying (as some do) we are a lost people, and undone,
there is no hope, we had been better never to have ventured so far as we have,
but give over what we have done; it dares not draw conclusions from what has
been, to what is, and what will be, this is too much presumption for any man;
David in the Cave can trust in God, and hide himself under Gods wing, Psalm.
57.1. So long as there is a God in Heaven this soul will expect help from him,
a true penitent will expect mercy notwithstanding Gods severity and justice;
the severity of justice in God cannot keep him from waiting for, and expecting
of what God has promised; if the soul can but get over this difficulty, the
deep gulf of Gods justice, it will easily get over all other dreadfulness of
men's displeasure: a repenting heart is a purged heart and therefore not a
discouraged but a supported heart, those which are unclean, of foul and filthy
spirits are always jealous of God and his dealings toward them: Oh let it
appear that we are not of discouraged and sinking spirits by the cleanness of
our lives and the purity of our conversations: carnal hearts are not
discouraged when they have carnal helps to underprop them, and shall we be
afraid of any difficulty, who have God for our help? Remarkable is that place,
The Philistines motive to courage in the battle.
1 Samuel 4.9. concerning the speech which was made to the Philistims upon the
coming of the Ark into the camp of Israel, what a fear were they put into? yet
how do they encourage themselves? Let us fight valiently for our wives and
children and estates, that we and our little ones be not slaves to the Hebrews.
So say I, let us be courageous in these times and fight for our Liberties,
Laws, and Religion: Did we but spend that strength in returning unto God which
we do in discouragements, Oh how soon would help come for us were we but thus
resolved! Now though we must not be discouraged, when helps and means fail, but
yet humbled we must be for our sins which cause these breaches, see how the
Prophet Habackuk mannages this disposition, c. 3. v. 16, 17. we should improve
our humiliation as they did, Judges, 20. who though in a good cause, Judge. 20.
a cause which God approved of yet lost forty thousand men at two battles in
the prosecution of it; what do they now? leave it off, and run away? No, but
put on courage and resolution, fasted and prayed, and humbled themselves before
the God of their fathers, and then they prospered. Oh let us be humbled that we
may not be discouraged.

And as we must not be discouraged, so must we not falsely encourage our selves;
as they said, The bricks are fallen down, but we can build with hewn stone: so
say not, this Army is lost, but we can raise another quickly. Let us only
encourage our selves in the Lord our God, let us take heed of the goodness of
our cause thereby too much to rest upon it, 1 Samuel 4.3. the people said, Let us
fetch home the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, that when it comes, it may
save us: they thought the bare having of that among them, would deliver them.
Know that it is not the goodness of our cause that can bear us up, and carry us
through difficulties, if we do not turn to the Lord.

Now that your spirits may not sink under these troubles, Motives to courag
let me give you a few props to lean upon.

If we have been faithful in our work, we may have this testimony,

If we suffer, God suffers more, this should mightily encourage

Know, that God sees further than we, and knows what is

Consider, things are no more difficult now than they in the greatest straits
as if there were none at all.









When God intends good to a people, he gives them an intimation of his love to
them. How did this people know that God would heal them and that He would bind
them up? Thus they argued it out, from Gods goodness, from his Name, and from
his Covenant; Oh would God but put into our thoughts to consider the mercy of
God to us in the Covenant.





The apprehension of what mercy is to come, will readily cause the heart to
turn to him. Many say God will not be gracious, mercy is past, there is no
hope, therefore we will give over waiting. No, but we will seek him still, and
wait longer for mercy to come.

Lastly, This people being turned to God, do not make the hopes of Many poor
souls think that they must not believe till they are so far humbled, and so
much broken: This is an error; we should exercise our faith more upon Gods
healing, than our returning, and this will cause us to be humbled: Works and
Faith.
humiliation will soon follow after this. Good works are a good nurse to faith,
but if we make works the mother of faith that faith is not right, it is a
bastard faith.

VER. 2. After two days will he revive us, in the third day he will r^ise us
up, and we shall live in his sight.


GODS Works are Comments upon his Word; and it has been so frequently in the
opening of this Prophecy: as Christ said of that Scripture, Luke, 4.21. This
day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears, so may I say of this Scripture at
this time, how has God literally fulfilled it? The last Exercise you heard of
Gods wounding and of his healing; How has he healed us in a gracious manner?
and how are these words fulfilled in the litteral sense? After two days he
will revive us. But two days after our humiliation he revived us, and the
third day we lived in his sight, and if we follow on to know the Lord we shall
know more of his counsel, and though the darkness of the night be not yet over,
yet the morning is prepared.

But may we have such ground to think so as this people, when any people may
apply the promise.
that God will revive u^ and that we shall live in his sight. If we can prove
our turning unto God, and our returning from sin, the other may be made good;
that he will revive us in our sorrows.

The scope of these two verses is to express a further confidence scope and sum.
of repenting believing Israel in Gods goodness: before he smote them, and now
he would revive them; but before this reviving comes perhaps we may be as dead
men, yea lie a day (that is a certain time) as dead men, forsaken of God, quite
out of his mind, yea, we may lie the second day also, that is a second time
wherein we expected help, yet then also the enemy may triumph over us, yet
shall we live in his sight, that is, all shall see, that the eye of God was on
us for good: he will revive us, and God shall be in our sight as we shall be in
his, glorious things is he about to make known to us, though it be night now,
yet know his mercy is a coming, even as the morning follows the dark night;
this is the sum of these words.

Yet for the further opening of them, know that interpreters differ, they keep
a great stir to know what is meant by two days, some think it spoken of the
Jewish captivity, others of the second coming of Christ, the Messiah therefore:
Luther Luther
seems to contemn their inceties, saying, he thinks them not worthy to find out
the meaning of a text, who stand so curiously upon such inceties.

The meaning the meaning
therefore of the words are, after two days, that is, although God do not come
presently, after two days, yet he will come, mercy though it stays long yet
it will come; two days in Scripture signifies a little and a short time; as
Numb. 9.22. whether it were two days, or a month, or a year, that the cloud
stayed upon the Tabernacle: two days, that is, when we shall be in any great
extremity of pain or misery, Mercer Mercer
quotes R. Abrah. R. Abrah.
Ezra filium, who says, that wounds and gashes in a man's body pain and smart
more at two days end than at the first; so God may let us lie in the smart of
pain and sorrow two days, but in the third day mercy shall follow.

Interpreters generally conceive these words to have reference unto the two
days that Christ lay in the grave; Christ's resurectio^ prophesied in this
scripture.
and Luther says that this is the Scripture which Paul speaks of in 1 Cor.
15.4. That Christ rose the third day according to the Scripture; what
Scripture? why this, the third day we shall live in his sight; though the text
Notes the confidence which repenting Israel had in Gods mercy toward them, yet
has it reference also unto Christ, as if they should say, our straits and
miseries may be great and we may lie in them a while, so did Christ, but he was
raised the third day and so shall we. Mr. Calvin Calvin
says that God gave a famous and memorable example of Isreal's mercy after
their captivity by Christ's rising from the grave, and this may well be meant of
Christ as that Scripture shows, Hosea, 11.1. When Israel was a child then I
loved him, and called my son out of Egypt: Who would have thought that this had
meant Christ, but that the Scripture applies it unto Christ, in Mat. 2.15. And
he departed into Egypt, until the death of Herod, that it might be fulfilled
etc. How darkly was Christ shadowed out in the old Testament? as by Jonas in
the Whales belly three days: Oh what cause have we to bless God who lives in
the times of the Gospel where Christ is manifested so clearly? what dark and
mistical intimations had they of Christ in those days, this was one of the
cleerest, and that of Jonas in the Whales belly.

When at any time God would comfort his people in distress, what does he do?
Christ Gods usual medium to comfort his afflicted people Luthers Object.
he reveals a prophecy of the Messiah to come: as in Isa. 7.14. and in Isa.
9.6. and when was this? when the rod of the oppressor was broken in Zacca. 9.9.
and so here, God having smitten, wounded and torn them, he comes and heals
them, promising life and reviving to them.

But here now, Luther makes an objection, If these words had reference unto
Christ, they should run thus, He should live in his sight, not we; and he
answers it himself, that it notes the efficacy of his resurrection, Answ.
Ostendit. fructum resurectionis Christi, we are risen and live in Christ's
resurectio^ (...) ad facies ejus.
not only for himself but for many others.

We shall live in his sight; that is comfortably, mortis habet vices, que
trahitur vita genitib. before his face, that is, His favor shall be toward us
for mercy; as the turning the face away shows anger, so the turning of Gods
face toward us signifies favor:

2. We shall see his face with comfort and re^oyce in the sight of it.

3. We shall eye his face in acts of obedience and he will eye our duties with
acceptance.

4. It notes security in his presence: As when we are in the presence of a King
his very presence is our security, and safety, so we shall live in his ^^ght,
that is, we shall be safe in his presence. The Notes from hence are,

That Gods own people may not only he smitten and wounded by God, but may lie
for dead in their own eyes, and in the eyes of all about them for a time: see
it in the case of Heman, Psalm. 88.8. and 14. verses, Lord, why castest thou off
my soul? why hidest thou thy face from me? verse 10. Will thou show wonders to
the dead? shall the dead praise thee? Ezekiel. 37.3. we read there of dry bones
which should be made to live, and Revel. 11. the witnesses shall be slain and
lie dead in the streets, the beast shall overcome them, the generallity of
those that stand for Christ shall be slain by the beast, and overcome by his
power.

Reas. God works by contraries
The reason of this may be, because God can work about his glory by contrary
means. This is a great affliction, yet not so great as sin is, when God fetches
out his glory from the afflictions of his people, it costs him not so much nor
so deer, as when he fetches it out of sin, now if Gods glory be so dear to
him, that he will suffer sin to be in the world, thereby to fetch his glory out
of it, why should we be unwilling that God should suffer afflictions to be upon
us seeing by them he fetches out glory to himself? Exodus, 15.7. In the
greatness of thine excellency have thou overthrown them which rose up against
thee; how should God manifest his glorious power in raising them up? were they
never brought very low? In Heaven God will manifest his glory so to us, that we
shall not need such dark shadows to have it set out and opened unto us as here
it is.

Use, Care to be well grounded in a cause that may suffer.
If this be thus, take heed of drawing darker conclusions from Gods dealings
than they will bear, as to say, the Lord has forsaken us, and God will have
mercy no more upon us, he has forgotten to be gracioos, or to say, he has
left his cause and turned his back upon his inheritance, therefore we should
labor to be well informed in the grounds upon which his cause stands, and is
maintained, and which may uphold us in the maintenance of it; for know that God
may put thee to the trial, and if thou art not thoroughly grounded thou will
apostatize.

God leaves his people in that dead condition for a time; the first Come, let
us return unto the Lord, yet what do they say? after two days he will revive
us; it must be some time first: God is a great God, and his creature must wait,
there is much grace exercised in an afflicted condition, when the soul quietly
submits to God and patiently waits upon his pleasure, let his dealing be never
so hard toward them; God sometimes answers his peoples prayers presently when
they seek him, so that it may not only be said, in the evening, but in the
morning have thou heard me; not only this day, but the next also: see that
place in 1 King. 18.38, and 44. Elijah prays, and the Lord heard him
presently, but he prays again, and then the Lord defers: in the 38. verse he
prays for fire to come down to consume the sacrifice, and it did so; but in
the 44. verse of the same chapter he prays again for rain, and see in what a
posture he prays in and obtained his petition with much difficulty, sent his
servent Seven times, and at the seventh time it was but a little cloud; at
first God heard him presently, but he prays again, and then mercy comes
difficultly, yet God was not angry with Elijah. So Daniel, he prays and was
heard presently; but the people they pray, and pray earnestly, yet they were
not answered.

Oh therefore let us take heed of impatiency and frowardnes of spirit in
trouble, and of being weary of duty, Use. be patient in prayer.
and g^owing careless in holy services, because an answer comes not presently,
this shows the rottenness of our spirits as much as any thing, and it is as
evident a sign of an hypocrite as any we have in Scripture Isa 8. they fa^^ed
and prayed so long that they thought themselves mightily wronged because they
were not heard; therefore are they so bold to ask God a reason why he was so far
behind hand with them when they had done so much service for him? Oh boldness
of spirit!

That the time of Gods reviving his people, is neither long in Gods nor the
Saints account; It Is but two days, the third day we shall live. Isa. 31.5. Isa.
31.5. opened
As birds flying, so will the Lord be swift to help Jerusalem; He has promised
not to contend for ever: and in 1 Peter, 1.6. 1 Pet. 1.6 rightly pointed.
Though now for a season (if need be) ye are in heaviness, through many
tribulations: in the Original it is, If now, if need be, so that there is great
need of afflictions before God sends them. So 2 Cor. 4.17. afflictions they are
for a moment a very little time: Faith, that lifts up the soul upon two hills,
where it sees Heaven on the one, and the valley of Achor in the middle, and it
so works in the soul that it causes it to be patient in suffering the greatest
trials, it is a sign of a distempered spirit, to complain of the length of an
affliction, a gracious heart desires more the sanctifying it than taking it
away; we might have been swallowed up in the gulf of eternal misery. Hag. 2.6.
yet a little while and I will shake Heaven etc. But it was between five and six
hundred years before this shaking came, viz. at the coming of Christ; our
impatience make affliction seem long.

In the sadest condition, faith makes present and real Gods reviving mercies.
When their help is gone, in the mount of man's extremity will God be seen. We
should reason thus, because Gods people are in great extremity, then it is a
sign that God will arise and help them, and not despair and give over our
hopes; simile.
as before the morning light is the thickest darkness, so let us never be
discouraged at the increase of afflictions, for they show the time then hastens
for deliverance; and thi^ faith makes present to the soul, it shows the soul
life in death, favor in frowns, love in strokes, faith sees a great difference
between the strokes of God upon the Saints and upon the wicked: that place is
famous for this, Isa. 26.14. compared with the 19. They are dead, they shall
not live, they are diseased, they shall not rise. When God strikes wicked men
their wounds forerun death here, and eternal death hereafter, when he smites
them in their cause, in their names, or estates, it is to undo them: But now
mark in the 19. verse, Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body
shall they arise. Some think that these words note the glorious condition of
the Church in regard of their safety, that though men and means fail, yet faith
can see deliverance in the womb of an infinite wisdom, Faith revives other
graces
power and faithfulness, Faith revives other graces when seeming dead and puts
life into them, much more does it into our dead conditions; it is reported of
the Vt vives alijs lapidibus pretiosis extinctis, solo attactu luscitoret.
Guliel. Paris.
Cristal, that it has such a virtue in it, that the very touching of it
quickens other stones, and puts a luster and beauty upon them. This is true of
faith, it makes evil things present, far off, and good things far off, present,
and herein consists the exercise of faith in a great measure, Psalm. 91.7. A
thousand shall fall on thy left band, and ten thousand on thy right hand, but
it shall not come nigh thee: this is a very strange speech, that a man may be
in a place where a thousand shall fall by him, and ten thousand on the side of
him, and yet he not touched by the disease. By faith the soul enjoyes this
security. Psalm. 60.6. God has spoken in his holiness. I will rejoice, I will
devide Sechem and met out the valley of Succoth: the thing was not yet done, yet
they rejoiced in it as present; faith it enables a dead and a barren womb to
bring forth a child, it raises up a dead son out of the ashes, Abraham bids
his servants to stay at the bottom of the hill, and expect his coming, Oh
strong was his faith in this thing.

How unbeseeming are our spirits and how is our faith manifested to be weak and
poor, Use of reproof.
when a mercy promised is within sight ready to be fulfilled and made good, yet
how impatient are we and froward when it comes not so soon as we desire? when
we are full of such determinings against our selves or the Cause of God,
saying, alas all is now gone, we are left desperate, God has forsaken his
Cause, Oh let us take heed of pleasing our selves with this kind of carnal
arguing and objecting, for they are such as mightily provoke God and dishonor
him, and hinder much good which else we might enjoy.

But were I worthy, I could think something,

Answ. Faith sees worthiness in its unworthines
In this case do thou exercise faith upon Christ even in thine unworthyness, and
though thou may die and not see the harvest, nor reap the fruit of thy
prayers, yet know the generations to come shall, and this may comfort thee.
That speech of Jacob is remarkable to this purpose; when he lay a dying, says
he, Behold I die; but God shall do much more for you. The Cause may be trod^n
down for a while, and God may hide himself, but know, that he will keep his
Covenant with thee, he never yet broke Covenant; so long as Christ is thine and
thou art his, Gods faithfulness in keeping Covenant is also thine; what if
those that stand for Christ and his Cause be sometimes beaten, must they
therefore give over? No, but venture still, and if our sins hinder not, though
we may lie dead to day, and to morrow, yet the third day we may live in his
sight.

Mercies after two days death, are reviving mercies.

After two days I will revive you. Promises in times of afflictions are sweet
indeed: Oh then, how much more deliverance? Such mercies are
resurection-mercies which God sends after killing afflictions. And such mercies
has the Lord given us at this very day; the Lord has revived us when almost
dead, Applicat. for Engl.
therefore would we give God the glory of such mercies, and render unto him due
and seasonable praise for such seasonable mercies, Let us observe these rules.

First, Look back to your base unbeleeving hearts formerly, and chide them,
upbraid them with this now, Oh vile heart of mine, did not I begin to say, Alas
I am undone, all i^ now lost, my hopes are now abortive? was not I sorry that
ever I was so engaged as I am? were it to do again I would be better advised?
did not I think newters which had never manifested themselves for God in his
Cause in a far better estate than I, and wish my self in their condition? how
has the Lord been dishonored by me? what secret pining and grudging thoughts
have I had even against God Himself, because of the various dispensations of
providence? Say now oh base vile unbeleeving heart, how has the Lord confuted
thee, and made thee to see thy shame and ignorance in believing sense rather
than faith?

Secondly, Has God bestowed reviving mercies upon you? then be willing to give
God the glory of them, and resign them up to him, upon thi^ ground, because we
have forfited them by our unbeleef: an unbeleeving heart forfits all mercies
before he has them; it is true God gives many precious mercies to sad, dumpish,
froward, discontented spirits, but you cannot have that comfort in your mercies
which others have because they are forfited, and though God through his bounty
lets you enjoy them, yet you are in fear continually lest God should take his
forfiture. Oh believe your mercies in the promise through the difficulties.

Thirdly, Remember the Covenants which you made unto God in the times of your
trouble, and keep them. It Is a provoking sin to break Covenant with God, God
complains of it against Israel, Psalm. 78.38. They flattered him with t^^ir lips
in making Covenants to him in their trouble, but they were not s^eadfast in
their Covenants. Oh how usual is it with men in any misery to Covenant largely
with God, and presently to forget what they have done! this is a sign of a
false heart, therefore take heed of it. Lay more wait upon your Covenants which
you make, if ever you mean to give God real praise for any mercy.

Fourthly, Consider how much better it is to give God the glory of a mercy
willingly, than force him to extort it from you in a way of wrath; God is
better pleased with active praise, than passive for his mercies; consider,
glory he will have for his mercies, Oh put not God to that trouble to force his
own glory so due to him, from you, if you give not God the glory of a mercy in
possession, he in wrath will take it from you: and had not God given us this
reviving mercy, it might have been our case to have been forced to give God his
glory in a passive way.

Fifthly, Whatever God c^lls for now, from you, be willing to give it up to him
freely; whatsoever we would have been willing to have given for such a mercy in
our misery, had God indented with us for it, let us be ready and willing to
give it to him now the mercy is come; had we known our danger and the miseries
which would have flowed in upon us had not mercy prevented, if God should have
said thus, What would you do? what would you suffer? what would you part withal
for me? and you shall be delivered out of this danger and possess the contrary
mercy? Then seeing God has given us such a mercy without this indenting, make
this an argument to come off freely in giving God that which he now calls for;
you have been (perhaps) in bodily fears and danger of death by some sickness,
now if God should have called for your estates, would not you have given them to
him? Do that now which you would then have done.

Lastly, Lay up against unbeleef for time to come. Has God remembered us in our
low estate? let us say with David, We will tr^st in him so long as we live, we
will never determine so as formerly we have, either against our selves or the
cause of God, we will never entertain hard thoughts of God more, but we are
resolved to do what belongs to us as creatures, and leave the success of the
business to God; apply this any way and it will be very useful: has God helped
us in any soul-trouble? revived thee in the depths of sorrow when God hid
himself from thee? lay up the passages of God toward thee in this case against
all the risings of unbeleef whatsoever, resolve upon this, that thy soul shall
rely upon him for help whatsoever becomes of thee, this is to give God the
glory of reviving mercies. Psalm. 18.1, 2. thus does David apropriate God to
himself and gathers strength from this to support him, David at this time was
in a great straight by Saul's persecution of him, that he gave all for lost, I
shall one day perish by the hands of Saul; but he soon recals himself again, It
was in my have, he said in his have the Prophets of God ( Gad and Nathan) they
are liars, they tell me that I shall be King, that I shall sway the Scepter in
Isra^l, but it is nothing so, I am like to be killed and betrayed every moment,
such enemies wait to catch me, and is it ever likely that I should fit upon the
Throne and be King? So, men in their have are ready to think that God will
forsake them, and leave his cause upon every frown and hard word which he
speaks; but David found a reviving mercy presently upon it in the 1. and 2.
verses of the 18. Psalm, where he praised God for that mercy, which formerly he
would not believe; before in this 2. verse he sets out God in way of praise by
eight titles, 8. Relations of God in Psalm. 18.2 with the Believers propriety in
them.
and all his propriety in them for strengthening of his faith. 1. My rock, 2.
my fortress, 3. my deliverer, 4. my God, 5. my strength in whom I will trust,
6. my buckler, 7. the born of my salvation, 8. my high Tower; from all these
titles of God as his, he strengthens himself. In all the Scripture I know not
such a short text so full for the strengthening of faith as this is: and it is
the special work of faith to make God to be ours in all these relations; Ps.
18.2. An eminent prop of faith.
Oh how beautiful would our praises for reviving mercies show could we but
exercise our faith thus upon all these titles of God as ours.

The real sight of deliverance from evil and the apprehension of This people
did make this use of mercy coming to them, What will God after two days deliver
and revive us? Come then, and let us return unto him, let us not any longer
stand out but come in, that he may revive us and raise us up. When the soul
sees mercy coming it beholds God outbidding all other temptations, and
over-powering all difficulties; when men by sense can behold mercy coming they
will then think it best to turn to God, happy are those who by faith can see
mercy coming a great way off and thereby are stirred up to turn to God, when
God lets such thoughts as these into the soul and settles them upon the spirit,
I am now in a very good condition, well and in health for the present, but
where may I be within two days? I enjoy peace and have every thing that heart
can desire, both for necessity and delight, but within a short time where may I
and these be? These are dreadful thoughts to consider of: But on the other
side, to believers these words are very comfortable and full of sweetness, I am
in great extremity of misery, but after two days they will blow over, then oh
where shall I be? in heaven, in joy and blessedness for evermore, at rest with
my Savior; dreadful are the meditations from these words to all the wicked, but
very sweet and comfortable to the Saints of God, as any text I know. This
consideration made Paul over look all his afflictions, 2 Cor. 4.^7. he thus
considered, '^is true, I am under great afflictions, but they are but light,
and it is but for a moment, and what shall I have then? An eternal weight of
glory. Therefore Christians should not be always poring upon their
afflictions, but look up to mercy, behold that which may comfort them as well
as what may discourage them; consider, that within two days God will raise us
up again, and this will mightily raise our spirits and quel the tumults in our
hearts; as we should be sensible of Gods hand to be humbled for our sins the
cause of it, yet should we take care that we do not destroy our selves by our
fears.

The apprehension of the death and resurrection of Christ is a special means to
help faith in the times of the greatest afflictions: Many things may help faith
in this case, but the consideration of Christ's resurrection is the chief: when
the soul shall exercise faith thus; I am thus and thus afflicted and in misery,
so was Christ and much more, although he were the Son of God, the first
begotten of the Father, and so blessed for ever, he was delivered up into his
enemies hands, scorned, persecuted, and contemned, nay, he was crucified and
put to a shameful death: but my condition for the present is not thus, but if
it should be so it is no more than Christ's was; in this his great misery all
his frinds forsook him, which aggravates their misery which are in straits, in
so much that those two Disciples which went to Emmaus said, We had thought that
God would have delivered Israel by this man: What a low condition did God bring
Christ unto? and yet this was the greatest work that ever was done, and such a
^ork as brings God the most glory of any work in the world; Christ therefore
become miserable for our consola^^^^
(...) the Church ever in a lower condition than Christ himself was? yet Christ
was raised and delivered out of them all, yea this was a special end why Christ
was brought into such a low estate, to be a comfort and a pattern for his
Churches, that may come into the same condition which he was in, and seeing
this is held forth unto us in a cleerer way than it was to the Jews under the
Law, we should make more use of it than they did? was Christ so low that the
wrath of God was upon him for satisfact^on even to death? this surely was a
very low condition; and now, is there any hope that ever he should be raised
from this? yea now was Gods time to show his power, and to diclare him to be
his Son, God be speaks his people in all their str^its thus, Did my power raise
my son in such a low estate? it is able also to raise you; as the Apostle
argues in the 1 Cor. 15. If Christ be not risen, the dead are not raised etc.
so from thence I also infer, That the Church must rise because Christ is risen;
if the Church does not rise, Christ is not risen; and if so, then our preaching
is in vain, and your faith is to no purpose; therefore raise up your sadded
spirits upon thi^ ground; well, Christ is risen, and I also shall rise with him
It was wont to be the salutation of the Christians in ancientt time, Christ is
risen: t^ ancient form of salutatio among christian
Christus resurrexit, Christ i^ risen: so the Saints may conclude though
brought very low, yet that power which raised the head will in his time raise
the body and make it glorious with himself.

And we shall live in his sight. As Israel was repenting so it was believing
Israel also: Faith an^ repentan^^ mu^ually act one another.
and as their believing furthered their repentance, so their repentance
furthered their faith; they were confident that they should live in his sight.

When God grants mercies to his people, he would have them of And this is the
scope of the holy Ghost in this text, however the Saints may seem as dead men
when wicked men prevail over them, yet when God gives rest and life they shall
be lively and full of spirit; God loves not to see his people of a sad fullen
pensive disposition, when that they have mat^er of the greatest joy in the
world.

When God is reconciled to (...) people, his face is then toward his he looks
then upon them and loves them, Apo^. 22.4. And they shall see his face. God
does nor deal with us as David did with his son, 2 Samuel 14.24. And the King
said, Let him not see my face any more. But if God be once reconciled all the
frowns in his face are turned into smiles, he is all lovely toward them.



Gods people account their life to be in Gods favor, not so much in what they
receive from God, as what they are in Gods favor and presence. Hypocrites
desires are only for the enjoyment of mercies, and if they obtain their desires
they are contented, though they have no presence of God at all in them: but the
Saints if they have precious mercies and no presence of God with them it
contents not them; if they have health and not Gods presence in it, if they
have peace and not their peace with God it satisfies not them; this is their
cry, Lord, let us hear thy voice, let me see thy face; Cant. 2.14
for thy voice is pleasant, and thy countenance comely.

When the Lord delivers his repenting believing Israel, he settles mercy upon
them, and settles their hearts in the possession of mercy. He does not only
give them hints, but real possessions of mercy. We are revived and raised, yea
but we may die again: No, we shall live in his sight, we shall live before him.
Mercies to the Saints are not the fruit of Gods patience, for then they would
not be settled mercies: But they are such mercies as comes from the Covenant of
grace, and so they come to be settled, therefore called, the sure mercies of
David, Isa. 55.3.

Faith is such a grace as raises the soul high and will not be contented with
small mercies. He will revive us, and He will raise us up; A carnal heart.
Is that all? No, but we shall live in his sight. It is an argument of a very
carnal heart to be contented with low mercies, when a man will be put off with
any thing: It pleases God very well, when his people will not be put off with
small mercies: Caution.
though it is true, we must be thankful for the least mercy, and content with
it in opp^sition to murmuring, yet we must not rest therewithal satisfied, but
if thy faith be true, it will expect more, and if it has got a promise from God
it will improve it to the utmost extent that the promise will bear, and when it
has one promise fulfilled it will look out for the answering of another; we do
not approve of such a craving disposition in a beggar, but God is much
delighted with it in his people,

Gods people rejoice much in this, That God sees them, they whereas it is the
greatest terror to the Hypocrites hypocrites
that God sees them, that they are continually in Gods eye, Job, 24.17. If one
know them they are in the terrors of the shadow of death, if man being a
spectator is so terrible, how much more is Gods eye? It Is no wonder they would
fain hide themselves from his presence, for the face of the Lord is against
them that do evil, but his eyes are over the righteous, and his ears are open
to their prayer; 1 Pet. 3.12. The Saints account it their privilege that God
sees them, and it is a very good sign of sincerity, when the soul is not afraid
that God should see him, when the soul can look upon the clear beams of the Sun
of righteousness without dazeling, simile
as the Eagle when she would prove her young ones holds them up in the sight of
the Sun and if they can endure the shining and look upon it, then are they of
the right

It is the great care of the Saints to walk as in Gods sight, and to have their
eyes in Gods sight, Psalm. 16.8. I have set the Lord always before me, because
he is at my right hand I will not be moved, I will not fear, I have set him
before me, this text is spoken chiefly of Christ as a Prophetical expression of
him.

And if Christ must be kept from falling, 2 Cor. 2. ult.
What we speak it is as in the sight of God in Christ, that is, what we say, it
is in the power and efficacy of Christ: but how comes this to pass, that they
thus preach? why as in the sight of God? We thus preach, his power enables.

The eye of God upon his people is their safety, and security. The forenamed
place testifies it, 1 Pet. 3.12. The eyes of the Lord are the safety and guard
of the righteous; simile
as a child thinks it self safe if it be in the parents eye; so the Saints
should look upon themselves very secure in the s^ght of God. A Philosopher
could say in danger of Shipwreck in a light starry night, A notable speech of
an heathen in danger
Surely I shall not perish there are so many eyes of providence over me. Could
a ^hilosopher say thus, and may not a Christian say so much more, that he shall
not perish seeing Gods providential eye is over him?

VER. 3. Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the LORD: His going forth
is prepared, as the morning; and He shall come unto us, as the rain; as the
latter and former rain unto the earth.


THIS Scripture is very full, and has much sweetness in it: As an egg is full
of meat, so full are these words of marrow and sweetness; and there is little
difficulty in them.

We shall know, if we follow on to know. (...) Incumbamus in id ut cognoscamus
Dominum.
[If] is not in the original, but it is thus read, And we shall know, and we
shall follow on to know. The word signifies to prosecute and persecute, to
follow one as eagerly as a man which persecutes another, and persecutes him, as
Paul did the Saints, with all intention and affection: when men thus follow on
to know, God will reveal Himself more. Luther applies these words to Christ,
and the Gospel revealing him, setting men's minds on fire by the truth so
clearly discovered, and inflamed with such love to it, that they followed on to
know it. But although these words have reference to Christ, yet first they are
to be understood of Gods delivering his people out of Captivity: Then they
shall know: What shall they know? that they shall live in his sight. When God
delivers them, then they shall know.

1. Gods faithfulness in his Covenant made to our fathers, What the saints shall
know when they follow on to know the Lord.
it is very little that we know of it now, but the time is coming that we shall
know it clearly.

2. The works of Gods wisdom, al working for his peoples good in their luster
and beauty.

3. The excellency of Gods power, how it overrules all things, and how it is
stretched out for the Saints good.

4. The mercy of God acting every way for their best advantage; we are now in
great misery, and our troubles increase, and we cannot see how mercy is working
for good; but then we shall know.

5. The mind of God we shall then know, that we are in darkness, not only in
our troubles, for the outward man, but in our spirits; it is very little that we
know of God now at the best, but we shall know him clearly.

6. The vanity of all worldly pomp, and glory, and the folly of all carnal
confidence; men are now ready to call the proud happy, and bless the works of
iniquity, and run to King Jareb; but then we shall know that God is able to
deliver his people out of all straits.

7. That it is not in vain for the people of God to seek him, even then, when
all humane helps and hopes fail, then they shall know that there is a power and
efficacy in prayer, as it is Gods Ordinance, to help them in difficulties.

8. The meaning of many prophesies which are now very dark and obscure, and yet
much sweetness in them for the Churches of God; and if this will be worth the
knowing, let men that know any thing be Judges.

9. The glorious purposes and decrees of God that he had from all eternity for
our good, God has glorious purposes, although we for the present know them
not, but we shall know them, there is such a time that all these things and
much more than these shall be revealed to them.

They shall know them, if they follow on to know them. [If] is not we shall
know if we follow on; then the sense runs thus; Does God reveal himself to his
people? and do his people lay hold of the opportunity? they shall If, thus, You
know and follow on to know: the meaning is, That when God begins to show mercy
he will go on to show more mercy; so that these words are a motive to turn to
God, or an expression of their confidence in God, God was now in the dark, his
presence was clouded toward them, and the enemies scoffed and mocked at them,
saying where is now your God? The people answer, We shall know our God again,
and he will discover himself to our comfort, but to your shame. The Notes are.

True penitents turn to God, that they might know God. As there must be some
knowledge before turning to God, so turning to God that we may know him more;
and the desire of knowing him should not be so much to deliver from hell, as to
be fitted thereby to do him more and better service: the hypocrite if he have
but as much service and knowledge to manage it as to attain his own ends he is
satisfied; but a gracious heart dares not do so.

No man can turn to God, but as Gods face is toward him: We cannot turn to God
except that God turn first to us, when he gives quietness who then can cause
trouble, Job, 34.29.

When God comes to his people in mercy he reveals much of himself unto them!
and according to the degrees of his coming unto them are the manifestations of
himself unto them, either more or less, he gives them something in this life,
an earnest penny at the beginning, and at death the full payment, the perfect
enjoyment of all promised good; faith can see a glory in God, even in the
darkest times, but in the times of light then it can see abundance of mercy.

dark, or wonderful negligent in the observation of the good things they enjoy
from God; Revel. 11.19. John who saw the blessed estate of the Church which it
should be in, he says the Temple of God, the Ark of the Testament was kept in
the holy of holies, and none of the people could see it, yet John saw the time
when the holy of holies should be opened, therefore it is said, that John should
prophecy again, Revel. 10.11. Rev. 10.11.
opened
not that he should arise again and prophecy, but the time is coming that the
Revelations shall be so clearly understood as if John had written a new
Revelation, according to that in Is^. 30.26. a Scripture parallel to the text,
the Lord promises when he binds the breach of the people and heals the
stroke of their wound, In that day the light of the Moon shall be as the light
of the Sun. Knowledge shall wonderfully increase, there shall be very glorious
manifestations of God, to his people, and this text in Isa. shows plainly that
my text has an eye to that time in which God will exalt his Church and make it
glorious in the eyes of all beholders.

The knowledge of God, is a very comfortable thing to the Saints; then shall we
know if we follow on to know; any thing of God makes gracious hearts to spring
with joy and gladness; such a soul looks not so much at the quantity, the
multitude of mercies which it enjoyes; as how much of those mercies it enjoyes:
It is the happiness of the Saints in Heaven, to know ^^d, and to have the
sight of God, and so it is here, This is eternal life, To know Thee and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent; not only to know him, but to know him as he appears
for his Churches deliverance: how many are there now in Heaven blessing God
that ever their eyes beheld these days? Nay certainly, should God but let our
forefathers out of their graves to see what a turn of things here is, and what
an answer of their prayers, they would be as men astonished, in a maze: If it
be so comfortable to see and know God in this life, what will it be in Heaven,
where shall be nothing to darken this sight of God?

Those that turn to God shall know God, and the more they turn, the yea, this
they may be sure of, what ever else we here enjoy. Dan. 9.13. All this evil is
come upon us; yet made we not our prayer unto thee, that we might turn from our
iniquities and understand thy truth. If we understand thy truth and turn from
our iniquities, we shall know more of the truth: the pure in heart shall see
God, Mat. 5.8. Oh the sweet light which purified minds enjoy, to these God
reveals his secrets and acquaints them with the mystery of his Covenant, Psalm.
25.14. of which the great Rabbis of the world are ignorant of, these things
are mysteries unto them; and this is the reason why they are so ignorant of
them, Because they turn not unto God, neither labor to know God.

Those that truly know something of God, desire to know more of him: As he that
is learned in something, covets after more still; and certainly, none but
ignorant people are enemies to learning: Learning
those that never knew the worth of it, these are they that cry it down;
therefore those which are contented with little, nay and think their little too
much sometimes, are of poor, mean, and base spirits, far from following on to
know the Lord.

A gracious heart is willing to put forth strong endeavors in the use of means
to increase and get more knowledge of God; he will slip no time, neglect no
opportunity in which knowledge may be increased; Dan. 9.13. This was Solomon's
prayer, 1 King. 3.9. Give therefore thy servant an understanding heart; in the
Hebrew it is, Lord give (...) a bearing heart. Though God had discovered
himself wonderfully, (...)
yet he desires that God would discover himself to him more: therefore they are
very foolish that think they know enough of God, and are contented with what
they know; it is a great blessing of God to have a hearing ear, and an
understanding heart: no marvail the Saints take so much pains to know the mind
of God, therefore what a fond opinion is it, and what a sluggish spirit does it
manifest to be sati^fied with that knowledge which has been before in former
times? therefore such speeches as these, What, shall we be wiser than our
forefathers? we are to bless God for the knowledge of our forefathers, and say
as Master Greenham M. Greenham.
did, I bless God for what our forefathers knew, says he, I bless God also
that has kept back some of his counsels for this generation to be acquainted
with. It Is an argument of a poor spirit to rest satisfied with small measures of
knowledge; the light three or four hundred years ago was small, and in these
days our light is poor and small to that which shall be revealed, it is very
little in the matter of worship in the ordering of his house, therefore had not
we need to follow on to know the Lord? therefore God forbid that there should
be any spirits scorn at the new lights which God discovers, therefore let us be
humbled for our ignornace and now begin to follow on to know the Lord; it is
true, there no new truth in respect of the word, but in respect of the
manifestation of them to us they mey be said to be new.

It is a blessed thing for a man or woman, to take notice of Gods revealing Oh
how happy a thing had it been for many of us, if when God first began to stir
our hearts we had followed on to know the Lord! How sad is it for many to look
back to former days? what glorious and sweet manifestations had they of Gods
love in former times? but through worldly cares and sluggishness of spirit have
lost all and are now in the dark, and cannot speak of God in any savoury way?
whereas many who are younger and have kept their communion with God, know more
of God, and are able to speak more sweetly of the goodness of God than they;
and you who thus know God in your youth, bless God that He has entered you
into this light, and make much of it; for as Christ said to Nathaneel, Joh.
1.50. Do thou believe, when I said I saw thee under the fig tree? Thou shall
see greater things than these. So do you bless God for what you do know, and
God will reveal more.

Those who follow on to know the Lord, may be encouraged that they The diligent
hand makes rich; it matters not though thy parts are weak, thy abilities mean,
thy failings many, if Christ be thy Teacher it matters not, thy weaknesses
shall not hinder his instructions; Christ teaches the weak as well as the
strong, nay Christ accounts it his glory to teach such; nay, the Father Himself
is not ashamed to instruct them; nay, Christ gives thanks to his Father that He
has revealed these things to babes and sucklings, Christ is a meek, gentle,
lowly teacher, very mild and loving, he will neither upbraid them with their
weakness, nor discourage them in their dullness; Christ here speaks to poor,
weak, burdened sinners: Who would be discouraged? Did not Christ teach thus
mildly? I will not upbraid for thy ignorance: No, to thy soul will he give
wisdom liberally, and infuse the principles of saving knowledge into thee:
Col. 1.10. Being filled with every good work, and increasing in the knowledge
of God. Great are the treasures of knowledge which a diligent Christian may
obtain. Psalm. 36.10. Draw out thy loving kindness O Lord, unto them that know
thee. Thou have some glimmering knowledge of God, some spark of Divine light;
bless God for it, go on still, and follow on to know the Lord, and then thou
shall know more. 2 Timothy 3.7
It is a heavy curse upon those women in Timothy, that they are always
learning, but never come to the knowledge of the truth.

That if this be thus, I fear it is my condition, that the means aggravares the
sins that I commit, and leaves me inexcusable.



One mecey makes way for another: a lesser prepares for a greater: God beholds
al things at once with one view of his providential eye, and it is his happiness
so to do. But the Saints cannot do this, they must know a little now, and more
at another time: And does not our times make good this text? The Lord will
grant one deliverance now, and another reviving the next day, and all to usher
in a greater: The Lord first smote us, and within two days he did revive us,
and the third day we lived in his sight, and since that deliverance we have
followed on to know the Lord, and God has revealed himself more in his power,
wisdom, and faithfulness; the vanity of an arm of flesh, and the outward glory
of the creature, and if it be not our fault we may know more of his workings,
if we would follow on to know the Lord. O that we had hearts to follow on the
Lord in repenting, believing, and turning to Him, He would follow us on with
mercies, and all the good that we can wish for one after another: God makes
wicked men to know more wrath; and the drops of his anger here, are but the
beginning of the deluge of miseries which are their portion, they sink, and
sink, and their sinking must be to all eternity: Oh the difference which there
is between Gods dealing with the Saints, and with the wicked! Though the Saints
may be under a cloud for the present, yet they shall know the Lord, the Sun
will appear again, the Lord will follow on his work, though we neglect ours,
and glorious shall the issue of things be in the conclusion; were it not a
glorious thing if a man had lived from the beginning to this day and might live
to the end of the world, to see what God did in former times, what God does
now, and what he will do to the end of the world for his poor Churches? The
Saints shall live to all eternity to see these glorious things; God did
glorious things in the first six thousand years, and surely the next six
thousand years shall be most glorious, but in eternity God will do most of all,
Eternity.
then the Saints of God those which follow on to know the Lord shall be put
into the real possession of all those glorious things which God has been a
doing from all eternity.

I come to the next words.

His going forth is prepared as the morning. Hierom Hierom.
conceived these words to be meant of Christ; he shall come as the morning,
being called the Son of righteousness, in loc.
the morning star; and he conceives that it may have reference to the title of
the 22. Psalm. A Psalm of David, to the chief Musicion upon Aijeleth Shahar,
that is the morning hind, to wit, Christ, who was sent forth as the morning
hind^, and hunted in his infancy and in his life, as the hind is pursued by
the hounds.

Expos.
If we take the words as they lie before us, they are an expression of Isreal's
confidence in God after a night of trouble, the word [prepared] signifies also
decreed, (...)
it is decreed upon as the morning, and the evening, and as the day follows the
night by a decree: Children when they see the Sun a going down will many times
cry because they think the Sun will never rise again; but if a man should do
so, you would think him very simple. Even thus it is with us, it is no wonder to
see wicked men in their straits crying out, we are undone, this darkness will
never be over, yet such is the baseness of our unbeleeving hearts who think
when the clouds of sorrow begin to arise, and blackness begins to cover the sun
of our prosperity, mercy will never break through, that we are undone, past
remedy, and there is no help for us, light will no more appear. But more
particularly; observe.

That the times of the afflictions of Gods people are night-times. This is
employed here; we may have a long time of sorrow and misery, a dark tempest may
overtake us, yet know, that a morning will come. They are called night-times
for three reasons.

Because of the uncomfortableness of those times. Darkness is very terrible.
Drexelius tells us of a young man, who being very fearful of darkness, God
striking him with a dangerous sickness in so much that he could not sleep,
tumbling up and down in his bed he uttered these words, If this darkness be so
terrible, what is eternal darkness? and this proved the means of his
conversion. Well therefore may affliction-times be called night-times, times of
darkness.

These are times that often take off men from service, from public and private
service. The night is the time in which the brute creatures which in the day
time keep close, then come forth for their prey. Therefore the Apostles
exhortation is seasonable, Let us work while it is called to day, before the
night comes when no man can work.

Night times are times of danger. Many of our brethren can speak this truth in
these times: When is the time that wicked men prey upon the Saints, and the
wild beasts go out to devour, but in the dark? So, when do men meditate upon
terror and create fears to themselves, but in the night of their afflictions
and sorrows?

The time of Gods delivering his people is the morning; the Psalm. 130.6. Ps.
130.6
My soul waits for the Lord, in the morning watch. Gods mercies after
afflictions are very sweet, as the light approaching in the morning is to the
laboring-man going to his work. When God has work for men to do, he expects
that they should go forth to it, and show themselves in it: as the Sun when it
rises begins to show it self in its brightness and glory,

The Church has no such afflictions upon it, but there comes a the morning will
come either to Churches in special, or persons in particular; and we hope this
time is a coming unto us, therefore let dominion be given unto the Lord in the
morning, yea and let dominion be given to the righteous in the morning, and
this seems to be the meaning of that place, Revel. 2.28. Rev. 2.28
To him that overcomes will I give the morning star: there may be great
contentions, opened.
grievous miseries in this night of afflictions, but be encouraged, To him that
overcomes will I give this morning star of comfort, and deliverance.

It is God presence which makes morning to the Saints, all natural as all the
stars cannot make one day light, some light they may give, but not day light,
but when the Sun arises there is day presently, so God may make some comfort to
a arise to soul by secondarie and inferior means, but it is Himself alone by the
shining of his face and the smiles of his countenance which causes morning.

Gods mercies to his people are prepared and decreed mercies. They are set and
determined, thy going forth is prepared as the morning, the word I showed you
in the Original signifies decreed, Jer. 33.20. Thus says the Lord, If you can
break my Covenant of the day, and my Covenant of the night, then also may my
Covenant with David be broken. Here we have both the text and the note from it,
the Covenant of Gods decree with day and night, morning and evening, called a
Covenant because it is sure and certain, so also is the Covenant which God has
made to Christ and to his Church, firm and sure, and this is a ground of strong
consolation to the Saints to consider, that mercies which they want are set and
decreed mercies, therefore with patience wait for them.

The Saints in the night of their affliction can comfort themselves in this,
That the morning is a coming. It is night yet, but the morning will come, it is
approaching; the assurance the morning is coming upholds the Saints spirits in
the night of their sorrows: the Marrener in tempestuous storms in the dark
night, the traveller in his wearisom and dirty journey comforts themselves with
this, the morning light is a coming; it is far better to be in darkness, and
know the morning light is a coming, than to be in the light, and to know or
fear that darkness is a coming, and light never to return more.

A little before the Saints deliverance out of their greatest disturbances of
misery and trouble, the darkness of their night is the greatest. As a little
before the dawning of the day, the darkness is the thickest, and the most
terrible; thus it was in Egypt a little before Isreal's deliverance, and their
return out of captivity, and this should mightily encourage us, not to be
disheartened in these times, though our miseries should increase, for the darker
the cloud is and the bigger it grows the nearer it is to its period, therefore
wait with patience.

Gods delivering of his Church is gradual, by degrees, not all at once; as the
day breaks by degrees, so the Saints shine gradually in their lives, answerable
to the light which God has let into them. We would have deliverance at an
instant, light, and perfect noontime presently; but this is not Gods way of
dealing with his people: a child does not know that it is day till it be very
light indeed; simile
but wise discerning men can see day at a little hole (as we use to say,) Oh
that we were so wise to discern Gods dealings, in the workings of providence
toward us. It follows.

His going forth is prepared as the morning. Text
And he shall come unto us as the rain. God glories much in this creature of
Rain, Rain
in so much that he wonders when men do not fear him who is the giver of rain:
They did not say in their hearts, let us fear God who gives rain: there is so
much of my glory in this very one creature, that men's hearts must be very hard
that will not give God glory for it; Jer. 5.24. God is styled the Father of
rain, this speech, the mention of it here has reference to that country in
which the Prophet spoke; to Canaan, where they had rain, not so frequently as
we have, but twice a year especially, viz. at seed time, to soften the ground,
and a little before harvest, to plump and fill up the Corn in the ear. The
Apostle James seems to allude unto this. Jam. 5.7. Jam. 5.7. illustrated
The husbandman waits patiently for the fruits of the earth, (so should we
for Gods time of delivering his people, Gods deliverances to his people shall
be as seasonable as the former and the latter rain) The Notes of observation
from these words are.

Look what the rain is to the Corn, so is Gods blessing to his people: Jer.
17.5, 6. hence we may see what poor creatures we are, having our dependence
upon such a poor creature as the rain is, in its self, and by the dependence
which we have on this creature we should learn to consider, what dependence we
have upon the infinite God for all the good things which we enjoy.

As the Church is parched and dried up without the rain of Gods blessing, so on
the other side, all the earth and flowers in the field are refreshed and a
beauty there is put on them; by the rain that coms from the Heavens, it makes
them to increase. And as the earth is not unthankful for the rain, Deuteronomy. 32.2.

Gods mercies to his people, are both seasonable and suitable: this promised in
the text, They should come as the latter, and former rain. The Lord comes to
wicked men in a general way of providence; but to the Saints as rain in
seed-time and harvest, with much fullness; how should this teach us our duty to
wait with patience upon God with the husbandman ( Jam. 5.7.) for the appointed
weeks of harvest? so should we till mercies come seasonably; if mercies should
always come when we would have them, they would prove judgments to us; that
which in its self is a mercy, coming untimely proves an affliction, God sent
his people Israel Israel.
a King, but he proved a heavy judgment to them: simile
if a woman should be delivered upon every pain and throwing she feels, what
misshapen birth would she have? It is Gods mercy unto you to prolong your births
till the full time: we cry out, Oh our troubles are great and continue long, we
had thought to have seen a period to these times, our wars at an end and peace
settled in our Kingdom; Oh know, that if they had ended sooner when we would
have them, what a plague would it have been to us? Saints experience in this.
how many that observe Gods dealings can say, that if such a mercy had come
when they desired it, they had been undone by it, it had ruined them; therefore
Gods time is the best time: hence we find that the Saints have often blessed
God when he has crossed them in their desires, and has denied them the thing
which they so importunatly desired: The Lord has sent us the former rain, at
the beginning of the summer in its season to prepare the earth for fruit; but
now there are scorching heats in the Kingdom, heats of displeasure in the
Country, in the City, nay almost in every family: Now let us with patience
wait, and the latter rain in its season will assuredly come.

Is God so seasonable in his mercies for us? Let us be seasonable and suitable
in our duty, Seasonablenesse commend duty.
as the godly man in the first Psalm is said to do: herein consists the
excellency of service, when it is in its place: Therefore it is no other but a
temptation of Satan that when men are called to exercise in their callings, they
are then stirred up to prayer, or hearing; but these are not the motions of the
Spirit, for they are seasonable; for God never puts the soul upon extremes, the
performing of two contrary duties at one and the same time. A note o^ a good
heart.
It is an excellent sign of a gracious heart, to account a season for service,
a mercy; and a misery to want an opportunity. Certainly it is a great judgment
of God upon a man, to be unserviceable in a season of service. Jude, 12. A
great judgment to be unservicable in times of service
Jude describing those corruptions of the Gospel by life and doctrine, in his
time, says, they were trees withered, twice dead, plucked up by the roots:
trees corrupt in the time of autumn, then when their fruit should come in.
Even thus it is with many men, at that time when God expects the most fruit
from them, show themselves most corrupt and vile. These are such as mightily
provoke God: Reproof.
and how many such have we among us at this day, who when God calls them to
service, manifest the rotteness which is in their spirits. Many when they are
in a poor condition think, Oh had I such a man's estate, what a deal of good
would I do with it? had I such parts and abilities as some have, and so much
time, and many oportunities given as they have, how would I lay them out for
God? Many that are now servants have many good resolutions, Oh what will they
do for God, when God calls them to it? O foolish hearts, who when they can do
nothing would do most, and when they may do most, do nothing at all.

Gods mercies to his people, are according to the variety of their necessityes,
the former and the latter rain. Toward the seed-time, they wanted rain, and
God sends it them; now let our duty be according to the variety of mercies, God
may call us to variety of service; let not us content our selves in that we
have don something, in such services we have had our heads, hands, and purses,
such and such have been idle, let them now appear; Oh say not so, be not weary
of well-doing, God has employed thee this day in one service, he has another
to do the next; be willing and ready to be set on work, and bless God he will
employ thee in service.

When God has begun in mercy with his people, he will go on with them, and
will not leave them. If God should give only the former rain, it would not
bring up the seed, the seed would not fructify and increase without the latter
rain: Faith will believe that God will not lose the glory of former mercies,
for want of succeeding mercies; Faith believes that God will never begin a work,
and there leave it.



Gods mercies to his people procure much good; They are not empty shells, there
is that good in them to the full, which they promise to have: these Notes are
observable from the words thus understood; but now put all the sense of them
together, and then they afford us two or three useful Observations more.

That Gods peoples deliverance comes from Heaven. They spring not out of the
earth, if ever Gops people are delivered there must be a Divine, Almighty power
put forth, else it will never be a deliverance in mercy.

Gods peoples deliverances cannot be hindered; no not by all the Why? because
they come from above, they are as the light of the Sun, and as the rain that
comes upon the earth: who can hinder the Sun from shining the rain from
falling? who can interupt night and day? so who can hinder the rain of mercy
from a people prepared for it?

We should make a spiritual use of Gods works, in his creatures: We

VER. 4. O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, what shall I do unto
thee? for your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew it goes
away.


LUTHER upon this place, Luthers Exposit.
carries on these words as a further expression of mercy to this people Israel,
and not in any way of reproof to them; as if the Lord had said to them thus: Oh
Israel, my people, I have been very good and gracious to you in the Land of
Egypt, and delivered you from that tyranny and oppression which you were under,
and I have been with you in the wilderness, and I have brought you into the
Land of Canaan, but what are these? all but temporal mercies, I have greater
mercies than these to bestow upon you, the Gospel it shall reveal other manner
of things to you. He carries it all along as in a way of mercy, but if this be
the meaning, then this objection will arise.

What shall we understand by the next words? your goodness is as the morning
cloud? how can this be said? Luther to this answers thus; Your goodness; that
is, the goodness of God which is yours by Covenant and purchase prepared for
you, this mercy of God shall refresh your parched souls, as the morning cloud
does the earth after a long drought; thus he carries it.

declined.
But the words, passing away, and their goodness being but as the morning cloud,
taking these together, the sense runs another way, viz. to a breaking off from
the discourse about the promise of mercy, to a convincement of the generality
of Ephraims and Judahs formality in their greatest pursuit of reformation; they
al passed away, as the morning cloud which vanishes away, and as the early dew
that comes to nothing.

And Jeroms.
Hierom thinks that it is Gods mercies toward them which does thus pass away;
he would not leave them quite without hope, they should have some mercy, but it
should not abide nor stay with them. But the genuine sense of the words I
conceive to be, The genuine meaning according to the English.
the generality of their formality in their pursuit of reformation, therefore,
O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? As if the Lord should say, you put me to
a stand you even non plus me in this thing, what therefore shall I do unto thee?

Obser.
Here in the general, we may observe the change of the Prophets voice, in the
beginning of the chapter it is all mercy, and their repentance sweetly joining
with the mercy promised them; but now he falls to upbraid them for their
hypocrisy, incorrigiblenels, and unconstancy in the ways of God; a very good
pattern for Ministers For Ministers
who have to deal with varieties of people.

But now, to open the expression of the words more particularly: [What shall I
do unto thee?] The manner of the expression is, either in a way of compassion
or expostulation; compassion, as if he should say, Oh Ephraim, it is in my
heart to do thee good, but nothing will work upon thee, therefore O Ephraim,
what shall I do unto thee? Like that expression in Isa. 5.4. What could I have
done more to my vinyard that I have not done? were there any other course
further to be taken, any thing else to do I would do it? Now from this sense
thus taken of Gods compassionating of them we may note.

That God does not willingly grieve the children of men; he is even

And so it should be with us, to those that are under us, Use all means before
correction.
as to children or servants, all means must be tried to prevail with them
before correction, exhort, advise, reprove, and pray for them, have you first
taken this course? else you can have little comfort in correcting them: this is
Gods way, though you perhaps see it not; God here meets with an objection which
repining Israel might seem to make, we are such as do believe, to whom the
promise does belong, why might not the Lord bring mercy to us without using
such means of smiting, wounding, killing, and parching of us? no says God, I
could not bring about mine own ends but by this way, Oh therefore let us check
our selves at such thoughts as these, God brings us low by afflictions, he
could do it by mercies, but then his end which he aims at would not be so fully
accomplished.

We should not think much to lose our pains in the use of means to others.



That it is a speci^l means to humble men for sin, to put them to it, to
consider what means they have had used to do them good. Would we be seriously
affected with sin, and humbled for sin? then go alone and call our souls into
examination, whether means have not been used sufficient to do us good?
consider what means they have been, judgments, national, domestic, and
personal: Mercies, reproofs out of the word, admonitions from friends, terror^
and checks of conscience etc. when you have done thus, charge conscience to
speak and tell thee the truth, Form of expostulatio^ with a man's own foul.
and when it does tell truth, give it leave to upbraid thee thus; what, so
unprofitable, so stout, and stubborn, so froward, and impatient, so unthankful,
and so unbeleeving for all this? This would be a singular means to show the
soul a view of sin in its colors. But alas most men put off and shun such a
course as this is, and the Devil he knows the prevalency and efficacy of such a
way as this, and he strives what he can to put the soul off from such a course,
and puts men upon such excuses as these, Had I such and such means as others
have, I should be more fruitful, I was reprooved, but it was too open, And of
men's excuses.
had it been in private and with more love, by such a one and in such a place,
it would have done more good. Infinite are the reasonings of a base heart,
either to put it off with the want of means, or some defect in the means, and
this is Satan's subtilty in the soul; but when the Lord comes truly to humble
the soul, that soul will charge it self home thoroughly for its sins, in all the
circumstances and aggravations of them.

What shall I do unto thee? notes unto us, that God was as it were in a
straight at this time about this people, the observation from them is, That
such is the perverseness of men hearts many times that God knows not almost what
to do with them: God was here even at a stand, he was fain to consult with
himself about them; see in other Scriptures how God expresses this, Ezod. 33.5.
Therefore now put off thy ornaments, that I may know what to do with thee: and
Deuteronomy. 32.5. They have corrupted their ways, they are a perverse and a coooked
generation. (...) Contortiss. of (...) Luctori contorquer i
The words there signifies the way of wrastlers, who wave up and down, that if
the one thinks to have the other here, he is winded the other way: so did this
people when God dealt with them this way, they put him off another way.
Therefore, Acts, 2.40. we are commanded to save our selves from this untoward
generation, such a people that none can do good unto; (...), a crooked piece.
no marvail then Gods Ministers are put to a stand with people many times, who
are so crooked and gainsying, like those in Christ's time, who put him to a
stand, they were so difficult and cross, that neither John nor Christ himself
could please; when John came they cried out of him, that he was ridged and
harsh, and when Christ came he was mild and gentle; and of him they said, he
was a winebibber and a friend of publicans and sinners, John had that which
Christ had not, and Christ had that which John had not, and yet neither of them
could please these.

But it may be objected, God knew not what to do,

To this I answer, that God was not bound to do this,

The condition of that people is very sad, when no means can do them good, then
that fearful judgment may be pronounced upon them, Jer. 6.30. Reprobate silver
shall men call them, because the Lord has rejected them. Ezekiel. 24.13. Because
I have purged thee and thou wast not purged; thou shall not be purged any more,
until I have caused my fury to rest upon thee.

It is a thing that goes very near the heart of God, to see those that are nigh
unto him to be perverse in their ways. What, for Judah to forsake me? It is
sad to find crosses and untowardness in Ephraim, but to meet with them in Judah
where my Ordinances are in a special manner, and they so near unto me, and I
so tender of them: it is much to behold of what knotty crabid spirits Gods own
people are? A piece of wood may be sound yet full of knots and very tough. What
goes nearer a man, than to find crossness in his wife, his children, or friend?
it is not so much from a stranger, as from one in relation. Even so God takes
the unkindness of his people to heart more, than the wickednesses of the
ungodly.

It is not enough to worship God better than others, if we be of perverse
spirits. This was the sin of Judah, because they had the Ordinances in a purer
way, and worshipped God better than Ephraim, Applicat. for Engl.
they thought they might continue in this their sin: Oh that this were not
Englands sin at this day: Let us be humbled for it that we may escape their
judgment.

For your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew it goes away.
(...) Benegnit^s miscricordia. Also Sanctitas pictas vestrum vel est ri. Vide
Kimchi of kercher.
Your goodness] That is, your kindness, or your mercy, as the word signifies,
in the Original it is [chesed] the same word which we have in the sixth verse,
your mercy, I will have mercy, that is, your piety, and godliness in the
strickt signification of it, but mercy in the large sense: The Seventy
Translators render the words, your mercy, your goodness: but why your goodness?
yours, because either of Gods goodness toward them, or their goodness, their
holiness which was in them: Gods goodness toward them; which is called ours,
sometimes Gods goodness, as in Romans 11.31. That through your mercy they might
obtain mercy; by that mercy which God bestowed on you, you may encourage the
gentile; to come in; 2. Their goodness: which is double, either to their
brethren, or their piety and holiness, both these were as the morning cloud, or
as the early dew that goes away. If the first signification of them be taken,
then the sense runs thus.

Gods goodness to them was as the morning cloud, that is, They by Bernard
Bernard
says, that the wind of their unthankfulness did drive away the floods of
mercy from them, much more the dews of mercy. Now God forbid that this should
be our condition, the clouds of mercy are over us, and the dews of mercy are
upon us, now should we by our sins drive these away from us, what a woeful case
should we be in? Therefore let us not only pray to have the dews of mercy, but
also the clouds to shower down rivers of mercy.

Though I do not think this to be the principal scope and sense of the words,
ye: it may be noted and afford us useful own goodness, which may betaken, 1.
more strictly for mercy and compassion toward one another; because in the sixth
verse God calls upon them so earnestly for mercy; notwithstanding all their
shows and promises of reformation it was but in hypocrisy, like those in Jer.
34.15, 16. of whom God says, That they were turned, and had done right in his
sight in proclaiming liberty to their servants, but they had polluted his Name
again, by causing those servants formerly set at liberty to return, and
bringing them into subjection; so that people which are for a time pitiful and
very merciful, afterward grow cruel and hardhearted.

Let us take heed of such a disposition which is so great an evil; App^i^,
we when together sometimes can join in love and unity, pitying each other,
and bearing with each others infirmities, bearing Christian admonition
patiently, but these good words and fair shows are vanished and come to
nothing, where are those refreshing showers of love and friendship which you
were wont to water each other withal in your Christian societies? In the room
of these there now grows nothing but the lusts of pride, passions, and sad
dissentions among us, which parch and dry up all these good seeds of love and
gentleness.

I desire to press this the more, because the Scripture is pleased to make use
of this expression of the dew, to set out the sweetness of a Christian spirit,
Psalm. 133.3. Behold, how good and pleasant a thing it is, for brethren to dwell
together in unity: How pleasant is it? It is like the dew of Hermon, and like
the dew that descended upon the mountain of Zion; as that refreshed the grass,
so is this affection of mercy and love in the Saints: He compares it not to a
dew that dried up presently, but to a dew which descended down; and there the
Lord commanded his blessing, Psa. 133. expound. Church Fellowship.
even life for evermore. There: Where? Even in the communion of his Saints:
This is spoken particularly of Church fellowship, Oh then take heed that your
mercy and bounty in releeving your brethren and persecuted Saints, be not as
the dew that passes away; the Lord has not made his mercy, no not his mercy
in dewing the earth as a morning cloud that vanishes away and comes to
nothing; Oh let not our mercy and love be only in shows and proffers withot any
truth and reality; our mercies should come like showers upon those who have
been parched with the burning rage nnd malice of the adversary: help those that
suffer for a good cause.
Now the Lord expects more from us in this duty than at other times, we must
not only pity them and give them good words, saying, Alas my Brother, and alas
my Sister, and no more, I would I could help you, the Lord pity you and help
you; you must not only do thus, but in actions and reality you must releeve
them with your money, and provisions. Is it not with too to many of us as it
was with those in James, 2.15. who say to a brother, Depart in peace, be ye
warmed and filled, but give them not wherewith to do it? what good does this
passing cloud do them? it is but an overture: but perhaps you will say, that
you have not been as an overture, a cloud passing away, you have bedewed the
Saints in their need, you have given something; but perhaps it is but a poor
pittance and that out of your abundance, know that this is not sufficient, it
must be a constant dew, and proceed on in degrees of mercy, we should rejoice
that God gives us an opportunity to show our love and mercy, and not think much
at it, doing that you do forcedly or repiningly; therefore let not our mercy be
as the dew that passes away. Thus much of the words in this signification of
mercy.

Now if we take the words in a large sense, as in Scripture they are often
taken, and in this place also, for their goodness and piety; and in this sense
there is much of the mind of God in the words, they are so full of marrow and
sweetness as can be desired; Now in that God should express godliness and piety
by such a word as mercy; Note from thence.

The necessity of this grace of love and brotherly kindness, in regard though
by nature men are passionate and rugged, grace will mollify them, of covetous
men it will change them to liberal and make them free-hearted, for grace is
part of the Divine Nature; Nothing is so communicative as God the highest good,
The more excellent the nature the more co^municative.
and according to the height of any creature is the communicativeness of it: as
the Sun being sublime and excellent is most communicative; so a gracious man,
has he parts? they are not for himself but for the Church; has he an estate?
he distributes and communicates of it to the Saints, and according as grace
arises in the soul, will communicativeness arise; a true Christian is not close
handed.

If grace has its denomination from hence, Then surely this When we use to set
out the whole of any thing by a part, we do not express it by an inferior part,
but in some thing which is eminent in it, as by prayer many times is expressed
the whole worship of God, as be that calls upon the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ
shall be saved. Romans 10.


As the morning cloud: and as the early dew.] In these words God charges this
people for three things in which their notorious hypocrisy was expressed.
Clouds and dew passing, what they employ.
For their vacuity and emptiness, their words were empty sounds, they were
clouds without water as Jude expresses it; Jude, 12. it is the high commendation
of Christians to be full of God, of Christ, and full of grace and knowledge: of
which Ephraim had a show, but it was but a show.



What shall I do unto thee Ob Ephraim? What shall I do unto thee Oh Judah?

We find glorious shows of reformation to come to nothing, as appears in these
many examples, 2 King 1, 9. and the 10. chapters, Jehu made great shows when
Joram asked him, Is it peace Jehu? he answered him, What peace so long as the
whoredoms of thy mother Jezebel and her witchcrafts are so many? And in the 10.
chapter, what a slaughter does he make upon the Priests of Baal? Well what came
of this? read but on in the chapter, verses 29. and 31. it is said, That Jehu
departed not from the sins of Jeroboam who made Israel to sin. What a cloud of
hopes was there in Ahahs time, 1 Kings, 18.39. all the people cried, The Lord
is God, the Lord he is the God, upon the miracle which was wrought by Elijahs
prayer, when the fire came down and consumed the sacrifice; but this all
vanished in the people, and for Ahab himself the text says, he did abominably
in following of Idols so that there was none like unto him, who sold himself
to work wickedness, 1 Kings, 21.26, 27. When the Prophet comes to him, after he
had killed Nabal and tells him of his sin, he falls down and humbles himself,
in so much that God himself takes notice of it, and upon it, pronounces a
transmission of his punishment, That he would not bring the evil in his days,
but in his sons; God bids the Prophet see how he humbled himself, and that not
in a show, as if his heart were not touched and affected, he did truly humble
himself in his kind; but now, was there no reformation followed upon this? No,
none at all, great men not easily reformed Theodos.
It Is very hard to bring great men to reforming: where have we such an example
since Theodosius the Emperor, who being a man guilty of rash effusion of blood,
coming upon a Sabbath day to the place of public worship and would have
received the Sacrament, Ambrose Ambrose
seeing him a coming goes and meets him at the door, and speaks thus to him;
How dare those bloody hands of yours lay hold of the body and blood of Christ,
who have been the sheders of so much innocent blood? Which speech did so
startle him that he went away and was humbled for his sin, and afterward came
and made his public confession and then was received in. Whence we may see,
that Kings, An Emperor may be kept back from the Sacrament.
yea Emperors have been kept back from the Sacrament. But did this humiliation
of Ahab come to nothing? If we look but into the 22. chap. we shall find him of
a proud hauty spirit, resolved upon his own will, contrary to the will of God,
he would go up to Ram^th Gilead, and when Jehoshaphat asked him if there were
not a Prophet of the Lord more that they might enquire of him, and he said,
there is one, but I hate him; and this was in the time of his humiliation. And
is it not thus with us? Applica
many times when judgments are upon us, how penitent are we and then humbled
presently? but if the rod be off us we grow proud and stout again presently. So
in Judah, what beginnings did that young King Joash Joash
make? in the 2 Chronicles. 24.6., what care was there taken in reparing the Temple,
gave commandment to the Priests and the Levites to gather money for the
building the House of the Lord, and commanded it to be done spedily, he was a
very young Prince, but very zealous, in so much that he blamed the high Priest
for his want of zeal, and verse 10. it is said the Princes and all the people
rejoiced and brought in, and cast into the chest; now what did this produce?
surely some glorious effect, mark in the 17. verse, After the death of
Jehojadah came the Princes of Judah and made obeisance to him (and what then?)
the King hearkened to them; they then began to get him on their side, by
complying with him, for the text says, that he hearkened to them, and then
wrath came upon them; it is very likely they said after this manner to him;
Consider who you are, a Prince, the head of a people, and you do all that the
old man Jehojada commanded; he was a subject to you, and you be commanded by
him, The Princes discourse to Joash.
and besides he is now dead and gone, therefore show your self a man, like a
Prince in your Kingdom, stand upon your own legs, be like unto the rest of the
Princes about you: Now such words as these might please the King, and be
hearkened to, and then they presently forsook the House of the Lord God of
their fathers and served groves and Idols, they forsook their Religion; while
they kept the truth it preserved them, and they followed the rule, but turning
from the rule what outrages do they commit? verse 21, 22. conspire against
Zaccariah and stoned him, the blood of a Prophets son is now nothing to them,
they can down with it, and the King stood and saw him stoned; Oh what a height
of sin is this young zealous Prince come unto! How many sad examples have we in
these our days which second this of Joash? Young ones of our times
how many young ones are there who in their youth give very good hopes but it
proves to be but a morning cloud, their timely beginnings, end in apostasy.
Another example we have in Amaziah in the 2 Chronicles. 25.2. Amaziah Amaziah
in the 6. verse had hired an hundred thousand of Israel to go to the war with
him, and for their hire he had given them an hundred talants of silver, now
after he had hired them, and paid them all their moneys, there comes a Prophet
of God and tells him, that he must not use a man of them, why says he what
shall I do for my money the hundred talents which I have paid the Army with? the
man of God answered, the Lord is able to give thee much more than these; he had
no security for it, but only G^^s word for it and that from the mouth of a man;
what now? Amaziah obeyed presently and separated the armies of Israel; But what
became of this? Verse. 14. after he returned from the slaughter of the Edomites
he brought the gods of the children of Seir and set them up to be his gods, and
bowed down to them; and the 15. verse, God sends him another Prophet, and now
see how the spirit of the man is changed; In the former verses the other
Prophet coms to him and crosses his design and turns his mind, and he hearkens
presently unto him, and obeys the command of God in that thing which was for
his present and eminent loss; but this Prophet speaks as mildly, with as much
love as possibly could be, and he speaks as much reason to him as a man can
desire: Why have thou relied and sought after the gods of the people which
could not deliver their own people out of thy hand? they could not rescue or
save their people from thee, and will thou serve them? yet in the 16. verse.
mark what he says, Meddle not with this matter, Art thou made of the Kings
Council? forbear, why should thou be smitten? Do thou know what a plot and
design there is in this thing? The Prophet forbears, but what follows? I know
by this, the Lord has determined to destroy thee, Because thou have done this,
Wilfulness after enlightening a note of d^structio^
and have not hearkened to my counsel. The truth is, when we see men unruly,
stubborn, and wilful, rejecting counsel, and very unreasonable in their way,
especially after some good workings and stirrings, it is a fearful sign God
has a purpose to destroy them: So that wicked King at one time could call the
prophet his father, yet how was he afterward enraged against him? Some may be
friends to the Saints at one time, and bitter enemies to them at another.

And as the Scripture is full of such examples as these, so also are
Ecclesiastical histories: It Is storied of Domitian Domitia^.
a most cruel persecutor of the Christians, who studied and inven^ed cruel
deaths for them, that when he came to the Crown could not endure blood to be
shed, no not for sacrifices. It Is also reported of Nero, Nero.
that for five years he was so pitiful and full of mercy, that when they came
to have his hand to the sentence of execution of a ^alefactor, He would wish
that he could not have writ, Quam vellem literas non didicisse.
that so he might not be used in any such thing; and yet where had the
Commonwealth of Rome, or the Church of God a more desperate enemy or cruel
persecutor? Oh that God would grant this may never be our case: What had we at
the first, Applic. to the Parl. of Engl.
in the beginning of the Parliament, how did they show themselves and did great
things? stood against Arbitrary government, impeached great ones, executed
justice upon a Peer or two? and kingdom
What a mighty spirit was raised in the countries to second and stand by the
Parliament! now where is the man that ever thought there would be such a party
of Lords and Commons found to join with a company of Papist, Atheists,
Malignants, and Irish Rebels, against the Cause of God and the Gospel, and
every thing that is truly good? Oh most horrid apostasy! that this morning
cloud which in the beginning shined so gloriously should thus vanish and come
to nothing! And for others that are not in public places, though perhaps not
so bad as others, And private men.
yet how cold and flat spirited are they? slack in their moving for public
good, private interest, self, and their own ends ruling in them, more than the
prosperity of the public; nay, so we can gain our own ends though with loss
to the public we care not: Oh what shall God do with us, who are such an
untoward people? Mutato nomine
Change but the name and this Scripture is ours, O England, what shall I do
unto thee? Your spirits for Reformation are down, you care not for a
deliverance, but are willing to crouch under your burdens; but let me tell you,
should these beginnings of reformation end as, and prove to be as the morning
cloud and early dew, we should be the most miserable people in the world,
losing the greatest opportunity to do our selves good that ever any people had,
and procure the greatest curse to our selves, and posterity that ever was upon
a people, the generations that are yet unborn may (if we lose this opportunity)
curse the time that we lived before them, therefore be encouraged to venture in
this work, and do you still own the cause, for God will own it, and never leave
it, that so the work may be finished, and we may say with the Saints, Lo, this
is our God, we have waited for him, and he has heard us; Isa.
we should consider that it is a mercy the Lord has made use of such false
spirited men in his work to do his people good by, and seeing the Lord is gone
so far in the work, let us entreat him that he would follow it on, and not only
bedew us, but even wet us to the root. It is Gods promise very remarkable in
the 14. chap. of this Prophecy and the 5. verse, I will be as the dew unto
Israel, he shall grow as the lilie: they shall have the dew, and be like the
lilly: but the lilly is a poor, weak, fading thing; but says God, I will
moisten the roots of it like Lebanon, my mercy shall be perfected toward them:
the Lord grant this promise may be made good to us. And thus much of their
reformation in the general, as it concerned the public State and Church

Now touching the particular reformation of themselves and their hypocrisy in
it: The note from thence is; 2. Reformation in particular persons. Obser.


That for any man to make good beginnings and overtures in the ways of God,
and let all fall again, and come to nothing, is a thing very grievous to God,
and dangerous to himself. Psalm. 78.36, 37. Nevertheless, they did flater him
with their mouth, and they lied unto him with their tongues, for their heart
was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his Covenant: what then?
ver. 58, 59. For they provoked him to anger with their Idols; God greatly
abhorred Israel, they were as a deceitful bow, hypocritical in all their ways,
which the Spirit of God cannot endure, for these reasons.

Reas. of the first part.
The Spirit of God is a holy Spirit; but this is a slight fickle, a very vain
spirit, no soundness in it.









Jer. 34.16. when they had let their servants go, and in an hypocritical
manner, called them home again, in this thing God says, they polluted his great
Name.



a steadfast life, and the life of every Saint should be like unto his; their
hearts were not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his Covenant.

Now as it is grievous to God and to his Spirit, Reas. of the 2d
so it is very dangerous to our selves. For,

We lose many an opportunity, many a soul-stirring, which

You that are so unconstant, shall never grow to any eminency Ruben, Genesis 49.4.
Unstable as water, thou shall not excel. Men that do but very little yet go on
in a constant way of godliness, though their parts be weak, and their
performances mean, many imperfections in them, yet going on they come to
something; but those who at the first do a great deal, run very fast in their
youth, and afterward grow cold again, are very bad; the cooling after heating
is very dangerous, as to the body so more to the soul.

This hardens the heart very much; when the spirit is cooled

This aggravates all other sinning; what, will thou sin

This spoils the acceptance of all our other services, be Lucida intervalla he
comes to himself and speaks sensibly and well; now if a man should see him at
this time he would think he aild nothing: so there are many who seem to be
eminent Christians for the present, but let a temptation come, or lust stir,
and they are overcome.

There is nothing will more d^mp the heart when it comes before God in duty,
than this unconstancy of spirit Go^ may say to thee, Oh soul, how dare thou
come be^o^^ in such a duty as this, when thou know thou a^^ (...) breach of
promise and falsefying Covenant with me? this will be an eating corrasive upon
thy spirit, God may say to thee, how can thou expect that I should be
constant in my mercies toward thee, when thou art so unconstant in thy duty to
me? this unconstancy toward God, brings wavering in faith, and unsetledness in
our confidence in God, the one makes way for the other; unconstancy in duty,
and wavering in believing; God shows himself to us, as we carry our selves to
him, To the pure, be will show himself pure, Tit. 1.15.

How should this stir us up to look to our own hearts, seeing they are so
fickle and deceitful? let us watch over and daily suspect them; John 2.23, 24.
it is said of the people, that many believed in Christ, because of the miracles
which he wrought; yet Christ would not commit himself unto them: so Deuteronomy. 5.29.
there is a people that made large promises to God, that they would walk in all
the Statutes and Ordinances of their God; now says God, this people say well,
they are good words, but Oh that there were such an heart in them! God regards
no work you do, except he find it rooted in you, John, 8.31. Then are you my
Disciples indeed, if ye continue in my words; no true Disciple of Christ
without abiding in Christ; all flesh is grass; that is, whatsoever is done by
fleshly principles, every duty though never so well done to the outward
appearance, if it come from a principle of flesh, it is but as the grass; and
as the grass withers and dies away so will these specious outside duties
vanish away; therefore look to your hearts, and above all keepings, keep it
very diligently, for if the root be sound the branches will be so too, and the
fruit savory which comes of it.

Means to persevere.
It Is a very dangerous thing to let beginnings to die; Therefore would you be
preserved from such an evil as this is, of fickleness and unconstancy? take my
counsel in these particulars.

Do not rest in sudden flashes and stirrings of spirit; perhaps at a Sermon
some truth or other that nearly concerns thee is pressed home upon thy
conscience and it begins to stir the heart and warm the affections, now do not
think the work is now over, or that the hazard of miscarrying to al eternity is
over; no thou must rise higher and go further than this, or else thou art
undone for ever; this is that rock upon which many poor souls split, and
overthrow themselves for ever: therefore look to your hearts in time.

Labor to get your hearts off from all earthly engagements; it is not

Take heed of secret sinning: secret sins will undo thee, if they simile
one moth in a garment may spoil the garment; one leak in a ship may drown the
ship; a penknife may stab and kill a man as well as a sword: so one sin may
damn the soul, nay there is more danger of a secret sin causing the miscarrying
of the soul than open profaneness, because they are not so obvious to the
reproofs of the Word; therefore take heed that secret sinnings eats not out
good beginnings.

Often take an account of your hearts how things stand with them; Paul did to
the Galatians, Where is now the blessedness which you spoke of?

Never trust your hearts after warmings with comfort and spiritual when thou in
any Ordinances have met with Gods presence, and he has shined upon thee in
love, if thou have got a smile from Jesus Christ at that time, have a care of
your hearts, and look for temptations and prepare for them; many when they have
good desires, and hopeful beginnings in them, think that the work is past, and
the danger is over, and and then for the most part comes a temptation of Satan
and incounters with them and they are basely foiled, and lose their peace
again, great consolations usually precedes great temptations. Mat. 3.17. when
God testifies that Jesus Christ is his beloved son, This is my beloved son in
whom I am well pleased, in the very next chapter, how was he led into
temptations? what a combat had he with the Devil? As after the greatest
mercies many times follows the greatest miseries: See how Christ thinks of
these temptations, all his glory and magnifficence could not put the thoughts
of his sufferings out of his mind: John 12.12. Christ comes riding in pomp to
Jerusalem, and the people they magnified him, crying out, Hosanna to the son of
David, yet ver. 27. he cries out, Father, save me from that hour.

When you find any stirrings of good desires to arise, any motion of the Spirit
to affect you, work them downwards to humble your hearts, making you base and
vile in your own eyes, that so you may grow downward in the root; it is very
dangerous when beginnings run upwards presently, but when they show us our sins
and unworthiness then they work kindly: If there be no moisture at the root of
the tree, though there be never so many blossoms they will die, vanish, and
come to nothing; so if your joys and secret raptures of soul are not moistened
in the tears of sorrow and humiliation they will blow off and be shaken down by
the next temptation; but when the inward workings of joy in the heart, do as
well operate to humiliation as consolation, when they work both ways, then
will not your goodness be as the early dew that goes away, and as the morning
cloud which soon vanishes? Psalm. 110.3. Ps. 110.3
opened.
it is prophesied that in the times of the Gospel Christ's people shall be a
willing people in the day of his power, Christ's power shall be put forth upon
his people to subdue their wills to the will of God, so that if we find this
effect of Christ's power in us, then may we be sure that our goodness shall not
prove as the morning cloud.

Rest not in stirrings and beginnings, except you find them to work therefore
as soon as your hearts begin to work, you should stop a little and ask your
hearts what of Jesus Christ is there in those beginnings; have I more of his
righteousness, wisdom and love than I had before? only such stirrings of heart
as bring Christ into the soul will hold and stand fast; that is very observable
which we read of concerning the Manna, Exodus 16.14. simile.
that the dew which was upon the ground that passed away, but the Manna that
stayed on still; so the good affections and desires which are in many are even
like the dew, which as soon as the Sun is up is gone presently; now if you would
not have the efficacy of them gone, try what Manna there is left behind, what
of Christ is strengthened, is your faith propped, your love increased, your
humility acted? then it is something; the Israelites could not feed upon the
dew, but the Manna was their nourishment; so how is it with you when the heat
of your desires and stirrings are over? can you then feed upon Christ this
spiritual Manna; look what word of promise is left in your hearts after your
stirrings are over, and how your hearts are affected with it; such as find the
promise remaining when the dew is gone and that these promises are as sweet now
as they were at the first working of the affections, such a soul will hold out,
and his righteousness shall not be as the morning cloud or early dew that
passes away.

VER. 5. Therefore have I hewed them by my Prophets: I have slain them by the
words of my mouth, and thy judgments are as the light, that goes forth.


THerefore have I hewed them.] We would think there were little dependence upon
these words, Conexio^.
yet there is a very fit one. Therefore, that is, because they are so fickle
and unconstant, so off and on, therefore have I caused my Prophets to deal
sharply with them to cut them to the quick; I would not have dealt thus with
them, but that I have no other way to take with them, seeing that they are so
vain, so slight in their spirits I deal thus with them, that if it were
possible I might fit them, and they might be brought to see what a God it is
they have to deal withal. The Apostle in Titus, 1.13. is commanded to reprove
them sharply that they might be sound in the faith; sharply, that is,
cuttingly, rebuke them cuttingly. My Prophets have been as an ax, [in
Prophetis] as an ax that cuts hard knotty wood, or as the instruments of
Carvers in stone, which cuts rough things. Seventy (...).
And have slain them by the words of my mouth; the seventy Translators carry
these words thus, Have slain the Prophets, that is, have hewn the Prophets; and
Hierom Hierom.
refers it to the time of Elijah, 1 Kings, 18.40. who slew so many of Baals
Prophets, and unto J^hu's time, that slew also many of Baals Prists, 2 Kings,
10.25. thus they carry it; and in this you have an objection answered that the
people might plead thus.



Obser.
That when God comes out against false Prophets, and appears against them, then
God looks especially that people should not follow them, nor do as they have
been taught by them. Ezekiel. 13.10. there is a woeful judgment denounced against
the false Prophets, for prophesying peace when Gods purposes were set against
Jerusalem, for destruction. Their judgment was, That they should not come into
the Assemblies of his people, and my hand shall be against them; (and mark,)
you shall know that I am the Lord God. They shall then know more particularly
that I am the Lord God, when my hand is thus out against them. It is a mighty
convincement of people, when they see the hand of God out against their false
teachers; and if so, how may the people of England be convinced of the evil of
that way they so admire and cry up, Applicat. for Engl. superstit. Ministers
when the hand of God is so heavy upon the superstitious time-servers and
maintainers of these ways?

But there are others who carry the word unto the good Pareus with some others,
and so in a twofold sense they are said to be slain.

First, In their charge. I have sent them (says God) to deliver my message to
this people, and they have flown in their faces and have killed them, and
destroyed them, and I account it as if I had done it, because I set them about
their work: and this was spoken at that time when the Prophets were grossly
abused, 2 Chronicles. 24.1.
when Zaccariah the Prophet delivered his Message to King Joash, and was slain
for it; and says the text, Acts, 7.52. Which of the Prophets have not your
fathers murdered? But now here is their encouragement against all the il usage
and the hardships which they meet withal in their work: I look upon it says
God as I doing it, I had a hand in it: therefore certainly God will not let them
go unrewarded. 1 Samuel 22.23. David said to Abiathar, Abide thou with me, fear
not; for he that seeks thy life, seeks my life: but with me thou shall be
in safeguard. David was the occasion of Abiathers fathers death, Consololation
to those Ministers and the friends of those that are perished in the Cause of
God.
and because of that, what respect had David of him for this? and shall not God
much more? So that, have you a friend, a brother, or a father slain for the
Cause of God, or in it, standing for Him? shall not God take his part? yea He
will. Ahim^lech was slain accidentally for the Cause of David, and yet he would
deal well with Abiathar: but says God, thy friend was slain, standing for Me,
and owning My Cause; he shall lose nothing by it, for I will deal well with
thee, and preserve thee alive for his sake.

I have slain them.] That is thus, Their Ministry has been a good death for a
Minister to die preaching. Pareus makes much use of this, Oportet Episcopum
concionantem mori.
says he, How much more honorable to die in doing Gods work, than by
committing sinful acts of intemperance, uncleanness, etc. they cannot spend
their strength better than in Gods service: O let that people who have such
Ministers look to it, that they bring forth fruit answerable in some proportion
to the cost that is bestowed on them: and if you take the sense thus, then God
seems to speak grievingly, Oh what shall I do with this people? what means has
been used, what losses have I sustained by them? I have spent many choice
Servants among them, the lives and strengths of such spirits have bin spent
upon them of whom the world was not worthy, Oh what shall I do unto such a
people! Surely such a people, enjoying such a Ministry had need look to their
profession: May not this be said of many Congregations in London? Congregations
in London.
has not God sent many choice spirits among you to do you good? and have they
effected the end for which they were sent among you? If not, woe to you: God
has a special regard unto this, when he shall spend the lives of his choicest
and most precious servants, and if he have not a considerable vallue and return
in peoples fruitfulnes it will mightily provoke and incense him against them:
God has an high esteem of his Ministers lives and strengths, they are vallued
more than so, to be spent and wasted upon unfruitful people, who neither care
for them nor their Ministry.

How the word slaies
Now the Word slaies in these two respects.

In its deonouncing of judgment upon men; for what the Jer. 18.7, 8. At what
instant I speak concerning a Nation, or concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and
to pull down, and to destroy, and when God promises mercy and good he is said
to give life; and we should look upon them as performing of it.

Isa. 11.3 It makes men of quick understanding in the fear of God; and God is
said to consume Antichrist by the breath of his nostrils, and by the Word of
his mouth, 2 These. 2.
the Word is of such a force that sometimes if brings death in a litteral sense
to some who withstand and oppose it, Ezekiel. 11.2. Pelatiah gives wicked counsel
in the City, and the Prophet is commanded to prophecy against him, and in the
13. verse we read that when the Prophet prophesied, Pelatiah died: so many
times God makes the Word so powerful in the mouths of his servants that it
strikes men dead presently: Gualter Gualter
has this Note from hence, that the power of the Word appears in this, that it
awakens, convinces, and terrifies the consciences of men, so that they go home
and make away themselves, and become self-murderers, and the truth is, it is
nothing else but the word working powerfully to the ruin and destruction of men.

Or the words may be taken hyperbolically; as men that Luther Luther
says that these words Thou have slain them, by the words of my mouth; that is
meant the Law, by the Law thou have slain them, and by the word Prophets he
says is meant, that part of Doctrine which is necessary to be preached, to
prevent the abuse of the Doctrine of the Gospel, which otherwise men would be
ready to pervert, and he further adds, that, those men which deny the use of
the Law were not fit so much as to be suffered; I mention this of Luther the
rather because those who deny the use of the Law urge him so strongly for the
upholding of them in their way. It follows.

Thy judgments are as the light. That is, passively, thy threatenings have
denounced against them; when the Prophet Jeremiah had delivered the message of
God to the Princes and the Priests they laid hold on him, and said, he should
surely die, Jer. 26.8. Now see what the Prophet says in the 14 and 15. verses,
As for me, behold I am in your hands, do with me as seems good and meet unto
you, but know ye for certain, that if ye put me to death, ye shall bring
innocent blood upon your heads; for of a truth the Lord has sent me unto you.
You think perhap^ that when the Minister is gone his words are gone and there
is an end of them; no, they shall lie upon you, and shall break out so
perspicuously that they shall clearly convince you; though formerly they
pleaded for themselves as they in Isa. 58. that let them be never so well
conceipted of themselves, I will discover them to be but a company of base
Hypocrites, I will then show you such clear demonstrations of the ways of
righteousness in which you should have walked, that all shall discern what you
are, it shall then appear as clear as the light wherein you have gone astray
from the rule.

That my power shall so appear upon them, that their righteousness and holiness
shall appear as the light. And then though my judgments were smart and tedious
at the first, yet you shall not repent it, you shall see so much good from them
which will make amends and pay all charges: Or thus, I have sent my Prophets
among this people for this very end and purpose, to make this people a
righteous people, and that they may manifest this as clearly as the light. And
thus you have the meaning of the words, the observations follow.

Inconstancy in the ways of Religion causes God to be incensed against a
people. Such men as are off and on, which make overtures in the ways of
Religion had need to have cutting truths preached to them; Therefore have I
hewed them (says God) by my Prophets; and as Gods Ministers must deal thus
with their people, so must every man in particular who loves his own soul, and
if so be ^hy soul be precious in thy eyes thou will willingly deal sharply with
thy self, say, Oh wretched heart that I have, to let such stirrings die, such
motions of the spirit come to nothing, do thou know whom thou have to deal
withal, the infinite great God? and for what thou have to deal with him, for no
less than eternity, and have thou stirrings of heart about this? and do thou
let them die? this provokes God.

Many men's hearts are like knotty timber and rough stones.

I have hewn them. And the longer men continued in their sins the knottier
they are; as timber which has lain long soking in the water is tough and
hardened; so men's spirits that are soaked in their evil ways, Oh how untoward
are they, and how hard a thing is it to fasten any thing that is good upon
them? so that when we see men's spirits tough, stubborn and hard to be wrought
upon think of this text, I have hewed them by my Prophets.

That this is spoken of a people whose goodness was as the morning cloud, and
the early dew which passes away: The Note is, That many people although their
goodness be but as the dew, soon off, yet their evil is hard and settled: the
goodness of many is like the A fit simile.
softness of a plumb soon crushed; but their wickedness is like the stone in
the plumb hard and unflexable; so that you may here see grace and truth does
not consist in good motions, stirrings, and desires, for these may be where the
heart is not melting, soft, nor tender; the heart is not changed, for were the
heart kindly wrought upon, it would kindly yield and buckle under the power of
the Word, when it comes against their sins, there would be a taking part with
the Word.

Gods Ministers are hewers. I have hewed them by my Prophets; Workmen, and here
Hewers, and that in these two respects: Either to prepare them for Gods
building, or to cast them into the fire, these are Gods ends in sending His
Ministers, His Hewers; now they hew all, good and bad, to take them off from
their own rootings and make them as beams in Gods building, or to be as an ax
laid to the root of their souls. It Is recorded that in the building of Solomon's
Temple there was no noise of knocking with hammers or tools, the materials
being prepared, fitted, and squared beforehand: so those which will be members
of Gods Temple hereafter, must be hewed and fitted for it here; therefore John
is said to be one sent to make rough things plain, to level great mountains,
mountains of sins, crabbed and rugged spirits.

Use, Ministers work difficult.
By this work you may see what a hard task the Ministers labor is, this made
Jeremiah to complain, when he saw the dullness and stupidity of the people,
resolved that he would speak no more in the Name of the Lord to this people.
The work of a Minister it is more laborious than the work of a Carpenter, as
Chrysostom Chrysostom
expresses it; for says he, the Carpenter when he has wrought hard all day he
goes home and comes again in the morning and finds it as he left it; but we hew
and take pains and leave our people, and come again we find them worse than
before.

That the Ministers of the Gospel when they meet with such rough, cross, and
untoward spirits must deal with them answerably.

I have hewed them by my Prophets, my Prophets have done their work upon them,
God seems to speak to the Prophets to bid them sharpen their tools, make their
instruments keen, preach sutably unto them, saving some with fear, as the
Apostle Jude speaks, verse 23. I wonder what people can say to this Scripture,
who cry out against Ministers for preaching the Law, when the text says
plainly, and save some with fear: therefore let those that are the Ministers of
the Word have a care that they sharpen their tools by the Word, putting an edge
upon them that so they may encounter with the greatest oppositions.

When the Ministers hew, God hews. I have hewn them says fire; so says God,
this man or this woman they are good for nothing, I Will throw them into the
fire: take heed, you who have stirrings and motions unto good, and yet have
your secret lusts, beloved bosom-corruptions, know that God may cut you down
for the fire, and thou may be already cut down for the fire, though thou
live in the bosom of the Church under the Ordinances; before thou art cut
down by death, as we may see, the figtree was cut down, yet had leaves for a
while, green and flourishing; know, it is possible that a man which makes a
glorious profession and performs many duties, yet may be but a vessel of wrath,
one cut down by the stroke of the Word by wrath, this cutting down, is like
unto that which we find in Luke 14.24. For I say unto, that none of those men
which were bidden shall taste of my supper; and yet these men had stirrings and
motions in them. Oh! the consideration of this should make sinners to tremble,
that it is possible for men, yea for men professing godliness to be cut down by
the Word of wrath, and that while they are living and well; When a man is cut
down
now God way be said to cut a man down for vengance when he in judgment
determines and secretly resolves against him, that no means nor mercies shall
do him good, now woe to that man against whom God is thus resolved and
determined. But that none may be discouraged and disheartened by this, but
awakened, know, that so long as God still strives with thee, and is yet working
upon thee by his Word, and by his Spirit, he has not yet determined against
thee, when not
thou art not past hope of cure, therefore improve the seasons, and do not
abuse this that has been said, let it support you from despair, but not
encourage you to presume.

Gods Ministers are Gods Tools; and as tools by working are wearing of it, so
will God also, not only reckon for the lives of his servants but also for their
strength and the weakening of their bodies by sweating and labor. Therefore
people had need to look to it, that their fruit may answer the cost God is at
with them; for know, that God sets a high price upon His choice servants lives,
and he will have a valluable consideration for them, either in you or upon you;
and woe be to you if God forces the price of such blood as theirs is in your
ruin.

Gods Ministers are Gods mouth to His people. I have slain them by the words of
my Mouth: Jer. 15.19. If thou take forth the precious from the vile, then shall
you be as my mouth. And look what is threatened by them, is threatened by God;
and what promise they open and press upon a soul in distress, is done by God
Himself, and it is to be looked upon as God speaking to thee in particular.

The Word of God is of great power, and full of efficacy. I have slain them by
the words of my mauth. The word is like a two-edged sword which smites every
way and does execution: every time men hear the Word it is for life or for
death, Deuteronomy. 32.46, 47. Set your hearts unto all the words which I testify
unto you this day, for it is not a vain thing for you, because it is your life;
it is your life which lies upon it, therefore look ye to it; so in Revel. 11.5.
And if any man will hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouths, and
devoureth their enemies: Though the witnesses be as Olive branches, yet if any
wrong them they must be killed by devouring fire.

But if the Word be of such efficacy, of a slaying nature, why should we hear
it?

The word flaies either the sin, or the soul.
When the Word comes, it will slay the one, either your sins, or your souls;
therefore if you would have your souls saved, put your sins to death: the
upright man need not fear coming to the Word; but such as are resolved to keep
their sins, the Word will slay both them and their sins too. It follows.

And thy judgmenes shall break forth, Text.
as the light that goes forth. Hence observe: That Gods judgments, while men
go on in a they sin and judgment appears not, and therefore they take liberty
and embolden themselves in their sins.

When judgments do come, they break out. Judgments were

God has His time to punish sins openly by His judgments; as

God will have His time to convince men by His judgments; then

Now Gods judgments may be said to break forth (to convince men, and) as the
light, three ways. How judgment convinces.


1. When the same thing threatened in the Word comes to pass.

2. When the judgment inflicted is suitable to the sin committed.

3. When it is executed by a remarkable han^ upon the sinner, then that
judgment breaks forth upon a man as the light.

Gods judgments are gradual. They break forth as the light,

There is much to be learned by the breakings out of judgment as the Isa. 26.8.
When thy Judgments are abroad, the inhabitants of the world will learn
righteousness. Mic. 6.9. The man of wisdom shall see thy Name: Hear ye the rod,
and who has appointed it. Pro. 28.5. Evil men understand not judgment: but
they that seek the Lord, understand all things: they shall learn much. Examine
your hearts by this, what you have learned by these judgments that are broken
out so clear upon us, that the greatest Atheist in the world may learn this,
That the Lord He is God, as the people cried out in 1 King. 18.39.

When God sends a Ministry to a people, it is to discover the way of God, and
of His Worship to that people; The Lord makes their righteousness to appear and
break forth as the light, and He will have His way and Worship to appear as
clearly as the light, His way shall not be in the dark to them.

When God brings a powerful Ministry to a people, the more powerful and sharp
that Ministry has been, if they do not turn, the more terrible and sharp shall
judgment be upon them. Your consciences shall echo upon this ground in your
ears, The Lord is righteous in all His ways, justly am I punished. Oh the sad
cries of many people in their sicknesses and deathbeds! How many times have I
been warned by the Word? but I slighted warnings, I did not regard them;
warnings have been no warnings to me, therefore justly am I in misery.



VER. 6. For I desired Mercy, and not sacrifice: and the knowledge of God, more
than burnt offerings.


THis being a great Scripture, having much of the mind of God in it, and much
difficulty in the understanding of it. Conexio^.
I read no further at this time. Here we have a reason of Gods severe
expression in the former verse, where it was said that God had hewed them by
his Prophets, and slew them by the words of his mouth. Why was God so severe
against them? it was, because he would not be put off with their sacrifices,
they boul^tered up themselves with these, objecting against the Prophet when he
pressed them to mercy and to the knowledge of God: Why, are not we abundant in
serving of God? burnt offerings are not neglected by us, and why should not we
be accepted? No says God, I desired mercy, and not sacrifice; never tell me of
your sacrifices and burnt offerings, so long as there is no mercy among you;
Therefore have I hewed them by my Prophets, and slain them by the words of my
mouth; you are so glued unto these outward things, that I must hew you off from
them. This sentence is most famous, quoted twice by Christ himself in the new
Testament, which we do not find of any place again, which notes the eminency of
it; the first time it is quoted you shall find in Mat. 9.13. and the second, in
Mat. 12.7.

For the meaning of of the words: Exposit.
For I desired mercy] the word signifies to desire and to will a thing with a
great complacency, or delight; as if God should say, mercy is a thing so
pleasing to me, that I desire it at my heart; the word in the Original is
fuller than is expressed in our English translation, (...)
nothing in the world is so pleasing unto me as mercy. There is Gods great
mercy in reconciling the world unto himself by Jesus Christ, and this is more
worth than all the sacrifices in the world; but this is not the mercy meant in
the text, Heb. 10.5, 6, Burnt offerings, and sacrifices thou had no pleasure
in, but a body have thou prepared: there is no mercy like this, the mercy of
God in his Son Jesus Christ. (...) Mercy goodness and rig^teousness
But the mercy here meant in the text, it is the mercy of man, and the word
here, mercy, is the same word in the Original with that in the 4. verse, your
goodness is as the morning cloud that passes away; so that I desire mercy,
that is not the mercy of God, but mercy to Man, and that mercy to our selves,
so Christ interprets it, in Mat. 12.7. I^ ye had known what this means, I
will have mercy and not sacrifice, ye would not h^ve condemned the guiltless.
As if Christ should say, God in some cases would have men provide for
themselves, though they neglect the keeping of the Sabbath, I will have mercy,
as to our selves so to others, mercy to men, either to their bodies or to their
souls; mercy to the body every one will grant, but it ought to be especially to
the soul: warranted from Christ's other quotation of these words, Mat. 9.13. Go
ye, and learn what that meane^h, I will have mercy and not sacrifice; for I am
not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance: This word mercy
Mercy.
is a synechdoche comprehending all the duties of the second Table under one, I
will have mercy, and not sacrifice; Sacrifice.
by sacrifice is meant synechdocically all instituted Ordinances and Worship,
all the affirmative precepts of the second and fourth commandments, all
Ordinances commanded them then, or that ever should be commanded them hereafter
are included in these commands; and this appears to be so by Christ's applying
of the text in Mat. 12.7. where it is applied to the sanctification of the
Sabbath, and in Mat. 9.13. there Christ applies it and quotes it under an
Ordinance, whether true or not, humane or divine, it matters not, the
separation of the Jews from publicans and sinners, it being unlawful to eat
with them, yet in a case of mercy they might, having thereby an opportunity to
do good to their souls; so that from these two texts you see a clear warrant
for the interpretation of this text.

Now in the further clearing of it, I shall answer some questions, satisfy
some objections, and lastly, raise certain observations.

What is an instituted Ordinance? There are natural Ordinances, and instituted
Duties: Now what is the difference between them? for natural worship, God
stands so much upon it, that He will have it before all kind of mercy; inform
us therefore of the difference of these two.

Natural Duties we understand, 1. Natural Duties
such Duties as we ow to God, as God, and to be performed by us as to a God:
Then there are other duties, to be performed by men, as unto men, which if
there had been no law to bind them to the performance of them, yet they would
be performed by men, and they were bound to perform them, they are radicated in
the heart, such Duties as the first Commandment binds us unto; Duties of
Natural worship.
To have no other Gods but the Lord, to fear this God, and Him alone, to love
Him before all, and above all, to trust in Him for help at all times: these are
Duties to be done as unto a God, Nature it self teaches a man to perform these
Duties.

Then there are Duties to be performed unto men, Natural duties of humanity
As honoring of parents, speaking the truth, not deceiving one another,
defiling men's bodies, these Duties are radicated in the heart, that were there
no Law of God to bind men, yet it were in men's hearts to do them: Natural
duties must not yield to mercy. 2. Instituted duties
Now these Duties must not yield to mercy. But for instituted worship, such
which if God had not revealed had not been duties, neither could men be bound
unto them: As for their sacrifices under the Law, by Bullocks and Goats, these
kind of sacrifices, were they not revealed by some Prophet to be the mind of
God they had not bin bound unto them: So for our Church Ordinances of
Sacraments, Christian Admonition and the like, are such as flow from Gods
Prerogative, and not so much from Gods Nature; the other duties lie in Gods
Nature and Holiness, and are to be performed unto Him as to a God so holy.

But how did God say here, mercy and not sacrifice? did not God require
sacrifice as well as mercy?

Yea, God did require sacrifice as well as mercy:

1. I will have sacrifice, but not without the spirit: Sacrifices without the
spirit joined with them are nothing worth; when spiritual worship is joined
with their outward sacrifices then they are accepted of, instituted worship
separated from natural worship is regarded.

2. Not sacrifices to make atonement for their sins. The people thought by
their sacrifices to make atonement for their lives though they were never so
vile and base; but says God, I will not have it thus, I will have it only
typical, in relation to Christ; but they left out Christ in them: therefore
says God in this sense, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice.

3. Not sacrifice. That is, of your own; They had many sacrifices of their own,
which God did neither require, nor would He accept them from them. I will have
mercy, and not etc.

4. Not sacrifices. That is, such as are injuriously gotten: the Jews were a
very oppressing, grinding people, they would be much in sacrifices, but it was
out of the rights of the poor, they would oppress and grind the poor and then
think to make up all again by their sacrifices, in this case I will have mercy
and not etc.

5. Not sacrifices; that is, comparatively, mercy rather than sacrifice; this
negative in Scripture is often set out for half the thing it self, as in Prove.
8.10. Receive instruction, and not silver, and the knowledge of God rather than
fine gold. Receive instruction, not silver, that is, rather than silver, Gods
requiring of knowledge does not forbid men seeking estates, but it shows us
rather that knowledge is to be chosen before it. So Paul is sent to preach the
Gospel, and not to baptize; that is, rather than to baptize; for Paul did
baptize in some places: so says God here, I will have mercy and not sacrifice:
that is, let me have both, but if both cannot be had, let me have mercy of the
two, I do so much delight in it that if I cannot have mercy and sacrifice
together, let me not miss of mercy.

Why should God require mercy rather than sacrifice?







The Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath: Now this cannot be said
of Natural worship, of the duties of fearing God, loving of God, trusting in
God.

Gods command argues more self-denial than to be offering up to God sacrifices,
it puts a great honor upon the creature to offer up sacrifice to God, because
then man has to do with God in an imediate manner.

Mercy is, Aeternae veritatis, it is an eternal everlasting duty, it

Sacrifice is a typical duty for the obtaining of the pardon

Because sacrifices are but to further us in natural duties:

What are these cases in which God will have mercy and not sacrifices?

The principal cases are these ten. Answ. in 10. Cases


Sometimes in the case of a beast he will have mercy and not sacrifice; if a
beast should be in danger of losing its life

In case of mercy to the poor; and that I conceive to be the either in
superfluities, or for the maintenance of Gods true worship, as to hinder them
in their benevolence and charity to the poor, no Ordinance of God should hinder
us in showing mercy to the least member of Jesus Christ; although those which
are next us ought to be first relieved, yet know, it is a shame that others
should be neglected and forgotten, yea it is a reproach to the ways of God,
that profane men should be more liberal to the poor, that more hungry bellies
should be fed and naked backs clothed by them than by those which profess
Religion and would seem to honor God most; do not you think this will be
sufficient to excuse you before God, when the cry of the poor shall come up
before him, that you have been at such and such charges for the Ordinances, and
for Gods worship: no in this case God will have mercy.

That he which forsakes not father and mother for my sake and the Gospel, Matt.
10.37. Christ's speech of neglect of parents expounded.
and follows not me, is not worthy of me. Here now is a mistake in this, Is not
worthy of me, that is, if your parents should counsel, advise, persuade,
entice, or command you to the practice of evil to the omission of any good, to
the breach of any command, and upon your refusal they should be angry with you,
that you will not obey them, but follow the command of God and not go out of
Gods way, in this case father and mother is to be forsaken for Christ and the
Gospel, but in no case if they stand in need of your help; this is grounded
upon that text in Mark, 7.11. by Mark, 7.11.
which text I shall open to you, but ye say, If a man shall say to his father
or mother, It is Corban, that is to say, a gift, by whatsoever thou might be
profited by me; he shall be free: Now what is the meaning of this word Corban?
Corban.
The word signifies a gift consecrated to God; now the Jews thought that if
they could say the word Corban, they were exempted from all duty to their
parents in this kind; it is true, I had an estate, but I have consecrated it to
God, and Church services, and though I owe duty and respect to you as my
parents, yet more to God, as my Creator: this is most vile and abominable, and
reproved by Christ himself, Possidonus in the life of Austin Austin.
reports that Austin condemned parents, who used to give their estates away to
Monastries, and pious uses as they thought, and neglected their children: so
for children to neglect and slight parents in the time of their necessity, and
think to excuse it with this they have given to the Church, and now they are
not able to do any m^re, this will not do it; and this was the old way of
Papists, to get people to give to their Mother, the Church. I find cited a
tradition by some of the Jews used by them, when they fell out and were
thoroughly angry one with another, they would tell him he should never have any
benefit in any thing which they had, and this they called Corban, and this in
Mat. 15.5. is called a gift, The gift of the Altar: therefore some of the
Heathens forbad this Oath Corban; and yet this was the Oath that these did
swear by, and by some is used (upon the matter) even at this day as an Oath, as
thus, when any that we have relation unto, having thoroughly angered us, we use
to say, well, you shall never be a penny the better for me, this is no other
than this oath Corban which they used to swear by in this place.

In the case of the good of souls, and this is Christ's case, Mat. 9.13. Go ye
and learn what that means; I will have mercy and not sacrifice, for I am not
come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance: though men ought to
prize Ordinances, and to set a high esteem of Gods worship, yet if it should so
fall out, that instituted worship and mercy to souls come together, and both
cannot be done together, instituted worship may be left undone so not slighted,
and the work of mercy to the soul must be vallued before it: we are ready to
think that nothing must give way to instituted worship, but certainly immortal
souls are of more worth than Ordinances. Paul was of such a disposition, that
he could wish himself out of Heaven and become an Anathema for his brethren,
that souls might be saved.

Solomon sent ships to Tharshis to fetch gold, which were it not for this text
I could not see any warrant there were for that employment of Navigation;
Navigation.
when men shall be three or four years out perhaps and never hear Sermons, nor
receive Sacraments; and yet it is lawful upon this ground, that God will have
the peace of Sates and quiet of Kingdoms preserved and maintained, he will
rather suspense with men in the use of his own Ordinances, for the prosperity
of Civil States: therefore Solomon is not reproved for sending Ships to Ophir
for gold.

Canaan, that they enjoyed any settlement than they were circumcised again, and
had the Passover which before they could not partake of; so that in some cases
and upon some grounds the people of God may be without Ordinances, and that for
a long time, and yet without sin to them; and upon this ground in the text, I
will have mercy and not sacrifice: therefore this may be the reason of those
words which Christ spoke to His Disciples: I have many things to say unto you,
but you are not able to bear them: so may we say, Christ has many truths to
reveal which yet people are not able to bear, therefore he withholds the
revelation of them until that time.

Matthew, 7. verse, If ye had known what this means, ye would not have
condemned the guiltless: yet, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice. Gods care
of the bodies of men is such, that he will rather have men do the one than the
other, He will rather have mercy than the duty: Christ does not plead here for
the Disciples, that this was not a breach of the Sabbath; but the case was such
that their bodies required it, it was a case of mercy, and now God would rather
have mercy than the duty: A servant perhaps thinks much to stay at home to tend
a child, or look to the house upon the Lords day, he objects, Why should not I
go to the Church? Is not my soul of greater worth and price than this child, or
this house? Now these people go upon a good principle; yet here they er in
their acting of it: as to instance; A father commands his child to do two
services for him, the one to wait on him at the table, simile
the other to make clean his shoos; to wait upon his father at the table he is
willing to do, because this is creditable, but the other he grumbles at and is
disconted: now in which does he show most obedience in? Surely in obeying of
the meanest command. So God requires of us two sorts of Duties, one the more
honorable, the other more mean, yet perhaps the meaner, a work of mercy: God is
wonderful careful of our bodies, God careful of the body.
and would have us also careful of the bodies of others, men ought not to
massacar their bodies, God does not require weak sickly bodies, to spend whole
nights in fasting and prayer: God in this case will have mercy, and not
sacrifice of us.

Mercy in case of our own estates. But here some may say, Numb. 9.13. If a man
were in a journey, and in the mean time the Passover were to be delivered, he
might go on in his journey, and do his business, and yet no sin to him. So may
we, if in a journey or special business, if not on purpose we go about this in
slighting or contemning of the Ordinance, we may go on in our business without
sin, God will have mercy.

Acts, 8.1. There was at that time a great persecution against the Church which
was at Jerusalem, so that the Church was scattered and could not be together to
enjoy Church Fellowship, and yet it was no unto them; Church assemblys not
always safe
it had been an unjust charge if any should have come and said, What, do you
prize your lives so highly, and fear the loss of them, more than the
Ordinances of God? will not you join together in Church Fellowship and constant
assembling your selves together, because you think you shall suffer by it? No,
in such case, God will have mercy, and not sacrifice.

Nehemiah, he being the Kings Cup Bearer he must attend it, and when he was to
go up to Jerusalem by the Kings leave, when he had finished his work he returns
to the King again to serve in his place, though he wanted the Ordinances there
in the Kings Court, which he might have enjoyed at Jerusalem, yet that he might
be more serviceable in the Churches Cause he is contented to deny himself in
his own comforts. These are the cases, with others of the like nature, in which
God will have mercy, and not sacrifice.

I shall answer some Objections that may be made against this.

But men's hearts are deceitful, and they may pretend cases of mercy when there
is no such thing in hand.

steward has not every thing given him in a particular command by his Lord,
but only general rules given him to order particulars according to prudence,
faithfulness, and zeal, 3. virtues requisi^ in a steward
for the exercise of these three graces are required in a steward: Prudence and
wisdom, faithfulness and trust, care and zeal, in all these. So does God give
general rules for the ordering of a Christian life, and these general rules
being observed, particular cases are to be ordered, in prudence, 1. Prudence.
faithfulness, 2. Faithfulness.
and zeal; 3. Zeal.
wisdom to judge, faithfulness in doing, zeal to keep up life and spirit in
action, and where there is a miscarring through frailty God will have mercy.

But it may be asked, Can any duty of the sec^nd Table be more

The duties of the first Table, are to be understood,

But if Gods Ordinances are duties, can they he omitted at any Are they duties
or not duties?

For answer, Take notice, there are two sorts of Precepts, semper, and ad
semper, always and at all times, but an affirmative does bind only semper, but
not ad semper, always, but not at al seasons; at one time we may omit a
thousand actions which are to be done, but we cannot do many actions at one and
the same time, therefore for affirmative duties, if they be done in their
season, God accepts of them as done continually; as for that command, Pray
continually; if it be done in its season God looks upon it as done continually,
and always done; if providence should so order it, that another duty be
brought to be done at this instant, that duty which I was going to perform
cease then to be a duty to me at this time; if two good things come together,
the one can be done but at a time, so that the other is not a duty at that time
to you, which otherwise is a duty, else if this were not, man would be
necessitated to sin, and all the grace and mercy and assistance of God could
not help in this case, if that two affirmative precepts must bind at the same
time, to be done, therefore this must be remembered for a truth, that when two
^ffirmative precepts come together, the one is a duty to be performed, the
other not.

Instance.
But what say you to the case of Daniel, when he knew that the writing was
signed, he went into his house and prayed more earnestly, Dan. 6.10. Might not
he have saved his life according to this rule? I will have mercy and not
sacrifice; yet his was a sacrifice that he tendered up to God, it was more than
a prayer.

Answ. Daniels case special.
Daniel at this time was called to manifest Jehovah to be the true God, for he
was forbid at this time by a Decree, to pray to any God, or ask a petition of
any man save of the King, in thirty days: now had he done this he had denied
the true God, and acknowledged Nebuchadnezzer to be God; the thing he had to
profess was higher than the sacrifice, it was a duty of the first commandment,
a manifestation of God to be the true God, and the case coming thus, who is the
God that must be praid unto? Daniel resolves the case saying, I Will pray to no
God but the true God. And surely in this high case, profession is to be made
whatever becomes of mercy, yea in a lesser case of sacrifice than this, if it
comes to profession, it is turned from a duty of the second Table, to a duty of
the first, and must be done as a duty of the first; as thus, Suppose a man be
forbid the doing of such a duty which formerly he has constantly performed,
and held lawful, and his forbearing of it shall be to them a testimony of his
denial of that truth which he formerly held, in such a case he is called to
suffer the hardest things that can be, yea life it self, if it come to it,
rather than to omit that duty, or to do the least thing that may be, which to
the enemies of the truth may interpretatively be a sign of denial, the doing of
such a duty against such a command is a witnessing to the truth, and not
offering up of sacrifice; it is not always that a man is called to this, but if
it ever come to this case, interpretatively to deny a truth of God, then must
we suffer, rather than obey in such a thing, though never so small: and this was
the case of the Primitive times, they would rather suffer the loss of life,
estates and all, than do that which interpretatively should be a profession of
the denial of any of the least truth of God. Tertulia^. De Corona miletes.
Turtullian reports of a Soldier who when all the rest of his fellows carried
Baies on their hats, in testimony of their worship to the false god, he carried
a sprig in his hand, and being asked the reason why he did so, he answered
thus, I am a Christian, and this manifested him to be so, and being further
questioned about it, he at the last suffered for it rather than he would yield.
How many among us would think this a small matter, and had it been their case
they would have done it, yet this man considering it was a note of distinction,
chose rather the loss of life than yield to do it; and this act of his was
approved of by learned and godly men, to be lawful; if we should have lived in
those times as many of our forefathers did, that the question should be, who is
a Christian, or who is not? and this by way of distinction the case is
different changed from a sacrifice to a precept and duty of the first
commandment: there was a time that the Saints would not assemble together
because of the persecution, Acts, 8.1. but at another time they would not
forsake joining together, whatever become of them; when their assembling was
made a note of distinction, who was a Saint, who not, who held for such a
truth, who would not, in this case for them not to have assembled together had
been a great sin in them, and interpretatively a denial of the truth.

But if God will have mercy in case of outward things, saving our estates and
preservation of our pers^ns, rather than his own Ordinances, Is not this to
prefer the body before the soul? etc.









But is not a man bound to part with much of his estate, yea and to suffer much
for the enjoyment of the Ordinances?



But when may it be said to come to a case of unmercifulnes in which God will
have mercy and not sacrifice?



it is impossible, to give particular rules in every thing, this is left to the
sanctified prudence of the Saints.

But is not this the justifying of, and consenting with those that took

I answer, No;

But is it not a greater mercy to enjoy Ordinances, than estates, we

Certainly the mercy is very great,

But yet know that the maintenance of the subject is to be

To be serviceable in public use is more than to enjoy Ordinances; Paul would
have been content to have been Anathema for his brethren, the being of public
use for the Churches good was a greater good to him and more in his esteem than
private. Thus far of the objections, the observations follow answerable to
these, Ten.

That carnal hearts who make little conscience of their duties toward men, and
are very cruel in their dealings toward them, yet may be contented, to submit
to instituted worship: This very Scripture, I will have mercy, and not
sacrifice, is a secret rebuke unto such people as these; such were those in
Jer. 7.4. who cried, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, yet very
wicked in their dealings, Isa 58. those Hypocrites they could be content to
submit to instituted worship, frequent in solemn duties of fasting and prayer,
yet were such as did smite with the fist, oppress, and grind the poor. Ezekiel.
24.21. Ezekiel. 24.21.
the sanctuary was accounted their strength, opened
the excellency of their strength, and that which their eyes did pity, and yet
these very wicked, and in the 28. verse their minds were on it, their hearts
did love it, yet themselves carnal.



2.
Because it has the most show of the power of godliness, they seem to be as
sincere as any in their worship, there is a great show in the flesh, in the
outward man; whereas Gods worship is inward, soul worship, which carnal hearts
cannot endure, nor do they desire it, it is outside worship which they prize;
now God forbid that any should have low conceits of Ordinances because wicked
men join in them.

Carnal men by joining in outward Ordinances think thereby to satisfy their
consciences. Thus did they in this place, think to put off God and their own
consciences by living in the external acts of worship, and yet live in the love
of known sin; what a deal of stir had the Prophet to convince these
Hypocrites of this their wickedness?

God and men's consciences will not be put off with this; God will despise both
it and them: the Heathen gods would not be put off with such outsides, Plato in
Alcitiade
even the Heathens had such a conceit of their gods: one says, What a vile
thing is it to think, that the gods will be put off with gifts? no, these are
despised by them, they look that the souls should be just: Seneca
And another says, It is not fat sacrifices, but inward performances that God
looks at.

The Lord has a high esteem of mercy; and it appears in this, an acceptable
sacrifice, and a sweet savor in Gods nostrils. Phil. 4, 18
Chrysostom Chrysostom
says, That he had rather work a work of mercy, than a miracle: and surely
that must needs be high in Gods eyes and esteem which he paies so dear for.

Oh Christians! immitate God in this, Use Exhort, to mercy.
let your esteems of mercy be raised higher than ever before, from this that
you have heard concerning the excellency of it. The works of mercy are gloriou^
works, there is more in such acts of mercy, than in those acts of religion
which men think are more spiritual: I speak the more of this, because it is a
scandal which is laid upon godly men by the men of the world, that they are
miserable and close handed; now in this we should labor to convince the world
by the practice of mercy.

It is the Christians skill, when two Duties come together, which to This is a
snare in which many Christians are caught and foiled, they think both must be
done at the same time, when as the one is the duty, the other not.

Though the object of an action be spiritual, yet it is not a sufficient The
Ordinances of God have God for their object, and the enjoying of communion with
him, yet in other actions which may be only natural I may show more obedience
to God in the doing of them, than in offering up of sacrifice.

If Gods own Worship may be forborne in case of mercy, how much Oh what a vile
spirit is there in those men which will not suffer their superstitious vanities
to give place to mercy, men must be undone in their bodies and estates rather
than their wills be disobeyed; the Prelates faction have confessed themselves,
that the Cross, the Surplice, and the rest of that trash were their own
institutions; yet Ministers must be silenced, bodies imprisoned, families
starved, and thousands of souls destroyed rather than their wills should not be
fulfi'ld; Oh the intolerable pride of these men, had they been Gods
institutions, yet in this case they might have been forborne, what did these men
say in plain English but thus much? Let Christ never be revealed to millions
and thousands of souls, rather than these ceremonies shall be omitted or
neglected.

Certainly he will have mercy rather than disputing about sacrifice. Suppose
there be a truth in that which is disputed about, yet God in this case will
have mercy rather than sacrifice, rather than mercy shall be neglected he will
have sacrifice omitted; we have Ordinances and plenty of preaching, but the
Lord knows how soon we may be deprived of them, let us not dispute and wrangle
away our mercy.

But must we not enquire after truth, and at this time also?

As in young converts
as thus, when young converts are taken off from fundamental truths, and led
into errors, and souls hindered from coming in to Christ, in this case we
should abstain from contending.

Instance
But young converts must abstain from all appearance of evil, and labor to
come to the knowledge of Christ's will in every point.

Romans 14, 1, urged,
Romans 14.1. Him that is weak in the faith, receive you, but not to doubtful
disputations: Now let no man say, the point was a case of indifferency, some
would eat herbs out of conscience, others would forbear; now certainly it is a
sin to do that out of conscience which God does not regard, nor command; the
thing it self here was indifferent, yet in this case they must not receive them
to doubtful disputations: now, if not to doubtful disputations, then surely not
to disputation to hold up error, and to ensnare and betray young beginners in
godliness, Acts, 15.24. There were troublers crept in among them, who were
formerly of them, and they labored to subvert their souls: The word in the
Original signifies, (...)
as if a man should have been packing up wares in a fat to send beyond the
Seas, and there should come another and scatter and undo all again which was
packed up; or as Soldiers who have packed up their artillery, their bag and
baggage, and all forced to be undone of a sudden again; so did these false
teachers, that did unvessel them, scatter, and bring them all into a confusion,
so they labored to subvert them from the faith.

If the duties of inward worship and mercy to men be preferred before God is
contented, that we may perform our duties to our brethren, to forbear his own
Ordinances; and what shall we stand upon our wills and humors? Oh proud spirit
that exalts thy self against the Lord; we must be content to deny our selves
very far for the public good, and our brethren, because in this case God is
pleased to indulge with men so far, as for a time to be without that honor
which he should have from men in their acknowledgment of him in public service.

As God is contented to forbear his Worship, let men also be contented but let
there be peace and quiet maintained by us, we should indulge and bear each with
other in such cases, of mercy especially, there should not be the urging of
lesser things upon tender consciences with that severity as to undo them,
though they be Gods Ordinances.

But if this be so, then what hinders but men may do what they list?

No. be urged, as to undo the other party that oppose; certainly such a
practice as this, is contrary to the rule of mercy in this text; but men must
unsatisfie themselves presently, and lay down their opinions upon such a day as
shall be appointed them: Is not this cruelty?

Instance
But you will say, It is sufficient that learned and godly men hold this opinion,
they find sufficient to satisfy them, and we may mistake.



It follows.

Text.
And the knowledge of God, more than burnt offerings. Expos.
For the understanding of these words, I shall, 1. Answer some Questions, and
then give you the Observations.

What knowledge of God is it that is here meant?

Isa. 53.11. By his knowledge, shall my righteous servant justify many.

Why is the knowledge of God joined to mercy here? was it not full enough
before, Mercy, and not sacrifice?

If I should give al my goods to the poor, and my body to be burnt, it were
nothing: so if we be never so merciful and ignorant it avails nothing; others
have much knowledge yet very rugged and hard hearted, now when these are
separated God regardes them not, but when mercy and knowledge meet together
then are they pleasing.

Why is knowledge only named here, when as there are many duties

Because both of the excellency and necessity of the knowledge

Because many are very much exercised in instituted worship,

Why is the knowledge of God put after mercy, it being better than

The knowledge of God is not set after mercy,

But why is it said burnt offerings, rather than peace offerings, and sin
offerings which we read of?

Because these have more respect unto God than other offerings have (as has
been manifested to you at other times,

The duties of the first and second Table are to be joined together. Mercy, and
sacrifice, knowledge of God, and burnt offerings when in their place are
acceptable, therefore let us take heed of separating that which God has joined.

The knowledge of God is a most excellent thing. This is that which sanctifies
Gods Name, and manifests him to be very glorious in the world; Paul accounted
all things but loss and dung in comparison of the excellency of this knowledge
of Christ.

Ephesians. 4.18.

Men may be very diligent in instituted worship, and yet very ignorant: none so
acted in their instituted worship as these people, ye^ none so ignorant as they.

That you are forward in instituted worship it is your commendation, but take
heed this be not your sin, to be ignorant of fundamental things. It is the
great design of the Devil to set up the man of sin, to keep men in darkness and
ignorance; many who think themselves, and would be thought to be opposers of
Antichrist, even in this, by their questioning of fundamentals of Religion, and
disputings about their new Opinions, they raise him up; when as the truth is,
it is the way the Devil uses to darken the truth of Christ and Religion, by
casting a vail over it, therefore you that are guilty of this distemper, take
heed though you have light in some things, yet take heed that a vail be not
drawn over those things which do more nearly concern you, and are of greater
consequence.

Soul-worship must be preferred before all other worship: we must not give God
a carrion service, a carkeise without a soul; strong are the expressions in
Scripture which are used against such outside, formal worship, Isa. 1.11, 12,
13. God professes of them, that he regards them not, he is full of them, his
soul loathes them, they are iniquity, and a trouble to him, they are looked upon
as a burden to him, such as God will hide his eyes from, and when they make
many prayers, he will not hear them; in this one Scripture we have fourteen
expressions against outside, formal duties, Isa. 1.11, 12, 13. there are 14.
expressions against formality
besides those four which we find in Isa. 66.3. Thus you have the mind of God
in this short, but full sentence.

Now God forbid that what has been said out of this Scripture should be abused
to liberty in a sinful way.

VER. 7. For they like men have transgressed the Covenant.


HEre is an argument, that mercy in the former verse is to be understood in a
large sense: Why? Because it is the very substance of the Covenant; they have
been hard-hearted, cruel and unmerciful, and thereby they have transgressed the
Covenant: I am merciful in the Covenant, and my grace is free and full to
sinners there; but they have transgressed the Covenant by being cruel and
unmerciful, for they like men have transgressed the Covenant.

Like men] That is, like Adam, these men have sinned after Adams transgression;
Romans 15.14. speaks of those who had not sinned after the similitude of Adams
transgression: But these, as they have old Adam in them, so they have dealt
with me as he did; and as he for his sin was cast out of Paradise, so these men
have deserved to be cast out of Vatablus, and Tremelius Vatablus and Tremel.
and others, read the words thus; They have broken my Covenant as a man, they
thought that I had been as their fellow creature; as they made it their
practice to break covenants with men, so they thought to do with God: so they
have transgressed my Covenant. This sense may be taken, and so the note of
Observation would be seasonable.

That the cause of breach of Covenant with God, is, Obser.
because we consider not that it is with God that we make our Covenants.

But the words are more usually read, as in our books, But that is, Not as I,
who like a God have kept Covenant: but they like such men as themselves, i. e.
weak, unconstant, frail, unfaithful creatures have transgressed, Job, 31.33.

They like men, (implying the common frailty of humane nature) have
transgressed?

Answ. (...)
No, it is rather an aggrav^tion of their sin. Therefore the word here translated
Men, is used for man in his corrupt estate, for weak men, frail men, not men at
their strength, but weakness, and so distinct from that which signifies,
generous and strenuous men; and so the comparison is not only between God and
man, but between the several degrees of men.

(...) 4.
Or thus: They have transgressed my Covenant like men. That is, not like my
people. Saints that are of my Church, they have not transgressed my Covenant
so. Their ways have been the ways of ordinary men, and as such they have
transgressed my Covenant. The two last senses are principally meant here.

Covenant with God 3 fold. 1. with Adam. 2. with Abraham. 3 with Israel
My Covenant] The Covenant of God we usually divide into two parts; but the
Scripture to me seems to hold forth a threefold Covenant: the one of Works,
that which was made with Adam in Paradise. The other Covenant is that which was
made with Abraham, the Covenant of Grace, the tenor of which is this, I will be
thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee. Then there was a Covenant which
was made with them upon mount Sinai. Now the Covenant here cannot be meant
imediatly of the Covenant of works, nor of the Covenant of grace, for this
Covenant here employed, is one especially made with them, and therefore must be
understood of that at mount Sinai, made many hundred years after the others,
yet it has reference to that of Works, and of Grace.

And were this knot rightly understood and untied, the Antinomians and we might
easily be reconciled; for we grant that Believers are delivered from the Law in
respect of the power of it, as condemning; from the riger of it, but not from
the duties of the Law; for the things commanded in the Law were duties before
the Law was given, the Law was written in the hearts of the Saints from the
beginning. But the opening of this point would require a whole Exercise, and I
shall reserve this to some other time.

Now then the Covenant which they transgressed, Expos.
was the Covenant at large, but especially that Covenant which God made with
them when they came into the Land of Canaan.

They transgressed] the word is, They went over it, They transgressed. (...)
the Covenant was betwixt them and their sins, and they went over it to their
sins, the banck was not high enough to keep them and their sins asunder.

There] they transgressed the Covenant, There (...)
there in that good Land of Canaan into which God had brought them, and given
them possession, so the Chaldae.

Again, There they transgressed the Covenant, Psa. 14.5, ibi tinuerunt; i. e.
tunc
there when God had hewed them by his Prophets, and thought to work them to
good.

Lastly, There, that is, in the Covenant it self, and that in

They dealt treacherously] The Greek renders it, (...)
they have despised me; they have forsaken me, and chosen other lovers, and
left me; even as a woman leaves her own husband to whom she was engaged and
goes to other men. It notes, the hearts joining to some other rather than God,
so as to be willing to leave the Lord, and either out of affection to some
other, or for private advantage, to forsake God and his Cause, to promote and
further that which is against God. The Notes of Observation from the words are
these.

That it is Gods goodness that he will please to enter into Covenant It is made
an aggravation of their sin here, that they did falsify the Covenant, the love
of God in entering into Covenant with such mean worthless creatures should
command duty from us in the most difficult precepts that are, and that with
willingness.

God is constant in his Covenant with men. This is in opposition his Covenant
with the strength of a Giant, Dan. 9.27 expounded (...)
Dan. 9.27. And he shall confirm the Covenant with many for one week: The word
there signifies, he confirms the Covenant like a Giant, or a mighty strong man;
they as weak men break Covenant with me, but I with strength confirm my
Covenant, therefore David says, 2 Samuel 23.5. Yet he has made with me an
everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure, it is immovable.

Man's nature is very weak and unsettled.

They like men have transgressed the Covenant. We must not lay too much upon
men, for when they are most unfaithful they do but like men, Oh what folly is
it in men to forsake the eternal God and run to the creature! We trust our
servants in our businesses, and shall we not trust God much more? the Word
says, all men are liars; nay, every man in his best estate is vanity. Psalm.
62.9. God is our refuge: men of low degree are vanity, men of high degree a
lie: if they be laid in the balance, they are lighter than vanity it self.

The apprehension of our obligations to obey, should keep us within Covenant.
Oh never let it be said, that our sins are so strong as to break Covenant, to
get our own desires; it is a sign of a most vile wretched spirit, so to desire
sin, as to break over this bond of the Covenant; think of this all you that are
so easily overtaken with sin; when a temptation comes to any sin, say thus,
such a sin I would have and my desires are after it, but did I never Covenant
against it? and what, shall I be so wicked as to break my Covenant for it?

The breach of Covenant with God, is a most grievous aggravation of our sin; it
provokes God highly against that people or person, there have they dealt
treacherously against me, Deuteronomy. 29.24, 25. Why has the Lord brought all this
evil upon this people? Then men shall say, because they have forsaken the God
of their fathers, and the Covenant in which they were bound to him in. What
cause have we to bless God that he has not destroyed us for breach of Covenant
with him? why should not our condition be the condition of this people here in
Deuteronomy? had God turned his hand and let our enemies prevail this might
have been our case.

God expects something from his people which cannot be done by every they must
not plead they are flesh and blood as other men, God would have you more than
men, you must remember that you are Saints and Members of Christ, and therefore
must live as the redeemed of the Lord, in the first of the Corinthians, 3.3.
Are you not carnal, and walk as Men? 1 Cor. 3.3 explained
The Apostle rebukes the Corinthians for this, God looked that they should walk
beyond other men, and that which the Apostle makes the ground of his reproof,
they make their excuse; Jesus Christ descended from on high, to this end; to
purchase a peculiar people to himself that might honor him in the world beyond
that which he has from other men; we should live as those which have the
Divine Nature in them, we should beware of passion and anger, even as God is
slow to anger: how far are those from doing any eminent thing for God, which
cannot deny themselves in their wills and passions, and have not so much as
humanity in them?

If God at any time give us hearts to keep Covenant with him, it is we have not
that power of our selves, therefore bless God for this mercy.

Men may go on in multitudes of services and yet be Covenant It Is possible for
a man to have committed the sin against the holy Ghost, and yet be a professor
of Christ and and the Gospel; therefore we had need look to our hearts.

Many times in those things which we seem to be most Religious in, But may this
be in the duties of Gods worship? yea, thereby this may be; thus, When men
shall think by this to cover any sin they live in, by their performing of
duties, this is treacherous dealing and playing false in the Covenant.

The sins of the Saints which break Covenant with him are sins of other men's
sins are rebellions against God, but theirs are treacheries.

The want of the right knowledge of God, is the main cause of breach 11.32. And
such as do wickedly against the Covenant, shall be corrupt by flatteries; but
the people that do know their God shall be strong, and do exploits. Who shall
be corrupted by flatteries? those that know God? No, they shall be strong and
do great exploits, such shall be employed by him in his work.

There can be no keeping Covenant with God, where there is unmercifulness to
men: let there be never such professions and expressions of Religion in words,
if there be cruelty and unmercifulness there can be no keeping of Covenant with
God, Heb. 3.10.

The consideration that it is God that we break Covenant withal, is a humbling
consideration. It is against Me who am their God, who have protected them from
dangers, delivered them in straights, it is against Me that they have thus
sinned; as a man that should bring up a poor child and take care, for him, and
when he comes to years, this child should abuse him and wrong him, would not
this be ingratitude and unkindness indeed? so the consideration of what a God
it is that we break Covenant withal, does wonderfully set forth our unkindness
to God.

VER. 8. Gilead is a City of them that work iniquity, and is polluted with
blood.


WE read in Numb. 32.1. of the Land of Gilead which was on the other side of
the river, which Reuben and the false Tribe of Manassah possessed, in it were
diverse Cities of refuge, which were the Cities of the Levites, and one of them
the most famous which had the name of the whole Country, was Gilead: which thing
is usually among us at this day, that whole Countries receive their names from
some eminent place in that Country, as Northampton, Northamptonshire,
Leicester, Leicestershire: in this City of Gilead the Priests were, and should
have been holier than the rest, but it was polluted, and from thence the rest
of the places of the Kingdom.

The word translated [They have wrought] is drawn from a word that signifies,
they have wrought iniquity, that is, vain things. And is polluted with blood,
or supplanted with blood, or overturned with blood; (...) Agere cum energia and
effectu, Pagn.
the Levites which had their abode there have undone the City, how many Cities,
are supplanted and overturned by the Priests which live in them, by their
cruelties, and by their distinctions and subtle pretenses for sin and
wickedness? they have supplanted these Cities of refuge: these Cities of refuge
were for those which had shed blood at unawars, they flying to them were
secure: (...) Vanitas.
but these Cities were supplanted, and polluted; now this was done these four
ways.

1: By taking those in which were wilful murderers, (...) Supplantata, Hier.
when as the City was for the shelter of those which had killed any by accident;
now these men they would judge wilful murder to be but manslaughter (as we call
it) and I wish our Kingdom be not deeply guilty of this sin, English guilty of
blood, by calling murder manslaughter.
even by this distinction as it is used, when men in their passions shall make
nothing to kill a man, and this shall be accounted for manslaughter; certainly
God will never account it so, but even willful murder.

2. By refusing to take in those, which of right they should, except they had
good store of money to give them, when some that were poor came to be let in,
they would refuse them and put them by, and by that means they were often taken
by the pursuer of blood: for these priests were to judge of it.

3. By casting those out which were in, and could not be gainful to them, and
many times they did deliver those out to the avenger of blood, when they should
have protected them.

4. By their cruelty to those that would not join with them in their false
worship; perhaps they might some of them be men of tender consciences and could
not join with them in their superstitious worship? now these Priests perhaps
would make complaints of them to the Magistrate, that they were troublesome
persons and bred divisions, and by this means they got them out of the Cities
of refuge. And has not this been our case of late? thus they supplanted these
Cities of refuge. The Notes of Observation are,

That through man's wickedness the best Ordinances of God for the good of his
people are corruted and abused. These Cities of refuge were for special use,
Ordinances of God set apart for the saving of blood, and they made it a means
and instrument for the sheding of blood. The Sacrament is an Ordinance set
apart by God, for union and communion; and what does more separate from this,
than the abuse of this Ordinance? men's coming unprepared separates tender
consciences from joining with them: so likewise in Civil Ordinances for men's
outward good, how have they been perverted? where have they tyrannized more,
and used more cruelty and injustice than in those Courts of Justice, where
Justice should have been done? and such as should have seen equity performed,
were the greatest instruments of oppression and mischief.

We must not always judge of places as heretofore they have been. Gilead was a
City famous for Gods worship, yet now how defiled with blood. So in Rome, how
famous was it for the worship of God? yet now it is become the very filth of
abomination.

Places set apart for Gods worship, and Religion, if they are corrupted, they
are the worst of all others. Gilead a City of refuge, yet where was there ever
such a defiled and corrupted place as it was? Universities.
so in our Universities, and Colleges, what superstitions, and vanities did
abound among them? even like Augeus Stable, a place of filthiness, and
vileness, and this is no new thing, Greg. Naz.
for Gr^gory Nazenzine reports of Athens, that it was the plaguest place in the
world for superstition, and he acknowledges it a great mercy that God did
preserve him and Bazil from those infections.

To be a worker of iniquity is a most abominable thing. Gilead is a City of
them that work iniquity, Gods people sometimes be overtaken by sin, but they
are never workers of iniquity, for the Scripture tells us, that he which works
iniquity is of the Devil.

That of all wicked men, Clergy men (if wicked) are the worst. No men can work
out or bring to pass their own ends so as they can, the Priests were in Gilead,
and they were the men, which wrought the mischief: and has not our times
sealed to this truth? Who have been so vile and wicked as our corrupted Clergy?
but how has God broken the plots, and crossed the designs of these vermin?

The cunning plots of the wicked Clergy over-whelm whole Cities These were they
which over-turned this City of Gilead: And thus would they have done to us, had
not God in his infinite wisdom and mercy prevented their hellish plots.

False worship and tyranny are joined together: Where ever you Luther tells us,
that the Devil is is a liar, and a murderer, so that where there is a lie in
Gods religion there is murdering.

There are none so cruel to the lives of men as wicked Clergy; so

That of all cruelties, cruelty in the Clergy is the worst; for it is

VER. 9. And as troops of robbers wait for a man, so the company of Priests
murder in the way, by consent; for they commit lewdness.


THis Verse has much of the former in it. [Troups of robbers] The Kingdom of
Israel had their troupers robbing and spoiling up and down; and who were these
robbers, but their Priests? their Priests were turned robbing Troupers? And
have not we this Text literally fulfilled at this day, in our Kingdom? The
Gown is cast off, and the Armor is put on, and now they are turned Troupers.
They were before murderers of souls, and now they are turned murderers of (...)
Think of this all you that do plot, and think of your sins before you do commit
them, in those sins there is lewdness.

Luther faciunt quiquid cogitant. Tam disparate malitiae ut nihil cogitent quod
non idem patrare ausuit.
Luther turns the word lewdness a little from the Original, which may be the
meaning also of the word lewdness, they do whatsoever they think, he says that
they had a proverb in Germany, that the Monks were so wicked, that there was
nothing so bad which they could think of, but they would dare to do it. None so
bold in sin, and dare to venture themselves in it, as wicked Clergy men, many
men are vile and wicked enough, but they want capacity and audacity to vend and
utter it, but these wicked Priests could do it, calumniate and reproach without
fear, these have impudent bold faces, and concerning such, I say no more but
this: The Lord rebuke them.

VER. 10. I habe seen an horrible thing in the house of Israel; there is the
whoredom of Ephraim, Israel is defiled.


THE Lord proceeds futher in His complaint against Israel.

(...) of (...) Pilus. (...). 70.
I have seen an horrible thing] The word signifies a thing that may make the
hairs of our head to stand an end, the Seventy turn it something to the same
purpose, by a word which signifies a storm in the Sea, this word sometimes
signifies the Devil, Levit. 17.7. They shall no more offer their sacrifices
unto Devils after whom they have gone a whoring.

Tr^melius in his coment observes that the letters are more than ordinary in
this word here, to increase its signification: as if he had said, it is a
horrible thing, a very horrible thing: what is this horrible thing? it was
this, Ephraim had defiled himself.

Obser.
From whence note, That Idolatry is a very horrible thing; to worship a false
God, and that for politic ends, as they did here, is a most horrible thing,
they to preserve their estates and their liberties, fell from the true worship
of God, to worship at Dan and Bethel, Jer. 2.11, 12. and Jer. 18. Will a nation
change their gods, for those which are no gods? but my people have changed
their glory for that which does not profit. Be ye astonished oh ye Heavens at
this, and be ye horribly afraid, be ye very desolate says the Lord. Jer.
18.13. The Virgin of Israel has done a very horrible thing. Jer. 44.4. Do not
that abominable thing which I hate. God does not put an aggravation upon this
sin, beyond what is in it; as it is usual with men, they, if any thing be done
against them, make it very horrible with circumstances and aggravations, but
God never does so: a notable example we have of man's aggravating an offense.
Dan. 3.14. (...) Nunquid desolatio, Mont. of (...) in Niphal Desolari.
Nebuchadnezzer spoke and said unto them, O Shedrack, Meshach and Abednego, do
not ye serve my gods, the golden Image which I have set up? Is it true, the
words in the Original are, what desolations have these made, not to obey me;
this is the manner of proud hearts, but this is not Gods way and manner, he
never speaks more against a sin, or punishes men for sin, than it deserves, we
can look upon Gods judgments as horrible, but where is the man that looks upon
sin as horrible? false worship to be trembled at.
it may be you tremble at gross sins, but where is the man that trembles at
false worship? the apparitions of the Devil are very horrible to us; and sin is
here set out by the same words that the Devil is.

I have seen a horrible thing in the house of Judah.

Though we may seem to color it over, yet God he sees it. Obser.


I have seen a horrible thing in the house of Issrael.

Idolatry is a provoking sin, Obs.
but especially in the house of Israel.

There is the whoredom of Ephraim. Court Idolatry most dangerous.
Ephraim was the Tribe of Jeroboam, and by Ephraim is to be understood, the
Court, and the Nobles, there (says God) did I see this abominable thing, that
Nation where the common people are wicked for the generality, it is a sign of
much evil, but if the Gentry are profane, it is much worse, but if the
Nobility and those at the Court are Idolaters it is night indeed, if Ephraim be
vile it is no mervail if Israel be so also. It follows.

VER. 11. Also O Judah, he has set an harvest for thee, etc.


THese words are something difficult, I shall show the meaning of them, thus;
Judah has wraped up her self in the same offense, in the same transgression
received from Ephraim, (the ten Tribes) and it was grown up to an harvest of
judgment, which was set, had its fixed time. But when? When I returned the
captivity of my people. This refers to that time in 2 Chronicles. 28.6. where you
shall find these three things: 1. The harvest set for Judah. 2. The captivity
of Judah. 3. The return of their captivity. The harvest was set when Pekah, the
son of Remaliah slew in Judah an hundred and twenty thousand men in one day,
because they had forsaken the Lord God of their fathers; what a harvest was
here set? and the text says, They were all valiant men for the war.

Obs.
Idolatry is a horrible sin, and God makes it as horrible for judgment. But
what was it that provoked the Lord thus against them? because they had forsaken
the Lord, the God of their fathers. Gods judgmemts in Scripture cutting down a
people, are compared to a harvest, Joel, 3.13 Put ye in the sickle, for the
harvest is ripe. But where was this captivity? in 2 Chronicles. 28.8. And the
children of Israel carried away captive of their brethren, two hundred thousand
men, sons and daughters. But when was their return? in the 9. verse, the
Prophet comes to them, and tells them in the 11. verse, they must deliver up
their captives which they had taken from their brethren; these were brethren as
is clear, yet behold the rage of brethren! yet in the 15. verse, see how this
took with them; they clothed, fed, and restored all their captives again
presently. See the mighty power of the Word to still the rage of the stoutest
spirits. Oh that it might do so with us at this time, as it did here with this
people, this would be a kindly work indeed; so that by this you may see what
the harvest is here in the text.

The Notes which we may observe from hence are.

That the sins of a people are seeds for a harvest of judgment, as good

God has a fixed set time for a harvest of judgment; and though

In the time of Gods judgments, the Lord remembers mercy for his He has set a
time for the return of their ca^tivity.

Thus you have (I conceive) the genuine sense of these words.

There are some that read these words thus: Judah, A 2d Interpretattion
since you are guilty also, you shall not enjoy your peace nor your lands in
quiet, till God return your captivity; Israel shall not enjoy their harvest, but
Judah shall.

Now that which makes me think this is not the meaning, is this, Because the
Lord still goes on to threaten Judah still; I have set an harvest for thee.

Some others read it thus: A 3d.
When God was about to turn away their captivity, Judah did so harden Isarel in
their way, that it was the cause of my hardening my heart against them, and not
to return their captivity. Israel might think thus, Though we are bad, and in
many things are amiss, yet Judah is also filthy in such and such things, who
are a people nearer to God than we, yet they do so.

Many are ripened for judgment by the example of others, Obs.
especially of great professors, and chiefly of professing and reforming
Churches that have the name of pure worship in them. Let such be very wary what
they practice, especially in a time of reformation, lest they harden others in
their corruption.

Thus I have finished the Sixth Chapter.

HOSEA, CHAP. VII.
VER. 1. When I would have healed Israel, then the iniquity of Ephraim was
discovered, and the wickedness of Samaria: for they commit falsehood; and the
thief comes in, and the troup of robbers spoileth without.


THIS Chapter is filled with complaints wholly against Israel. The two former
Chapters brought in Judah with them; but this Chapter is spent wholly against
Israel. Luther Luther
says, that by the reading of this Chapter we may see, that the Church has
always evils of one and the same kind, even at this day that it had in those
times, even as one eg is like to another eg. We have had a clear and lively
pattern of this held forth to us in our times concerning our evils. Expos.


When I would have healed Israel] Before God took upon him the person of a
husband, that would have recalled his adultrous wife: but in this Chapter He
compares Himself to a Chyrurgion who would have cured a wounded person: and His
people He compares unto such. But coming to cure them He found the wound in
them worse than He expected; as when a Chyrurgion sometimes first comes to a
wound, he thinks it not so bad and dangerous as indeed it is upon the searching
of it, and all this while perhaps the patient is very mild and quiet and
strugles not at all, but when they are put to pain by searching of their wound,
then they are froward and strugle: so says God, so many ways and means have I
used to do them good, judgments, reproofs, and exhortations, and nothing does
them good, but they grow worse and worse, then the sins of Ephraim did break
forth, the sins of the Court they work out: and the sins of Samaria (which was
the chief City) show themselves; in Isa. 7.9. The head of Ephraim is Samaria:
as if the wickedness of the Court should be complained of by some in the
Country.

When I would have healed Israel, the iniquity of Ephraim and Samaria did
appear; the Prophet looks upon Ephraim the wicked Court, and Samaria the
profane City, and sees death in the face of both, the sin of Ephraim and
Samariah, it is in the head which speaks them in a dangerous condition, Leuit.
13.44. they ad iniquity to iniquity, which shows their perverseness, and he that
is of a perverse spirit shall be despised, Prove. 12.8.

Their wickednesses. In the Original it is in the plural number, When I would
have healed Israel, (...)
then the sin of Ephraim did break out, and the wickedness of Samariah appeared.

In great Cities where there is such concourse of people, Obs.
there is all manner of evils.

But now, when was the time that God was about to heal these ten Tribes? to
what time does this refer? some interpret this to be the time when God went
about to cure the evils and the abominations that were in Rehoboams time which
was a very sad time, Time of this Prophecy
had he hearkened to the counsel of his wise, grave Counselors, it had been
well for him, and his people; but he giving credit to the counsel of his young
green heads, he endangered the very life of his Kingdom by it, and when he
would not hearken through the pride of his heart, God rent the greatest part of
the Kingdom from him, and gave it to Jeroboam, and now when there were such
hopes of delivering them from these their oppressions, Note
then the iniquity of Ephraim did appear, then did they oppress and crush (...)
up and healed presently, and then they putrify and are worse than ever. But
the Lord is the healer of his people, and when he heals he does it to purpose;
and many encouragements we have in Scripture, to seek to God for healing, the
promise of God, 1 Chronicles. 7.13.14. If my people which are called by my Name,
shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from the evil of
their ways; then will I hear from Heaven, and forgive their sin, and heal
their land. Mark the conexion of these words; first, seek to be forgiven, and
then healed; if we should be healed before pardoned, woe be to us, we should
then be undone. Isa. 57.16, 17, 18. verses, The Lord will not contend for ever,
neither will he be angry for ever; lest the spirit should fail before him. For
the iniquity of his covetousness was I wrath with him, and smote him; I hid my
face from him, and he went on frowardly in the way of his heart. Now what may
we think will become of him? surely now, nothing but desolation and
destruction. No says God, I have seen his way, and will heal him: I will lead
him, and restore comforts unto his mourners. Jer. 3.22. Return ye backsliding
children and I will heal your backslidings. Oh that the answer of this people
might be ours: Behold we come unto thee, for thou art our God.

How God heals.
Now the Lord cures accuratly, as Chyrurgions do by purgation, and allaying the
misery, so the Lord heals his people



That God in willing things, does not always will them according

I would have healed Ephraim: That is, I would, and I did use all the means
that was possible to heal them, and which might have done it.

But it may be objected, If God see that we are unable of our selves to be
healed, how can we be healed, when we have no power to be healed?

Now for answer to this, we must know,

There is much wickedness lies hid many times in a Kingdom or It was thus with
Paul, Romans 7.9. he was sinful before, but when the Law came sin revived and I
died, yet notwithstanding God by his almighty power helped him over them all:
As when a man comes to repair an old house which is rotten and decayed, simile
he does not conceive the trouble of it till he comes to remove the rubbish:
Who would imagine the wickedness that is in many men's hearts which discovers it
self when the means comes? had not God set many servants in good families the
vileness and the vanity of their spirits had not discovered it self: Servants
Englands wickedness
certainly this is our condition, some few years since, there appeared much
wickedness in England, but how much more since God has sent the means to cure
it? As appears,

By a bitter spirit of malignancy, against the power of godliness. No our
wickedness is now grown to a spirit of malice, and oppoposition against the
Word and the Saints. At the first men cried out for a reformation, and cried
down Bishops, but when Gods people began to rejoice and thought that they
should have a day, of a sudden, what a desperate spirit of pride, a spirit of
malignancy was there raised to oppose with all the might that could be the way
of reformation so much desired, and this so much the more vile, because of
their malice against reformation.

agravated
1. Blind men's eyes, so that they cannot see their misery, by reason of the
falsities, and flatteries, and treacheries which is used against Scotland,
Ireland, and England, nay.2. these men rather than they will be subject to the
yoke of Christ they will be slaves to men, any men, yea the worst of men, and
that to their vilest lusts rather than yield to the way of Christ, and does not
this show a desperate spirit against God?

What a base sordid spirit is there now among us? that rather than men will be
contented to suffer a little trouble, will rather endure perpetual enslavery by
vile men.

A most treacherous spirit appears in the most, for their own private gain and
advantages, when men shall betray Kingdoms, overthrow States, and deceive the
trust and confidence that is put in them, undermine and destroy Parliaments,
does not this manifest a most vile spirit in the people of this Kingdom?
Heretofore the rascality of the people could not be brought to fight against
the Scots, yet now there can be found a Gentry to fight against the Parliament.

What a blasphemous spirit is there abroad, this sin abounded before, but how
much more is it now increased; nay, are there not now new oaths invented and
pressed?

A cruel bloody spirit is now risen in the people of the land; some few years
since who could have imagined the cruelties that have been used by English men.

What a spirit of division is there among us? we should have thought that in a
time of public calamity we should have sodered together, when there was
private persecution more love was expressed, and that which makes the rents the
more sad, is, that they are between the best people.

What an oppressing, tyrannizing spirit is there now in many;

A spirit of envy and jealousy: if any man be in publik place

A spirit of superstition: Would ever any man have thought

A wanton erroneous spirit: such opinions as were never

What an unmerciful spirit is there among us. Every one seeking Ephraim, which
was their Court, Court
and though the City of Samariah did join with Ephraim, yet the City City
with us has not joined with Ephraim but the bulk of it has kept faithful
with their God; for which mercy the children He lived not to see the late
dissension which yet was not total, blessed be God though prevailing long.
yet unborn will have cause to bless God.

A fifth observation is this; That when a people grow worse upon the means of
healing, it is a sign that their condition is desperate; Isa. 1.15. why should
you be smitten any more? Ye will revolt yet more and more. Jer. 51.9. We would
have healed Babylon, but she would not; forsake her. In thy filthiness is
lewdness; because I have purged thee, and thou would not be purged, thou
shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more until I have caused my fury
to rest upon thee. Now certainly had not God found a party in this Kingdom
which closed with him, when he would have healed us, we might have had occasion
to make use of this Scripture, how just were it with God to leave such a people
as we are in our healing, because we are so impatient under the rod, and oppose
him even in our healing, Arius Montan^s quotes it out of Hippocrates, that the
Physicians in his time, Ar. Mont.
were bound by an Oath to leave such under their wounds to perish by them, that
were incorrigable and would not endure the Chirurgions to cure them. When a man
is engaged in a bad cause, and means is used for the convincing of him, and yet
often times he will proceed and fly out the worse, Oh the vileness of men's
spirits in this thing; we had need take heed what we engage our selves in, that
the thing be good, the cause warrantable, how many men are there which break
their consciences rather than yield to take shame to themselves for their sin.
Oh what cause have we to fall down and be humbled for our iniquity, and to say
as they in Jer. 14.18, 19, 20. So for particular Towns and places where God
sends the Gospel, the means of grace, and that people is the worse for it, they
have cause to tremble at it, do not cry out against the preaching of the Word
as if that were the cause of it, when men are worse for preaching, an evil sign.
this were most wicked and abominable; it was thus in Christ's time: we never
read of any possessed with Devils before Christ came; now shall we say, it had
been better that Christ had not come? Oh blame not the Ministry, but your own
hearts: and consider of this you that God is working upon, the Lord comes close
by the Ministry of his Word to heal you, and then you discover your wickedness,
and rotten hearts, the Lord he stirs such a conscience and begins to heal the
soul, now it is the Devils policy to spoil such beginnings, now thinks the
Devil, if I can make such a soul to commit a sin against conscience, or live in
the omission of any known duty, the word then will never work more to do such a
man good. I have heard of a man who being troubled in conscience for committing
that great sin of uncleanness, the Devil tempting him to commit it again, and
told him if he would he should never be troubled more for it, the poor man
yiedling to do it, and venturing upon it again, after he had done it he was
never tempted again nor troubled more, but presently lay in a wanzeing,
languishing senceless condition and so died. Oh take heed of this you that are
convinced in your consciences of the evil of such and such courses, for it is
the great policy of the Devil to make thee who art convinced in conscience, to
sin against conscience, and then he thinks the work is lost, the Devil does not
much fear the Words working upon him, whom he has prevailed over to live in
secret known sins and to venture upon the commission of sins against
conscience; you who are under Gods hand of cure, be silent, and submit quietly
under Gods hand and be not froward, as many are in their troubles of
conscience, but hearken for a word from God; Troubled Consciences.
as the men of Benhadad did from that King, in 1 King. 20.33. hearkened
diligently whether any words of comfort fell from him, and they catched at them
hastily. Know that it were just with God to make you as that people, Isa. 6.10.
that your hearts should be made fat. This concerns all people, but especially
those that are in trouble of conscience, those that God begins to stir and work
upon, take heed I say; does Christ himself begin to work upon you? does he
desire to heal you? is he willing to offer his blood to cure you by applying it
to your wounded consciences? Let not the corruptions of your hearts now break
forth, now take heed of sins against conscience, lest he let you to perish in
your lusts, be willing to let God alone to do his work in you, lie quiet and
still, take heed of murmuring and repining speeches, but follow on the work
begun and beseech him not to leave you till the work be completed in you, and
the great hazard of your miscarrying over, little do you imagine the wait and
burden of those sins will be upon conscience which now you commit against
conscience; what a torment will it be to thy conscience to think, that at such
a time I felt Jesus Christ coming to heal my soul in the Ministry of his Word,
Oh happy had it been for me, if I had lain under his hand, and to have kept his
salve upon my sore! but because it was for the present troublesome, and smart, I
cast it off and went into such company, and listened unto such temptations, and
by this means have wounded my soul anew most desperately, and now what can I
expect but that the Lord should for ever forsake me, and leave me to die in my
sins, and wallow in my blood, and his eye not pity me, and make me to inherit
the curse of that people, whose ears should be deaf that they should not hear,
whose eyes should be blind that they should not see and be converted, and I
should heal them.

When I would have healed Israel, then the iniquity of Ephraim was discovered,
and the wickedness of Samaria: for they committed falsehood; and the thirf
breaks in, and the troup of robbers spoileth without. Furthermore, In these
words the Prophet shows in what particulars their iniquity did appear; they
committed falsehood, they wrought a lie in regard of their falsehood, their false
worship; and then in regard of their oppression, wronging one another, but
especially in falsifying their trust one to another, and in their relations not
performing the duties which their relations called for, and bound them unto,
(...) officij diliti vi^lati ex singulari audacia.
so the word in the original (Shekar) in the propriety of it, signifies. They
commit falsehood. That is, they commit such a sin as the breaking of that duty
which the law of their relation calls for from them. The Notes hence are:

It is the description of a wicked man to commit falsehood: As the godly man is
said to be for the truth, and to do the truth; so wicked men are against the
truth, and go contrary to the truth: as the Devil is said, not to abide in the
truth; even such are these who commit falsehood, and work a lie.

It is a forerunner of great mischief, when men are false in their relations.

The thief breaks in to rob and spoil by violence.

From whence note: There is much secret wickedness committed by those which
have forsaken the true religion, such as these are secret and cunning workers
of mischief in Church and State. Gal. 2.4. There are false brethren crept in
secretly, which afterward sought to bring us into bondage. It Is a great evil
in a Commonwealth to have secret oppressors, but far worse to have public
spoiling: We have had much of the first formerly, and the Lord knows how much
more of the second we may further taste of; I verily believe, there is none that
ever thought the Enemy would have spoiled in such a manner as He has done, and
that ever English men would have endured it; and we are the first people that
ever endured such oppressions, that were not slaves before, and what the
counsels and thoughts of God are in this thing concerning us we cannot tell.
Violence and spoil before me continually, is grief and wounds. What then? Be
instructed O Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from thee, Jer. 6.7, 8. The first
part of this Scripture is ours at this day, grief and wounds are continually
before us: but be thou instructed, O England: In what? In this, That dreadful
breach which sin has made between the King and Parliament; be instructed in
this. Jer. 15.13. Thy substance and thy treasures will I give to the spoilers
without price, and that for all thy sins, even in all thy borders. So Isa.
44.22.24. But this is a people robbed and spoiled, they are all of them snared
in holes; they are for a prey, and none delivers them; for a spoil, and none
says, Restore. Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? Did not
the Lord, against whom we have sinned. Who among you will give ear and hearken
to this? Men are wicked and tyrannical: But who is he that has given this our
Land to the plunderers? Is it not the Lord? Therefore we should look beyond the
troubles, the hand that strikes, to God who gave them their commission, and
delivered us up into their hands. When God gives up a people to the robbers and
spoilers in such a kind, his wrath is said to come upon them; as in the 25.
verse, Therefore he has powered upon them the fury of his anger, and the
strength of battle.

VER. 2. And they considered not in their hearts, that I remembered all their
wickedness: now their own doings have beset them about, they are before my
face.


THey considered not in their hearts] In the original it is, They say not to
their hearts. (...)
This phrase in other Scriptures is used for saying in their hearts: Jer. 5.24.
Neither say they IN their hearts, Let us fear God which gives rain. And in
Eccles. 1.16. Considering, is, communing with our own hearts; I spoke or
consulted with my heart. From this phrase of speaking thus to our hearts, we
may observe:

1
It is a good thing to be often speaking to our own hearts, thus: Oh my soul,
how is it with thee? what case art thou in? how stand things between God and
thee? what terms stand thou in for eternity? can thou look upon Gods face
with comfort and not be afraid? what guilt is there in thy conscience? can
thou behold eternity and rejoice in the thoughts of it? Such meditations and
questionings as these would be very profitable for the soul; Many people can
talk abroad in company of these things, but where is the man that sets apart
time to question with his soul about these? Ps. 4.4. Stand in awe, and sin not,
commune with your own hearts upon your bed, and be still: There are in the soul
many times boisterous distempers, but then we should cause a silence and a calm
in our hearts, bid them be still; there are great distemper^ in that family
where the husband and the wife go two or three days together and speak not one
to another; so there is no less distemper in that soul which can go two or
three days without questioning it self and examining its condition: simile
But what is it they should speak? This,

That I remember their iniquities: the old Latin carries it thus, lest they
should consider: do not you think that God remembers the sins of your
forefathers only, that they were vile and wicked; no, but I also remember the
sins that are present before me. But according to the reading of the words in
your books is most agreeable to the Original; therefore Luther says, Luther
that these words are a reproof of their security then which no evil being
worse: the Princes they feel not the judgment yet the principal actors in the
wickedness, the common people they suffer much, and yet though they suffer yet
attribute their sufferings to any thing rather than to their sins to be the
causes of them: the observations.

That God does remember the wickedness of people though long since as we may
see in Amalek, God remembers this their wickedness many hundred years after, 1 Samuel 15.2. I remember the prank which Amalek played to you when you came out of
Egypt. Amos, 8.7. The Lord has sworn by the excellency of Jacob, surely I will
never forget any of their works: nay they are not only remembered, but recorded,
the sin of Judah is written with a pen of iron, and with the point of a
diamond, Jer. 17.1. every oath, every lie, yea and every vain thought which
thou have committed, and continuest in under an impenitent condition, know,
that thy sins are remembered; and that thou may be sure of it, see what the
text says, Job, 14.17. Job 4.17.
My transgression is sealed up in a bag, opened.
and thou sewest up my iniquity. They are sealed in a bag; as the Clark of
Assizes seals up the inditements of men, and at the Assizes brings his bag and
takes them out; even so will God; as God has his time to seal up men's
transgressio^s in his bag, so he will have his time to take them out to reckon
with sinners for them, and then woe to them, Deuteronomy. 32.34. Is not this laid up in
store with me, and sealed up among my treasures? It is sealed up to be
remembered though perhaps committed forty or fifty years ago, and it is thy sin
if thou do not remember them, when and where they were committed, and if thou will not, know, that God has his time to make thee know them.

Wicked men will not consider that God does remember their sins. Psalm. 94.7.
they commit horrible wickednesses, daring sins, yet they force themselves not
to believe that God does remember them, and take notice of them, yet they say,
The Lord shall not see it, neither shall the God of Jacob remember it. The Jews
tell us, that when Jeroboams hand was dried up, the false Prophets told him
that this was but by chance, and so kept him from thinking of God that had
smitten him. Did men consider that it is God that remembers them, it would work
humiliation in them, and stop them in their sins; were the danger that sin
brings men into, always in their eye, they would think it a great madness to
sin against God, and folly too; Joshua thought it so, Is the iniquity of Peor a
small thing in your eyes, that you should ad more to them? Did thou know that
God remembers the sins of thy youth and thy elder age, thou would fear, that
upon the next sin thou committest God might bring upon thee all the rest of the
sins which thou have committed; as a man that has used his body to drink
poison, simile.
at the first and second time he may do well, but at last he is overcome, and
destroies himself: so the next sin which thou committest, Note
though it be a less sin than formerly thou have committed, this sin may set
all the rest on working: as suppose there be many barrels of Gunpouder in a
room, and there lies but a thimbleful by it, ^imile
and a spark falls into that and so fires all the rest; so thy former sins are
as the barrels of Gunpouder, the next sin thou committest, especially if a sin
against knowledge, may be the thimbleful which sets all the rest on work to pull
down judgment upon thee. There is no argument so powerful to keep men from
their sins as the consideration that God sees them, and knows them all, and
will remember them.

When God does punish for sin, he manifests that he remembers sin: 1 King.
17.18. the woman of Zarephath falls out with the Prophet saying, What have I to
do with thee, Oh thou man of God, art thou come unto me to call my sin into
remembrance, and to slay my son? Gods hand being upon her, brought her sin into
remembrance. How does the consciences of men dictate this unto them in their
afflictions, this cross is for such a sin, this misery for such a base lust
that thou would have fulfilled at such a time, God now puts thee in mind of
such an act of uncleanness, such a time thou were cruel and hardhearted; this
is clear in Joseph's brethren, whose sin was committed twenty two years before
this trouble came upon them; you that have committed many sins a long time ago
and think they are forgotten, it is no such matter, if the guilt of them be
taken away by Christ, know that there will come a time in which thou shall be
put in mind of them; as a man that gets a surfeit in his youth and younger age,
simile
or gets many a bruise and rub which then he undergoes well enough and never
complains of them, but when he grows old or has an infirm body, then against
every rain and change of weather it will appear and he will complain: but this
is the Saints privilege, that God never so remembers their sins, as to condemn
them for their sins. It follows.

I remember all their wickedness, now their own d^ings have bese^ them about,
they are before my face. Their wickedness.] Luther says their studied
wickedness, Septuag. Luther
their contrived iniquities have beset them round about, or their doing have
compassed them round: Expos.
These words have reference to these similitudes; as Officers beset
Malefactors, who shift up and down and play least in sight, but at the last are
found and beset. Just thus their sins had beset them, that they could no way
escape; or as Soldiers beleaguer a Town and will not let any in the Town get
out; so men by their sins are besiged, and brought into such a condition that
there is no way for comfort to come at them, or for them to avoid the judgments
which are coming upon them; men's sins are like unto those six men in Ezekiel. 9.2.
And behold six men came from the way of the higher Gate, to beset the Gates of
the City. And know, Oh thou bold sinner, that God has his time to beset thee
with thy sins and his judgments, Applic.
to awaken thy conscience by setting thy sin^ in order before thee; and this is
the great reason why men cry out in the horror of their consciences, because
they are beset with their sins: what a sad condition were this City in if
beleaguerd with an hundred thousand men? Every man's sins are worse and endanger
a man more than millions of enemies can do; man shall need no other enemy than
his own iniquity, thine own iniquity shall find thee out, it shall find thee as
in a snare, Prove. 5.21. For the ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord,
and he pondereth all his goings: that is, I so remember their sins as if they
were all present before me, committed at this very instant; so that thou art to
consider that God does not only remember thy sins, but they are before Gods
face, so that God never can look about him but they are present before his
face: thou have committed a sin and perhaps art troubled for it, but after a
while thou forgettest it and the trouble is blown over; but God looks upon it
as now presently committed: for as there is no beginning of eternity, so there
is no succession of it. If thou were to go to the Lords table thou would not
go in a drunken fit, Note well
or immediately after an act of uncleanness; but God at that very instant looks
upon thee as drunken, unclean, and filthy, though the act may be past many
years before.

VER. 3. They make the King glad with their wickedness, and the Princes with
their lies.


THey make the King glad.] That is,

Jeroboam to change the way of Gods worship, they had cause to fear that it
might not take with the people, there would be something to do, to make them
change the way of Gods worship, but when they saw it go on currently without
contradiction they rejoiced.

go so far as Jerusalem to worship, and they flattered him in this extremely,
telling him that this was the way to establish his Kingdom.

He was glad, when he saw the people wicked in their ways Dan and Bethel: Thus
they made the King glad.

The Notes: First observe, That carnal and wicked people are Which way
Superiors go, the multitude will go: if they do that which is good in the
outward part of it for externals, they will do the same; if they do wickedly
they will do so likewise, though they do not love their Prince, yet that they
may have their Princes favor they will sin against God.

It is wickedness for any people to obey the unlawful commands of This people
might think this was no sin in them, What, must we not obey our Governors and
be subject to authority? yet we see the holy Ghost calls it wickedness. So how
many are there who for their worship have no other authority but their
superiors, their Governors, this will never pass for current in Gods account.

It is a vile wickedness to flatter Princes. Yet how has this Dionysius, that
when he spit, his flatterers would lick it up and say, it was sweeter than
Honey. This is vileness in people to do, and more vile in Princes to love to be
flattered. Cyril Cyril
upon this text says, That the fear and love of God, had it been in this
people, it would have kept both them and their Princes, to have withstood such
wicked commands, it would have balanced their spirits.

It is a most most wicked and vile thing, to make any glad with their
wickedness, or to be made glad by wickedness. Yet how many are guilty of this
sin? some are so hardened in their wickedness that they will make others drunk,
and then laugh at them when they have done so; How far are these from David's
temper? whose eyes ran down with tears, because men kept not the Law, and
horror took hold on him; there is no greater sign of a desperate heart hardened
in sin, than to laugh at sin in others, and make a sport of it in themselves;
and the higher men are in place and dignity the greater is the aggravation of
their s^ns; for Princes to be glad at wickeness and to be made merry by
iniquity, who are set to be punishers of sin and a terror to evil doers, this
is most horrible wickedness, Prove. 29.22. If the Prince hearken to lies, all
his servants are wicked.

They make the King glad with their lies. Note:

The King is in a sad condition, when his ends and plots must be accomplished
by the wickedness of the people. Such are the dispositions of these men, that
they will do any thing rather than suffer the least evil of punishment, for
says a Prince, these men they have no conscience left in them to check them;
but these precise Puritans they will suffer and die rather than sin against God
and wrong their consciences. Now these Priests and their officers (which the
Prophet here speaks of,) they would reason thus: If I should cross the Kings
mind I should lose my place, and be put out of my office, and suffer a great
deal of trouble, and rather than they will run upon these straights they will
run upon any design for the ruining of that which crosses them, yea, though it
be the worship of God: Oecolampadius says, that bad Princes are always
enemies to to the strict ways of religion, and unto such as are the strictest
in those ways, and walk most agreeable to the Word, and are tender in their
conscience, fearful to sin against it, these are disregarded and
discount^^anced; but those that are most wicked they are accounted the best
subject^, Irreligion and slavery companions.
and these they will trust. Therefore where there is no religion, slavery soon
follows, that people may be brought to any thing, who have lost their religion;
but where profession is maintained it will teach men to stand for their
liberties, and not to yield against the truth. But what, does Religion teach
men rebellion? does it deny obedience to Governors? No, by no means, Religion
teaches obedience to Governors, and the more religious any man is, the more
obedient he will be to lawful Authority, the Gospel commands obedience to
Governors, but not to Tyranny, to the wills and humors of men, God never made
such difference between men, Religion never teaches disobedience to lawful
authority, to such as rule in the Lord, yet this was the case of this people.
It follows.

And the Princes with their lies. Luther Luther
carries this to the lie of their false worship, their Idolatry, which the
Scripture calls a lie, Romans 1.25. Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and
worshipped the creature more than the Creator. But this is not the full meaning
and scope of the words, but thus:

They put their false glosses upon their false worship, to

Or thus: By denying whats^^er may hinder them in their

But principally they made the King glad with their lye^ people; and those in
authority loved this at the heart, this was mighty pleasing in the eyes of the
Princes; and this certainly was the plot of the Priests who at that time were
enemies to the true worship of God.

The Notes are:

That al Idolatry and false worship is but a lie in Gods esteem, He looks upon
it as a deceitful thing.

The old way of false worshipers to further their false worship is, by lies and
calumniations of all sorts, to tell them of their good success, when they had
none; and when they had ill success, to say it was a fl^m, it was no such
matter, their success was as good as heart could desire; but this in special
was their trick to slander and disgrace those that stood in their way. The text
says in Jeremiah, Jer. 20.10
That they waited for the Prophets halting, and they said, Report, and we will
report, do you say the thing, and we will affirm it, we will spread it abroad,
Report, and let us alone with it then, we will never stand examining the truth
of it, we heard it reported, and that is sufficient; this has bin the course
and practice of our times: and in the stories of later times against Luther,
what calumnies and reproaches were by the Papists raised against him? men set
on work on purpose to do it. You may perceive my straight at this time, how
loath I am to rake in these filthy puddles, and yet led by this Scripture so
fully to it, ^^at I must either baulk the mind of God, or else touch upon ^^^se
jarring strings; but I shall for peace sake for the present wave it, and
reserve it to its more convenient place, howbeit this will stick to some whose
course it has been; but how vile and wicked is this course? for what
recompense is it posible that such can make for the wrong done.

Evils of slander
For first, It cannot be expected that an answer should suddenly into all the
hands that these Reproaches have.

It is a very evil thing, to make men glad with falsities. This was

You had need look to your hearts when you hear reproaches and slanders against
public instruments:

VER. 4. They are all adulterers, as an oven heated by the Baker; who cease
from raising after he has kneaded the dough, until it be leavened.


THIS Verse needs but little opening, and the rather because the sixth verse
has much of it, to the same effect. They are all adulterers, either spiritual
or corporal. Is the heat of either like to an oven? Therefore let every one
take heed of that which may kindle this fire, either of corporal or spiritual
adultery: 1. an inward heat. 2. violent, that turns every thing to the increase
of it. 3. an heat abiding, collected and resting, not of a harth which scatters
the heat, but as the heat in an oven.

Now if wicked sinful heat be so kept in and compacted; simile
the Devil he comes and scatters our heat, and spoils us in our affections: now
we should oppose the Devil in this. It follows.

Who cease from raising. Hierom Hierom
and others have great light for the understanding of these words from a
tradition of the Jews which was this. They say, the intent of Jeroboam for
altering of Religion was very hot, but not knowing how it would take, they sent
abroad spies to leven the people to see how they stood affected, they thought
if so be this their design were urged upon them of a sudden, it would not take,
but if in this way by degrees it might gain upon men's spirits. Thus Hierom and
Cyril. As the Baker cease from kneading, he does not presently put it into
the Oven, but lets it lie that the leven may run through it; so Jeroboam and
his Princes were like this Baker, they were set upon their design, and it they
would have, but they would have the people first leavened, and then they would
put it into execution: and Cyril Cyril.
ads that, those which went to persuade the people, used this fetch and device
upon the people, and told them it would be for their ease and profit not to go
up to Jerusalem, but to petition the King that he out of his Princely love and
wisdom would permit them to worship at Dan and Bethel. And here lay the top of
the plot, that the Kings design so much desired by him and his Princes, yet
this must be brought about by the people, they must petition to the King that
he would grant this liberty to them to worship at Dan and Bethel, and that they
might not go up to Jerusalem, Alphonsus Arragoniae Rex.
when it was first of all the Kings and the Princes own design. By this you may
see how wicked and wise Idolaters are for the accomplishment of their purposes,
by this means Princes obtain their ends, and their plots kept in.

Behold the cunning plots of the Devil to delude poor souls in matters of
worship, therefore we had need to look to our ways when we have to deal with
cunning Princes and subtle pated men.

This means was of late used among our selves, our bakers have been a doing
their feats, but they had heated their Oven too hot, and so their cake proved
over baked, and therefore proved abortive and came to nothing; and we have
cause to bless God, Applic. to England.
who gave them up to this violence of rage. Those in Jeroboams time were wise
enough to carry on their designs with moderation, policy, and secrecy, and so
got the day, though our enemies were not.

And as wicked men do stay and are contented to wait, till the fittest time is
for the accomplishment of their wicked plots, so the Devil is contented to
wait, Satan's temptat.
he first tempts the soul to sin, and when the temptation has prevailed he
stays a while and lets the sin work a while, therefore take heed of letting a
temptation prevail, do not roll them up and down in your thoughts, saying: what
if I should do such a thing, what if I should not; now know, that the Devil is
a leavening your hearts, and when your hearts are thus leavened, the Devil will
come in with such strength of temptation that you shall not be able to resist
him; therefore as Christ bad his Disciples to beware of the leaven of the
Scribes and Pharisees, so take heed of the leaven of Satan in this kind, and in
this the Devil deals as God does with a sinner in the Gospel, the Gospel is
compared to leaven in Mat. 13.33. God he leavens the heart with some truth or
other, and there lets it lie and soak a while in the soul, God casts into the
soul some truth and does not presently urge it with violence upon the soul,
putting them presently upon difficult duties, which they are not capable to
perform at the first, but lets these truths lie, soak, and spread in the heart,
till such time as the disposition and savor of the heart be molded and changed
into the truth, and then the Lord comes in with other truths, and works them
upon the heart, which it was neither fit nor capable of before; and it were
wisdom in the Ministers of the Gospel, to take this course, not violently to
urge strict and hard duties upon new converts which they are not capable of, as
to say this must be done, and the other must not be neglected, but press the
Gospel to them and there let it lie and soak a while upon the spirit, and
blessed is that soul which is thus levened: The Lord will carry on this work to
perfection, these beginnings the Lord in his time will finish.

VER. 5. In the day of our King, the Princes have made him sick with bottles of
wine, be stretched out his hand with scorners.


THere is no preposition in, in the Hebrew, it is only, The day of our King.
(...)
The people being leavened with Jeroboams Idolatry, they now make their
acclamations in honor of their King, The day of our King
and rejoice in the way of their worship which they had from their King, which
he and his Princes had set up, and would not regard the requests and petitions
of some few who desired it, might not be established, and though they were
bound in conscience to go up to Jerusalem, yet notwithstanding the King would
send forth his Edicts, to tell the people there should be no more going up to
Jerusalem, but to Dan and Bethel, now at this they rejoice and cry out, Oh the
day of our good King which has set his good people at liberty and eased us of
our great journey to Jerusalem! (to the danger of the Kingdom) and is an enemy
to those precise people.

This day of their King was either the day of his birth, or his coronation day,
or the day in which he set up the Calves at Dan and Bethel. Now it cannot be
imagined but that there was some murmurings amongst some of the people, they
were not all of a mind, to give their consent to the setting up of the Calves,
therefore they did it by a strategem, with all the mirth and triumphing in the
day of their King, pleasing and pampering the flesh, drowned all the discontents
by this way of pleasing the flesh, caused all things to be carried before them.
Or thus: If the people were not thoroughly levened, by this means, they would
take this course; Come, we will go set up our King, and magnify our King, and
this will prepare the people to receive any thing he enjoins. Let the Citizens
be in their gowns, and the Gentry in their bravery, and let the King be amongst
them, and show himself courteous and loving to the people, and now let us cry
out, Oh our good King! This is the day of our King.

Those who carry this day to the day of his birth, Kings birthdays
have this Note, That we never read in Scripture of any godly King that ever
celebrated his birthday, but of three wicked Kings, of Pharaoh, Genesis 40.20.
and of Jeroboam, in this text; and of Herod in Mark. 6.21. not that it is
altogether unlawful to celebrate or observe a birthday, or a coronation day,
if it be observed with two Cautions.

So that it be not made as a holy day, with what cautio^ to be celebrated.
so there be not put a holiness in it; for God never gave that power to man, to
set a day apart as holy for his use.

Then it may be here objected, What, may not man set days apart for
Humiliation, or Thanksgiving? Yea, he may. Then what is the difference between
Gods setting of days apart for holy uses, and man's setting of days apart for
holy uses?

The difference lies in this:

There may be a day kept, yet so, as God do not at that called unto; so men
married may at the revolution of the year bless God for the mercies they have
enjoyed in that Ordinance entered into on that day: but how many are there who
have little cause to remember either that, or their birth day? nay may they not
rather with Job, curse the day of their birth? Suppose you should hear a voice
from heaven this day that you must die and not live, that this must be the last
day you should live, tell me then, could you bless God for the day of your
birth? would the thoughts of it be delightful to you? It Is reported of Philip
the third, King of Spain, Philip the 3 of Spain
who lived so strictly that he never committed any gross crime, never committed
any known sin willingly, yet when he came to die, cries out, Oh that I had
never reigned! that I had lived a private life in the wilderness; that I might
not have the sin to answer, for not doing the good, or hindering the evil which
I might have done. It is a sad thing when men come to die that they cannot look
back with comfort to their lives spent, that they have not discharged their
places: had Jeroboam kept his birth day in this manner, there had been no evil
in it; but his keeping of it, was only to satisfy the flesh, till he himself
was sick with wine: in such days Bachus, and Venus have the greatest portions.

Festeval days are usually made distempering days, days of provocation. It
follows.

With bottels of wine. This wine is like that in Deuteronomy. 32.33. Their wine is the
poison of Dragons, and the cruel venime of Asps: this wine of Asps it makes the
spirits warm, and the body sick. Job knew the danger of feasting, therefore
when his children were a feasting, he was in sacrificing. They made the king
drunk with wine. This was the way which they took to gain the King. And is not
this the course which is taken now in our days, to betray the young Gentry
into base filthiness? This was the plot of these Priests, first to make the
King drunk, and then they could do any thing with him, could get any edict from
him to serve their base ends and intentions, to suppress the precise people.

Drunkenness is an old Court sin. See how the Prophet, Isa. Ephraim; Woe to the
Crown of pride, to the drunkards of Ephraim. The Court, the Crown of Ephraim
was at Samaria. A miserable thing it is that those which have the most
opportunity for God should spend their time in such beastly vanities, and do to
their bodies and souls as Richard the third Rich. 3d
to his brother, drown them in a Butt of Sack.

Drunkards courses brings diseases. Be not amongst wine-bibbers, Drunkenness
brings diseases
for the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty; how many are there
which carry about with them the marks of their lusts, as Paul carried about him
the marks of the Lord Jesus; men will venture much for their lusts, but if
Christ call them to suffer any thing for him, then they are tender and sickly,
but let their estates, healths, and credits stand in the way to hinder them in
the pursuance of their desires in sin, they will break through them all: now a
shame is it for a Christian not to do more for God than these men will do for
their lusts: Timothy is commanded to drink but a little wine, and that for his
refreshment, to help nature; but when men drink and make sots of themselves by
it, what diseases does this bring men into? See Mr. Sa. Ward his woe to
drunkenes.
as the falling sickness disfiguring their countenances making them to look
more lik swine, than men, etc. The Scripture tells us that the Saints bodies
are the Temples of the holy Ghost; do you think that such a body as this, is
like to be a Temple? no but rather like matter for the very sinck of hell where
all filth shall be fuel for everlasting burning. How can thou answer the
weakening of thy strength by this lust, when God deserves all thy abilities? It
may be thou will say, thou were never dead drunk; but were thou never so
distemperd as to weaken thy abilities and make thee unfit for service? how
sinful then is the practice of those that drink others healths till themselves
are sick through excess.

Drunkenness is vile in any, but most of all vile in Governors, men of place
and power, Prove. 31.4. It is not for Kings to drink wine, nor for Princes
strong drink: It is not for them, and why? because they are above us, and how
can any man endure to be under drunken beasts: they are gods, and how vile and
abominable is it to have drunken gods? The law of Carth.
Therefore the Carthaginians made a Law, that none of their Magistrates in the
time of their Magistracy should drink any wine.

It is much more vile to make others drunk, than to be drunk our selves;
Therefore in Esth. 1.8. the drinking was according to the Law, none did compel;
for the King had appointed to all the Officers of the house that they should do
according to every man's pleasure, none were compelled to drink more than they
were willing; you may think they express a great deal of love to you, in
drinking to you, and pressing you to drink, and when they have overcome you,
then will they laugh at you, and make you a scorn, especially if they can get
you who are professors of Religion to be overtaken. Therefore you had need
above all men to take heed of this sin, for if you fall, Religion suffers,
and the Name of God is evil spoken of by your means; therefore Christ bids his
Disciples themselves to take heed of surfeting and drunkenness. Therefore you
that are professors had the more need to take heed of this sin, and mind this
exhortation of Christ.

That drunkenness is vile at any time, but especially when we pretend to praise
God: When God shall show thee mercy, and thou pretendest to praise him for it,
and then take liberty to be excessive in the creature, this is most abominable:
we have had many days of thanksgiving to praise God for his mercies, if we
have been excessive in the use of the creatures, be humbled, it is an ill
requital of God for his mercy. It follows.

He stretched out his hand with the scorners. (...)
The Septuagent translate this word [Scorners] by diverse words, as,

(...)
First, Pestilent people; so in Psalm. 1.5. Therefore the ungodly shall not stand
in the judgment, nor sinners in the Congregation of the righteous; because
every scorner is a plague to the family, place, and town where he lives. Prove.
22.10. Cast out the scorner and contention will go out, yea, strife and
reproach shall cease.

Hierom translates these words, cast him out, that is, eijce pirtilentem de
consilio.
cast him out of your counsels, let him have no part of advice with you.

Again, The Septuagent translate it, (...)
one without understanding, because scorners are foolish and silly men, Prove.
21.11. When the scorner is punished, the simple are made wise.

Thirdly, they translate it pride, (...).
because scorners are proud men, Prove. 1.3, 4. God resists the proud, Prove.
21.24. Proud and haughty scorner is his name, who deals in proud wrath.

Fourthly, they turn it by, untamed, unpunished, Prove. 19.29. (...): wanton,
stripes are prepared for the backs of scorners: Because they go unpunished
they grow scorners.

Luther translates the word mockers and flowters, (...), by a word signifying
evil men, because scorners are full of al kind of evils.
and interprets false teachers that delude the people, and deprave the
Scriptures, and this kind of scorning by perverting the Scripture is the worst
kind of scorning of all others, it is most abominable, Job, 20.14. The meat in
his bowels is turned to the gaul of Asps, the word in such men's spirits as
these are, is turned into bitterness; these scorners, who were they? the Nobles
and the Princes, the Officers in the Court, these were the men which scorned at
the people for going up to Jerusalem to worship, what fools are these which
will lose the Kings favor, their places at Court, their honors and preferments,
and all for a mere circumstance, and a trifle as they thought; and this was at
the time of their feasts and jovialities when they might both harden the hearts
of the King and people; now he stretched forth his hand to them, that is, 1. He
encouraged them, and gave them his hand to kiss; how unlike is this unto God of
whom Job speaks that he will not give his hand to the wicked, to malignants.
Again, 2. Job, 8.2^
to stretch forth his hand is to put forward any work, or further designs on
foot, as Herod furthered their wicked designs of the high Priests and Scribes
in persecuting Christ, by countenancing them, he stretched out his hand to
scorners. Acts 12.1
Scorners such as are the basest kind of people, as fiddlers, common jerves etc.
as if he were a common companion for them, he put off all Princely dignities
and made himself an associate for the basest of men, that could but any ways
further his designs.

That such Courtiers which live sensually, are for the most part great
scorners. Experience proves this.

Times of feasting are usually times of the greatest scorning, and contemning
all Religion; then they think there is none live such brave lives as they do,
when they are thoroughly heated with wine, then they have a flout and a scorn
for every one, then God himself is reproached by them, and his Saints had in
disgrace, Psalm. 35.16. With hypocritical mockers in feasts; they gnashed upon
me with their teeth. There are many which carry things very fair in the eyes of
the world, who seem to be Christians, yet when they come in place among
scorners they have a scorn, a flout, and a private jeer; these are odious in
Gods sight. Where is there more scorning and scoffing than in Princes Courts,
and great men's Tables? If a Court Chaplain had but heard any thing of a
Puritan, or of a private meeting, was it not their music? Thus they informed
the King, that they were none but a company of precise fools, giddy headed
people, and the King he received this news with joy, it made him merry, and he
gave them thanks for their pains; Oh how far is this below a true Princely
spirit!

That the right way of worship is by carnal hearts accounted a very slight
thing: and Gods people who stand for Gods Ordinances in their purity are looked
upon as people who stand for incities and trifles.

It has been the old way of the Devil to hinder reformation by raising up men
of pestilent wits to scorn at Religion: and this way the Devil prevails very
much, when he cannot prevail by persecution, he gains much this way; men that
are of any spirit cannot endure scorning, therefore we read of mocking to be a
cruel persecution in Heb. 11.36. And others had trials of cruel mockings. And
Ishmaels mocking is said to be persecution. In the primitive times they would
set up an Asses Head, and a book by it, to show that they professed to learn,
and yet were as simple as an Ass. I have heard of a Scholar in Queens College,
who professed he had rather suffer the torments of Hell than endure the
comtempt and scorn of the puritans. And this is the Devils old way; but men
will not be jeered out of their inheritance, and God will scorn such scorners,
Prove. 3.34. That place is famous in Lament. 3.62, 63. The lips of them that
rose up against me! behold their rising up and their siting down, I was their
music. What then? Render them a recompense according to their works, give them
sorrow of heart thy curse unto them.

Kings while their hearts are against Religion, shall never want

It is a sad thing to that Kingdom when their Princes give their it was a happy
and blessed time with that people in 2 Chronicles. 35.1, 2, 3. verses, when the
Prophets of God were encouraged by the King himself. It follows.

VER. 6. For they have made ready their hearts like an oven whiles they lie in
wait: their baker sleeps all the night, in the morning it burns as a
flaming fire.


THE meaning of these words is, to set out the strength of Jeroboam, and his
Princes desires to set up false worship, and their subtilty in taking
opportunity and lying in wait to leaven the people. The Notes are from the
similitude.

The heat of their hearts was so violent, that it did devour all that as fire
devoures all cumbustable things, so they devoured all kind of reason which was
brought against them and their way, what was spoken to them to contradict them
in their worship, it was like straw or wood in an oven, they were so strongly
set upon it, they devoured all presently, they tell in all companies, such men
have nothing to say for their way etc. Therefore at any time, when we come to
men and see them wilfully bent upon their way, it is to no purpose to speak to
them, but let them alone, and let God but humble them upon their sick beds, and
then they will hearken. No dealing with Bees in a hot day, but at night there
is.

As men's spirits are as hot as an oven in sin, so Gods judgments which are
prepared for such, are as hot as an oven. Malachy, 4.1. God will make as little
of them as they do of Gods people? The day of the Lord comes, that shall burn
as an oven; and all the proud, and all that do wickedly shall be as stubble,
and the day that comes shall burn them up. It follows.

Expos.
While they lie in wait. Though they are as hot as an oven, yet they do not run
headlong imprudently, but they have will to wait their opportunity: And should
nor this be our wisdom in the ways of God,

And their Baker sleeps. Expos.
It Is, as if men which have a common oven, they put fuel into it and let it burn
till they go and call their customers together, and when this was done, then
they might go and sleep. So the people were leavened. These people by their
Bakers were prepared, they had heated their oven, and now they thought they
might go to sleep, they might be quiet: and did not our Bakers do thus? they
had heated their oven, Engl.
but blessed be God that disapointed them in their way: when these bakers
slept, their oven heated, notwithstanding.

Subtle adversaries, when we think them to be most secure, Obs.
their designs are still driving on. Thus it was in Ireland; and here amongst
us, Treaties in Engl.
even in their greatest shows of peace in their Treaties; the truth is, if ever
we will have the fire quenched which now burns so violently, we must take away
the incendiaries and stirrers up of these unnatural wars. Let us in good
causes, though opportunities may cease for work, let not the fire go out, let
the oven be hot still; at the first their oven did but begin to heat, now it is
all in a flame; at the first they would use fair means with the people and
persuade them with good words, and answer their arguments, but when their oven
was hot, that they had brought their designs to maturity, and got power into
their hands, then --, it is now no longer, will ye worship at Dan and Bethel?
and it is your best course; but now Clup law, now no more satisfying of
consciences, but, to prison with them, now such a prison for such, and the
other strong goole for the rest: this has been the way and course of those
which would set up any false way of worship; when their morning is come and
their oven hot, then -- come the day is ours, no more persuading now; Will they
not come in? force them to yield. Their way was at the first to leaven the
people, to try how they stood affected; but now enough of that, seize their
estates, and imprison their persons.

VER. 7. They are all hot as an oven, and have devoured their Judges; all their
Kings are fallen, there is none among them that calls unto me.


NOT only Jeroboam and his for this Jeroboam under whom Hosea prophesied, was
the son of Ioash, chap, 1.1, not the first Jeroboam
successors, but also Princes, and people at length grew hot in the pursuit of
that great design of altering Religion, in so much, that no man might dare to
show himself against them; many of the people at the first made scruple of
yielding to their new way: but having overcome their consciences, now nothing
troubles them, they not only yield themselves, but violently press the
consciences of others which refused: but this similitude we met withal in the
fourth verse of this Chapter, which we opened then, and therefore pass it over
here. It follows.

They have devoured their Judges. Some of their Judges (it is like) could not,
but have some light in them, to see that the altering of Religion could not but
be against their Laws, yet seeing both the Princes and the people were set
violently upon it, they also yielded, Hierom observes this.

This is the vile, base, and low spirits of men in honor, and this honor
depending upon the favor of Kings, that rather than they will hazard their
places, and lose their gains, will yield to any thing, and for the pleasing the
King will tell him the Law is for him, the bonds of the Kingdom do not forbid
him. Mica. 3.11. They build up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity;
the Heads thereof judge for reward, and the Priests thereof teach for hire, and
the Prophets thereof divine for money: the Princes and the Prophets ask for a
reward. The Princes have a mind to such and such a thing of their subjects, but
to cover the vileness of the action and his injustice, King craft
he would ask the Judges whether it were not Law or no; now the Judges for
their own profit encouraged him, and told him it was lawful, he might do it.
How have our Judges immitated these? Though men had some integrety at the
first, England
yet the heat arising so high in the Princes and Nobles, yea and in many of the
High Court of Judicature, that they could not endure it. Thus we see how one
time answers to another in wickedness, The Princes designs go on with strength,
when they have got the Judges to side with them, and to give sentence for them
in their unjust designs.

Mercer ex talmud therosolymit.
therefore Mercer that learned Interpretor, for the furtherance of this sense,
brings a tradition of the Jews, That the Princes and Rulers had so wrought
about with the people, that they should come to the King and bring a humble
petition to him, in which they should desire and entreat the King to give them
leave to set up an Idol, which they did; and when they came, the King put them
off and told them it was late in the evening now, and bid them come in the
morning: in the morning they came, and bid him, Arise, and set them up an I^ol.
No (says he) your Synedrin the Court Ecclesiastical and Civil: according to
the government of those times.
Synedrium will not give consent to it, nor suffer it. No say they, we have
taken a course with them, we have kill,d them; which is the old way and course
which persecutors take with those which might seem to oppose them in their
plots.

Or thus: They had devoured their Judges and their Princes Chron. 13. a Chapter
of as much treachery as we read of: All their Kings are fallen: that is, into
that false worship which Jeroboam was fallen into. And that is very observable,
that all the Kings in the ten Tribes were wicked. From Jeroboam the first, to
to the captivity, there were eighteen Kings, and all of them wicked and naught,
and the reason of this was, that the way of false worship did so suit with
their politic ends; so that the Observation may be from it,

That it is a hard thing to take men off from their strong engagements. Obser.
It was a work so difficult, that all the Prophets could not do it, it is very
hard, especially when their engagements are in great things; they were wise
politic men, and therefore could not choose in all probability but see, how
point blank their ways went against Gods mind; even Jehu himself who was
raised up so high by God on purpose to root out Idolatry, and did root out
Idols and Baals Priests, and yet he followed the Calves as well as hi^
predecessors.

Therefore never wonder to see men obstinate, than sin they will leave their
livings rather than yield to them; Places of honor great snares.
but when did you ever see a Bishop deny himself? when was it ever known that a
Prelate so far submitted to lay down his great dignities and fat livings for
his conscience? It follows.

There is none among them that calls unto me. They were presumtuous and
confident in their way, and none of them would ask counsel of me,
notwithstanding their Judges were devoured, they sought to other helps, or
rested in their outward prosperity, or 2. They are sottish and stupid, and call
not unto me, though all be in a confusion in the State, their Judges devoured
etc.

When people are under Gods hand, and Governors set up false worship, such
times should quicken our prayers: Mic. 7.7. I will look unto the Lord, I will
wait for the God of my salvation, my God will hear me: so in Act. 4.29. And now
Lord hear us. The Christians there got into a corner and made their complaints
and moans to God, (...) Act. 4.29
of the evil of the times and do but observe the rise and ground of their
prayers, and now O God hear us. They do as men that would leap a great way,
take their rise upon a hill to further them; so these people make the miseries
of the times their encouragements, not their discouragements; it is a desperate
sign to see men sink under their discouragements, and to murmur against God, Oh
let us go to God and make our moan to him, and let us die calling upon his
Name, let that be our resolution which was David's, Psalm. 116.2. I will call on
the Lord as long as I live. And this is a very good argument that the Cause of
God will stand; if our spirits of prayer hold, the Cause of God will hold, but
if that go down, fear the sinking of the Cause.

VER. 8. Ephraim he has mixed himself among the people, Ephraim is a cake not
turned.


EPHRAIM has mixed himself.] There is a great evil charged upon Ephraim, and
that is observable, he has mingled himself among the people, the people did
not so much seek to him, as he to them; some here understand by Ephraim the
Court, because Jeroboam was of the Tribe of Ephraim; and Cyril Cyril
has this Note from thence, that it is a great dishonor for them that are in
place of honor to suit themselves and their minds to those that are of base low
spirits among their people; men of place and power should be men of honor and
worth. But we take Ephraim here for the people of the ten Tribes, for so it is
more often taken in Scripture, they were guilty of this sin, in mixing
themselves with the people, that is, the Gentiles, in these five regards.

First, In their marriages. The seed of the Israelites was Deuteronomy. 7.3. and the
good man Ezra in the 9. chapter, in the day of humiliation, confessed this sin
unto God against them, and this was typified of the Christians under the Gospel
that they should not mix themselves with the wicked and ungodly of the world;
they must marry in the Lord, Unequel marriages Maxent.
it is a sad affliction to be unequally yoked; it is reported of Maxentius a
cruel tyrant whose custom it was to judge some Malefactors to death after this
manner, viz. To have a dead man chained to the living man, till the living man
was killed by the dead man. How many living men have dead wives, and living
wives dead husbands? Oh how comely a thing it is to see the delight of our
eyes, the delight of Gods eyes!

They mingled Gods worship with their superstitions and Idolatries: Jeroboam
had been in Egypt where he had seen their Idolatrous Heifer, and he was much
taken with it, therefore he would imitate them in his Calves: 2 Kings, 17.33,
34. in one verse it is said, they feared the Lord, and in the next verse it is
said they did not; They feared the Lord, and served their own gods; unto this
day they do after their former manners, they fear not the Lord; never let us
satisfy our selves in mixtures of worship: Mixed worship
though we have never so much true worship among us, God will never be put off
with such excuses.

They mixed themselves in their persons, and suffered others to join with them:
neither must Christians suffer the wicked to join with the^ in matters of
worship; Mixed congregations
and surely if fornicators, adulterers and profane men are crept in; they must
(when discerned) be cast out speedily. Now if such as these must be cast out
when crept in unawares, Note
then surely such must not be received in, when they are known beforehand to be
such, and certainly a bare confession of faith is not sufficient or enough to
admit a man to the Ordinances, for those that are vile and wicked in their
lives, may make a verbal and outward confession, yet far from a true and
cordial; men may confess with their mouths, and yet deny all in their lives; as
if a man should confess his faith in English and deny it again in Latin; yet if
any should creep into a Church in which thou art bodied, Not to separate from a
Church for some offenders
if thou do thy duty in admonishing them, and if they will not be warned to
profess against them, thou may certainly, yea and with good conscience
partake of the Ordinance notwithstanding.

In their leagues and covenants they mixed themselves, they made Covenants and
leagues with other people, which was forbidden them in Exodus 34.12. Take heed
to thy self, lest thou make a Covenant with the people of the Land, whither
thou go, lest it become a snare in the midst of thee. Deuteronomy. 7.2. And when
the Lord thy God shall deliver them before thee, thou shall smite them, and
utterly destroy them, thou shall make no covenant with them nor show mercy unto
them. Isa. 30.2. They went down to Egypt for help and have not asked at my
mouth, to strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and trust in the
shadow of Egypt: therefore shall the strength of Pharaoh be your shame.

They were mixed in their societies with other people; Psalm. 106.35. Numb, 11.4.
And the mixed multitude which were amongst them (people that came out of
Egypt) fell a lusting; The mixed multitude fell a murmuring; this is an
affliction in any society, but especially in Church societies. But suppose
providence cast me into a family where there are such as these? In such a
family thou may be as oil in water unmixt, simile
put never so much water amongst oil, the oil will be above it, swimming upon
the top, Psalm. 26.9. Psa. 26.9 applied
Gather not my soul with sinners, nor my life with bloody men; if you would not
be gathered with them in the day of judgment, do not you gather to them now in
communion in Ordinances, nor in intimate society. The Lacedaemonians Lacedem
would not suffer a stranger to be with them above three days; and shall we
associate our selves with such ar are strangers to God? God had made a great
difference betwixt Istael and other people, they were a people separated from
all the people of the earth, Exodus 33.16. in the Original it is marvailously
separated, or set apart for God, (...)
they were a people whom God did own in a more peculiar manner, and his eye was
upon them for good, therefore it did not become them to mix with other people.

Ephraim is a cake not turned. We read this expression and make little of it,
but there is very much concerning us in it; mark well the expression, the
repetition of the word Ephraim; Ephraim is a cake not turned, the Prophet here
speaks in a condoling way and manner, Oh Ephraim, what my deer son and do thus.
Ephraim was a cake not turned in these four respects.

In their plots and counsels, they did not turn their designs this way and that
way.

A cake not turned, or baked; that is, you could not tell what to make of him
he was so indifferent, that it mattered not much to him whether God were God,
or Baal. 1 Kings, 18.21. How many men are of this garb among us, both in their
opinions and practices?

As a cake not turned; in regard of their perverseness: allthough heavy
afflictions were upon them that they lay as it were burning upon the coals, and
took no means for their help and cure, they cried out and lay howling upon
their beds, yet they turned not to the Lord, they could not devise a way to
escape, they were good for nothing, as a cake not baked; like those in Jer.
3.5. Will he reserve his anger for ever? will he keep it to the end? Behold
thou have spoken and done evil things as thou could: Just thus it is with
souls in their spiritual estates, in terrors of conscience and sorrow for sin,
they lie pining away in their iniquities, and take no course to deliver and
help themselves: when thou art in this condition thou should be acting upon
God, and looking after him, thou should not lie scorching and burning upon
the coals of thy transgressions, but should make out after the mercy of God in
Jesus Christ.

Luther Luther
and Vatablus Vatablus
make the sense of the words to note the greediness of Ephraims adversaries,
they were like a man pinched with hunger, and coming to food fall upon it
presently, and eat the cake presently, and will not stay till it be baked; thus
Ephraims adversaries fell upon him; but this I conceive not to be the meaning
of the words, but the second and the third. It follows.

VER. 9. Strangers have devoured his strength, and he knows it not, yea gray
hairs are here and there upon him, yet he knows not.


STrangers have devoured his strength] By strength we must understand, Ephraims
rich and warlike power; and here we may see the poor shifts and strength of
carnal hearts; the Almighty is the strength of the Saints, Humane strength.
such a strength is God that all the Devils in hell nor men on earth cannot
take away from them; strangers devoured the strength of Ephraim, wicked men
such as were not in covenant with God, may rob the Saints of their outward
supports and comforts, a good cause may miscarry when those which are the
mannagers of it are rested upon, and too much confidence is placed in them, we
see how just it is with God to cross and turn the designs of men against
themselves when they forsake God, and this is a great curse to men, when wicked
men are suffered to take away what we have and do enjoy in our estates and
liberties; and metaphorically this may be applied to our spiritual strength,
we should take special care that strong lusts do not devour our strength for
God; and this is the reason of our flatness in duties; you many times complain
of deadness in prayer; examine whether there be not some secret lust which
takes away your strength: And is it a misery for strangers to devour the
strength of our bodies and estates? much more of our spirits. It follows.

And he knows it not. The Note from hence is this, Obser.
That the hearts of wicked men do so strongly work after their lusts, that
although they meet with never so many difficulties in their way, yet they know
them not. But in good they know every little difficulty they meet withal, and
have repenting thoughts in them that ever they were so engaged in a good Cause;
but in their own ways, the ways of their lusts they are not troublesome to
them. It follows.

Gray hairs are here and there upon him. That is, Such miseries as make them
gray, there were at gray hairs
often afflicted by the Assyrians plundering and spoiling of them: and it is no
strange thing to see men gray with very grief and sorrow. Scaliger tells us, of
a young man who through the extreme trouble of his spirit, was turned all gray
in one one night. How much more should our spirits be affected with the
miseries of our times.

Gray hairs] That is, their miseries were so long upon them, that made them
gray, they were lasting sorrows, they were old in sin, and God made them old in
miseries and punishments for their sins. Thus Germany has been gray headed for
many years together, in respect of the length of their miseries.

Gray hairs: that is, They have been a long time and might have gained more
knowledge of me, and got large experiences of the goodness of my ways, yet
they know me not, nor my ways; the whiter men's heads are, the blacker are
their sins many times; it is a most dreadful sight to see a white head and an
old sinner. I have read of one Eleazer, Eleazer
which would not do any thing which might seem to be evil, because he would not
spot his white head. Gray hairs should be a strong argument to move men to walk
blamelesly in their lives.

Gray hairs: that is, They had many symtoms of their ruin and destruction upon
them: As gray hairs show that men's ends are near, men that are gray, and would
not be thought to be old, will pluck out their white hairs: but if there be gray
hairs upon us, let us know, they are admonitions to us, and warnings of our
ruin: Heb. 8. ult. There are many symtoms of a kingdoms gray hairs; I shall
instance in some of them: As,

1. Oppression in Courts of Justice, is a gray hair.

2. Idolatry and superstition in Gods Worship and Ordinances.

3. The secret curse of God upon men and their estates.

4. The taking away of the valiant and righteous men out of the kingdom, is a
sad gray hair in that kingdom. Such a kingdom where these gray hairs are is in
a dying condition, and happy were it for us if these gray hairs were not to be
found amongst us; we have lain a long time at the graves mouth, and yet many
gray hairs do continue still, and what God will do with us we know not; how
covetous and self-seeking are men in these days, notwithstanding Gods wrath
burns so hot, threatening an utter desolation of al? Had we not need therefore
to prepare for a dying kingdom. It follows.

And he knows it not. Does not this speak our condition likewise? Gray hairs
are here and there and we know it not; how have the Mini-nisters of God
forewarned us a long time since of these times? but we would not regard them,
both they and their message was slighted: this people was so stupefied they
knew not who it was that smote them, nor for what it was they were smitten.

VER. 10. And the pride of Israel testifies to his face; and they do not return
unto the Lord their God, nor seek Him for all this.


IN the fifth Chapter we opened the same words with these, only the scope of
the place is different; they would not take notice of Gods hands, but braved it
out in a proud way, and would not learn his meaning in the rod. Let us learn
the contrary humility, to accept of the punishment of our iniquities,
submitting, and acknowledging that our father has smitten us and spit in our
face, (and yet they return not to me) Whence observe:

God expects we should turn upon afflictions. Job, 33.16. Sealed Chap. 36.10.
Commands that they return, repentance forced by afflictions.

Afflictions, if not sanctified, will never turn the heart.

It is a great aggravation of men's sins, not to turn under afflictions.

Though when afflictions work repentance, yet repentance is seldom it will not
often times hold out the trying; yet people should try and see what it will do:
repentance coming from afflictions has a promise: Levit. 26.14. If then their
uncircumcised hearts be humbled, if then even when my hand is upon them, they
accept of the punishment of their iniquities: then will I remember my Covenant
with Jacob, and I will remember the Land.

True repentance is rather a seeking of Gods face, than our

VER. 11. Ephraim also is like a silly Dove, without heart, they call to Egypt,
they go to Assyria.


(...)
THE word translated silly signifies, easily seduced, persuaded to any thing; we
use to say, that children and fools are easily persuaded to any thing; men that
are hardly persuaded to believe in God, and what God says? yet are easily
persuaded to believe errors, these are silly Doves: yet they thought themselves
very wise, in going to Egypt, but they have done very sillily, 2 King. 17.4.
the leaving of Gods ways and following our own is very silly: how many when it
has been too late have cried out of this their folly? From whence this Note
may be observed.

Obs.
That although men by others may be misled and seduced, yet are they not
excused; this will not excuse them before God at the great day to say others
did thus, and I followed them, thinking them to be in the right.

Without heart.] That is, without understanding, Prove. 6.32. But who so
commits adultery with a woman, lacks understanding, Prove. 10.21. The lips
of the righteous feed many, but fools die for want of understanding, or for
lack of wisdom. Now of all creatures the Dove is the most silly: as appears.

The Dove
defends not her young ones as other creatures do, the Hen and other flying
creatures will preserve their young ones, but the silly Dove lets them go
quietly; so was Ephraim, in this respect like unto the Dove, they were
destroyed and made a prey on by others, yet they never laid it to heart. The
Lord in mercy look upon us, Is not this our case? we suffer our brethren to be
destroyed and made a prey of, and never lay it to heart, because we for the
present are quiet.

Pliny Pliny
reports of some Doves which will fly many miles to their lockers. Even in this
is Ephraim like unto a silly Dove also, where he was ^any years ago there he is
still. And so it is with many men, they know and are convinced that such
company has done them mischief, which they have frequented, and yet they
cannot leave them, here is a silly Dove, without understanding indeed.

Doves though they be swift in their flying, yet dull in preventing Plin. l.
10. c, 37
so was Ephraim easily ensnared by his enemies at their pleasures and preyed
upon by them.

The Dove is delighted in the beauty of her feathers, and Ide^. l. 11. c. 36.
and cutting of the air as it were; Ephraim was priding her self in her
ornaments, and fine excellent out side; we are very ready and prone to imitate
the creatures in that which is evil, but not in that which is good; there are
some good properties in the Dove which they would not follow, as in their
innocence and simplicity, their unity and chastity, meekness, without gall,
cleanliness and purity, it loves clear water, loves no carcass to feed on etc.
Prudentia obsque bonitate malitia est, and simplicitas obsque ratione stultitia
est. From whence we may note, that godliness does not bear men out in ways of
folly, when men will not go from the rule, but stick unto that to be guided in
all cases of their lives, this is godly simplicity; it is matter of wonder to
see how subtle men are to damn themselves, and it is, and should be the care of
the Saints to be wise to save their souls, it is a scandal which is raised upon
the Gospel, that it makes men fools. Those are only wise men who are truly
godly, then men begin to be wise, when they begin to be godly; our simplicity
may aggravate our misery, but it can never bear us out in it, nor excuse it;
true godliness will undermine all sinful simplicity, therefore take heed of
putting that upon the Spirit of God which is nothing but the simplicity of our
own hearts, Therefore be ye, wise as Serpents, but innocent as Doves.

VER. 12. When they shall go, I will spread my net upon them, I will bring them
down as the fouls of the heaven: I will chastise them as their Congregation
has heard.


IN the former verses, the Lord by the Prophet charges Israel for their
silliness as the Doves but as silly as they were they thought to provide for
themselves well enough, by their going to Egypt; but it being out of Gods way,
it proved but silliness, for God was resolved to meet with them: when they go,
I Will spread my net over them, my providence shall so begirt and straighten
them, that although they may seem to escape, yet they shall be ensnared. This
place has reference unto that story in 2 Kings, 17.4. the Assyrian was G^ds
net to take them in, the emphasis of the word lies here.

My net; in the pronoun my. Men by their cunning and policy may bring men into
great trouble and straights, but when God sets himself by his Attributes of
wisdom, power, and justice to bring a people down to ruin, they shall be taken,
they shall not escape. The Notes are:

Those which go out of Gods way, it is just with God they should be ensnared.
Job, 18.7. The steps of his strength shall be straightened, and his own counsel
shall bring him down. Job, 22.10. Therefore snares are round about thee, and
sudden fear troubles thee. How many men from experience can speak the truth of
this? who going out of Gods ways have met with snares? and it is Gods curse
upon the wicked, that their table shall become a snare to them, and God
threatens it in Isa. 8.14. that he would be for a stone of stumbling, and for a
rock of offense to both the houses of Israel, for a gin and for a snare to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem. And therefore when we are in straights, it is good to
think thus, Where am I? what am I a doing? am I in my way or no? have I not
followed my own counsel and left Gods? If we have, mark what God says, I Will
bring you down as the fouls of Heaven: you think to escape by flying, no stay a
while, when you think you are the most secure, then I will meet with you.

God may for a time let wicked men prosper in their ways, insomuch Sam. 22.28.
But thine eyes are upon the haughty, that thou may bring them down. Thine
eyes are upon them: That is, as a fowler sets his eyes upon a bird, which he
would take in his snare or net, that sits on high; the proud and haughty
spirits fly on high and think themselves very secure, and bless themselves in
their way, but Gods eyes are upon them, waiting for a fit time to pull them
down. It was the answer of a Philosopher being asked what Jupiter did in the
highest heaven; says he, he pulls down the haughty, and exalts the humble.
Obadia the 3, 4. verses, The pride of thine heart has deceived thee, thou that
dwell in the clefts of the rock, whose habitation is high, that says in his
heart, Who shall bring me down to the ground? Though thou exalt thy self as the
Eagle, and though thou set thy nest among the stars, thence will I bring thee
down says the Lord. This is also true in that proud King of Babylon in Isa.
24.21. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall punish the
host of the high ones, which art on high, and the Kings of the earth upon the
earth. This cannot be understood of the Devil, but of the King of Babylon, whom
God threatens to pull down. It follows.

I will chastise them. The word translated, I will chastise, signifies both, to
bind, to chastise, and instruct.

First, I will bind them: sinners shall be bound with the cords of their lusts.

Secondly, I Will chastise and instruct them; noting that chastisements should be
with instructions: I will chastise them.

As they have heard] Moses and the Prophets have instructed them, but they
disregarded them, but I Will make it good what they said of them.

Sinners had need to regard what they hear out of the Word of God in the
Congregation, for it will take hold on them some way or other, Zecharia, 1.6.
But my Words, and my Statutes, which I commanded my servants the Prophets, Did
they not take hold of your fathers, or overtake them? Oh thou impenitent
sinner! take heed how thou go on in thy wicked ways, for know, that all the
power in God is engaged to make good his Word against thee. Therefore when
Christ sends forth his Disciples to preach the Gospel, he engages all his
power to make good what they in his Name and according to his mind deliver,
Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. Matt. 28.18, 19, 20 opened
All power is given to me in Heaven and in Earth: Go ye therefore and teach all
Nations; and lo I am with you always to the end of the world. Oh how should we
from this consideration, be stirred up to hear the word with trembling!

When judgments come upon impenitent sinners, it is a humbling consideration
unto them, to consider, that that word which they heard in the Congregation was
true? How do multitudes on their sick beds prove this to be true? Now God makes
them believe the truth of that word which before they had slight thoughts of;
it is wonderful to consider how God brings Sermons into the minds of such upon
their sick beds which they had forgotten before, it is the office of the Spirit
of God to bring the Word into the minds of the Saints though by them it be
forgotten, John 14.26. But the Comforter, which is the holy Ghost, whom the
Father will send, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things into your
remembrance, whatsoever I have taught you: But it is another manner of course
that God uses to bring the word into wicked men's minds, even by his strokes,
and that not for their comfort, but for their horror and destruction. It
follows.

VER. 13. Woe unto them, for they have fled from me: destruction unto them,
because they have transgressed against me, though I have redeemed them, yet
they have spoken lies against me.


WOE in Scripture sometimes signifies pity, and misery; here it is to be
understood of misery, destruction to them.

They forsake me] The word here interpreted, forsake, signifies to wander; it
is a woeful thing to depart from God, much more to wander from God: Woe be to
you, when I depart from you, but if you depart from me, what will you do? In
wandering from God, thou wanderest from the only Infinite good, and then, where
will thou rest the sole of thy foot? what shall comfort thee in the time of thy
distress? It is evil to wander from God, but much more to make have from God.
It is the Devils plot and custom, to hurry backsliding sinners from God, that
they should not consider what they do, and whither they are going, he posteth
them on in their evil ways as a bird to the snare, and knows it not that it
is for his life, Prove. 7.23. Oh how much more should the Saints be put on for
God? not to be kept off with impediments, but let our souls with David's, in
Psalm. 63.8. follow hard after God; and Psalm. 119.63. I made have and delaied
not, to keep thy righteous judgments. It follows.

Destruction to them. This is the end always of such as depart from God: and
happy were it if thou could see it beforehand. Oh how many when they have
come to see the end of their ways upon their death beds, have given a most
dreadful shriek as seeing themselves past recovery.

They have transgressed against me. They have not only sinned against me, but
have broken covenant also, they have now dealt perfideously with the Lord.
Before God said He would chastise them: but now He would destroy them, Covenant
breakers ruin.
make an end of them: Utter ruin is the portion of those that break Covenant
with me.

Though I have redeemed them, yet they speak lies against me. Some read it in
the future: Though I would, and was ready to do it, yet they say that the way
of worship I prescribed is not so successeful, and no such blessing follows it;
they say my Prophets threaten nothing but judgment and utter desolation: now
says God, All these are lies, it is no such matter, I was ready to do them
good. But the future is often used for the pretertense in the Hebrew, and so
here: the sense is, I have not only redeemed them out of Egypt, but very often
since out of the hands of their enemies. And the story which this Scripture
refers unto, is, in 2 Kings. 14.27. the Lord wonderfully prospered them in
their wars, and the Lord said not, that he would blot out the name of Israel
from under heaven? but he saved them by the hand of Jeroboam the son of Joash.
It follows.

But they spoke lies against him. That is, They attributed their redemption
unto those helps which they had, or to their Idols, saying in this manner:
Other people that served not God were delivered as well as we, we see not so
much of Gods hand in our deliverance as you speak of. Or else, They fathered
their errors upon me because I delivered. Now says God, in this you lie
against me: They made false interpretations of Gods mercies; As that God was no
such enemy to this way of worship, because he had redeemed them. The Notes are:

Gods reedeeming mercies, are great aggravations of our sin. When

When God delivers a people or person from danger, and they now As they, in
Jer. 7.10. said they were delivered for to do all these abominations. Or as
that wicked King, Philip King of Spain.
being delivered in a storm, said it was to this end, That he might root out
all the Lutherans. So, are there not many so vile who being delivered in a
sickness, or from any great danger, think it is, that they might sin more
freely: which is a most hurrible wickedness, and lying against the Lord.

For any man to urge any false doctrine or opinion upon another, is Therefore
take heed how you bring Scriptures to prove any error which you hold, or is
maintained by any, for God will look upon it but as a lying against him. It is
a dangerous thing to counterfeit the Kings Stamp; simile
and is it not much more to counterfeit the Truths of God, by errors seemingly
maintained by Scripture?

But to apply this spiritually: Luther upon these words takes much notice of
Gods speaking so in his own person: They have departed from Me, they have
transgressed against Me, done wickedly against Me, speak lies against me, call
not upon Me etc. Here note,

That the great evil of sin lies in this, That it is against God. This
consideration laid David very low, Against thee only have I sinned. And this is
that which humbles a gracious heart, that it should sin so unkindly against God.

The more a man's sins are directly against God, the greater is the sin. For now
God suffers more immediately in his glory, and this puts the aggravation upon
the sin.

VER. 14. And they have not cried unto me with their heart, when they howled
upon their beds: they assemble themselves for corn and wine, and they rebel
against me.


AND they have not cried unto me] The Seventy have it thus: (...) 70.
Heart-prayer.
Their hearts have not cried to me. Where we may see, that it is not enough to
cry with with the mouth, except the heart cry as well as the mouth. We read of
Moses, who though he spoke not a word that is expressed in the text, yet it is
said, he prayed: It is the working of the heart that is the heart of prayer.
Oration est res ardua, and magni laboris est opus difficillimum ideo rarissimum.
Luther
Therefore when Elijah prayed, it is said, he prayed in praying, Jam. 5.17. And
by this we see the great difference there is in praying; Heart-prayer pleases
God. A workman which wants words to express himself, yet may be able to
perform his business very well in Gods account; so he that is able to express
himself in fine language, eloquent sentences, and multitudes of words, may yet
not pray at all: therefore when you pray look that your hearts go along with
the duty, otherwise, your cries will be but as their prayers here in the text,
which are called howlings, and that in these four respects. Prayers howlings
why.


howling. (...) the letter is super added.
And thus the Heathen Indians at this day howl to their gods. And in this
manner were the cries of Israel looked at but as howlings.

and unquiet in their lives, and froward in their carriage in prayer. Even thus
it is with many in trouble of conscience, they are very boisterous and make
troublesome noises, the shallowest waters makes the greatest noise, but the
deepest rivers run the stillest; so those that have the deepest sense of sin,
and are kindly troubled for it, are quiet, still and submissive under Gods
hand, and certainly such a boisterousness of spirit under the sense of sin, is
not from the Spirit, although there may be some legal terrors, but when God
has subdued the heart to himself, the heart will seek earnestly for mercy, and
yet in a quiet humble way.

They howled upon their beds in regard of their pain. Pharaoh and David, Saul
and David: Saul cries, he cries to Samuel, saying, I have sinned, and done
foolishly, yet honor me I pray thee, before the people. David he confesses his
sin and accepts of the punishment of his iniquity, Lord, it is I that have
sinned, as for these sheep, what have they done? Pharaoh he cries to Moses that
he would pray to God to deliver him from the plagues that were upon him. David
he cries to God, Lord take away the iniquity of thy servant. If iniquity be
done away, judgment will soon be removed, sin being the cause of all misery.

Howling; to note, that God regarded their cries no more Amos, 8.3. Amos, 3.8
opened.
The songs of the Temple shall be howlings in that day: as the prayers, so the
sacrifices of such, how pleasing they are to God we find, Isa. 66.3. they are
but as the cutting off a dogs neck; and their cries were but as the cries of
that dog whose neck was cut off: They in their pride were wont to speak
contemptibly of God, his ways, and servants, contemning them, and God, he
contemns and scorns them, their prayers, and their sacrifices; therefore that
in Prove. 1.26. is verified here, He will laugh at their destruction, and mock
when their fear comes. Oh how vile are wicked men in God eyes, when they are
in trouble and misery. None so vile but we pity them, and releeve them; but for
the infinite, merciful, pitiful God, who is full of goodness and has bowels of
tender love and compassion, for him to have them in derision and to jeer (as we
may so speak) the cries of his creature, Oh the consideration of this is most
sad; Oh vile is the sin which makes man thus odious.

And here we see what little use there is of wicked men's spirits, they are of
no use, there is for them in the places where they live nothing that they can
do, Wicked men of no use.
thou can easily sin and bring down judgments by thy sins, but when they are
come upon thee what will thou do? perhaps thou will pray and cry to God, God he
abhors thy prayers, thy cries are abomination unto him; it is the Saints
prayers that are so acceptable unto him, the prayer of the upright is his
delight, Prove. 15.8. the least sigh, which come^ from a godly heart is such a
strong cry that it fills heaven and earth; so that (as I may speak with
reverence) God can hear nothing else but that, because he both prepares their
hearts to pray, and prepares his ear to hear; therefore we find in Scripture
such expressions as these: Psalm. 10.17. and Nehem. 1.7. the good man prays
that Gods ear would be attentive, and his eyes open that he might hear the
prayers of his servant. Psalm. 86.1. Bow down thine ear, O Lord, hear, and help
me for I am poor. 1 Pet. 3.12. His ears are open to their prayers. And Psalm.
86.6. God gives his ear to their prayers and attends to the voice of their
supplication; what does all this hold forth unto us but this? that the prayers
of Saints are very delightful to him, they are pleasant music in his ears,
were there no other difference between the godly and the wicked than in their
prayers, it were sufficient to make men out of love with the ways of sin, and
join with the Saints in the ways of holiness, the Saints they send up sweet
breathings, and God takes pleasure in them: the wicked they howl and cry out,
and God rejects them.

They howl upon their beds. Men in their prosperity go up and down uncontrowled
in their wicked ways, but when God confines them to their chambers annd their
sick beds, then they howl. It follows.

They assemble themselves for corn and wine. The old Latin: Ruminabant, not
Comedebant, like beasts they feed: the Hebrew word that has such a
signification, differrs not much from that which signifies to assemble, (...)
congregare (...) setare, rumniare. The Seventy (...) they cut themselves as
Baals Priests: But rather it signifies to assemble. They flock together, that
they might get corn and wine, so they had it, they did not care what became of
God and his Ordinances. 2. Assemble to feed themselves with the wheat, so they
might be pampered, they looked at nothing else. 3. Or more probably, were
assembled at their Temples to cry for wheat. The Notes are these.

That the vilest men in times of common calamity and public miseries Now
certainly, if they will pray to have trouble taken away, when upon them, it is
our duty to pray to prevent danger a coming.

When ever Hypocrites assemble together, it is for themselves, not for for corn
and wine, and outward mercies. Were it not that they wanted some outward good,
God should seldom or never hear from them.

Hypocrites in their seeking of God seek him more for sensual things We
assemble together in our fasts to seek God, but what is it for? if only or
principally for outward things, it is but carnal and not spiritual seeking. It
follows.

And they rebel against me. Prae frumento, when they are fed like unto the Ox
when it is fed fat it kicks against tht Master. Or 2. they rebel after they
have assembled themselves, when once the duty is over, they go to their old
courses again, and undo all their prayers: as Jer. 5.3. Thou have stricken them,
but they have not grieved; thou have consumed them, but they have refused to
receive correction. We should from hence learn, That duties should mightily
engage us against sin. Have thou in prayer, either confessed sin, or asked
mercy of God to pardon thy sins? Know, there lies a great engagement upon our
hearts now to be humbled for our sins, and to walk according to our prayers:
Do thou in prayer beg power against thy sins? and in thy life do thou rebel
against God? Are there not many who will be long in prayer, and very earnest,
and judge themselves for their sins, yea and in words justify God if he should
for ever condemn them for their sins, and yet afterward rebel anew against
God? Oh! may it not be said, What is this the man that even now was in Heaven
in prayer, and is now as it were in Hell in his conversation? Me thinks the
very next time thou go to pray to God, thy mouth should be stopped and not
able to speak unto God: as we read Origins was, when he had apostatized,
Origin.
and coming to preach again, and reading that text in Psalm. 50. What have thou
to do to take my Word into thy mouth, and hate to be reformed? his mouth was
presently stopped, and he was not able to speak a word more. So thou prayest to
God, and after thou have prayed, thou go and sinnest freely again, Oh thou
wretch, tremble at this, go and humble thy soul before God for thy sins, and
tremble at coming into Gods presence in this kind. I put this delemma to you;
Either you pray against your sins, or you do not; if not, Oh consider how thou
art departed from God; if thou do pray against them, then how dare thou
live in those sins which thou have prayed against? Tertullian Tertull.
has an excellent speech to this purpose: he says, That prayer must always
be with remembrance of Gods precepts, lest we are as far from Gods ear, as his
precepts are from our hearts. It follows.

They rebel against me. That is, When their own turns are served, and their
own ends satisfied, then they rebel against me, as if now they had no more need
of God, nor never should want help from him; Oh how many are there who upon
their sick beds cry out to God, that he would spare their sins, and show them
mercy, making large promises to God what they would do? God has taken them at
their words, and has raised them up again and restored them to strength. And
what have they done? nothing but rebelled against him more than formerly, and
are like the wild ass that snuffeth up the wind.

VER. 15. Though I have bound and strengthened their arms, yet do they imagine
mischief against me.


GOD in this verse compares himself to a skilful Chyrurgion, who binds up
broken arms and wounds; so God had often bound up their arms when broken by the
enemies. 2 King. 14. there we find God bound up their broken arms; It is God
only who can bind up broken arms.

2 It is a great aggravation of a man's sin, to be sinful after great God finds
us as Chyrurgions do their patients, all out of joint, and crying out of their
pains, Oh that I had ease! I would give my estate, that I might be cured; and
when the Chyrurgion has used his skill, and has cured you of your pain, and
has given you some ease, if now you should stand hagling with him for a
shilling matter, Would it not be an unworthy act? and would not the man think
his time and skill ill bestowed? Oh how many people are there who deal thus
with God? haggle and shuffle it with God in their distress: Oh if God will
diliver them, what promises do they make? but when they have peace and quiet
forget again.

It were an argument of an exellent spirit indeed, if when after our Have our
arms been broken, and has God bound them up for us? O let us now use them for
God. But this people were far from this disposition, they imagined evil against
God: As if a patient which is cured of some desperate wound, simile.
or disease, should seek to stab his Chyrurgion or Physician.

They imagine mischief. (...)
The word signifies, al kinds of evil, and to imagine mischief is in some regard
worse than to practice it; it was not a weakness or sin of infirmity in the^^
for it was an imagined mischief, it was a most vile provoking sin, for it did
aim at the mischieving of God Himself: they who live in sin, live as if they
were born for nothing but to do mischief to God.

What was this mischief they imagined against God?

England.
how have many improved all opportunities to set up themselves and their ways.

VER. 16. They return, but not to the most high: they are like a deceitful bow:
their Princes shall fall by the sword, for the rage of their tongue: this shall
be their derision in the land of Egypt.


THEY return] They make shows, yea something they do. This verse has reference
to the story of Jehu who did very much; there were very great beginnings in his
time to cast out Idolatry, but neither he, nor the people did come up to the
full height that God required of them, but they would have some mixtures of
their own. And thus it is in many peoples reformation, they are very hot at it
in the beginning; and even among us, England.
how high did the hearts of people rise? but what a damp is there since that
time? though blessed be God great things are don among us. But says God, that
is not yet done amongst them which I would have done, it is true, they honor me
indeed, but it is as the Nations round about them honor their Gods, they do not
honor me as the Infinite Eternal First being of all things; I am not worshipped
by them as the Infinite, High, Eternal God; people should so labor to reform
themselves that they may hold forth the honor of God as he is Infinite,
Glorious, Eternal, How we should honor God
and having all power in his hands. The Notes of Observation from the words are
these.

That God is the most high God, the supreme Majesty of Heaven he is so high
that he humbles himself to behold things done in Heaven, it is a stooping in him
that he takes notice of things in Heaven, surely then much more for things done
on the earth: surely then he is a high God, and when ever we come before him in
prayer we should come before him as unto such a God who is so glorious and high
above all things betwixt whom and us there is an infinite distance.

A true repenting sinner should have the sight of this high God always and
great would be the efficacy of such a sight as this is upon the spirit, it
would be very profitable for the soul. For,

This would make the soul to be very serious with God, not

It would make the soul abhor it self in dust and ashes, Job,

It shows unto the soul the infinite evil which there is in sin

That there is no standing out against this high God, that

That he is infinitely worthy of all that I am or have, and





Trial of repentanc
whether it be of the right kind or no, by your thoughts of God. Have you
sorrowed for sin, as before such a glorious high God as the Lord is, that those
that see ^ur humiliations may see glory and honor and praise written upon them
to the Lord? The want of this, these people were charged for here: and this
has been our case many times, the Lord help our reformers to carry on the work
of reformation begun, as before the high God. If we lose this opportunity, we
lose such an opportunity as yet was scarce ever granted to any Nation upon the
face of the earth. Now wicked proud men may lift themseves high in the world,
and be thought to be somebody for it, but it is the low, broken, penitent soul
which it the high man, because he returns to the high God. But secondly, They
return, but it is not to the yoke, as some render the words, They will not come
under obedience to Gods commands, for there is but a little difference (namely
in the pricks) between (...) jugum and (...) alitissi, and if we understand the
word thus, then it notes, that they promised much, and made many fair shows of
doing much, but they would not come under the yoke; they will still be sons of
Belial, without yoke. So many people, upon exhortation and entreaties will
promise fair, they will return, and they will do much, but when it comes to see
the yooke, Oh they flinch back and hold off, Oh it is too hard for them. It
follows.

They are like a deceitful bow. Thus did their progenitors they trod in the
same steps, Psalm. 78.57. They kept not his testimony, Deceitful bow.
but turned back and dealt deceitfully as did their fathers, that were turned
aside like a deceitful bow. Now a bow is deceitful two ways.

When it cause^ the arrow to turn from them it was levelled Zachariah, 9.13.
says God, I have bent Israel as my bow to shoot at evil doers. How vile and
wicked are those men, into whose hands God has committed power to execute
justice and judgment against evil doers, and they shall turn all their power
against the Saints and those that do well.

A bow is deceitful when it carries the arrow the wrong Jehu's time, he was a
notorious deceitful bow; Come, see my zeal for the Lord, yet an hypocrit. Oh
let us look to our hearts, there may be secret warpings in our hearts which may
cause us to miscarry for ever, if we take not heed; many who have good
intentions, good purposes, aims and desires, and yet have some secret warping
which they know not of, simile
which may make them miscarry to all eternity. A man may with a deceitful bow
aim at a beast, and yet kill a man; so many may think they strike at sin, and
yet with that very goad may at the same time wound the Saints. It follows.

Their Princes shall fall by the sword. These were they who had the chief hand
in the setting up of false worship, and in oppressing those that would not join
with them: now God would reach these great ones. In times of battle Princes
stand by secured at a distance, they have their Life guards, they put on others
and think to be safe themselves, they will bring others into straights, and
miseries and care not though thousands of them be slain at a fight, they shall
do well enough, but says God, they shall not so escape in battle, Their
Princes shall fall by the sword, it shall not distinguish them from others.

For the rage of their tongue. They raged against God, his People, and
Ordinances, and thought themselves too big to be contradicted; we may note here,

Obs.
That when men grow very wicked they grow outrageous, like mad men, there is no
ruling of them, there is such a world of wickedness in them they take a liberty
to say what they please; we find many strong expressions about the tongue in
Scripture.

(...) so the 70. render the words
As Job, 5.21. it is called a scourge; therefore the Saints are promised to be
delivered from it.

2. Psalm. 57.4. it is called a sharp sword. Prove. 12.18. there is that speaks
like the piercing of a sword, Prove. 25.18. a man that bears false witness
against his neighbor, Epethites of the tongue.
is a Mole, and a Sword, and a sharp Arrow.

3. It is compared to fire, yea unto the fire of hell, James, 3.7, 8. To the
coals of Juniper, Psalm. 120.4. which are quickly kindled, but abide long; all
these expressions with others we find about the tongue of the wicked. But now
see what is said of the tongues of the Saints, Cant. 4.11. Thy lips Oh my
Spouse, drop as the honey comb, honey and milk are under thy tongue. And Prove.
10.20. The tongue of the just is as choice silver: The heart of the wicked is
little worth.

4. An outrageous tongue is such a poison as poisons it self, which no other
poison does, other poisons hurt no further than they are applied, they cannot
poison at a distance, but this is such a strange working thing, that it will
both hurt and so destroy men that they shall never recover themselves, and this
it will do at a distance, and come not near, these men have such dispositions,
that they will let none pass without a lash of their tongue. Now the Lord he
will not let these go in this manner, he will scorn the scorners; when these
men are in their rage none are spared, Magistrates, Misiers, Parents,
Ordinances, no nor God Himself; But Christ will convince them of their hard
words. Consider how in your families, or in some companies you have been guilty
of the rage of the tongue in these kinds. It follows in the last words.

This shall be their derision in the Land of Egypt. When they come to Egypt
they think to find them their friends, that they will help them and stick unto
them; no says God, instead of helping them, they shall scorn them. One part of
the rage of their tongue was in speaking basely of the worship of God, and of
his people; and now the Egyptians shall speak basely to them; Why do you come to
us for help? where is your God become, that you so boasted of? Therefore just
is it with God, that those which forsake him and his help, and go to men for
succor, that they by them should be made a scorn: O it is a most grievous
judgment for Gods people to be made a scorn by such, the Egyptians! And it
should be our care and duty not to put our brethren into such straights, that
the poor Saints of God should be forced to go to the wicked for help least,
they should reproach them, saying, Why do you come to us? What, cannot your
holy brethren releeve you? do you expect help from us? But in special this is
their derision in the land of Egypt, the rage of their tongue, their fallings
out one with another, they could not agree but wrangled and jangled among
themselves, when the Egyptians shall see this, they shall deride them, and look
upon them as the greatest objects of scorn that possibly can be.

The Lord deliver us from this judgment; when was there such divisions amongst
us as at this day? Oh the rage of the tongue which abounds in every place! the
Devil himself has a chief stroke in this rage, and he laughs to see it prosper
and increase as well as our adversaries, who laugh in their sleeves at us both;
and what should move us more to agree one with another than this; The
consideration of that woeful scorn and derision we should be to them if God
should deliver us up into their hands. Now as this their rage was a symtom to
them of their ruin, so the Lord grant that we

Prophet in time of destress Page 87
All
All pretend to seek God Page 408
Ambition
The ambition of Priests Page 103
Anathema Maranatha
Anathema Maranatha what it means Page 903
Apes
An Apes tooth worshipped for a god Page 200
Apostates
The hearts of Apostates are rooted in wickedness Page 357 Apostates seldom
turn Page 384
Apostasy
What the beginning of Apostasy is Page 425
Art
What the art of Preaching is, and wherein it consists Page 440
Avenged
God will be avenged for breach of trust Page 29
Agravation
Agravation of Englands wickedness Page 642
Application
Application to the Parliament Page 580 Application to England in general ibid
Application to private men ib.
Assemblies
Church assemblies are not always safe Page 608
Arguments
Arguments that mercy is coming Page 547 Arguments of a carnal heart. Page 550
B
Baseness
The baseness of people discribed, and whereon it consists Page 367
Beasts
When the beasts are taken away our comforts are gone Page 65
Beda
Beda his opinion of Austin the Monk Page 395
Best
Best men not to be depended on Page 485
Beware
Men ought to beware of secret sins Page 483
Blood
Blood requires blood Page 48
Bribery
Bribery in Magistrates is a curse of God upon a Nation Page 221
Beginnings
It is grievous to God for men to let fall good beginnings, and the reasons why
Page 582 see Dangerous

Body
God is careful of the body Page 607
Bound
God is not bound to do for man Page 571
C
Carnal men
Carnal men shall be ashamed and why? Page 331
Carnalists
Carnalists portion is outward Page 434
Christ
see Humble
Christ
see Duty
Children
Wicked children are a dishonor to their parents Page 197
Cause
A good Cause may be lost by too much depending on it Page 388
Comfort
see beasts
Commands
Commands to superstition usually find obedience Page 473
Communion
How communion is defiled by the presence of wicked men. Page 373
Creature
The good or evil of the creature depends upon man Page 67
Contend
God contends not without cause Page 21 God contends not for little things Page
22
Condition
The condition of the person offending aggravates the sin Page 118 The poor
condition of such as are rich only in this world Page 434
Conscience
How pride of conscience may be discerned Page 395
Contempt
Contempt of the word, a constant companion to Idolatry Page 363
Controversy
Controversies between them that are near are grievous controversies Page 2 The
controversy of Gods with sinners is very grievous Page 5 Gods controversy
against England. Page 8 Gods controversy with Covenant-breakers is dreadful.
Page 26
Covetousness
The covetousness of Priests Page 93
Counsels
Perplexed counsels are a fearful judgment to a Nation Page 170
Court,
see Evil
Curiosity,
see Superstition
Carnal,
see Agreements
Carthaginians
The Carthaginians Law concerning Magistrates Page 660
Christ
Christ became miserable for our consolation Page 548 Christ's speech of neglect
of parents expounded Page 604
Choice,
see Spirits
Clouds
Clouds and dew passing, what it implies Page 576
Communicative,
see Nature
Consolation
Consolation to those whose friends have perished in Gods Cause Page 589
Comfort,
see God
Consideration
What considerations move men best to turn to God Page 536
Correction,
see Means
Court,
see Idolatry
Church,
see Assemblies
Courage
Motives to courage Page 535
Covenant
The Covenant which God has made with man, is threefold Page 622 The portion
of Covenant-breakers Page 686
Cut-down
How to know when a man is cut down Page 595
D
Danger
The danger of forsaking the truth Page 386 The danger of depending upon duties
Page 403
Dangerous
It is dangerous to venture upon the beginnings of false worship Page 354 It is
dangerous to be deeply rooted in superstition Page 355
Defiled
Defiled worship defiles the soul Page 372
Defiled,
see Nation
Defilement
A twofold defilement Page 371
Deny
We should deny our selves to promote the true worship of God. Page 357
Disappointment
Disappointment brings shame. Page 326
Distinction
There ought to be a distinction made between the children of wicked, and of
godly Ministers Page 130
Disrespect
Disrespect breeds shame Page 325
Divination
How the Heathens were wont to divine by staves Page 134
Dogs
Wicked men are dogs Page 73
Duty
What the duty of Ministers is. Page 141 What the duty of Christians is. Page
474
Dying
What a dying and terrified conscience is Page 500
Danger
Danger, see Night
Days,
see Festival, Difference
Dangerous
It is dangerous to men to let good beginnings fall. Page 583 See Hypocrisy
Daniels case in prayer opened. Page 611
Deliverance
All deliverance comes from heaven Page 566
Destruction
see wilfulness
Difference
Difference between Gods setting days apart, and man's setting days apart Page
661
Discovery
see Morning
Duties
see Natural
Drunkenness
Drunkenness brings diseases Page 663
E
Education
The custom of the Romans concerning the education of their children Page 421
Emperor
Emperors called and accounted the Popes Dogs Page 117
England
England admonished Page 86 A warning for England Page 375 see Controversy

End
The end of duties is to find out God Page 411
Evil
The reason why there was so much evil at Court Page 115 See Punishment

Example
The example of wicked parents is not to be followed by their children Page 429
Excellency
The excellency of grace makes sin the worse Page 179
Experience
Experience of our late Prelates Page 358
Emperor
An Emperor may be kept from the Sacrament Page 577
England
The men of England of perverse spirits Page 572 Englands superstition reproved
Page 589 England guilty of blood, by calling murder manslaughter Page 627
Englands wickedness Page 641
Evil
see Slander
Excuses
Men's excuses Page 570
Exhortation
Exhortations to mercy Page 615
Experience
The Saints experience Page 564
Expostulation,
see Form
Expressions
Scripture expressions against formality Page 621
F
False worship
The evils false worship does in a Nation Page 138
Families
The families of wicked Ministers are many times forgotten Page 97
Failings
God looks not at the particular failings of a State Page 382
Flower
The glory of the world is but as a flower Page 64
Formal
God delights not in formal professors Page 412
Framing
Notes of framing ones heart to the will of God Page 381
Faith
Faith makes God real in the saddest condition Page 542 An eminent prop of
faith Page 548 See Unworthiness and Repentance

False Prophets
False Ptophets are not to be followed Page 588
False Worship
False Worship is to be trembled at Page 633
Festival days
Festival days are usually distempering days Page 664
Form
A form of expostulation with ones soul Page 570
G
Gilgal
Wherein Gilgal was famous. Page 183
Given
A dreadful thing to be given over of God, and why Page 207
Glory
see Flower
God
God is a God of truth Page 23 God is no respecter of person Page 118 We should
seriously mind what God does Page 338 Gods pleading with man is not to be
neglected Page 345 How God rebukes men Page 363 God will deal with men
according to their present ways. Page 370 God is not engaged to any Page 402
God delights most in his second right Page 405 God will not always be found
Page 411 God never smites a people before he warns them Page 452 God is a moth
and rottenness, and how Page 477 See Real, Controversy, Contend, Punish, Wrath,
Holiness.

Good works
The good works of the Saints shall return unto them Page 121
Governors
Governors of families should be careful of their families Page 154 The
Governors of the people are usually the causes of the evils of the people Page
198 See Rulers

Grace,
see Excellency
God
God will have glory from men Page 516 Gods usual way of comforting his people
Page 520 God works by contraries Page 540 God does not willingly grieve men
Page 669 See Heart, Keep, Leave, Penitent, Mercies, Bound

Governors,
see Wicked
Great-men
Great men are not easily reformed Page 577
Grounded
We must be well grounded in the cause we suffer for Page 540
H
Hard
Hard truths are hardly born Page 2 The signs of an hard heart Page 515
Heathens
Why the Heathens sacrificed undrr trees Page 149 A notable speech of an
Heathen. Page 552
Heart
The secrets of man's heart are known to God Page 367 The heart of man is knotty
Page 593 See Framing, Argument, Hard, Note

Herod
Herod's mercy in time of famine Page 30
Holiness
God puts a stamp of holiness upon the places he chooses. Page 143
Hope
There is little hope of private means when public means fail Page 85
Humble
An humble man knows much of the mind of Christ Page 396
Help
We should help those that suffer for a good cause Page 574
Heal
How God heals Page 640
Hypocrites,
see Terror
Hypocrisy
Hypocrisy in Reformation is dangerous Page 581
Honor
Places of honor are great snares. Page 670 How we should honor God Page 695
Howling,
see Prayer
I
Idolaters
Idolaters seldom come in and return Page 125 What poor ways of worship
Idolaters have Page 136 If parents be Idolaters their children are usually so
too Page 161 It is dangerous living near Idolaters, and why Page 172 Idolaters
are proud men Page 391 Idolaters despise Gods worship. Page 391
Idolatry
The Idolatry of the Papists Page 133 The nearer Idolatry comes to the Worship
of God, the more dangerous it is Page 174 Court- idolatry is most dangerous
Page 633 See Contempt
Idols
Idols are bewitching things Page 199
Ignorance
The cause of ignorance Page 35 Ignorance is the deformity of the soul Page 90
Ignorance is dangerous, and how Page 91 Ignorance and pride are companions Page
390
Incest
Incest an heinous sin Page 61
Influence
There is a great influence between the Priests and the People Page 100
Impetuousness
Impetuousness of spirit is to be suspected Page 136
Institutions
Institutions are to be minded in point of worship Page 128
Inclinations
Strong inclinations bind the mind Page 388
Justice
Justice must be executed impartially Page 50 Justice must not struck dumb with
the appearance of angels Page 222
Judgment
It is a great judgment for men to be unserviceable in times of service Page
565 How judgment convinces Page 597 See Leave and Ministry
Irreligion
Irreligion and slavery are companions Page 654
K
Kings
Kings were accounted of as the Popes dogs Page 177 Godly Kings observed not
their birth-daies Page 661 See Respect
Knowledge
Want of knowledge of God makes men cruel Page 32
Keep
How to keep God with us Page 510
Know,
see Saints
Knowledge,
see Opportunity
Kingdom,
see Officers
L
Lady
The folly of a Lady in Paris Page 151
Land
How a Land may be said to mourn Page 62
Living-God
Living-God what it implies. Page 189
Lying
Lying and swearing go together. Page 44
Leave
It is a sad judgment for God to leave men Page 509 God never leaves his Page
510
Live
see Resurrection
M
Magistrates see Bribery Man slaughter
Manslaughter is but a vain distinction from murder Page 48
Men see Merciless Merciless
A merciful God sets him against merciless men Page 29
Ministers
Ministers must plead for God Page 3 How faithful Ministers shall be dealt
withal Page 77 Striving against faithful Ministers is a great hastening of
judgment Page 81 Ill Ministers are besotted Page 88 Ministers must rebuke sin.
Page 361 The duty of Ministers Page 438 It is a comfort to Ministers to die
preaching Page 590 Ministers are hewers Page 593 Ministers work is difficult.
Page 594 See Truths, Superstition, Whoremongers, Duty.

Mind see Inclinations. Mixture
How the mixture of wicked and godly men is hurtful Page 372 How the mixture of
wicked and godly men is to be distinguished Page 373
Murder
Murder is not to be pardoned. Page 48
Manslaughter
see England
Men
see Causes
Means
Means to persevere Page 585
Mercies
How to use mercies well Page 545 Mercies are forfeited by unbeleef before they
be received ibid One mercy makes way for another Page 558 Gods mercies are
seasonable Page 564
In what cases God will have mercy and not sacrifice Page 601
Means
All means must be used before correction Page 569
Ministry
The sharper the Ministry is the sharper shall the judgment be if it be
neglected Page 598
Morning
Gods discovery is in the morning Page 560 See Presence

Murder
see England
N
Nation
A defiled Nation is near ruin Page 374 While a Nation is purging there is hope
Page 375 How it may be known what shall become of a Nation Page 428
Natural
What a Natural man may do toward conversion Page 377 What natural duties are
Page 601
Nature
The more excellent the Nature is the more communicative it is Page 573
Neighbors
Ill neighbors are an ill thing Page 445
Night
Night times are times of danger Page 560
Note
A note of a good heart Page 565
O
Oath
What an Oath implies Page 189
Obedience
Willing Obedience to sin brings guilt upon a Nation Page 473
Obedience
see Command
Officers
The Officers of the Kingdom seek their own interest Page 639
Opportunity
No Opportunity to get knowledge must be neglected Page 609
P
Passion
Passion makes a man a beast. Page 48
Papists
The doctrine of the Papists is opposite to the Scripture Page 81
Papists,
see Idolatry
Patience
The patience of God described. Page 368 We must be patient in prayer. Page 541
People
The people of God suffer with others, if they sin with others. Page 401 People
must return to God Page 530 When any people may apply the promise Page 537
Persons
How particular persons are defiled by the wicked Page 373 See Mixture
Plague
A strange plague in London. Page 67
Pleading
The more imediate Gods pleading with men is, the more dreadful it is Page 4
Preaching
Preaching is the way to remove superstition Page 146
Priest
It is the work of the Priest to strive against the people for sin Page 75 When
priests strive against the people, they must lock to be striven with Page 76
Priests,
see Covetousness Ambition, Influence
Prelates,
see Experience
Presence
The consideration of Gods presence humbles the heart Page 368 Gods presence
makes morning to the Saints Page 562
Pride
Pride discovers much sin within Page 394 Pride goes from God and against God
Page 397 The pride of men's spirits Page 514 See Ignorance, Conscience

Private,
see Hope
Princes
Princes have been preachers Page 146 How Princes and Priests delude the people
about Gods worship. Page 348
Princes,
see Subjects
Prophet,
see Affliction
Prosperity
Prosperity abused shall be punished Page 100 See Wicked

Profession,
see Formal
Proud
God will cast proud men down. Page 397 Proud men fall low ibid
Public,
see Hope
Punish
When men will not punish sin, God will Page 61
Punishment
They that are alike in sin shall be alike in punishment Page 116
Pains
We must not think much to lose our pains Page 569
Parents,
see Christ
Prayers
When prayers are howlings Page 688
Penitent
Penitent hearts retain good thoughts of God in affliction. Page 532 Penitent
hearts are not discouraged in afflictions Page 534
Perverseness
Perverseness of spirit in those that are nigh to God is very grievous to God
Page 572
Persevere,
see Means
Place
Where Gods place is Page 511
Preaching
It is an ill sign when men are the worse for preaching Page 644
Presumption
What presumption is Page 536
Propriety
The propriety of Believers Page 547
Prop,
see Faith
Prophets,
see False
R
Rebukes
The rebukes of a brother are loving rebukes Page 73 Gods rebukes are furious
ibid See God

Real
Gods threatenings are real Page 452
Religion,
see Staff
Reprobation
What Reprobation is Page 210
Repentance
What true Repentance is. Page 385 Faith and Repentance mutually act on another
Page 549 The trial of Repentance Page 696
Respect
Due respect is to be given to Kings Page 345
Riches
How riches are fatal to Churchmen. Page 100
Rule
The rule of our actions must be known and why Page 341
Rulers
Rulers and Governors should be men of good mettle Page 229
Romans see Education Resurrection
We live in Christ's Resurrection Page 543
Relations
What relation God stands in to the Saints Page 547
Revealing
We must take notice of Gods revealing himself to us Page 557
Reformation
see Hypocrisy
Religion,
see Unconstancy
S
Saints
see Good works
Sacrifices
The sacrifices of the wicked are slaughters Page 3^^ What sacrifices should be
rendered up to God Page 332
Satan
Satan's way to get in false worship Page 469 See Temptation, Admonition.

Sensual
see Ministers
Sensuality
Sensuality is a besotting sin. Page 129
Self-love
Self-love is sinful Page 409
Sermons
Sermons must be preached to the life Page 439 How to know when a Sermon works
really Page 440 Ministers in their Sermons must denounce war if peace be
slighted Page 441
Secret sins,
see Beware
Services
Former services are not to be presumed on Page 402
Shame
Causes of shame what they are Page 326
Sin
Sin causes a controversy between God and man Page 4 Sin not mortified will
break out again Page 59 God punishes sin with sin Page 152 Sin after rebuke is
very sinful Page 363 Sin acts more on the will than on the power Page 376
Sin,
see Controversy
Stealing
What stealing is Page 52
Strife
Strife against God is dreadful Page 7
Strive,
see priest
Striving
Striving against God is vain. Page 6
Scornfulness
Scornfulness reproved Page 19
Scripture,
see Papists
Society
The Society of the Saints is to be improved Page 196
State
A State is hard to be stood out against in matter of Religion Page 365
State,
see Failing
Subjects
Subjects suffer for Princes sins Page 490
Superstition
Curiosity to see Superstition is dangerous Page 187 See Preaching, Command.

Superstitious
How Superstitious men look upon Gods Ordinances Page 325 Superstitious people
must be heeded when they come with greatest show of reason Page 358
Superstitious people are abundant in services Page 406 Superstitious people
spare no cost in their services Page 407 See Admonition

Stubborn
Stubborn people have base spirits Page 194
Swearing
Whence swearing proceeds Page 41 The evil of swearing Page 42 Swearing in its
self is lawful Page 189 See Lying

Salutation
The ancient form of the Saints salutation Page 549
Saints
What the Saints shall know. Page 553 See Experience

Sacrifice
see Mercy
Scornful
Evil men are scornful Page 665
Seasonableness
Seasonableness commends duty Page 565
Service
see Judgment
Sin
Sin disturbs Heaven and Earth Page 511
Slanders
The evils of slanders Page 659
Sluggish
A Sluggish spirit in the men of our times Page 556 Soul, see Form Suffer, see
Help Steward, see Virtue Superstition, see England

Spirit
God has sent choice spirits to London Page 590
T
Take heeed
How men ought to take heed to the Lord Page 126
Ten Tribes
Why the ten Tribes had never a good King Page 469
Temptation
Satan's Temptations are an aggravation to sin Page 386
Terrified,
see Dying
Thought,
Our Thoughts must be accounted for Page 120
Toys
Men contend about toys Page 23
Threatenings,
see Real
Treachery
Treachery against God is dangerous Page 419 Treachery is the greatest sin.
Page 420
Trust,
see Avenged
Truth
Suffering truths go hardly down with Ministers Page 94 A hint of Truth
prevails much with a subdued heart Page 389 See Hard

Terror
Terror to Hypocrites Page 551
Thoughts,
see Penitent
Trial,
see Repentance
Turning
Joint turning to God is very honorable Page 531
U
Understanding
What evil, want of understanding does Page 167
Ugly
The ugly face of sin Page 63
Unfaithfulness
Unfaithfulness provokes God to cast men off Page 96
Universities
Univers ties corrupted Page 628 Why Universities are corrupted Page 116
Unlawful
We can never expect unlawful undertakings to prosper Page 124
Virtues
Virtues requisite in a steward Page 609
Unbeleef
Lay up for time to come against unbeleef Page 546
Unconstancy
Unconstancy in Religion provokes God Page 592
Unworthiness
Faith sees worthiness in our unworthiness
W
Way
When God is in a way of wrath he can reach the most remote creatures Page 68
Wicked
The different spirits of wicked men in prosperity and adversity Page 64 Many
wicked Parents are loath their children' should be wicked Page 156 Wicked men
shall need God. Page 407 See Children, Dogs.

Wickedness
Thoughtful wickedness is the worst wickedness Page 120 God remembers
wickedness a long time Page 649 It is a wickedness to flatter Princes Page 653
It is a wickedness to obey unlawful commands Page 653 See Apostates

Whoremongers
Whoremongers and plausible Ministers are alike Page 124
Works,
see Good
Wine
How Wine takes away the heart Page 130
Worship
In point of Gods Worship we must not do as others do. Page 177 By whom the
Worship of God is disesteemed Page 325 See Institution

Will
Will Worship is abominable to God Page 360 The more will to sin the greater is
the sin Page 472
Willing,
see Obedience
Wrath
No creature can help in time of Gods wrath Page 68
Wicked men
Wicked men are led aside by their Governors Page 653 Wicked men are of no use.
Page 690
Wilfulness
Wilfulness after enlightening is a note of destruction Page 579
Worthiness,
see Unworthiness
Word
How the Word slaies Page 590 The Word slaies either the sin or the soul Page
596
Worship,
see False
Y
Young
Young Converts and weak Christians are soon deceived. Page 409
Young ones
Young ones are the hope of a Nation Page 429 Young ones must not be corrupted
Page 430 Young ones are subject to m scarry Page 578
FINIS

