POINOPY'PGOS.

Pastorum Propugnaculum. OR, THE PULPITS PATRONAGE Against the Force of
Un-ordained Usurpation, and Invasion.

By THOMAS BALL, sometimes Fellow of Emmanuel College in Cambridge, now
Minister of the Gospel in Northampton, at the request, and by the advice, of
very many of his Neighbour-Ministers.

Jerem. 6. 27. I have set thee for a Tower, and a Fortress among my people,
that thou may know and try their way.

Jer. 23. 4. And I will set up Shepherds over them, which shall feed them, and
they shall fear no more, nor be dismayed; neither shall they be lacking, says
the Lord.

LONDON, Printed by S. G. for John Wright at the King's Head in the Old-Bayley.
1656.

To my Reverend and Loving Brethren, the Ministers of the Gospel, within the
County of Northampton.
Beloved,
IT has pleased God, in his goodness and mercy, at the last, to enable your
Servant to absolve the task imposed on him by very many of you, though not so
soon as you expected, and himself desired, yet as soon as he was able, and the
pressing duties of his Ministry and Family would give him leave; had I been
importuned (as many are) to print my Sermons upon any subject that I have
treated of, I should have been ashamed to have been so slow; but its well
known, nothing here published has ever been the subject of my
Preaching-labours; so that my frequent Preaching, did not only interrupt and
spend my time, but did also divert and place my thoughts upon matters Foreign
and Heterogeneal; yet I think if my ordinary Sermons were penned so exactly,
and my style so punctual and elaborate, as many of my Brethrens be, I should
have been more able and ready for the Press, but I have been accustomed to
study matter, and take such words as offered themselves, and were suggested in
the time of speaking: being therefore now for to compose, and think of every
thing before I wrote, I found it heavier and harder than my Sermons ever were.
These rubs have much retarded my engaged service and endeavors to my Brethren,
and the Church, and Cause of God, if happily it may be thought to be concerned
in these lucubrations.

I have made bold to use the Plural Number, because I designed to be your
common mouth, vox and praeterea nihil, and to publish nothing but what I had
ground to think was all your senses, as by many of the Writings received from
you, I shall be able to demonstrate, if required.

If any think, I have been light and lavish in illustrations, let them
consider, this is my first piece, and hanging long upon the wheel, I was
constrained to refresh my self with toys and stories, which I thought might
happily be a refection also unto others, and ease the tedium of a long
discourse; yet I hope it has not hindered light, nor any way impeached the
strength and cleerness of the matter; what ever it is, I humbly offer it unto
your worths, taking it as a great favor from God, and respect from you, that I
was thought worthy to be accounted,

Your unworthy Servant, Tho: Ball.
Northampton December. 17. 1655.
The CONTENTS.
THe First Part shows there is a Ministry, where in ye have,
1. An Introduction, showing the difficulty, and yet necessity of the Work,
cap. 1, 2, 3. unto page 24 2. The grand Objection against it answered, cap. 4.
unto page 32 3. The Question stated, cap. 5. unto page 52 4. An Advertisement
unto the Reader, concerning the difficulty of compelling men's assent, where the
conclusion is Fides, not Scientia, Faith, not Science, cap. ^. unto page 64 5.
The Thesis or Position argued, from sixteen grounds, in so many several
Chapters, unto p. 130 6. Eight Objections, with their Answers, in so many
Chapters, unto page 153


The Second Part, showing the necessity of Ordination, wherein ye have,
1. A Reason of this Second Part, cap. 1. unto page 163 2. An Introduction unto
the Doctrine of Ordination, by such degrees and steps as lead unto it, cap. 2.
unto page 173 3. What is not meant by Ordination, cap. 3 unto page 187 4. How
far the People ought to have an hand in Ordination, cap. 4. unto page 212 5.
A Description of Ordination, cap. 5. unto page 235 6. The equity of it argued,
from eight several grounds, cap. 6. unto page 251 7. Objections answered, cap.
7. unto page 289


The Third Part, showing what Ministers by there Office are obliged, and bound
to, where in ye have,
1. The Design and Purpose of this Part, cap. 1. unto page 292 2. The
Discipline here meant, described, cap. 2. unto page 306 3. The inconveniences
attending this Part of the Office intimated, and a willingness to be exempted,
cap. 3. unto page 315 4. The Grounds and Reasons of our perswaston, that we are
engaged, offered, cap. 4. unto the end.


(...). Pastorum propugnaculum. OR, The Pulpits Patronage, against the force of
unordained usurpation and invasion.
The first Part.
CHAP. I. Being the INTRODVCTION.
THose that attempt the cure of prejudice, or the removal of disaffection, by
Expositions and Apologies, do play an aftergame, and shall encounter many
difficulties; for they shall find their hearers and Readers, prepossest, and
their intentions and affections so engaged, that it will be hard to find
access, and get any competent entertainment, in any of their better rooms; for
he that is first in his own cause, seems just, Prove. 18. 17.
(and we say) one tale is good till another be told. And if by importunity, we
do break in as he did, Luke 11. 8
we shall be sure to find our Judge a party, and our selves at such a loss
and disadvantage, as poor men are, when they come to borrow money of their
richer Neighbors; for the poor uses entreaties, but the rich answer roughly,
Prove. 18. 23.
perit judicium, cum reo transiit in affectum, you may perhaps have good words,
and be fairly told impossibilities; but the effect and issue will bewray
unwillingnesse: non velle in causa est, posse non praetenditur.

And therefore, some have thought, that in such a case, the best address is
sitting still, and the most eloquent oration, silence: according to that Rule,
contra contemptum, remedium optimum esse quiescere; when men are in the dark,
their safest way, is for to sit still, as they did, Exodus 10. 23.
until God, by some beam of providence, be pleased to shine upon them: Isa. 50.
10
who is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his Servant,
that walks in darkness, and has no light, let him trust in the name of the
Lord, and stay upon his God: he may be a Child of light, and yet may walk in
darkness: as Joseph in the prison, strikes not fire, though he had a good
brain, but waits till it come down from Heaven, in the Butlers dream unto him.
Genesis 40. 14, 15.


Disguised persons, such as your Maskers and Mummers are, use not to speak. Our
Savior Christ when by his Robe and Crown, he was exposed to their scorn, would
not make answer in his own defense, but was a mute: John 19. 9. 10.
for he knew, whatsoever then was answered, would but excite, and exercise the
adversaries insolency, and give them matter of insulting and tryumphing: as
good therefore never awhit, as never the better: as good give them leave to use
their wit, and vent their spleen and malice, as let them take it: quisquis
volet tibi contumeliam facere, faciat. Whosoever will smite thee on the right
cheek, turn to him the other also: Mat. 5. 39 2, 3, 4.
whosoever will not bear a little injury, shall have a great one laid upon him;
but if a little weight subdues, and silenceth him, they will not add unto it:
where there is power, if you are not willing to allow them victory, they will
extort it, and leave upon you Characters of Conquest. For at such a time, the
matter is not so much heeded as the man, the speech as the speaker: non defuit
quod responderetur, sed qui daret responsum: Queen Esther makes not her own
Apology, till she had warmed the Kings affections to her, at a double banquet:
Esth. 7. 2, 3, 4:
our lives in that condition, must be our language, and our hands and feet must
speak, and not our tongues. Ego sic vivam, ut nemo eis credat; i Pet. 5.
for so is the will of God, that with well doing, you may put to silence the
ignorance of foolish men: when Saul was slighted by those Sons of Belial, that
refused to acknowledge him, he does not presently assert his call, and make
them feel his power, but held his peace: 1 Samuel 10. 27.
he knew those prejudiced, and prepossessed persons could not be cured and
taken off, with Expositions and Apologies; but when in the following Chapter,
he had commanded well, and by relieving Jabesh Gilead, had given proof of his
abilities: the people were so much his Servants, that they would have made
those murderers a sacrifice unto his worth and valor, if modesty and wisdom
in him had not restrained them. 1 Samuel 11, 12, 13.


Yet it must not be a sullen, unadvised silence, arising from a discontented
indisposednesse to action: we must not hide our selves, and come away from
duty, as Jonas did; Jonas 1. 3.
but if God call us, we must be vowels: if providence engage and order us, to
make our own defense, we must not boggle and refuse; for Ministers are men of
honor, 1 Timothy 5. 17.
and their reputation ought to be as dear unto them, as their lives: negligere
enim quid de se quisque sentiat, non arrogantis modo est, sed etiam dissoluti.
He must have a good report of them that are without, lest he fall into
reproach, and the snare of the Devil: 1 Timothy 3. 7.
and a great name is like a great house, not easily maintained and repaired: a
man must always be doing something to it, be mending something, ever and anon,
famam fama plutegite, ne perfluat. And because we often are too dull and
backward in repairs, the Landlord takes occasion to remember us, and mind us of
it: John 8. 48.
say we not well that thou art a Samaritan, and have a Devil, they try how he
could bear plain dealing, in that tender part of his good name and credit: so
Joseph's modesty is dressed and arrayed in the garb and habit of prostitute and
bold incontinency: Genesis 39. 17, 18.
the Hebrew servant, which thou have brought unto us, came in to me to mock me:
Paul's innocence so overwhelmed, that he saw no light; but only at the dividing
temper and disposition of his enemies. Act. 23. 6.
Mordecai so shut up and obscured, when the decree was signed against the Jews,
that he saw no light but at the little crevice, of Esthers honor and
advancement in the Court, and accordingly is very careful to improve and
manage that for their repair and rescue: so when the Christians, in the
primitive Church, were slaughtered and condemned, for the title only of their
cause, without examining the truth, because they were Christians, without
considering what a Christian was: yet for some time they sat still, and made no
applications unto Authority, because they had no Candle to direct and go before
them, till at the last, God moved some to write Apologies and Expositions to
the present powers in their defense, wherein by Gods blessing, they were
victorious and succesful.

Yet it is not safe in our own case, to be too busy with Apologies; for its
well said, omnis apologia habet in se aliquid turpitudinis: Apologies have
something in them of abasement and unseemlinesse; for they suppose the writers
at a loss, and behind-hand in the world, in point of reputation, wanting good
Neighbors to be their advocates, and plead their cause before their
adversaries; for that for the most part, cannot be done well, without putting
some greater price and valuation upon their actions, without improving and
asserting of their worth and merit, which would become another better then
themselves: proprio laus sordet in ore, non alieno: let another praise thee,
and not thine own mouth, a stranger, and not thine own lips, Prove. 27. 2*
our praise becomes another mouth, but not our own.

Yet sometimes, there may be a defense, without a commendation, when their
innocence only is to be opened and asserted without additionals of praise, as a
Diamond found in the dirt and dunghill, needs not be painted, but only washed
clean: as Joseph does not make mention of his skill and knowledge in
interpreting and opening dreams and riddles; but only tells the Butler, he was
an innocent, Genesis 40. 14. 15.
and in such a case, none are so fit to do it as our selves, nemo te, nisi tu,
exprimere potest, none can be better acquainted with our innocence, then our
selves, nor have more assurance to be succesful: the Jews had a Tertullus to be
their Orator; but Paul speaks for himself: Act. 24. 10.
so John and Peter, when they were questioned about a good work, Act. 4. 9. 10.
needed no Lawyers to open and assert their cause, but do it boldly and
willingly themselves: and in such a case, Martyr and Confessor have been much
alike: when Christ our Savior spoke to Pontius Pilate in his own defense, and
for his life, Joh. 18. 36. 37.
yet he is said by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6. 13.
to have witnessed a good Confession, as in cases of the Commonwealth, the
party wronged gives in evidence, because the wrong is not so much his own, as
the States and Commonwealths.

CHAP. II. The ground of it.
THe godly Ministers of England, have been for some years past, neglected and
despised: their persons many times exposed to affronts and incivilities: their
Doctrine scandalized and reproached, they have sat still, and not been
overhasty to make their own defense; they thought it proper, to let their
enemies have scope and liberty to put all their exceptions in, and be heard out
in all their calumnies: that as the Nation had had some experience and evidence
of their integrity and innocence: so they might have some time to ponder and
consider what is said against them: truth (they believed) was the Daughter of
time, and lost not, but gained by her gray hairs, scelera impetu, bona consilia
mora valescunt, a lie will do the work of truth, if it be presently for to be
done; but if it stay, it will catch cold, pellucet omne mendacium, nec per
omnia quadrat, in time some circumstance will be discovered, that will detect
it; but now, that all is said that can be, their adversaries have been seen and
known; and their exceptions scanned by the godly and well-meaning party of the
Land, they think it proper for them to come unto their answer: and they think,
some beams have lately shined in the matter of their dues and salaries, that do
admonish and awaken them unto their own defense: yet were that all that were in
question, they hope they should have held their peace: were it our garbs and
Garments only that were endangered, we hope we should have been content to be
without them, or had it been our liberties alone that had been struck at, we
hope, with Esther, we should have held our tongues: Esth. 7. 4.
nay, we will go yet a little farther, were it our lives alone, that had been
sought, we hope we should not sordidly, nor basely have endeavored for to save
them; but have adventured them, (as many hundreds have already done) upon that
promise, he that will save his life, shall lose it; but whosoever shall lose
his life for my sake shall save it, Luke 9. 24.
if we had been well assured, that our blood would have in riched and fattened
the soil and ground of this our native Country, as the blood of the Martyrs
did in former time the Churches: we hope we should have been content to be the
purchasers of that, at any price, and to say with the Apostle, that none of
those things move us, neither count we our lives dear unto us, that we may
fulfill our course with joy, and the Ministry we have received, to testific the
Gospel of the grace of God, Act. 20. 24.
though there ought to be no have, to hang true men: and its truly said, nulla
est de morte hominis cunctatio longa, and by gaining time, many have gained
Life: when Arion in the Port was condemned to be drowned, by those barbarous
Pirates that had seized on his money, yet they gave him time, to play a while
upon his harp; wherewith the Dolphins being allured and made his hearers, one
of them bears him safe upon his back, unto his native Country, (if the
Muthollogist may be believed) when Paul was going to be examined by scourging,
which many times cost men their lives,) he craves the benefit of his Clergy,
that is, of his being a Citizen of Rome, and by that means, was delivered: Act.
22. 25, 26.
there was one Mooragena, (as Polybius writes) that was appointed by
Agathocles, in Alexandria, to be tormented, and all the Instruments and
Executioners were ready: yet the Officer being suddenly and unexpectedly by one
whispered in the ear, and going out, the Executioner soon followed, and left
him naked all alone, and so he escaped, accidit in puncto, quod non speratur in
anno: yet had that been all, our defense should not have been praepropera
purgatio: we would have stayed, till we had been beckoned to, to speak as Paul
did; Act. 24. 10
but when we hear our Calling vilified, our Ministry decried, as Antichristian
and unlawful, as useless, heedlesse, carnal and unprofitable: we cannot hold
our peace, nay, when we hear it voiced, if not voted, null and void, not by the
vulgar breath of common and unskilful persons, but at Committees, and by some,
in highest place, we cannot then be quiet and content: they that will not be
awakened by such a voice, (though we know it came not from the Temple) may have
their grace, ad dormiendum Endymionis somnum, for ought we know.

Yet, were it we alone, that were concerned in our Ministry, we should not
struggle overmuch, were our good only, and reputation, obscured and bedewed
with the Cloud, that is, upon our Calling, we should not be so sensible; but we
think Religion and the precious truths of Christ are struck at in us, that we
are set for the defense of the Gospel, as Paul was, Ph. 1. 17.
that if the Shepherds be smitten, the sheep of the flock will be scattered
abroad: Mat. 26. 31.
the Ministers in Scripture, Act. 26. 16 1 Cor. 4. 1.
are called (...), a name derived from a word, that signifies to row, and sit
at Oars, as Seamen do, validis incumbite remis, perhaps incumbents sprang from
this Original, and the Church is compared to a Boat or Ship: 1 p. 3. 20. 21.
now how a Boat or Ship should come in safe unto the Port or Haven, without her
Mariners and Sailers, we do not know. Paul had a promise, that no man's life
should perish, but the Ship or Vessel only, Act. 27. 22*
yet when the Mariners did think to steal away, Paul tells them, that without
those abode, they could not possibly be saved, v. 31.
its truly said, in tranquillo quilibet potest esse gubernator, in calm and
quiet Seas, and in obvious and open harbors, an ordinary person may make a
shift to steer; but when the Seas are rough, and the Ports and Channels
dubious and uncertain, there needs skill.

The word of God, in the mouth of one, that is, an Officer, is by Gods spirit,
called the word of salvation, Act. 13. 26.
for whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved; but how
shall they call upon him, in whom they have not believed? and how shall they
believe on him, of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a
Preacher? and how shall they preach except they be sent? Romans 10. 13. 14, 15.
so it is said of Peter to Cornelius, Act. 11. 14
He shall tell thee words, whereby thou and all thy house shall be saved; and
so the Apostle unto Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. 16.
take heed to thy self and to the Doctrine, continue in them; for in so doing,
thou shall both save thy self, and them that hear thee: therefore we think,
salvation and an ordered Ministry, are so in separable, that the one is not
without the other: neither do we find in all our reading and experience, that
the Ministers were taken away from any people, and yet the Gospel and salvation
stayed behind, that the lights or Candles were removed, as they are called,
Mat. 5. 14. 15.
and yet the Candlesticks continued and let alone, when as we find a
threatening to remove the Candlestick, because the light burnt some what dimmer:
Rev. 2, 5.
we find salvation and damnation, entitled to, and intailed upon an ordered
and lawful Ministry, Mark. 16. 15, 16.
preach the Gospel to every Creature, he that believes and is baptized shall
be saved, he that believes not shall be damned: damnation is by our Savior,
said to be the losing of our souls, Mat. 16. 26.
and we dare not undervalue peoples souls: we think men's souls are capable of
joy and sorrow, of pain and pleasure, of comfort and torment, as Lazarus and
Dives are said to be: Luke 16. 25
those poisoned pens that have attempted to assert the contrary, have not
convinced us; for then we think our Savior Christ could in no sense have said
unto the Thief upon the Cross, to day thou shall be with me in Paradise: Luke
23. 43.
we think the Devil, (who is himself a spirit,) would not so seriously
endeavor, and intend the ruin of them, as he does; 1 Pet. 5. 8.
for he is kind and friendly many times unto their bodies, upon condition, he
may endanger and ensnare their souls, feeds often, and refreshes that, that he
may famish and devour the other.

CHAP. III. The lot and foundation of it.
BUt in this point, as in the rest, we acquiesce in the judgment and authority
of the Scriptures that makes the end of faith, the souls salvation: 1 Pet. 1. 9.
the putting of the Gospel preached from us, a judging of our selves unworthy
of eternal life: Act. 13. 46
and do believe, that the Scriptures are the word of God, from Heaven, not of
men, as John's Baptism is acknowledged to be, Mat. 21. 25.
that they are given by inspiration from God, 2 Timothy 3. 16.
and not contrived for politic and worldly interests: that the Prophecy came
not in old time, by the will of man, but holy men of God, spoke as they were
moved by the holy Ghost; 2 Pet. 1. 21
for had they been a cunningly devised fable, imposed on that world, for
politic and carnal ends: the deviser and contriver must either have been a
good man, or a bad: a good man could not have invented and promoted so great a
lie, Rev. 22. 15.
be guilty of so known a couzenage, obtruded such a cheat upon the world,
beguiled so many innocent well-meaning men, do so much evil, that good might
come of it: Romans 3. 8.
and a bad man could not beget, and breed so handsome and well favored a
Progeny, be the Father and founder of so beautiful a brood: we know, that
pa^tus sequitur ventrem, the birth does smell, and savor of the belly: that so
much virtue, purity, and self-denial, could not be ingendered, harbored and
published, by an ugly, foul, ill-favored imagination and invention: that
Thersites was not the Father of Achilles, nor Absalom the Son of Agesilaus:
fortes creantur fortibus, and bonis, who can bring a clean thing out of that
which is unclean? Job. 14. 4.
sincerum fit nisi vas, quod cunque insundis acescit.

And he must have been a wise man, or a fool: a fool could not have happened
upon so well composed and contrived a plot: that wise men should from time to
time allow of, and subscribe unto; and a wise man would not spend so much
strength and time, in hatching, framing, falslaying, and promoting of a way,
that would not gratify him, and reward him, cui prosuit scelus, is fecit: hos
ego versiculos feci, will be subscribed, rather then so good and happy an
invention, should be suppressed or misapplyed.

Beside, it either must have been one, or many: one could not plot and perfect,
resolve and ripen, begin and end so great an Engine, that was not begotten and
brought forth in the same age; but like the Earth, and matter of our
Chinah-dishes, is begun by the Father, continued and promoted by the Son, and
completed by the Grandchild: nor by many; for it was hard for so many good
wits, to jump upon so empty vessels, barren and unprofitable an employment. We
acknowledge that there has been cheats and juggles in Religion; for the
simplest plainest men, have in all ages been the most religious, 1 Cor. 1. 26.
and innocent well-meaning men are aptest to be ensnared, and soonest caught:
homines antiqui ex suo ingenio caeteros fingunt, imagine all men as upright as
themselves, and innocent; quo magis verax, eo minus suspicax, two hundred men
engage for Absalom, in mere simplicity, that knew not any thing; 2 Samuel 15. 11.
for where faith swayes, opinion and persuasion, are not strangers: men do as
verily believe the things they dream of, as walking persons, the things they
see and know, yet we know of none, that are, or ever were in all the world: the
Author whereof, perished unknown or unrewarded, at least in their intention
and design: we read of Jeroboam, that made Israel to sin; 2 King. 10. 29.
but withal we read, what his design and purpose in that seducement and
imposture was: namely, left the Kingdom should revert, and turn again unto the
house of David, 1 King. 12. 26, 27, 28.
we read of Mahomet, prevailing by his feigned Saintship, and exact devotion
with the people of Arabia, to enable him to ruin, and remove their lawful
Government and Governors: and when he had done, we see him set the Crown upon
his own head, and a bit and bridle in their jaws: from which, to this day, they
are not free: we have seen the man of sin, exalting and preferring of himself,
(...): above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; 2 These. 2. 4
but we know, he did it, to enjoy their Territories and Dominions, that he
might dispose of their Estates, and subdue their persons to attendance on him,
and submission to him: that we may not mention lesser cheats: But what got he,
or they that framed and contrived the Scriptures? what was his name, or what
was his Sons name? as he speaks: Prove 30. 4.
therefore we own the Scriptures for the oracles of God, as they are called,
Romans 3. 2. 1 Pet. 4. 11.
and think what is said in them, to be ex tripode, that is, undoubted, certain,
and of eternal verity, and cannot choose but act accordingly, that is, adventure
all, upon the promises therein contained: spend willingly our time and
strength, in the study, meditation, and contemplation of them: build upon what
is there held forth, to good men and believers, fear what is there denounced
against seducers, and ungodly persons: love and rejoice, in what is there
commended, hate and abhor, what there is threatened and condemned. We are not
willing to be mistaken, in what so properly concerns us; but if we may believe
our own experience for some years, many of us: we think this Calling has
little in it, properly begetting or exciting envy, the Apostles were of all men
in the world, the most opposed, and affronted: 1 Cor. 4. 9
and in the Catalogue of Paul's preferments: 2 Cor. 11. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.
wherein he glories and rides in triumph, there is a very little to be
envied: the world is carried on and groverned, by interests and self-respects:
all Creatures do intend their own advancement, and the Ministers are people of
another interest, not mingling nor piecing with them, and therefore shunned and
declined by them: Landamus monitores, sed fugimus: praise and commend the
Sermon for a good one, but care not for hearing any more: if you were of the
world, the world would love her own, but I have chosen you out of the world,
therefore the world hates you Joh. 15. 16
: our Studies and Employments do put us upon many melancholy meditations, when
we are alone: and when we come into resort and company, our carriage must be
grave and serious: we cannot take that liberty that others do, because we are
in danger to give offense: so that what is properly the life and comfort of
other Callings, and correspondencies, is death and heaviness to us: yet we
could bear it, if we were but pitied and bemoaned; but to be sad and heavy,
studious and painful, watchful and wary in our ways and walking, and yet be
envied, grudged, brow-beaten, and affronted, we think hard measure, and
believe we may say with the Prophet, Jer. 15. 10.
Woe is me my Mother, that thou have born me a man of strife, and a man of
contention to the whole earth: but yet we bear up in the midst of all
discouragements, on this account, that we are called to it: 2 Timothy 2. 3. 4.
thou therefore endure hardness, as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ, no man
that warreth intangleth himself with the affairs of this life, that he may
please him who has chosen bim to be a soldier: when the Soldiers were
discouraged at Tredagh, yet when the General went foremost, and intimated their
Engagement, they ventured all: when we look upon our work and entertainment in
the world, we find an ap^nesse to be discouraged, as he did Jer. 20. 8, 9
; but when we look upon our Leader and Commander Jesus Christ, and our
Commission from him, we are resolved and enlivened: we are not ignorant how
many injuries and inconveniences, we are exposed to, by this condition we
are in; but we consider who has put us into this condition: we are advised of
all the woes and sorrows that attend us, if we preach the Gospel; but we
consider withal, that a necessity is laid upon us, and woe is unto us if we
preach not 1 Cor. 9. 16
, and we think, the second woe is heavier than the first, and are willing and
resolved, rather to lose our ease and interest in Earth, than in Heaven; our
short uncertain lease and term, than our inheritance, our parts in Paris, than
in Paradise, (contrary to that profane exp^ession of the Frenchman,) in a
word, to enter into life maimed, than having two hands and two eyes, to be cast
into hell, where their worm dies not, and their fire is not quenched Mark 9.
43, 44.
. When Cardinal Tolet was admonished by some of his Colleagues, to enlarge
himself a little more in the entertainment of those delights and comforts, that
his place afforded, and the Scarlet Gown did offer to him, because in those
there was a greater certainty: haec habui qua edi; but the hopes and comforts
of another life, which he seemed to rely and dote upon, were ayrie, and
uncertain, far of, and in the dark; he answered, if it fell out that there
was no other life but this, yet the worst was, but the losing of his labor,
which had an entertainment and refreshment in the acting, that is, a proper and
proportioned employment of his faculties; but if there were another life, he
should for ever lose his soul, and he was not willing to venture the loss of
that.

When Socrates was threatened death, unless he would forbear instructing of
the people, (as his manner was) against their Country way of worship; he told
them, what they forbad, God did command, and he thought it safer to obey God
then them; and for their threatening, he knew not whether death were not rather
to be chosen, if he were at liberty; for in death he knew it should be been
bonis, and male malis: the Poets were the looser sort of Heathen, yet more then
one of them could say, non omnis moriar, but we have the sure Word of God for
our encouragement and invitation, and being so persuaded, we must be proved if
we be serious. The Proverb says, You must give loosers leave to speak, for
we having the same Spirit of Faith, according as it is written, I believed and
therefore have I spoken, we also believe and therefore speak. 2 Cor. 4. 13.


If it be said, our Calling has not been immediate by Jesus Christ in person,
as the Apostles was, or by a voice from Heaven, as the Prophets, and therefore
we may leave it if we will; if it be hard and heavy to us, we may lay it aside,
and accept a Writ of Ease, that seems by our adversaries to be offered to us.

We answer, Though it be immediately from men, yet its originally and mediatly
from God, and Jesus Christ, though ministerially and instrumentally from men,
yet au^horitatively and principally from God: The Elders of Ephesus were
neither Prophets nor Apostles, yet the Holy Ghost had made them overseers of
their flocks, Act. 20 28
Archippus, neither Prophet nor Apostle, yet had his Ministry from the Lord
and in the Lord, Col. 4. 17.
as in the sequel we hope to prove; neither do we think it fair to lay down
that at the discretion of a mo^tal erroneous ill-affected man, which we think
we took not up without the immortal unerring well-affected God, to leave that
in a pet and discontent, that we have spent our strength and time, our youth
and vigor, in procuring what has cost us so dear, we think not fit to part
with so cheap, omer at ille prius, vendere jure potest.

This we acknowledge is the great and serious reason that we are not willing
that our Ministry should be annihilated, the office utterly abolisht and
extinguished; because as we have said, our peoples souls and their eternal
welfare is at the stake: But this is not all, for we think their temporal and
worldly happiness, is much concerned in it; for though its true, that an
Esau's dwelling may be the fatness of the earth, Genesis 27. 39. 40.
and by his Sword he may live, though Turk and Pope may graze upon the
goodliest pastures of Asia and Europe, though God gave unto the Heathen, rain
from Heaven and fruitful seasons, filling their hearts with food and
gladness: Act. 14. 17*
Though Egypt, a fruitful Country, be given unto Nebuch adnezzar, as wages
for his service against Tire, Ezekiel. 29. 18, 19, 20.
yea, though no man knows either lone or hatred, kindness or unkindnesse,
favor or frowns, by all that is before him, as the wise man speaks, Eccles.
9 1.
yet we think that the Gospel never is removed from a Place or Nation, but the
People of the Place are made to feel the want of it; both Peace and Plenty
commonly go with it. The Sword comes commonly to revenge the quarrel of Gods
Covevant. Levit. 26. 25.
When Israel had been a long season without the true God, and without a
teaching Priest, and without Law, there was no peace to him that went out, nor
to him that came in, but great vexations were upon all the inhabitants of the
Countries; Nations was destroyed of Nation, and City of City, for God did vex
them with all adversity. 2 Chronicles. 15. 3, 5, 6.
When Jerehoam for politic and worldly ends, had altered and new modelled the
Temple-Worship, and set up ways of Worship that should be subject to, and
serve his carnal interests, 1 King. 12. 26, 27, 28.
and had forced the ^riests and Levites to forsake, their Suburbs, and made him
Priests of the lowest and meanest of the people, 2 Chronicles. 13. 9.
there quickly followed desolation and destruction, as the story plainly tells,
2 Kings 17. 7, 8,
and that without recovery, or restitution unto this day; and howsoever Juda
lasted somewhat longer, yet when they also m^cked the Messengers of God, and
despised his Word, and misused his Prophets, the wrath of the Lord brake out
against his people, and there was no remedy. 2 Chro* 36. 16.
And though the Gospel was once more offered them in the Ministry of John the
Baptist, yet withal, the ax was laid unto the root of the tree, that if it
bear not fruit then, it might be cut down and cast into the fire, Mat 3. 10*
and though the execution of that sentence were for a time deferred and put
off, yet at the last it came upon them to the uttermost, as the Apostle
speaks, 1 These. 2: 16. 29.
and the Gospel was translated to the Gentiles, Acts 13. 46, 47.
and though with them the Gospel went on conquering, and to conquer for a long
time, Rev. 6. ^.
yea when they also waxed wanton, began to play and trifle with the holy things
of God, when spiritual and powerful Preaching was laid aside, and tales and
stories told the people in the stead of it; When the ordinary and saving Gospel
truths grew cheap, and lay dispersed and neglected every where, and
Revelations, Visions, and Apparitions of the dead, began to be received,
admired, and entertained; when public Meetings and Assemblies began to be
neglected and grow thin and rare; and Separation, Monkery, and Monastick-living
to be exalted and cried up, as it did about six hundred years after our
Saviors coming in the Flesh; The Saracens in the East, and the barbarous
Northern Nations in the West, brake in and rooted up, and ruined all before
them; when the guard and fence which God had set about his Church, was plucked
up, the Boar out of the wood did wast it, and the wild beast of the field
devou^e it, as the Psalmist has it. Psalm. 80. 13
When God is in a place its good to keep him, he never comes nor stays alone,
but if he be offended and departs, he does not smile: when the King in
progress came unto a place, he brought rich furniture and hangings with him,
but when he went away, they took them down again, and carried them away.

Certain it is, the Church and Truths of Christ, and of the Gospel, shall
continue in the world, until the end of it, Mat. 28. 2.
the gates of hell, the plots and powers of the Devil, shall not prevail
against it, Mat. 16. 18
his house is built on such a Rock, and ground, as winds and tempests cannot
overthrowe; but that it shall continue in this Island always, we cannot
warrant and assure. The Stars in Christ's right hand, no man can put out; Rev.
2. 1.
but he may go with them into another Clymate and Country of the world, the Sun
it self, the most illustrious and glorious Star, does set and rise: the
Kingdom of God has been taken from the Jews, Gods darling and beloved Nation:
Mat. 21. 43.
and why it may not be from us, we cannot tell.

We have as many pawns and hostages as other men, and as little reason, to
desire confusion and calamity, are like our selves, to be the first that
suffer, and have retinues and dependencies, as well as any; but do not know,
what Patent and Commission, England has to be unruly and rebellious, no more
then others: why she by the Prophet may not be sent, to Shiloh, as well as
Judah was, to see what God has done to that place: Jer. 7. 12.
why England should be born with, and indulged, to mock the Messengers of God,
to despise his word, and to misuse his Prophets, and not the wrath of the Lord
arise against them, until there be no remedy: 2 Chronicles. 36. 16.
though it may be truly said of England, as it was of Ephesus, Rev. 2. 3.
that she has born and had patience, and for his names sake, has labored, and
has not fainted: yet, if God have any thing against her, (as no doubt he has)
yea, that very thing, namely, that she has lost her first love, (a) we know no
reason, why he may not come against her Verse. 4, 5, 6.
quickly, and remove her Candlestick, unless she repent and do her first works.

Let no man therefore blame and censure, our godly jealousy, when we see no
Porters at the Temple Gates, to examine and observe who goes in, or comes
out, as there was among the Jews, 1 Cron. 15. 18.
when there is nothing settled in the affairs and things of God, when
Congregations and Assemblies are continued, to pray and preach down the
Ministry, and maintenance of this state and Church, as Antichristian, carnal
and unlawful: when no provision or preparation to so great a work, is thought
convenient or necessary; but a si quis, passed upon every Church-dore, that
whosoever will, may come and consecrate himself, 2 Cron. 13. 9.
officiate and exercise his gifts, though it may be, ^e he is a Romish Priest
or Jesuit: yea, when we are told, it ought to be so, and that no man ought to
interpose or oppose, but all be left unto the will of God, and working of his
spirit, in the minds and hearts of his Elect: Church Matters and affairs left
wholly unto Jesus Christ, and no man meddle with them, further then he is
engaged, stirred up, and set on work by those flames of holy fi^e, that God
has kindled in his heart and spirit: we think these be sad symptoms of a
drooping and decaying state, of want of love unto our Lord and Master Jesus
Christ, who surely would not have his Servants so indifferent: puts Peter to
approve and evidence his love, by feeding of his Lambs and sheep, Joh. 21. 15,
16, 17.
and when Paul saw, that after his departure, grievous Wolves should enter in
among them, not sparing the flock, yea of their own selves should men arise,
speaking perverse things, to draw Disciples after them, Act. 20. 29. 30.
he does not leave all to Jesus Christ. Though he was then, as were we, and
conversant with his Church, as now he is, but send for the Elders of the
Church, and bids them take heed unto themselves, and all the ^lock, over whom
the holy Ghost had made them overseers, to feed the Church of God which he had
purchased with his own blood, Act. 20. 28
yea, bids them watch, and remember, that by the space of three years, he
ceased not to warn every one of them, night and day with tears, Act. 20 31
yea, that no man may pretend Christ's service for his carelessness, and think
therein, he acts according to the mind and will of Christ: we will produce
Christ's speaking to the Church of Ephesus, to whom Paul spoke before, Rev. 2. 2.
I know thy works, and thy labor, and thy patience, and how thou can not bear
them that are evil: an^ t^ou have tried them, which say, they are Apostles, and
are not, and have found them liars: when he was in the flesh, he told us, Mat.
13. 25
that while men slept, the enemy came and sowed tears among the wheat, and went
his way; and we think, that charge does in a special manner belong to us, that
Paul (in a manner) concludes his Epistle to the Corinthians with 1 Cor. 16. 13.
watch ye, stand ye fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong; and that
which he gave unto Timothy, when he was ready to be offered up, and the time of
his departure was at hand, 2 Timothy 4. 6
Preach the word, be instant, in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke,
exhort, with all long suffering and Doctrine; for the time will come, when they
will not endure sound Doctrine, but after their own lusts, shall they heap unto
themselves teachers, having itching ears; and they shall turn away their ears
from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables: 2 Timothy 4. 2, 3, 4.
yea, that of Jude, who wrote a great while after Paul, Jud. 3.
who thought it needful, that he should write unto them, and exhort them, that
they should earnestly contend for the faith, which was once delivered unto the
Saints. We know not how soon some of us may be summoned for to appear before
him, and we would be loath for to be Children when we come, and asked, as David
was, with whom we have left those few sheep in the Wilder nesse: 1 Samuel 17. 28.
the Lord enable us for to remember and consider, the things that do belong
unto our peace, at least in this our day, before they be hidden from our eyes,
before the days come, that our enemies shall cast a trench about us, and
compass us round, and keep us in on every side, and shall lay us even with the
ground, and our Children within us, because we know not the time of our
visitation, as our Savior Jesus Christ speaks to Jerusalem, with weeping
tears. Luke 19. 41, 42, 43, 44.


CHAP. IV. The general Objection answered.
BUt perhaps it will be said, we are mistaken, and misapply what is meant well:
if we conclude, that godly Ministers are laid aside, because some others are
encouraged to exercise those gifts and graces God has given them that are not
counted and esteemed Ministers by all: that is, that are not educated in the
Universities* nor solemnly ordained and set apart to that employment; but take
oc*casion, as its offered to them, to speak unto men, to edification, and
exhortation and comfort, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 14. 3.
and as they have received the gift, so to minister the same to another, as
good Stewards of the manifold graces of God, 1 Pet 4. 10
that because the best are bad enough, and need be quickened and stirred up,
all may have liberty to do it, if they will and can: and because many places
are exceeding ignorant, and destitute of the knowledge of God, those that are
able, and willing to instruct them, may have liberty to do it, and not be
curbed and discouraged therein: and if Gods spirit have breathed upon any one,
and put him on to do good, he may be allowed to do all the good he can, Gal. 6.
10.
and that great work of teaching and instructing others, may not be straightened
and confined unto some few that must be trained up, and fitted by a tedious and
long-winded education, or else be silenced, and shut out; but that any one may
trade in spiritual things, and no imbargo or restraint be laid upon them: in a
word, we wish that all the Lords people did prophecy, and that the Lord would
pour out his spirit upon them, as Moses did: Numb. 11. 29.
and why this should occasion fear and jealousy, we do not know.

The Lord forbid that we should go about to hinder any body from doing good: or
to straiten and confine the doing of it unto any kind of men; for we think all
bound to do all the good they can, 1 Timothy 6. 18, 19.
but because there may be much deceit in universals, we humbly crave, that our
answer may be taken in these particulars.

1. That all good cannot be done by all: in a Ship, all cannot steer: in an
Army, all cannot rule: in a Family, all cannot be the Steward. Mat. 24. 45.
who then is a faithful and wise Servant, whom his Lord shall make ruler over
his household, to give them their portion of meat in due season. Some must do
one thing, some another, and no man choose his work, but take that work that is
assigned him, though it be not that which he desires, or thinks himself fit
for: Adonijah says, I will be King, 1 King. 1. 5.
yet was not fit for it, I have not sent these Prophets, (says God) yet they
ran, I have not spoken to them, yet they prophesied Jer. 23. 21 Luke 10. 17.
its not enough to have the general calling of Christianity; for exercising a
particular jurisdiction or employment in the Church or State; but we must have
Orders and Commissions in particular: neither is the best and noblest
employment always fittest: what office is more noble then to be Ambassador
unto his Prince, yet none are such, till they be chosen and deputed, nor
entertained and allowed, till their Letters of credence be produced and
perused: it is an excellent work, to cast the Devil out, and when Christ gave
Commissions for it, they fell before them and were subject; (y) but when some
undertook it without Commission, the Devil would not obey their Warrants; Act.
19. 15, 16.
but got the better, those in these late Wars, that took men's goods, and were
not in Commission, have been forced since, for to restore them: let men
therefore consider, that the work be theirs, as well as good, else they may
suffer, as (...), as busy bodies in other men's matters, as the Apostle speaks.
1 Pet. 4. 15.


2. All is not good, that is so called, convenient rebus nomina saepe suis, non
semper, good is a nickname sometimes, and not set where it should be: oum rem
non poteris, (says the Politician) da verba, if you cannot do what is good, yet
call that good you do: let the voice be Jacobs voice, though the hands be the
hands of Esau: Genesis 27. 22
your Brethren that hated you, (says the Prophet) that cast you cut for my
names sake, said, let the Lord be glorified, (good words) and yet they
sometimes think it too, as well as speak it, Joh. 16. 2.
the time shall come, that they that kill you shall think they do God service:
the Pharisees appeal unto our Savior, whether they said not well, that he was
a Samaritan, and had a Devil: we must not (d) Joh. 8. 48
therefore take men's bare word, but b^ing it to the touchstone; for all is not
gold that glisters, bonum non oritur nisi ex causis integris, malum ex quolibet
defectu: miss* but in another matter, manner, end, and all is marred:
Church-work and Clock-work, are much alike, if but one wheel be out of tune,
it will not go well: if Saul may be the Judge of his own acts, he had performed
Gods Commandment, when he had sinned grievously against him; 1 Samuel 15. 13.
for which fact, he was for ever laid aside. v. 26, 27, 28


3. If it were proved never so good, yet we are sure, its new: we acknowledge,
men may edify themselves, Jud. 20. 1.
and one another, 1 These. 5. 11.
yea, teach and instruct, such as are under them, and appertain unto them: Tit.
2. 4, 5.
so it be things themselves have learned, and practiced before, and be done in
an humble, modest, private, self-denying way, and this is not new; but if they
will be public teachers of the Law, not knowing what they speak, nor whereof
they affirm: 1 Timothy 1. 7
or will usurp the places and powers of another: 1 Timothy 2. 12
then it is new: not seen nor practiced in any Church or State, till about an
hundred years ago; and whoever reads that story, will hardly be persuaded
there was good work. And what is new, must be examined: in rebus novandis,
evidens debet esse utilitas: there is no question, but there may be changes,
but they always must be for the better: and it must be very good, that is
thought better in a change; for custom in a course, does flatter and facilitate
the same exceedingly, elige vitam optimam, consuetudo faciet jucundissimam: no
man (says Christ,) Luke 5. 39
having drunk old wine, presently desires new; for he says, the old is better,
old way, and good way in the Prophets are Synonyma*s: Jer. 6. 16.
The Thessalonians, (as we have seen) are allowed for to edify and comfort one
another, and the aged women to teach the younger; but are bidden
notwithstanding that, to know them that labor among them, and are over them in
the Lord, and admonish them, 1 These. 5. 12, 13.
and to esteem them very highly in love, for their work sake, and the Women are
commanded silence in the Churches, 1 Cor. 14.
though allowed to teach in private, and upon occasion, what men have bin
accustomed unto, they are the better able to distinguish and give judgment of:
it was good Armor, doubtless) Saul puts on David, 1 Samuel 17. 39.
but David had not bin used to them, what the senses have bin exercised and
versed in, they will be better able for to judge as he speaks, Heb. 4. 14.
and therefore the Apostle doubts not, to make that the guide and rule of trial,
Romans 16, 17, 18.
mark those that cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine that ye
have learned, and avoid them: he would not have their palate again distasted
with the new devices of false and erroneous teachers; but would have them stick
and cleave unto the truth they had been versed in, and accustomed unto: as he
likewise advises his dearly beloved Timothy, 2 Timothy 1. 13. chap. 3. 10.
to hold fast the form of sound words which thou have heard of me, and doubts
not, but that would secure him in the worst times; but thou have fully known my
Doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, long suffering, charity, patience.

4. In all great changes, there should be allowed a taste: as Moses sent men
into the Land of Canaan, for to discover and propose unto the people, some
experiment, and trial of the worth and goodness of the fruits that grew
therein: Numb. 13. 20.
so in these great alterations, in the Churches, its good to mark well, what
the first fruits be, ut prima cesserunt, erant universa: Romans 11. 16.
if the first fruits be holy, so is the lump also: the best liquor is that
which runs first; worse it may after be, seldom better, as in the broaching
of the Gospel first, three thousand were converted; Act. 2. 41.
but after, Sermons did not work such wonders: now if we may know, ex ungue
Leonem, or, ex pede, Herculem: a Lion by his paw, or a Giant by his toe: we
have no reason to be overmuch in love with this new way: when we consider, how
many daring errors it has produced, how many Monsters this Lethaean Doctrine
has ingendered: at first, men stood amazed, and knew not what to think, the
newnes was a garnish, that did much invite, but time has showed the
unwholsomnesse thereof, how empty, airy, windy, those things are, that in these
late years, have been proposed and set to sale, by these late gamesters:
whether sinners have not been found under the notion and name of Saints? Wolves
in the clothing and garbs of sheep, flesh under the name of spirit, ranting
lasciviousness under the profession of exact and rigid abstinence: now if the
first fruits be thus unholy, what will the lump be, if the root be impure? what
will the fruit and branches be? it was Gods goodness, that these Cockatrices
were not crushed in the Egg, but were suffered thus to break forth into a
Viper, Isa. 59. 5.
for men would have been apt to think, some good had been suppressed and stifled,
and that the spirit had been quenched and restrained: whereas now they have had
time and elbow-room enough, to show themselves, and will not be so pitied as
they would have been, if they had been persecuted, and crushed in their
Cradles, as Christ had like to have been: though they were not altogether new
to us: the insurrections, tumults, confusions, and disorders that grew in
Germany, upon the same grounds, might have admonished us; and had not these
excrescencies bin managed, and mastered by some more cunning, well advized
heads and hands, that have nourished and bred them up, as men do Tigers and
Bears, to make a gain and an advantage of them in the end: they would have
worried and devoured one another long before this, as the false Apostles did in
Paul's time: Gal. 5. 16.
and if at any time, they break their Chains, and get loose from their Keepers,
we may have cause to wish they had not grown so lusty.

5. But perhaps it will be said, no body suckles such Imps as these, good
honest people are intended to be countenanced and encouraged: whose holiness
and graces do bear witness unto their gifts that have been tried and found
blameless, and well deserving: we think that many such, think it unlawful to
be thus employed, or if they have been tempted and seduced unto any such
extravagancies and intemperance: yet now they are awakened and taken off, and
are willing to acknowledge with him in the Prophet, Zach. 13. 5
I am no Prophet, I am an Husbandman; for man taught me to keep Cattle from my
youth, do find the work is not so easy, as they thought it had been; for
howsoever popular applause, may blow men at the first, into a Pulpit: yet when
the wind fails, or turns, they will come down: no Trade is driven long, or
unto Profit, without a stock, gaudeo quod spectant oculi, me mitte loquentem,
was at the first a fine thing; but when for want of store and plenty, the same
Colewort is served up again, it will be nauseous: those that without wit at
first, ran to them; at last, without fear, will run from them; and those that
came into into the Pulpit, to be admired and wondered at, will not be willing to
be rejected and unde^valued, quem tulit ad scaenan ventoso gloria curru,
Examinat sensus spectator: a careless hearer kills; but a Minister that has a
Calling, and is furnished, will bear it well enough, and assure himself, the
Seas will flow again, as well as now they ebb: as Christ preached his hearers
all away; but the Apostle Joh, 6, 66, 67.
yet gave not over, but encouraged himself again: now if we set by these
conscientious scrupulous men, the rest will be too few, to do this great work;
for its as true as ever, that the Harvest is great, and the laborers are few;
Mat. 9, 37
for those that have pretended to assist and aid, have greatly added to our
labors, and have put us to begin our work a new: to lay again, the foundations
of repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God, of the Doctrine of
baptismes, and of laying on of hands, and of the Resurrection of the dead, and
of eternal judgment, Heb. 6. 1, 2.
instead of propagating, they have plundered and depopulated many precious
truths, or at least, endeavored to do it: so that there is need of many hands
to carry it on again, and set it forward: and we think there will not be good,
humble, modest, private Christians enough to do it, though the encouragements
were greater.

6. But finally, we answer, that we think, there will be work enough for them
and us; no doubt it may be truly said, to the honor and renown of English
Ministers, that many godly private Christians have attained unto, and gotten
very great abilities, by hearing, writing, and repeating good Sermons: by
frequent and assiduous reading of the Scriptures, by learning English
Catechismes, and such little easy bodies, and compendiums of Divinity, by much
discourse and frequent conferences, about matters of their Estates and souls,
and reading good English Books: unto all which, they have been frequently and
seriously exhorted, by the Ministers; and these abilities, (doubtless) they
may and ought to use; but it must be in a subordinate and sober way, not in a
tumult and confusion, as those Babylonish Brick-layers, that understood not
what another said; Genesis 11. 9.
but managed and kept within their banks and bounds, by Ministers, who may
charge them, and look unto them, that in their meetings and conventions, they
vent no other Doctrine, neither give heed to fables, and such things, as
Minister questions, rather then godly edifying, which is in faith: 1 Timothy 1. 3,
4.
as in the building of the Temple, there were many Laborers that furthered the
work; but not that gave out patterns for the direction of it 1 Chronicles. 28. 11,
12, 13.
so private Christians may help forward the work of God exceeding much, if they
will act by order and direction from the Ministers, and Pastors of the place;
but must not be for that, set up and substituted in the Office, place and power
of the Minister and Pastor, may help the building very much, yet must not be
esteemed, Master Builders, as the Apostle calls himself, 1 Cor. 3: 10.
though they perhaps do understand, the model of the work, and will offer, and
may afford their service at a cheaper rate; but notwithstanding these
assistants, and subordinated Laborers, there must be some ordained Pastors to
attend, and wait upon every flock or Congregation, and take the custody and
care of them upon him, and be accountable to the chief Shepherd for them.

CHAP. V. The Question stated.
IT is well said, minimus error in principio, erit maximus in fine, a line
distant but a very little, in the center, at the circumference, will be a great
way off: and therefore in foundations, men must be very wary how they err:
when the doubt or question is not stated well, there is much ^rangling to
little purpose: the Apostle seem^ to make that the ground of their vain
jangling, that they understood not whereof they did affirm, 1 Timothy 1. 6, 7.
that is, did not state the question well, whereabout they wrangled, and moved
doubts; that we therefore, may not err this error, nor lose our way in
setting out; we desire our sense, may be conceived, and taken in this ensuing
thesis, proposition, aphorism.

That in every settled, well-ordered Church, there ought to be some persons set
a part, to attend and act in holy things, with more assurance and Authority
then others; besides the labors and endeavors of godly, well-affected,
private Christians.

1. We say, Church; that is, assembly and society of Christians, for spiritual
and religious ends; for though the word may signify, any called or assembled
Company, though for external civil ends: as that meeting is called: Act. 19.
52.
yet we use it here, in an ecclesiastical and spiritual sense, for religious
meetings and Assemblies, as the Apostle does, 1 Cor. 14. 23.
to show, that we intend not civil meetings; but confine our selves to those
that are divine and spiritual: but we take it in the utmost Ecclesiastical, and
spiritual latitude; for we think, what we affirm and set down, is true, of the
Catholic Church of Christ, and of every Member, division, and sub-division of
it, from universal to particular, from national to provincial, and from thence
to parochial, and congregational; for in every one of these, there ought to be
some set a part.

2. We say, settled: that is, grown up, and come to some maturity and ripeness;
for though a rude unpolisht company of two or three, may in some sense be
called a Church: Mat. 18. 20.
as an Embrio conceived, but not fashioned in the womb, may be called a man, as
the Psalmist seems to intimate: Psalm. 139. 16.
yet we mean not, such a young unformed Company, as the Church in Adams and the
Patriarks Families: or if grown up, yet in distemper, or unsettled, by some
external accidents, as the Church yet in the Wilderness, Act. 7. 38.
and as it was in that confusion, which the Prophet does allude to; 2 Chronicles.
15. 3.
but we mean, a Church enjoying some external quiet, and communion with her
self and others: as that was, after Saul was turned preacher, Act. 9. 31.
and of a Lion was become a Lamb, though it be not every way accomplished, and
accomodated, though it be liable to troubles and persecutions.

3. Well ordered, we acknowledge, this might be implied, in settled, yet think
it good for plainness, to express it; for a thing may be settled ill, or out
of order, as all materials belonging to an house, may be comported, and
brought together, and laid down on an heap, and so far settled: yet is not
property an house, till it be coupled, and joined together fitly; and so
stuff, and all necessaries to make a Garment: so there may be a rude,
promiscuous unpolished Company that may be settled, that is, resolved to live
and act together: yet undistinguished, and placed unjoynted and unordered, as
they ought to be, and must be, before they can do business, and encounter
difficulties; for action supposes and requires order, a broken tooth, and
foot out of joint, may not be trusted to, nor any stresse laid on them, as the
wise man speaks: Prove. 25. 19.
We mean therefore, a body joynted as it should be, having Head and Members,
orderly distinguished and complying, by the nerves and sinues, with one another,
as the Apostle speaks, Col. 2. 19. Ephesians. 4. 12, 13.
not that we think it needful and essential, to the being of a Church, that
this order be exact and perfect here, but that we think it should be aimed at,
and labored for, and some degrees attained; as a Ship must have some tackle,
and accomodations, before it can be put to Sea, and make a voyage; for though
it be not necessary to the being, yet it is to the beauty and well-being, Col.
2. 5.
joining and beholding your Order: and though he could not order all things, in
the Church of Corinth, when he was with them, yet he promised to do it at his
return. 1 Cor. 11. 34.


4. We say, some; for the Church is a body, that has dissimilar, and
heterogeneal parts, is integrum as well as totum, and has offices distinct,
and diverse from one another; Romans 12. 4, 5.
for as we have many Members in one body, and all Members have not the same
Office; so we being many, are one body in Christ, and every one members one of
another. A body is not a lump of flesh, unorganized and undistinguished; but
orderly accomodated with Members, answerable unto the functions needful for it;
1 Cor. 12. 14.
for the body is not one Member but many: some therefore must be set a part,
not all, its true, all should be Saints, at least in show and in profession;
Ephesians. 4. 12
but all the Saints should not be Governors and Rulers in the Church, Heb. 13.
24
salute all them that have the rule over you, and all the Saints: Gods people
in the old administration, under Moses, had as fair a title unto Saint-ship, as
ever any people in the world had: Exodus 19. 5, 6.
ye shall be a peculiar theasure unto me, above all people; for all the earth
is mine, and ye shall be unto me a Kingdom of Priests, and an holy Nation. So
that they were not without book, when they said, that all the Congregation were
holy, every one of them, and the Lord was among them: Numb. 16. 3.
yet Aarons Priesthood was asserted against those opposites. Men may be holy,
and yet not high; graced with favors, and endearements of great concernment,
yet no^ set up in Mose^ Chair, nor beautified with Arons Ornaments: all are not
overseers in a Congregation, nor Captains and Commanders in a Company: so God
has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly
Teachers; 1 Cor. 1^. 28, 29.
and therefore might well ask, are all Apostles? are all Prophets? are all
Teachers? if all were Teachers, who should be taught? if all Shepherds, who
should be sheep? where all are set apart, none are set apart, eadem est nimia,
and nulla divisio.

5. Set apart, that is, designed and devoted to the work betimes, as Aarons
Sons were, Exodus 28. 1.
and Samuel, whilst yet an Infant, 1 Sa. 1. 11.
that so they may be trained up and educated, answerably; for if that great
King would have none about him, to attend and wait upon him till they were
qualified, and fitted for it: Dan. 1. 3, 4, 5.
how much more may the great God, require a training up, and education
answerable to the place and service they are intended for; its true, Gods
spirit and the graces of it, are the main endowments that are required, that
they be holy, godly men, that they be full of faith and of the Holy Ghost, as
Stephen was; Act. 6. 3.
for they will never do the work of God well, that have not first Gods work
done on them: will hardly labor and endeavor seriously* to make their hearers
and Scholars better then themselves; but that is not all, they must have
fitness for the service, which all Gods people have not: in former ages, when
God did more immediately endow and qualify for that great work: yet, education
and instruction was required, how to discern those visions and apparitions
which they had, God called Samuel, 1 Samuel 3. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
but he runs unto Eli, and thought it had been he: so God sends a Prophet unto
Jeroboam and bids him come away and not accept of any entertainment that should
be offered him: and upon this ground, he does refuse the Kings; 1 King. 13. 8,
9.
but another Prophet comes unto him, and pretends a Message from an Angel, for
his going back: v. 18, 19.
the young Prophet obayes the old Prophet, and believed the latter order did
supercede the former: yet for this his weakness and mistake, for this credulity
and inability for to distinguish, calls and orders, a Lion meets with him in
his return, and kills him: v. 24.
therefore in those times, there were not only Prophets, but Prophets Sons,
that had distinct and proper education, that dwell together in one place, 2
King. 2. 3. 5.
and had one over them, for to instruct and guide them in the knowledge and
carriage of those great affairs: 1 Samuel 19. 20.
that as the Priests Sons had their Fathers and Brothers to instruct and bring
them up, in the knowledge of what they were to be employed in, when they were
men, so the Prophets had Fathers also, designed and appointed unto them: 1 Samuel
10. 12.
by whom they were directed and instructed, how to understand and answer those
celestial influences; which shows that holiness and sanctifying grace was not
enough.

So much more now, when there is more required from those Servants and
attendants, and less bestowed; for in the Apostles times, there was not only
required sanctifying grace, but also many other qualifications and endowments,
to enable godly men for Offices, and public administrations, as the Apostle
shows at large: 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Tit. 1. 6, 7, 8, 9.
which, if godliness had bin enough, might have all bin spared, nam frustra
fit per plura, quod fieri potest per panciora: as he said, when they were
debating an Ambassadors instructions, mitte prudentem, and nihil dicito: so
Paul might have said, see they be godly men, and care for nothing else. The
Apostles were not only holy, godly men, but had also their breeding and
education under Jesus Christ, for some years, yea had been used and accustomed
unto the work, yet when they were to go alone, to encounter with the great and
common enemy, they are commanded to tarry at Jerusalem, until they were endued
with power from on high. Luke 24. 4.


6. Set apart, that is, examined and tried, by men enabled and appointed
thereunto; for they are not to be the Judges of their own abilities; for all
are partial to themselves, and apt to think their own Geese Swans, Ante omnia
videndum, ne supra vires quid aggrediamur, quia fere plus nobis videmur posse,
quam possumus: Judge. 9. 28. 29.
who is Shechem, that we should serve him, and would this people were under my
hand, then would I remove Abimelech: yet he found it not so easy, when he came
to act it: every body can rule a shrew but he that has her: its fit, men's
forces should be considered, before they be entrusted with great adventures:
when David offered himself to go against Goliath, Saul takes a good account of
him, upon what grounds he durst adventure, upon such a duel: and puts him not
on, till he had given satisfaction: 1 Samuel 17. 33, 34, 35, 36.
the very Deacons must be proved, before they be admitted Officers, 1 Timothy 3. 10
much more the Ministers: Timothy was dedicated and devoted to the work of God,
by education under a godly Grandmother and Mother, 2 Timothy 2. 1. 5.
and by prophecy, 1 Timothy 1. 18.
and by the hand of Paul: 2 Timothy 1. 6
yet all this would not serve, but he must have hands imposed by the
Presbytery: 1 Timothy* 4. 14.
and accordingly, he was to charge others, that they should teach no other
Doctrine, 1 Timothy 1. 3.
nor lay hands on no man suddenly, 1 Timothy 5. 22.
and Titus was left in Creet for the same reason: Tit. 1. 5.
both of them being able and confiding persons: of whose fidelity and skill,
the Apostle had had much experience, as he speaks of Timothy. Phil. 2. 22.


7. To attend: God says, he is a great King, Mal. 1. 14
and must be waited on accordingly, as Solomon, that great King was: 1 King.
10. 5.
never did God appear, without a great train and retinue: Isa. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Dan. 7. 9, 10.
his Ministers must be attendants on him, not come and go, when they see cause;
but fixed and annexed to their Office, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 12. 7.
God will not have his work done by any body, that can do it, but by those that
are designed and appointed, as that man called his own Servants to distribute
and give his goods unto, Mat. 25. 14
and they must not be out of the way when they are called, but attend
continually, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 13. 6.
cannot depute and substitute another in their stead; as the Keepers of the
Great Seal, at every sealing must be present; so the Officers and Priests of
God were to attend, and if a Stranger offered to come near, though in good
will, he was to be put to death, Number. 1. 51.
and if they were more slack and negligent, in putting this severe decree and
rule in execution, God did it for them, as in the case of Vzzah, 2 Samuel 6* 6, 7.
not that God intended they should be drudges, and harass out themselves, till
they were spiritlesse, and fit for nothing; for we see, he succored and
relieved Moses, when he did complain, Number. 11. 16 17.
according to the good advice, that Jethro his Father in law, had given to him,
Exodus 18. 19, 20.
and though the Priests were to attend, and wait upon the service in their
courses, as Solomon, by David's direction, had appointed, 2 Chronicles. 8 14.
and Zacharias does accordingly attend: Luke 1. 8, 9
yet there were four and twenty courses, 1 Chronicles. 24. 18.
so that it came unto their lot to attend, but one month in two years: and
therefore Paul enjoyneth Timothy, to give himself wholly up to that attendance,
1 Timothy 4. 13, 15.
and as now the case is with Ministers, and those that are to wait upon the
holy things of God, all is too little: so much work to be done, so few to do
it, so many lets within us, and without us: so few encouragements, that we may
well say, with the Apostle, 2 Cor. 2. 16
who is sufficient for it, though he do nothing else.

8. And act: the Church without her Officers, is like the hulk and body of a
Ship without her Tackle, Mariners, and Seamen, and cannot move nor act no
more then that can. The Church in Christ's time was pretty well equipped and
accomodated, could move and sail within view of the Shore, and so were ordered
to do, Mat. 10. 5.
Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any City of the Samaritans enter
ye not; they were not fit for bustles and encounters yet, and therefore when
their Pilot was departing and going from them, he bids them tarry at Jerusalem,
till he provided them a better and a fitter equipage: Luke 24. 49
one says a Ship is avis lignea, a wooden Bird, and a Bird we know cannot fly
swiftly, except her wings and feathers be dry and smooth. God therefore, that
he might enable the Church, his Arc, or wooden Bird, to fly the better, and
encounter difficulties; sends down according to his promise, wind and fire,
both for to dry her moystened and ruffled feathers, and bear her up above the
scorns and calumnies of popular and vulgar breath; Act. 2. 2, 3, 4.
And suddenly there came from heaven a sound, as of a rushing mighty wind, and
it filled all the house where they were sitting; and there appeared unto them
cloven tongues, like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them: and they were
all filled with the holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the
spirit gave them utterance. Fire is the most active element, and therefore was
predominant in this accommodation, to show that Ministers ought to be active,
are often in the Scripture called Angels, Rev. 1. 20.
the seven stars are the Angels of the seven Churches, and we know what is said
of them, Psalm. 104. 4
who makes his Angels spirits, and his Ministers a flaming fire; its true, God
is to be attended with more then are to be employed; Psalm. 68. 17, 18.
the charets of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of angels, so Dan. 7.
10.
ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him, yet all of them are to be
Agents, able and apt to act what shall be ordered and appointed to them; so
that if he say unto one go, he goes; to another come, and he comes; and to his
servant, do this and he does it. Luke 7. 8.
They say the Russian Emperor, when any solemn entertainment is to be made,
has many Citizens, mechanic persons arrayed and set out, to stand as Mutes in
the solemnity, and look on; but God will have all his servants and attendants
to be vowells, will have no blemishes that disable unto action, will have no
Idols in the Church his holy Temple; that have mouths and speak not, eyes and
see not, they have hands and handle not, feet have they and walk not, as the
Psalmist speaks, Psa. 115. 5, 6, 7.
and therefore that is especially put in, that he be apt to teach, 1 Timothy 3. 2.
and an unfitnes here, begets a nullity, as it does in a knife that is not apt
to cut, in an instrument that is not apt to sound; as Aristotle says,
perforatus calix, non est mutilus, sed nullus: an hole in an earthen vessel,
destroys not only the beauty, but the being of it.

9. In holy things, that is the things of God, such as the Temple and Altar
were among the Jews; 1 Cor. 9. 13
and such as the word Prayer, Sacramnt^s, and Censures, are among the
Christians; for as there were Guides and Overseers in the Temple, to attend and
order at Administrations, and the stranger that came nigh was to be put to
death; Number. 3. 38
so in the Gospel Administrations, some must be specially provided and devo^ed
unto these attendances and administrations; the Church of God is compared unto,
and called the house of God, 1 Timothy 3. 15.
as therefore in a settled well-ordered house, there always is and must be,
some body to oversee and act in all domestic administrations; so in the
Church, the Apostle makes the parralel, 1 Timothy 3. 4, 5.
One that rules well his own house, having his children in subjection, with
all gravity; for if a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take
cart of the Church of God? The Ministers of the Gospel are and ought to be
Masters of the Assemblies, as the wise man speaks, Eccl. 12. 11.
that the meeting may not be confused, and the more part know not wherefore
they come together, as it is said of that confused company; (f) for though the
Scriptures Act. 19. 32
be the Word of God, and able to make us wise unto salvation, as the Apostle
speaks, 2 Timothy 3. 15.
yet without a guide all cannot understand them; Act. 8. 30. 31.
there is eternal life involved and bound up in that Book, but they must be
searched before that can be found, Joh. 5. 39.
they must be opened and divided by a Workman, 2. Tim. 2. 15.
that every Son and Servant in the house may have his portion, and allowance in
convenient time, Luke 12. 42
that there be no plaistering and daubing over with untempered mortar, as the
Prophets speaks; Ezekiel. 13. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
that is, because with lies they make the hearts of the righteous sad, whom the
Lord has not made sad; and strengthened the hands of the wicked that he should
not return from his wicked way, by promising him life. Verse. 22.


So for the Sacraments, Gods Great Seals, as Circumcision is expressly called;
Romans 4. 11.
and by a real and just proportion, the other may be: that they be not set
unto a Blank or to a Patent, that is not warrantable and authentic; and
therefore may be confided in the hands of such as God has ordered and
autberized to be keepers of them: Mat. ^8. 19, 20. 1 Cor. 11 23.
and so for Prayer, another great part of ministerial office, Acts 6. 4.
that it be offered up to God, by one that is an Advocate in Office, in the
stead of Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 20
Gods mouth unto the people, as the Prophet is expressly called, Jer. 15. 9.
and the People likewise unto God, as Moses is expressly said to be; Deuteronomy. 5.
27* Exodus 19. 8, 9.
not that we think a private godly Christian may not pray, no, we acknowledge
that he may and must; 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.
but we think there is a Public Service, or Sacrifice of Prayer, that must
not be offered up without an Officer, Jam. 5. 14, 15.
representing Jesus Christ, who is our only effectual authentic Advocate and
Intercessor to his Heavenly Father. Heb. 7. 25.
For as the Judges of the Courts at Westminster, will not have ignorant
unskilful persons plead before them, because the Terms a^e short, and Causes
many. So God loves those should pray to him that do speak sense and come unto
the point; and therefore our Savior Christ has expressly said, Mat. 6. 7, 8.
(...), use not vain repetitions as the Heathen do; and especially Baltus a
Poet, infamous for his empty and unseemly repetition^; one may say much in few
words, and little in many, if he be not careful and intent on what he speaks;
as Tacitus, Drusum paucioribus lauda^nt, sed intentiori, and fida oratione.

And for the Censures, no doubt a Rod in School, is not more needful then in
the Church; for its as true of Gods Servants as of ours, that they will not be
corrected with words, for though they understand, they will not answer; Pro.
29* 19
but the extremes are very hard to be avoided, Paul had it ready, and lets
them know so much, 1 Cor. 4 21
offers them which they would; a good Physician is not willing for to lance and
burn, but is some times forced by his Patients inordinatenesse, intemperans
aeger crudelem facit medicum, makes him do that which if not forced to it,
would be accounted cruelty. God loves his Children as well a^ we do ours, but
dotes not on them, non ut matter, sed ut pater, diligit Deus; and so if they
provoke him, and put him to it, can and will correct and chasten them, Heb. 12.
6, 7
but it should be in the Church, as it is in many Grammar-Schooles; many
devices and inventions found out to keep off whipping, that the commonness of
it bring it not into contempt, and blunt the edge of it; for if the shame and
terror of the censure be grown familiar, the shame and terror of it will abate,
as he said well, videbis ea saepius committi, quae saepe puniuntur, the spur
often used will make the Horse neglect the use of it; our preaching therefore
should rebuke our hearers, as the Apostle orders, 2 Timothy 4. 2.
and private admonition should succeed, and second that, as our Savior has
directed, Mat. 18 15, 16.
and the cutting off, should be reserved for extreme necessity.

10. We say, with more assurance, he that adventures on those dangerous and
great attempts, that is, to turn men from darkness, unto light; from the power
of Satan, unto God, as the Apostle speaks, Act. 26. 18.
had need be very well assured of his Call, his Mission, and Commission; its
well said, ad pauca respicientes, facile pronunciant, they leap easily that
look but a little way before them; its an easy matter to engage and undertake,
but not to execute and come off. The Duke of Savoies Fool chanced to be present
at a Debate about invading Switzerland, and on a sudden fell into a great
laughter; and being asked why he laughed, told them, because every body
advised how to go in, but no body considered how they should come out, in case
the enter prise succeeded not: we like those Leaders in an Army, that consider
how they shall escape in case they should be worsted; our Savior therefore
does inculcate, ever and anon, and reiterate, and mind them of their call; they
had his promise and assurance in it, that they should catch men as now they did
fish; Mat. 4. 19. Luke 5. 10.
yet he calls them over again, and gives them more assurance of their being
Officers, Mat. 10. 1, 2. Luke 6. 13.
and they found his presence with them in a special manner in the execution of
their office, which was a great assurance and security; Luke 10. 17.
yet after he was risen from the dead, he gives another mission and assurance,
Mat. 28. 19 20. Joh. 20. 21, 22, 23.
and as if that still were little and defective, and did not sufficiently
assure and settle them, against those great encounters they were to undergo; he
bids them tarry at Jerusalem until they had a greater power afforded to them,
Luke 24. 49.
and because Paul was to encounter with more enemies then any of them, and had
not his Commission sealed so soon as they; he had successive promises at his
conversion, Act. 26. 17.
delivering thee from the people, and from the Gentiles unto whom now I send
thee, and when he was come to Jerusalem, and the disciples were all afraid of
him, yet he was by Barnabas commended to them, and received, Act. 9. 26. 27, 28.
yet when he had preached fourteen years among the Gentiles, he is received by
James, Cephas, and John, who gave to him and Barnabas, the right hand of
fellowship, Gal. 2. 9, 10
which was another confirmation, so a man would think he was sufficiently
assured and encouraged; yet when he was at Corinth, the Lord himself again
appeared to him, and assured him that he was with him in the work; Act. 18. 9,
10.
so that he had warm clothes continually brought to him, to encourage and
support him: So when he writes to Timothy of the great Apostacy, and falling
off, that was like to follow in the last days; he settles him upon this
ground, that he was well assured of what he was instructed in, 2 Timothy 3. 14
continue thou in the things which thou have learned, and have been assured of,
knowing of whom thou have learned them. It is as dangerous to b^ing men home to
God, as to rob a Bear of her Whelps, and he that goes to fetch the Bears
Whelps from her, had need be very well assured of his Call. Pro. 17. 12.
When storms at sea endanger all, their comfort and assurance is, the
lawfulness and good assurance of their Call; but if a man should put himself
into a vessel for wantonness and curiosity, and should be driven suddenly into
the sea, and seized by Pirates, it would be sad to bear that cruel bondage
upon so slender an account; yet here the danger is greater, because they do
transgress the bounds which God himself has set, and seldom is their
punishment without some mark of terror and astonishment, as Corahs was, and
his Associates. Number. 16.


11. We say, with more authority then others, assurance and authority establish
one another; for if one be assured of his Call, he has authority: when Christ
sent out his Twelve Apostles, its said expressly, Luke 9. 1.
that he gave them authority over all Devils, as if before, some Devils were at
liberty: as that kind, that came not forth, but by fasting and prayer; Mar. 9.
29
but after they had this Commission, none stood before them, and a very full
authority it was, they had, and therefore he assures them before, that he had a
plenipotency: Mat. 28. 18
all power in Heaven and Earth; and what his Father gave him, he gave them, as
far as they were capable, and could receive and entertain it, Joh. 17. 22.
and what was needful to their Office, they did and could receive, not for them
only; but also for their successors, unto the worlds end; for he closes his
Commission, with this assertion, and assurance, that he would be with them,
unto the worlds end. Mat. 28. 20
It falls out often here in this world, that many promise fair, whilst they are
in pursuit, of some enjoyment and satisfaction, that is in their eye; but when
they have achieved and attained, what they prosecuted, forget their promises;
as Pharoahs Butler, did his promise and engagement unto Joseph; Genesis 40. 23.
but Christ forgets not what he promised his Servants, but when he had attained
what he aimed at, was settled and possessed of his Kingdom, ascended up on high,
was out of danger, now himself: had led captivity captive, had all his enemies
his footstool, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 110. 1.
yet he gives gifts to men, some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists,
some Pastors and Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints, the work of the
Ministry, the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of
the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13.
that is, till we be come to Heaven, and are past faith and hope, all Acts and
Ordinances, that help us in the way, and suppose infirmity and imperfection:
and this Authority, Paul and the rest, not only exercised and used themselves;
but give directions unto others also, for to use, as unto Titus, Tit. 2. 15.
these things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all authority: let no man
despise thee. And because Timothy was but a young man, and wanted that
authority, which age and gray hairs give, he gives direction to make that up by
conversation, which course of years gave not, 1 Timothy 4. 12
let no man despise thy youth; but be thou an example of believers, in word, in
conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity. These graces he was
sure would purchase and beget authority a little sooner then the ordinary time
and course of years, would bring it: and it was not ordinary to admit of young
men, an Elder and a Minister, being in the Scripture of the new Testament, of
great affinity, because their very years procured some authority to what they
said; and it is as needful and as useful now, as ever, that a Minister should
be a man of gravity and seniority, that they may, by that means, have some
authority annexed unto what they say, which an ordinary person, that has never
been abroad, that was never from the place of his nativity, can hardly have:
whereas those that have spent their younger years in study, and have been out
of sight, have by their very absence and distance, gotten some opinion and
reputation; nam major reverentia, e longinquo, they would not entertain our
Saviors Doctrine, because he was their Neighbor, and bred among them; Mat.
13. 54, 55, 56, 57.
but when a man has been abroad, has been in some great famous University,
annum jam audientem Cratippum, idque Athenis, and then is sifted and examined,
and afterward admitted, and made a Minister, it carries reputation with it,
and more authority then another can have, though of equal parts and gifts: as
the same words, to a prisoner, by one that is a Judge, and has Commission of
Oyer and Terminer, have more authority and influence, then if spoken to him, by
one not in office. Though the private person, be the abler Orator, and have
more dexterity, in expressing of himself: Women can speak well many times, and
their affections make them eloquent and apt to speak, yet the Apostle calls it
usurpation, to exercise this faculty of theirs, in public meetings of Gods
people, 1 Timothy 2. 12.
because they could not do it, in the hearing and sight of men, with that
authority that was required.

12. We say, that all this ought to be in every settled, well ordered Church,
beside the labors and endeavors of godly, well-affected, private Christians:
these are diversa, but not opposita: diverse, but not dissenting or opposing one
another: Church-work, is for the most part slow, and many hands may be
employed, provided that they be subordinate to one another, that the
Master Builders be allowed to give directions: as in an Army many hands may,
yea must be employed; but ranks and files must be observed: the Officers must
give out Orders and Commands, and the common Soldiers execute: as in the body
there are many Members, yet all subordinate unto the head: in a Ship there are
many Mariners and Soldiers, yet all under one General, and duly distributed
into different, distinct, and several subordinations: so in the Church, good
people may have use enough, of all their parts and gifts, of all their
faculties and graces, and yet need Ministers, to guide and lead them to teach
in public, and with more authority then they; for the Church consists, and
is made up of many small societies and bodies; and every little body has
ability to govern and direct it self: yet in subordination to the whole. In a
Grammar School, the upper forms, can order and direct the lower, yet there is
use of, and need of Masters: in a Town there be some that have good medicines
for the stone and toothache, yet there must be Physicians: in a Ship, there be
many that can steer, and understand the Card and Compass, yet there is use of
Pilots: so in a settled and well-ordered Church, there may be many that can
speak of good things, that can instruct and catechize their families, that can
admonish one another, and exhort and comfort, as there is occasion offered and
afforded: yet for all this, in those very places some should be set apart, to
attend and act in holy things, beside the labors and endeavors of these
godly, well-affected, private Christians.

CHAP. VI. A praeludium to the Arguments.
HAving thus opened and expressed our sense, and fixed what we purpose to
assert, we come in the next place to maintain and make it good: having declared
and discovered what we hold, we come to show the grounds and evidences, by
which we hold it: having said what we think, in this particular, we come to
settle and assure it.

Though we believe, unto a willing mind, we have already said what may
suffice, if we be not much mistaken in our explications all along: we have been
rather Doctors then Dictators, Ministers, then Masters of your apprehensions:
so that unto an impartial unbyassed and can did Reader, more need not be added.
But we consider, what an Iron age we live in, how sparing men are of their
faith and charity. How many godly, well-meaning Christians, have in these late
years bin robbed and rifled of their fastness and easiness, to entertain
truths brought unto them, by pretenders to integrity and ingenuity; and
therefore are not willing to exact upon them, and exhaust them of that Title
they have left; but are content to lavish and expend our own parts, that we may
spare theirs, to feed them with milk, and not with strong meat, because (at
present) we think, they are not able to bear it, in regard of the queasiness
and weakness of their stomachs, as the Apostle speaks: 1 Cor. 3. 2
we only crave and beg their candor, care, and consideration, of what we offer
to them, that our Arguments may not be slighted, before ever they be seen:
proscribed and expunged, before they be perused and examined; complaint is made
against the Ministers at Ephesus, by Demetrius and the Craftsmen; Act. 19. 38.
but when one of them was ready, to make his own and fellows just defense unto
the people, when they perceived, that he was a Jew, there arose a cry, about
two hours long, so that nothing could be answered: Act. 19. 33, 34.
such turbulent, engaged, prepossessed Readers, we would not by our good wills
meet with; but such as with those noble Bereans will afford us so much of their
time and intellectuals, as may be able to examine, and consider what we say.

In times of peace, men build their houses, with respect unto those Offices,
employments and entertainments they are like to have; but in times of war,
combustion and disorder, men's houses were accustomed to be their Castles:
walled (most commonly) and towred about, for safety and defense: so those that
have employed their pens upon this subject, in former quiet times, have framed
their speeches and discourses, for civil guests, that would be willing to take
all well, and make the best of every thing; but we, that venture in the storm,
must carry Anchors and Cables with us; must look we build upon the Rock, that
though the rain descend, and the floods come, and the winds beat vehemently
upon our house, yet it may not fall, because it is founded upon a Rock: Mat. 7.
25. Luke 6. 48.
that is, say nothing, that we are not able to assert and justify, put nothing
down, but what we are provided for to prove: offer nothing to our readers, as
opinion, which they may at their liberty and leisure, take or leave: choose or
refuse, receive or reject; but arm our assertions with arguments and
demonstrations, that may not only crave, but carry and command admission, and
entertainment; yet in a quiet, and mild address, and importunity; for we would
have no man to exclude and shut his reason out, that we might be received,
unreasonable and evil men, are much alike with us. 2 These. 3. 2.


But alas, what is it, that we go about, with such anxiety and care, for to
assert and prove? some dubious exotic Paradox, some hidden and unheard of
aphorism, or position, as the circulation of the blood in all men's bodies: the
standing or blazing of the Sun unmovably, and the turning and dancing of the
fixed Stars and Planets round about it: yet even such things have been argued
unto belief, and satisfaction of very many: or, is it the ebbing and flowing of
the Sea, in the nature and manner of a boiling Pot or Caldron, (as the
Scripture calls Leviathan, that great Sea monster: Job. 41. 20
by reason of the heat of the earth, in which it stands, and the influences of
the heavenly bodies, that lie continually upon it, and make it boil: or is it
some new discovery, in the Planet Jupiter, of we know not what new forms and
fabrics, as others have done already in the Moon? yet these things have been
said, not without some evidence: no, alas, our thesis is that there ought to
be a Ministry: some persons set apart, to attend and act in holy things, with
more assurance and authority then others: when one had made a very learned, and
good oration, in the hearing of Alcibiades, in praise of Hercules, he asked him,
if he ever heard one made in his disprayse: we might be well afraid of such a
question, but that we are better provided of an answer: its said indeed,
sapientis est, de manifestis, rationem reddere: to give a reason of the rising
and setting of the Sun, of the waxing and waining of the Moon, of the raising
and falling of the rain and dew, of the lengthening and shortning of the days,
in spring and fall; for of all these, questions may be framed, and doubts made;
but no man argues seriously against them, unless it be for sport: ut simus duo,
as he said; but we meet with serious and elaborate impleadings against this
known and common truth, with men that labor and engage their reputation in
this cause: and perhaps are come at last for to believe themselves: we have
heard of some that have told a lie so often, that at last, they were persuaded,
and began to think it might be true; but we cannot think so meanly of
professors of the truth among us, that the most elevated and rankest Christians
in this Church, that pretend unto the highest strains of inspirations and
assurance, should dis-believe a principle, so generally and long received, and
owned by themselves and all men: so reasonable and agreeable to order,
comlines, improvement, and edification of the Church and Saints: so grounded,
bottomed, abetted in the Scriptures: how were those innovators and incroachers,
in the Bishops times, exploded and cried out on, for offering to perplex and
puzzle the persuasion, that Gods people of the Nation had, of the divinity of
the Lords days rest: yet that was not so clear and evident, the institution of
it in the Scripture, more uncertain and consequential, the observation not more
universal: and shall we worship and adore for Saints and sublimated Christians,
those that do not only offer and endeavor to puzzle and perplex this
principle, that there is a Ministry, but to expunge and overthrow it utterly?
The Philosopher in the beginning of his metaphysical enquiries, says, its a
piece of great skill, and an evidence of ingenuity, sapienter dubitare, to make
pertinent and proper doubts, qui nescit dubitare, nescit discere; but we do not
think, this is a good doubt, for men and women in a Nation, professing
godliness after so many years persuasion and belief, there was a Ministry:
after so much efficacy and operation of it, upon the hearts and lives of Saints
and sinners: after so much evidence and witness bearing to it from above, in
various apparent, providential administrations and effects: after it has,
(upon the matter) ruined and overturned Popery, removed usurpation in the
Church, shut out and shamed looseness and profaneness, enabled very many of
their hearers and Disciples, to preach, and write, and wrangle, and contest
with them, and contend against them, for the Garland: after they are charged
and accused, to have raised all this dust, confusion and division in the
Nations, that where five have been in one house, there have been three against
two, and two against three, the Father against the Son, and the Son against the
Father, the Mother against the Daughter, and the Daughter against the Mother,
as our Savior speaks: Luke 12. 52, 53.
shall we doubt, whether he can write, whose scholar, whom he has taught and
bred, is now contending with him, for the silver pen, whether he be a
Grammarian, that has many of his scholars in both the Universities?

If there were a party in the Land, that went about for to persuade, there
neither were nor ought to be an Army in the Commonwealth, that with those wild
and giddy Anabaptists in Germany, and the Netherlands, did preach and publish,
that it was not lawful for men professing Christ and godliness, to take up
Arms, or to make any manner of resistance to their enemies, in any case,
because Christ said, Mat. 5. 39:
resist not evil, and again, Mat 27. 52
all they that take the sword, shall perish with the sword, would any body heed
them, or believe them? would they not show them, what successes, victories, and
rich rewards, and gratulations, our Arms and Forces have been followed and
blessed with from the beginning? how many Christian Soldiers served the
Heathen Emperors of Rome, against invading enemies, that there was a Legion,
called Pia, the holy, or religious: would they not tell them, that David was a
Soldier, and a man of war, 1 Chronicles. 22. 8.
that Solomon in times of peace had four thousand stalls for horses, and twelve
thousand Horsemen? 2 Chronicles 9. 25.
would any body take the pains, to write a book against such triflers, and
nonsense? yet this is our case; for carnal weapons, there may be reason why
they should be abated, and their numbers lessened, in times of peace; but there
are no times wherein spiritual weapons are not useful: whatever enemies we kill
and conquer, we cannot kill the Devil: your adversary the Devil, (says the
Apostle) 1 Pet. 5. 8
goes about continually, seeking whom he may devour: in times of peace, our
civil outward Arms and Ammunition, may be spared and laid aside, but the Devil
does most mischief in the times of peace.

If Christians were at ease, and wanted work, they might perhaps think fit to
recall and reconsider, what they have learned, to examine and peruse their
grounds and principles; but we do not find any such long vacations, we see no
leisure for to do and undo: the Apostle blames the Hebrews, because they
needed repetitions, and new teaching over principles, Heb. 5. 12.
and compares such hearers unto ground that is nigh unto cursing, whose end is
to be burned, Heb. 6, 7, 8
and our Savior says, when the Devil is cast out, and comes again, the end of
that man is worse then the beginning; Mat. 12. 45
for unless there be some principles allowed, and consented to on both sides,
there can be no debates: Archimedes would have room, to plant his Engine, or
else he could not show the force and vigor of it, contra principia negantem,
non est disputandum, if the foundations be cast down, what can the righteous
do? Psalm. 11. 3.
a good act, once before King James was marred, because the answerer would grant
his opponents nothing, but made them waste their time in proving principles,
that were to be allowed and granted.

Yet we speak not this to spare our pains, and excuse the labors we are likely
to be put to; what is more proper then to die, defending of the Post and Guard,
we are commanded and appointed to, se defendendo, is the best plea, that arms
can have: the light of nature, and law of Nations ever did, and do allow it:
when we are set upon, and stormed in our trenches, when we study to be quiet,
and to do our own business, as the Apostle speaks, 1 These. 5. 11.
we cannot have a more compelling call, to take up arms, and set our selves
unto the work: yet there is no work so sorrowful, and full of anguish and
anxiety, as after-throwes, and bearing over again our own Children: how does
the Apostle mourn in that condition, that he must again be brought to bed, must
travel in birth again till Christ be formed in his little Children: Gal. 4. 19.
and if it be many times such hard and piercing labor, to bring forth little
Children, what will it be to bring forth great ones? a sad message it was unto
Henry the eighth, when they told him, either the Mother or the Child must be
destroyed, an hard choice to him; but harder to the poor afflicted Mother, when
she could not save her self, but by the death and ruin of her Child, nor her
Child, but by the death and ruin of her self* its hard for us to say, how
tender Mothers affections use to be unto their Infants, can a Mother forget her
sucking Child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb?
Isa. 49. 15
yet this is our case, we cannot clear our selves, but by accusing those that
are our Children, we cannot be innocent, unless we find them guilty: when
Thamar was defiled by her Brother Amnon, that wounded her, that she knew not
whether to translate her shame, 2 Samuel 13. 13.
she could not make her own defense, but by accusing and depraving her own
Brother: Caesar did struggle, till he saw Brutus ready for to strike, but then
submitted: we have been slow to make our own defense, but can you blame us,
seeing it must be with our Childrens accusation; its true, there is a Law of
God not inabling only, but enjoining (...), or want of natural affection; Deuteronomy.
21: 18, 19, 20, 21.
but how seldom do we see it practiced, how few such Parents are there: no, we
rather choose to take the fault upon our selves, then lay it on our Children: we
are desirous to show our natural, paternall, and maternal dispositions and
affections, to our Children, as well as any, if we could find that our
debasement would advance and honor them, if they might reign in our ruin, we
should go near to say, occidant modo imperent, as she did, if they were as
likely to attain it; but alas, it will be their dishonor, as well as our
grief; if we have no Commission and Authority, they must be bastards, if the
Mother be proved an harlot the Children cannot be legitimate.

But there is another sorrow and perplexity, in this our labor, and that is
our little hope of convincing, and winning those that are our proper
adversaries; for had they been humble, modest, teachable, and tractable, they
hardly could have fallen into this error; for the Scripture seems to us to be
so punctual in the point, the practice and belief so universal, the opposers so
modern and infamous, the learned pens that have gone before us in the work, so
pathetical and powerful, that we see not what we shall be able for to add, nor
how an adversary could stand against them, unless some carnal biass be clapped
upon his conscience, some worldly and ignoble interest, have overturned and
subverted him, as the Apostle speaks: Tit. 3. 10, 11.
and if that be the case, what hope can we have of curing such a cankered and
gangrened a Member, 2 Timothy 2. 17
and if we think that others may be saved and delivered from the danger: yet
there is difficulty therein also; for if ordinary and common grounds could do
it, they have been furnished with such already, from such pens and parts, as we
cannot, nor do not hope to outdo: and in this case, may well say, nihil
dictum, quod non dictum prius. What dish soever* or howsoever dressed up, yet
will be thought, a double sodden Colewort: and if any think, that we would not
obtrude our selves in this extreme satiety, and nauseous crowd of Pamphlets,
without some carrying and cogent demonstrations, they must be told, the subject
matter will not bear it; for as the Philosopher, in the beginning of his moral
writings truly says, its as improper to expect a demonstration from an Orator,
as not to have it from a Mathematician: were we to argue some axiom or
position, in the mathematics, if we did not carry it by clear, convincing,
undeniable conclusions, it were much better not to have meddled in it; but
whoever thinks to do so in morality, especially in Divinity, will find himself
deceived in the subject; for in such things, the assent is not scientia sed
fides, not knowledge properly so called, or science, but persuasion and belief;
religio (says Hugo Grotius) est medicina, sanabilium ingeniorum, a medicine
for those that are not stark mad, a receipt for such as are desirous and willing
to be cured: we can force one to acknowledge and confess, that every whole is
bigger then his part, that equals equally abridged, will still be equal; but
we cannot force ones reason to acknowledge three are one, that God and man are
one Christ: that a woman is with Child, and yet a Virgin: here must be faith
and submission of our reason unto authority. And therefore when our Savior
sends out his Apostles, to convert the rational, and Heathen world, because he
knew they were not able to demonstrate what they moved and pleaded for, to
captious and cunning sophisters, such as Porphis and Lucian, and Simon Magus,
and Elimas the sorcerer were, he gave them power to do miracles, to melt and
mould the frame and course of natures method and efficiency instead of it, Heb.
2. 4.
God also bearing them witness, both with signs and wonders, and with diverse
miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own will: we must
therefore make this humble prologue and proposal, unto all we have to say, that
our Readers would be pleased to put on when they are resolved to read our
writing (as the Elect of God) holy and beloved, bowels of mercy, kindness,
humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering, forbearing one another, and
forgiving one another; and above all these, to put on charity, which is the
bond of perfection, as the Apostle speaks: Col. 3. 12. 13, 14.
that they would not think, we are about to cudgel and compel them into a
judgment and persuasion of what we say, but to beseech and bow them, that they
would believe that the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, 2 Cor. 10. 4.
that we are not Club-men and Commanders, but submiss and lovingly entreating,
and beseeching Brethren, that profess we can have no admission, where faith
and love are not door-keepers; that we mean not to break open, or heave the
door from off the hooks, but only quietly and calmly knock: if any man open to
us, we shall acknowledge it a courtesy, if none, we hope we shall be quiet,
and content to wait. And remember, that the Servant of God must not strive, but
be gentle unto all men, apt to teach, patient in meekness, instructing those
that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them repentance, to the
acknowledging of the truth, and that they may recover themselves, out of the
snare of the Devil, who are taken captive by him at his will, 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25,
26.


CHAP. VII. The first Argument.
ANd thus having labored and endeavored, to sweeten and assuage our Readers
expectation, we come to offer and propound, what we have thought upon by way of
Argument.

That ought to be in every settled well-ordered Prove. 3. 9
Honor, the Lord with thy substance, and with the first fruits of all thy
increase: the first fruits are commonly the best fruits, and were therefore to
be offered unto God, Exodus 23. 19.
so the Levites were separated from the other Tribes, and offered for an
offering unto God, as we find it: Numb. 8. 14, 15.
now when we are to send a present, and offer any thing unto a great person, we
must be careful that it be the best, as Jacob to his Sons, Genesis 43. 11.
take of the best fruits of the Land in your Vessels, and carry down the man a
present: how much more, when we offer it to God, who is a great King, and his
name is dreadful among the Heathen, as he speaks, Mal. 1. 14.
and is as curious as any person; the Sons of Aaron were designed to the
Priesthood, but not ^and over head; for if any of them there were a blemish,
they might not execute that office (r); yet they were but a company of
Butchers, Cooks and Bakers, wherein a blemish is not thought to be so great an
eyesore: but the Ministry of the Gospel-administration, is a great deal more
refined 2 Cor. 3. 6, 7, 8, 9.
, wherein a blemish will be sooner spied, and must be therefore more warily
avoided, and took heed of.

But its better, that in every Church or Congregation, some should be set
apart, to attend and act in holy things; for they are the more engaged and
obliged, fidelem putaveris feceris, as Joseph would not meddle with his
Mistress, because his Master had entrusted him with all the rest of his
possessions and enjoyments Genesis 39. 9. Eccles. 4. 9.
: its good to be sure of some; when Dion went to free the Syracusans, from the
bondage they were in, and was persuaded to come alone, and promised all manner
of assistance, yet he thought good to carry some engaged skilful persons with
him, that he might confide in, and cast himself upon. Its better leave, then
lack: we may have common Soldiers to assist us, when we cannot have
Commanders: however, both are better then any one; better have Officers and
Soldiers, then only Soldiers; better have Ministers and private Christians,
then only private Christians. When Readiness Messengers find the Prophets
prophesying, and Samuel appointed over them 1 Samuel 19. 20.
, they also were engaged in the service. Its better ^o have Mariners and Pilots
in a Ship, then only Mariners.

CHAP. VIII. The second Argument.
THat ought to be in every settled well-ordered the Author of confusion 1 Cor.
14. 33.
, but orders and appoints all Creatures to their proper functions: first lights
a Candle in the dark world Genesis 1. 3, 4
, and then works by it; first furnished the earth with all accommodations, and
then brings man to be the Governor and Master of it. Its really doubted,
whether (...), signifying the world, be derived ab ordine, vel ab ornamento,
that is, from order, or from ornament, because order is so proper, and
essential unto Ornament, nihil ornate, quod non ordine. The Apostle though
absent, is refreshed with the contemplation of it Col. 2. 5.
; for though I be absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit, joying
and beholding your Order: and therefore the Apostle spends many lines, in
setting their assemblies in order, yet did not absolutely effect it, but
engaged to absolve it at his coming 1 Cor. 11. 34.
, and in the interim, does enjoyne them, to observe it as much as might be 1
Cor. 14. 40.
: But its more orderly, that some should be engaged, and set apart to attend
and act in holy things, then that it should be set at six and sevens; that
every body in the Assembly, should know, how, and what, and when, and where to
act and move, then that the Assembly should be confused, and the more part not
know, wherefore they came together Act. 19, 32.
; that the Officers and Soldiers should know their ranks and files, then that
they should be jumbled, and thrust together immethodically; that the Minister
should know, and keep his station, then be (...), as the Apostle calls it 1
Pet. 4. 15
; for its the rule of the Apostle 1 Cor. 7. 24.
that every man wherein he is called, therein abides with God, unless he be
unfixed, and may remove without the breach of order and agreement; for who is
sufficient for these things 2 Cor. 2: 16.
? but we think them binding and obliging unto others, as well as we; for no
doubt, it is as lawful and as easy for us to go down to another seat below us,
as for others to come up to us; for a Minister to be a Justice, as for a
Justice to be a Minister; that it is as far from Athens to Thebes, as from
Thebes to Athens; facilis descensus, its easier to descend then ascend; a man
with manners, may take the lowest seat, when it may be pride to ascend and
occupy the uppermost Luke 14. 10
: it is as meet, that we should leave the word of God, and serve tables Act. 6.
2:
, as that others should leave their shops and stables, to administer the word
of God, and Sacraments.

CHAP. IX. The third Argument.
THat ought to be in every settled well-ordered state, and becomes a part of
that possession, and present good we do enjoy; and so it has always been the
care of prudent men, to improve their interest, by increasing their relations
and correspondencies; as Pharaoh, when he had preferred Joseph, and saw how
useful he was like to be unto him, gives him a wife, to oblige and bind him the
faster, and the closer to him Genesis 41. 45.
; so Paul makes use of that great interest of being a Citizen of Rome, when he
was in any great extremity Act. 16. 37 Act. 22. 25.
; and if we be at any time disposed to make one feel us, if you do but touch
his interest, you shall hear of him: as Jonas, when the Gourd was withered Jon.
4. 9.
, Demetrius and the Craftsmen, when their livelihood was undermined, as they
believed Act. 19. ^4, 25, 26, 27.
; this was the motive that much promoted the death and sufferings of the
Savior of the world, because they thought his fame and actions would incense
the Romans Joh. 11. 48.
, and checked Pilate, when he was about to free him from his envious and
malicious accusation; for they tell him plainly, that if he let him go, he was
not Caesar's friend; for whosoever makes himself a King, speaks against
Caesar Joh. 19. 12.
, sapienti dictum sat est, he never considered our Saviors innocence after
that, but his relation unto Caesar, and the sovereign Authority he lived under.
When William Duke of Normandy did land in Sussex, he presently Commands his
Navy to be burned, that the Soldiers might see, it was their interest as well
as his, to get the victory. Yea those are managed and led by this, that are
incapable of any other Oratory: Isa. 1. 2.
the Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters cribb, come to their food
and rest, without compulsion Jer. 8. 7.
: yea, the stork in the Heaven, knows her appointed times, and the Turtle,
and the Crane, and the Swallow, observe the times of their coming: all
Creatures have a natural impression on them, of that which is their proper and
real interest, and move accordingly.

But it is the Churches interest, to have some persons set apart, to attend and
act in holy things, besides the endeavors of private well-affected Christians:
for those that are set a part have nothing else to trust to, but the emolument
and profit that arises from their attendance upon holy things; as the Sons of
Aaron had no inheritance among the other Tribes, because they should be careful
to continue and keep up the public worship Numb. 18. 20.
, so that if they were not in an Office, they could not eat a piece of bread 1 Samuel 2. 36.
: as the interest of a Ship is, that the Mariners must sink and swim with her;
and therefore when those would have gone into the Boat, the Soldiers cut the
Ropes, and let her fall off Act. 27. 32
: so the Apostles were called from their fishing Mat. 4. 18, 19.
, and were appointed another way of living, as they had another work appointed
them Mat. 10. 10.
: and it was not terminated in them alone, or confined unto them, but made an
Ordinance for all succeeding Churches, that as they that minister about holy
things, live of the things of the Temple, and they which wait at the Altar, are
partakers with the Altar; even so, has the Lord ordained, that they which
preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14.
. God knew self-love was the most powerful engagement; that men would keep that
up, which kept up them; promote that which promoted them, be most intent upon
those clients causes, that paid them best; do more for one fee, then for twenty
forma pauperis: as in the University, we find those boys intend and mind
their studies most, that have no other hopes; those seek and promote the
profits and Revenues of the College, that have no other livelihood; and so
those serve the Church best, that have no other succor and support, when they
can say, as he does, sirs, ye see how by this Calling we have our livelihood,
and this is a self-seeking, that God allows and calls for at our hand Deuteronomy. 10.
12, 13.
; and those that go about to deprive the Church of those that are set apart to
attend, and act in holy things, do go about to deprive her of her proper good:
as they do that deprive the sheep of their shepherds, the ship of her Mariners
and Pylots, the Army of her Officers and Ensigns, the Child of his birthright
and inheritance; for which Esau, though in his own wrong, is for ever branded
with the infamy of a profane person Heb. 12. 16.
; or those that in extremity, and times of danger, call off the Watchmen from
the walls, and take away the Lifeguard of one in danger, as Rabshake
endeavored for to do 2 King. 18. 27, 28, ^9.
.

CHAP. X. The fourth Argument.
THat ought to be in every settled, well-ordered the Church is the body of
Christ, Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. 1 Cor. 12. 27.
which he has purchased and paid dear for. Our bodies, though defective and
deformed, yet are given us, and cost us nothing, and we must not be too
Eagle-eyed on what is given us, beneficium non spectandum a deteriore part;
but Christ has bought his; as he that had little crooked legs, yet would have
the Painter make him handsome ones, because he bought those, not the other. So
it is called, the house of God 1 Timothy 3. 15. Heb. 3. 6.
, and we may not think our houses should be neat and handsome, well governed
and ordered, and his lie waste, as the Prophet speaks Hag. 1. 4.
: so a City Heb. 12: 22.
. What therefore ought to be in every natural body, house, or City, ought to
be in the Church, which is invested with all these titles and denominations.

But in every natural body, family, society, or City, there are some persons
set a part to attend, and act in their affairs; for the head has one
employment in the body, the hand another, and the foot another, as the Apostle
shows Romans 12. 4, 5.
; yea those members of the body, which seem more feeble, are notwithstanding
necessary 1 Cor. 12. 22.
; as one says well, caput est optimum, sed non oportet ut totum sit caput: the
General in an Army is the best Officer, yet all cannot be Generals; and if
the feeble members in a body cannot be spared, much less the noble: if one
cannot spare his hand or foot, much less his head. Yea, though the other
members could supply the place, and serve, yet it would be unhandsome and
inconvenient, to sow, and thread their needles with their toes, as some have
done: so in a family, though servants can act the Fathers part, in correcting
or directing of the Chrildren, yet the Apostle does appropriate that Office
unto the Father Heb. 12. 9.
; so many Servants can do the Husbands Office, yet are not suffered: In a
Corporation that is allowed and legal in the Head-Officer, that would be an
usurpation, and a crime in any other: if a prudent and well-spoken Gentleman
should step into the Judges place, and give sentence, and order execution upon
offenders, without Commission, it were a crime; as the Wolf in the fable, that
came by the Butchers slaughterhouse, cried out, si ego hoc fecissem, if I
should do it, what an uproar would therebe? yet there is not in the word of
God, half so much said for Government and rule in civil things, as in Church
matters, the civil Governors have not so manifest, and plain Commissions in
the word of God, as spiritual have: if therefore it would be accounted an
heinous crime, for a lusty serving-man, to put his Lord and Master out of bed,
and step into his place, because he thought himself as able for that service as
his Master; why should a Minister be pulled out of his Pulpit by one that
thinks he can speak better? If a Soldier, well attended, should invade the
Lord Mayor of Londons place, and presume to manage what he was about, we
suppose the attendants of the Court, and Auditors, would not expect who could
do better, but would think fit to interrupt him; or if they were not strong
enough, for to complain unto those in Authority, and think their liberties
invaded, and their Charters and Powers much infringed: and why Gods people in
their public solemn meetings and Assemblies, should be disturbed and
interruped, we do not know; Obsta principiis sero medicina paratur, cum mala
per longas invaluere moras: When every man did what was right in his own eyes,
and public order was neglected, and not looked after, as it is said Jud. 17. 6.
, the Lord was heavily revenged on them for it, as appears in the sequel of
that History. If the Church affairs, and Ecclesiastical Assemblies, be
neglected and exposed, be sure the Civil will not long be quiet: When Israel
had been a long time without the true God, and without a teaching Priest, and
without Law, there was no peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in,
but great vexations were upon all the Inhabitants of the Countries; Nation was
destroyed of Nation, and City of City, for God did vex them with all adversity
2 Chronicles. 15 3, 5, 6,
; for the conscience is the fountain and spring of duty, and if that be not
directed and awed by the Word of God, in vain are Acts of Parliament and
Proclamations made; as if the Spring of a Clock be down, in vain are all the
Wheels kept clean, and put in order: And therefore good Governors have
always studied to settle that, as Abijah does, before that bloody and great
Encounter between his Army and Jeroboam's 2 Chronicles. 13 4, 5, etc.
, And so the Apostle, You must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also
for conscience sake Romans 13. 5.
.

CHAP. XI. The fifth Argument.
THat ought to be in every settled, well-ordered natura inchoat aminimis,
draws first the rudest and smallest lines; the stoutest Lion is but a little
lump at first, has nothing in it in the first attempt of nature, but what is
essential and of absolute necessity, can polish afterward and perfect, but not
begin; the unborn Embryo, or Infant, has all its necessaries and essentialls
in the first draught, Psalm. 139. 16.
Thine eyes did see my substance, being yet imperfect, and in thy Book were all
my members written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was
none of them. So in the Chaos, or first confused heap, which God created Genesis
1. 1, 2.
, there was the spawn and seed of all that goodly frame, that afterward
appeared; the first imperfect lines in every picture, have the essentialls of
the portraiture intended, which afterward are polished and filled up.

But in the youngest, rudest, most unpolisht, newborn Church that ever was,
there were some that attended and did act in holy things. There is no question
but Adams Family was the rudest, most unpolisht Church that ever was, seeing he
and his Wife were cast out from the holy and immediate presence and face of
God, into the cursed, stubborn, unsubdued earth, that was enabled and
encouraged to rebel and kick against him, Genesis 3 17, 18, 19.
and was condemned and adjudged to an hard, unusual and unwelcome state of
toil and drudgery; so bruised and distempered with this great Fall, that it
was not easy to retain his senses; had something to distinguish him, and make
him differ from the devils, and be a groundwork and foundation to build his
Faith and Hope upon; and that was a short, obscure, imperfect promise of
salvation in the Woman's Seed Genesis 3. 15.
, which he had little leisure to consider, so great was his confusion and
distraction at the first, and so full of terror and disappointment, his
arraignment and conviction.

Yet in Adams Family, some did attend and act in holy things; for in process
of time, Cain brought of the fruit of the ground, an offering unto the Lord;
and Abel brought of the first-lings of his flock, and of the fat thereof; this
they could not have done, if their Father Adam had not instructed them, and
taught them how to do it. So Enoch is by the Apostle Jude Jud. 14, 15*
acknowledged a Prophet, and his Prophecy recorded and accounted a part of Holy
Writ. Noah is called by Peter, a Preacher of righteousness 2 Pet. 2. 5.
. So after the Flood, we find Melchisedech a Priest Genesis 14. 18:
, Abraham expressly called a Prophet Genesis 20. 7
, and by consequence, the other patriarchs and heads of Families by the
Psalm^st, saying, Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm Psalm.
105. 15.
; and so along in all these rude unpolisht ages of the world, some did attend
and act in holy things; and the Priesthood settled in the first born, unless by
some miscarriage they were deprived of it, as Reuben was Genesis 49. 4.
: so that at the last the firstborn, for that and other reasons, were
dedicated and given unto God Exodus 13. 2 Exodus 22. 29.
, for there were Priests before that solemn consecration of the firstborn, or
the separation of the Tribe of Levi to that employment; for before the giving
of the Law, there is mention made of Priests: Exodus 19. 22.
: and there are young men sent by Moses to offer sacrifice, before the Tribe of
Levi was assumed Exodus 24. 5
, which could be no other but the firstborn of every Family. Now if in these
rude, unpolisht, and imperfect draughts of Churches, there were some set a part
to attend and act in holy things; how much more ought such to be in perfect
Modells? if in a frame of Building that is to be sold at Sturbridge Fair, there
be foundations, walls, and roof, though all imperfect and unfurnisht; how much
more are there foundations, walls, and roof, in White Hall, Hampton Court, and
such other stately and royal Fabrics.

CHAP. XII. The sixth Argument.
THat ought to be in every settled, well-ordered by nature are no Gods Gal. 4. 8.
; Whether we consider the Image or Picture they did adore, and was the present
immediate object of their worship, for they knew that to be a piece of wood, or
stone, or gold, or silver; as the Poet:

Olim truncus eram ficulnus, inutile lignum,
Cum faber incertus scamnum faceretve Priapum,
Maluit esse Deum.
They knew that their gods had not their dwellings here below with men, as they
truly and wisely answered to that great King Dan. 2. 11.
; but that they had (...), as the Poet speaks in the beginning of his Illiades;
although they thought they sometimes came down in the shapes of men, or other
creatures, as they speak Act. 14 11
. Or whether we consider the thing represented to them by the Image; for that
was either some puissant and famous man, as Belus, Jupiter, Osyris, Mercury, or
some evil spirit, that deluded and misled them; for howsoever the ancient
Platon^sts, as Porphyrie and others, thought they did worship good ones as well
as bad ones, and give Rules to know the good ones from the bad ones, yet we
know the good ones never would admit of worship; Rev. 19. 10
See thou do it not, I am thy fellow servants; and the Apostle expressly says,
that they were devils, and not Gods 1 Cor. 10. 20, 21.
.

And as their object, unto which their worship was designed, was a creature; so
their light whereby they acted was a very dim light, that would discover
nothing but what was palpable and very obvious, as that Adultery and Murder
was a sin, and such great characters and prin^s that were engraven on their
hearts in the Creation, and could not easily be blotted and defaced, as the
Apostle shows Romans 2. 14, 15.
. Now what Pagans, guided by this dim, uncertain, polluted, and infected light
of nature, did unto their Images and Idol Gods, must not be wanting and
defective in the Religious Worship of the true God that is guided and directed
by the inspired and written Word of God; for Idolaters and Heathens must not
outdo us, must not go farther, and be more serviceable, then pretenders to the
highest and exactest strains of Christianity. What blind men see and settle,
the seers must not stumble at and fail in.

But we find a Priesthood and attendance upon holy things among the Heathen,
some persons set a part to attend and act in holy things among Idolaters; this
due was given to the Devil by those that in their Images did sacrifice to him:
for howsoever Noah were a Worshipper of God, and had Religion in his Family, as
well after as before the Flood Genesis 8. 20, 21.
, yet his issue and posterity soon fell off, and were drowned in the common
practice of the Countries where they lived; for we find them charged with
Idolatry, and the Worshipping, and Serving other Gods, Whilst Sem the son of
Noah was yet alive Jos. 24. 2.
, Your Fathers dwelt on the other side of the Flood in old time, even Terah,
the Father of Abraham, and they served other Gods; and some of the Rabbis say,
that Terah got his living by making and selling of Image^; yet they had some
that acted and attended in holy things; for the Caldeans became in after times
an order and degree of Priesthood and attendance, as appears Dan. 2. ^, 10
; And for Japhets issue, that went further off to seek their habitations, among
whom the Isles of the Gentiles, (among which were reckoned also these Western
Nations of France, and Germany, and Spain, and Italy,) were at the first
divided as Moses shows Genesis 10. 5*
; as also, the Provinces of the lesser Asia, as Pontus, Galathia, Cappadocia,
Lycaonia, Bithinia, there is no doubt made by any, but that they soon forgot
the pure Religion of their Patriarch and Father Noah, and fell into Idolatry:
yet had they Priests that did attend and act in holy things; for when Paul and
Barnabas were come down unto Lystra, a City within the confines of Lycaonia,
and had healed a Cripple there, the people cried out in the speech of Lycaonia,
that the Gods were come down to them in the likeness of men, and the Priests
of Jupiter which before the gates of the City, brought Oxen and Garlands unto
the gates, and would have done sacrifice, with the people Act. 14. 11, 12, 13.
; and for the other more Western European Nations, its well known that they had
their Pithias, Flamins, Druids, Bards, attending on their holy things, and had
in great account among them.

And because our Argument is a minore, we will close it with some instances
derived from the worst of Heathens, and those were Chams posterity, which were
accursed for their Fathers fault Genesis 9. 25*
; for they inhabited the Land of Egypt, which is often in the Scripture called
the Land of Ham Psa. 105. 23.
, and his son Mitzraim, who succeeded in the Government, is acknowledged to be
that famous Osyris, that settled the Government of all those parts: yet here the
Priests were in such reputation and respect, that when all the other Natives
were by the Famine made the Tenants and Farmers of the King, only the Priests
were free Genesis 47. 22
; and not only among those of Mi^zraim that planted there, but those also that
went up higher toward the North-West, and inhabited the Seacoasts of the Land
of Canaan Genesis 10. 13, 14.
; for when the Ark of God was taken Captive ^ Sam. 5. 1, 2.
, and had been carried round about from one place to another, and was too hot
for every place, the Priests are called for, and give directions for the
sending of it back again unto Judea 1 Samuel 6. 2, 3.
; which shows that in all these Countries of the Sons of Cham, the most
ungracious of all that came out of the Ark, some persons yet were set apart to
attend and act in holy things. But Chams posterity poss^ssed other Countries as
well as Egypt, and the Seacoasts of the Land of Canaan, for Cush his eldest
Son Genesis 10. 6.
, took up his Quarters in Arabia, between the two Gulphs of Persia and Arabia,
now called the Red Sea, from the stony and desert part whereof those came that
robbed Job, and took away his Cattle Job 1. 14, 15.
; and those Wise men, that were guided by a star unto our Savior Christ at
his Nativity, are thou^ht to come from these parts Mat. 2. 1, 2:
; and no question were persons set a part to attend and act in holy things; for
Magi was a common name of the Divines and Priests of those Eastern Countries;
for we find in after times, when that Cyrus King of Persia had gotten any
notable and signal Victory, that the Magi, or Priests, were always sent for
to pick out of the spoils what they thought fit, to adorn the Temples, and
Sacrifice unto their Gods, as Xenophon shows in many places of his story of
the education, and acts of Cyrus; wherein he did no more then God himself
expressly ordered, in that great victory against the Midianites Numb. 31. 28,
29, 30*
: now, if the worst of Heathens had some persons set apart to attend and act in
holy things, shall we be worse then they? our Savior counted it a very
grievous punishment to be as heathen Mat. 18. 17.
, and it will be unhandsome to be worse; if the men of Ninive shall rise in
judgment against Juda, and condemn it, because they repented at Jonahs
preaching Mat* 12. 41, 42.
; what shall they do to those that will not own the Office and Authority of
Jonah? for if he that is least in the Kingdom of Heaven, be greater then John
Baptist Mat. 11. 11.
, then those that slight them, will have as much to answer for, as they that
slighted him.

CHAP. XIII. The seventh Argument.
THat ought to be in every settled, well-ordered Church is Gods house 1 Timothy 3.
15.
, and it is an unrepealed Law, that every man bear rule in his own house Esth.
1. 22.
, that is, give Laws and Rules of Government Psalm. 101. per totum.
, order and oversee the execution of them 1 Timothy 3. 4
; one that rules well his own house, having Children in subjection, dispose of
places and preferment in it Luke 12. 42, 43, 44.
; who is that faithful and wise Steward, whom his Lord shall make ruler over
his Household, to give them their portion of meat in due season? by house is not
here meant so much the fabric, building and materials of it, as the Family and
members of it; as they speak of Ruth the Moabitess Ruth. 4. 11.
, the Lord make the woman that is come into thine house, like Rachel and like
Leah, which two did build up the house of Israel; not the material houses and
fabrics which they had, but the persons and members of it.

But God has settled and appointed some to attend and act in holy things,
whilst the Church was but a sojourner and wanderer in the world, as in the
Patriarchs times Heb. 11. 13
, the First born were appointed, as we have showed before; but when they were
embodied, and began to settle, there was a fixed and solid provision made. It
is well said by the Psalmist Ps. 103. 14
, that he knows our frame, he remembereth that we are dust, homo est terrae
filius, nihili nepos, as Austin, the Son of the earth, the Grandson of nothing,
and so retains a pronenesse and proclivity, to sink and totter into the same
again, to mind and magnify himself, to be indulgent to his proper interests
and relations. It is observed, that such as settle their Estates by will, upon
those persons to whom by right and common Law they should descend, leave
quietness and peace amongst them; whereas extorted and unnatural bequests do
seldom settle: So God intending now to make a settled and quiet state, disposes
of the highest and chiefest Offices, according to their natural and next
relations; for having chosen and picked Moses to be supreme and sovereign, in
all Ecclesiastical and civil administrations (as he says) Numb. 12. 6, 7, 8.
, was pleased that all the settled dignities and offices should be established
upon his alliances and nearest kindred, as the Priesthood upon Aron and upon
his Sons Exodus 27. 21. Exo. 28. 1. etc.
, and this was so intayled on him and his Sons, that if any other offered to
invade it, and intermeddle in it, without a special Warrant, he was expressly to
be put to death Numb. 3. 10
; and when they were not careful in the execution of this Law, God undertakes
it, as in the case of Vzzah is apparent 2 Samuel 6. 6, 7.
. They were wont to say, that Kings were personae mixtae, and so might not
order only, but act in Ecclesiasticalls as well as Civills, as Moses did Lev.
8. 6, 7. etc.
, and so Solomon 1 King. 8. 22.
, who for that and other acts in holy things, does call himself a Preacher
Eccles. 1. 12.
; but the Kings of Juda did not find it so; for when they ventured upon any
thing that was proper to the Priests, they heard of it, 1 Samuel 13. 12.
as Saul for offering a burnt-offering, and Vzziah for attempting to offer
incense 2 Chronicles. 26. 16.
; for though they were not put to death according to the rigor of the Law, as
Vzzah was, yet the one was not established in his Government, and the other by
a Levitical pollution was disabled for it.

And because there was great reason that the High Priest should have a hand in
ordering the Affairs, and bestowing of the Offices that were of trust and
profit in the service and attendance, the Tribe of Levi his nearest kindred, is
taken from among the rest, and given unto Aaron and his Sons to be employed in
the holy things Numb. 3. 9, 10, 12, 13.
; and because the Church of God at this time had the pre-eminence, and was
attended in that Nation with much magnificence and state, there were besides
these ordinary and meniall Servants that were tied to their times and tasks,
some extraordinary and honorable Servants, that were as well for ornament as
use; as Moses, Samuel, David, Eliah, Esaias, Jeremy, and others, that were
employed upon occasions and emergencies; as in a great house there are not only
vessels of wood and earth for use and service, but also of gold and silver, for
honor and magnificence, as the Apostle speaks 2 Timothy 2. 20.
; so in this House of God, some were at all times raised up in an extraordinary
manner, to attend and act in holy things; and so curious and exact was God in
these Administrations and Employments, and so rigid in the Rule and Government
of his own house, that he left almost nothing unto humane prudence: for though
Moses was faithful in all his house, as the Apostle speaks Heb. 3. 2.
; yet God gives him exact and punctual directions for every thing, leaving
nothing to invention and discretion, which God knew was a leaden rule, and
might be bowed to interests and occasions; and because he would have these
directions riveted and fixed in him, he gives him patterns of them Exodus 25. 9.
, that his eyes might be engaged to succor and assist his ears:

Segnius irritant animos demissa per aures,
Quam quae sunt oculis subject a fidelibus --
And because he might forget, or be unmindfull of his directions, he is
severely charged for to make them after the pattern which was showed thee in
the Mount Exodus 25. 40.
. One would have thought, that seeing David and Solomon were both of them
exceeding wise, and had both of them (especially Solomon) great skill in
building and Architecture, there would have needed no particular direction for
the Temple, for he might have said, make all things in proportion to the
Tabernacle which thou have ready to be thy guide and copy, only the Temple must
be bigger and more magnificent. As the Prince of Orange said unto his Steward,
when a great Ambassador was invited to his Table, that every dish should be
enlarged; so God might have said, let every thing be more magnificent and
illustrous then in the Tabernacle, for there you have the substance.

No, God would not adventure any thing upon David's honesty, or Solomon's
ability, but gives him patterns and directions for them 1 Chronicles. 28. 11, 12, 13.
; and lest Solomon should think that he could help it, and make some
improvement of what he had received, his Father tells him, 1 Chronicles. 29. 19.
that God had given it, and left no latitude of adding or detracting any thing;
as men give order in their houses for many things to please and gratify their
own peculiar fancies, that others many times mislike. The World has been a
long time exercised in contriving and inventing Forms of Government, that
Tyranny on the one hand, and Anarchy on the other, might beexcluded; yet the
best in many things have been defective: but God considers every thing, who
should be Officers, and what Subordination, there should be, what should belong
unto the Priests alone Numb. 3. 38.
, and what should belong unto the Levits that were not Priests Numb. 3. 6, 7, 8.
; and that not only in the general, but in all the sub-divisions of the
Levites: for God well knew, that what was every bodies work, was no bodies
work. Its said of the King of Swedens Army, that wheresoever they encamped,
there was such order and exactness in the posture and model of it, that how
unexpected soever an alarm was, no Soldier missed his own proper Pike or
Musket; God takes that order in the marching and incamping of his Church, that
every family of the Levites knew what belonged unto them; for those of Gershon,
the body of the Tabernacle Numb. 3. 25, 26.
; for those of Kohath, the Ark and Table, and Candlestick, and Altars hanging,
and what was proper to it Numb. 3. 31.
; for those of Merari, the boards, and bars, and pillars, and sockets, and
all the furniture belonging to the outward Court Numb. 3. 36, 37.
: now if God were so exact and punctual in all the Officers and Offices of a
transitory moving Tabernacle, that was shortly after to be swallowed up, and
shadowed by the Temple; and of the Temple that was nothing but a foil and
introduction to the Gospel-service, what should we be in that? for if that
which was done away, was glorious, much more that which remains is glorious 2
Cor. 3. 11
; if the Levitical and legal administration were so exactly and punctually
provided for; how much more should the Evangelical? if God himself set some
apart to attend and act in holy things, which many others of the Congregation
could have done as well as they; how much more curious should we be in things
for which who is sufficient? as the Apostle speaks 2 Cor. 2. 16
: if God would have his Cooks and Butchers so exact and absolute, so educated,
instructed and provided for; what should his Secretaries, Counselors and
Heralds be?

CHAP. XIV. The eighth Argument.
THat ought to be in every settled, well-ordered Bacon and Burleigh, the late
Queens real and serious Servants, with a project or design of raising and
advansing her Revenue, they would ask him, how much reputation would redound
unto her by it? Moses was fairly offered to be made the Father and Fountain of
a glorious offspring, upon condition he would let God cut off those provoking
and pernicious Apostates Exodus 32. 10.
; but he considered not so much what he should get, as what God should lose,
that then God should not make good his promise, that now every body knew, and
had took special notice of Exodus 3^. 1^, 13, 14. Numb. 14. 12, 13, 14, 15.
; good Servants should consult their Masters praise, as well as profit, what
honor as well as what advantage it will bring.

And if they fail in duty, God is not absolved by it; he is engaged, and cannot
make them bear the blame 2 Timothy 2, 13.
: if we believe not, yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself; and
therefore did consider what he did, before he promised, saw that his people
might be faithless, might fail on their parts, and that so grossly and a pertly,
that his promise could not be made good without dishonor and disparagement
unto his justice* Christ therefore was resolved on, and laid as the foundation
of all his promises, in whom they are and may be made good, without
disparagement unto his truth or justice 2 Cor. 1. 20
; for all the promises of God in him, are yea, and in him amen, unto the glory
of God by us; though others are unworthy to have them made good, yet Christ is
not: Christ had not promised that Centurion to come unto him, but the Jews that
were employed in the service told him, he was worthy Luke 7. 4.
; but God has promised, and Christ is worthy, to whom especially it is to be
made good; and indeed, what makes men to fail in their promises, cannot befall
God; for he is not a man that he should lie, or the Son of man, that he should
repent; has he said, and shall he not do it? or has he spoken it, and shall
he not make it good Numb 23. 19.
? Men sometimes promise to evade a present and oppressing importunity, that
cannot otherwise be put off; as he, Mat. 18. 26.
have patience with me, and I will pay thee all: but when their leisure serves
them to weigh and consider what they promised, they see, there being non
solvendo, how utterly they are unable, and so repent: But God cannot be brought
to this extremity: Job 41. 11
who has prevented me that I should repay him? A great King of this Land did
promise to a Courtier a thousand pound, and ordered his Treasurer to get it
ready; the Treasurer takes occasion to bring the King through the Room where it
lay, all in silver on a Table ready counted; the King admiring, asked what all
that money was for? he told him, he had provided it for such a Courtier, and
showed the King his own hand for it: the King repeals and tears the Order, and
commanded half of it to be sent away, and swore, the other was more then he
could well give.

Moses thought God had made an unadvised promise, that the people should have
flesh to eat a month together, therefore he praye^ him to consider, that they
were six hundred thousand footmen, and the flocks and herds would not suffice
them; but God answers, that his hand was not waxed short Numb. 11. 23.
; we must not tell God of the greatness of the Sum that is required, he can
make that he does not find, never is non plust: yea, men, thou^h they be able,
are many times unwilling to make good their promises; l^ke little Children, are
easily blown on with every wind, and easily blown off, resolve and refuse, are
angry and appeased in a breath, iras colligit* and ponit temere, mutatur in
horas, in one mind to day, in another mind to morrow, Roma Tybur amo,
ventosus Tybure Romam; how honest does Saul seem to be, when a good pang was on
him 1 Samuel 26. 21.
? but David doubted his unconstancy.

But God is not exposed to any such unconstancy, cannot be off and on, sees
nothing which he s^w not before he made the promise Mal. 3. 6.
, cannot say, non putaram, allege he was abused and misinformed, as we do
often: whatsoever therefore he has made promise of, you may expect, you may
account it paid, his word and deed are all one.

But God has promised to every settled, wellordered Church, some to attend and
act in holy things; for that he promised to Gospel, or Evangelical Churches,
which were ordered by Christ, of whom its said, that he did all things well
Mark 7. 36.
, or by his Apostles, who knew how to behave themselves in the house of God 1 Timothy 3. 15.
; for what God promised by the Prophets, he promised to Evangelical or
Gospel-Churches; for the Levitical administration was then decaying and waxing
old, as the Apostle says Heb. 8. 13
; but he promised by the Prophets, some to attend and act in holy things, Jer.
3. 15.
I will give you pastors according to mine heart, that shall feed you with
knowledge and understanding, which they could never do without attending on
them, nor do we find they did it until Christ's times; but of him it is said,
Luke 21. 37, 38.
that in the day time he was teaching in the Temple, and at night he went out,
and abode in the Mount that is called the Mount of Olives, and all the people
came early in the morning to him, to hear him; and if we may believe St. Paul
himself Act. 20. 31
, he says, that by the space of three years, he ceased not to warn every one
night and day with tears; and that he charged it on his successors, appears in
that pathetical and serious exhortation given Timothy 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2.
; and that the Prophet meant these times, appears in that place, where the same
is iterated and repeated, though in something other words Jer. 23. 3, 4, 5, 6.
, In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is
his name whereby he shall be called, The Lord our righteousness; what can more
plainly point out Gospel Times? for though the Levitical administration of the
Covenant was to expire, or to be disannulled, as the Apostle speaks Heb. 7. 18,
19.
, yet the Covenant was not, but was even then an everlrsting Covenant Jer. 32.
40
, and Aarons Priesthood, however in some sense it was to be determined and
cease, yet was indeed in some sense, an everlasting Priesthood, as it is
expressly promised to Phineas Numb. 25. 12, 13.
, that is, the Office and attendance upon holy things, was everlasting, to be
continued in Aarons Priesthood for a time, and afterward to be translated into
the Tribe of Judah, and Order of Melchizedeck, as God has not only said, but
sworn Heb. 7. 20 21.
, where now it is, and shall be to the worlds end, in the Pastors and Teachers
of Gospel Times.

The Prophet Isaiah says Isa. 44. 3.
, I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground,
I will power my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring;
and the Prophet Joel Joe. 2. 28, 29.
, I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh: now when, and where were these
great floods, and inundations of the Spirit poured out? the Apostle Peter tells
you, that the greatest and most observed inundation, was in the day of
Pentecost, upon the Apostles that were then assembled in the Temple Act. 2. 2,
3, 4.
, though there were dewes and lesser showers upon others afterward Act. 11. 15
, and that not only in an extraordinary, but ordinary manner 1 Cor. 12. 8, 9,
10, 11.
; yet in the Prophets these are promised in the reverend and known
denominations and Titles of Priests and Levites; for when the Jews and Gentiles
shall be gathered out of all the Nations, and bound up together in one volume,
and presented in Jerusalem unto the Lord, God promises, that he will take of
them for Priests and for Levites Isa 66. 20. 21.
: properly and literally they could not be; for the promise is, to gather all
tongues and all Nations, Tarshish and Pull, and Lud, Javan and Tuball, are
expressly named v. 18. 19.
, that is, the Gentiles, as they are called verse the ninteenth; for the
Priests and Levits properly so called, were only Jews, and of the Tribe of
Levi; and Spiritual Priests and Levits they could not be, for it is said v. 21.
, I will take of them, not them, (...), not (...), ex istis as Junius,
Montanus, and others, that is, ex istis gentibus quae in munus oblatae fuerint
domino, as in their note: now who ever is converted, and washed in the blood of
Christ, is made a spiritual Priest, and there is no distinguishing and picking
out of some from others of them, Rev. 1. 5, 6
for all have great dignity, and there is no culling out.

CHAP. XV. The ninth Argument.
THat ought to be in every settled, well-ordered Jerusalem should be besieged,
and would have the people be assured of it, he commands the Prophet to
express it in a picture Ezekiel. 4. 1, 2, 3.
; for God knows, that words are but windywinged Creatures, that stay not when
they have done their errand, (...), as the Poet often calls them, nocte volat
caeli medio terraeque per umbras, as another says of Fame, a flying report,
Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, and curse not the rich in thy
bedchamber, for the bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which
has wings shall tell the matter Eccles. 10. 20.
; that is, some rumor or report will fly abroad, and Kings have long ears as
well as hands. Christ told the Apostles often of his dying at Jerusalem, but
his words flew away, before they understood them Luke 18. 31, 32, 33, 34.
; and therefore when he was to dye indeed, and resolved they should remember
it, he closes those expressions in the amulets and earings of the holy
Sacrament, that might hang as pendents at their ears continually 1 Cor, 11.
23, 24, 25, 26.
; we confess, one way of chayning and confining words unto there proper office
and employment, of serving and securing of the memory, is to record and write
them down; some think the reason of that great Apostasy and irreligion that was
among the Sons of Noah after the Flood, was want of writing, for tradition was
very easy and apt to be corrupted; and therefore Moses was enabled and
commanded to write all down, and God himself began unto him in the Tables of
the Law Deuteronomy. 9. 10.
; but this was not enough to see the Characters and Letters, but Portraitures
and Pictures were annexed and written also, and imprinted, because they made a
deeper and more palpable impression on the senses; when you have a story or
fable, not only written, but also pictured, and drawn in lively
representatives before you, as all the Prophecies of the succeding times are
unto John, from the fourth Chapter of his Revelation, unto the end.

But God has promised a Gospel Ministry, some to attend and act in holy
things, not only in words, but in visible and real Types, Delineations, and
Representations; for when the City and Temple at Jerusalem were smitten, as the
Prophet speaks Ezekiel 40. ^.
; those graceless Jews were apt to think God had forgotten all Religion: as
Gardener, that bloody Bishop, told Henry the eighth, when he had pulled down
the Monasteries, and seized their Lands unto his own use, that now he would be
thought the most Atheistical and irreligious King in all the world, and that
would have an evil influence upon his discontented Subjects, whereby he
wrought him to a willingness to enact and execute those six Statutes, whereby
so many conscientious persons of both Religions were destroyed. So the Jews now
began to whisper, that God now cared not, nor looked after any thing, but had
forsaken all Ezekiel. 8. 12
, and so fell to the worship of other Gods: the Lord therefore was now engaged
to make it known and certain unto all men, that the Jews had not stumbled that
they should fall, but rather, that through their fall, salvation was to come
unto the Gentiles, to provoke them to jealousy, as the Apostle speaks Romans 11.
11.
, that, though the bricks were fallen, yet he would build with hewn stones,
though the Sicomores were cut down, yet he would change them into Cedars Isa.
9. 10.
, though the City and Temple were destroyed, yet he would raise a greater and
more glorious structure among the Gentiles, Isa. 54. 11, 12.
I will lay thy stones with fair colors, and thy foundations with Saphires,
and I will make thy windows of Agates, and thy gates of carbuncles, and all thy
borders of pleasant stones; that is, I will erect and raise my Church and
Temple among the Gentiles, and adorn and deck it with luster and variety of
precious graces.

But it was not now enough to say, but show, words would not be took, therefore
he gives them deeds; describes and sets out another house, and sets it down in
all the parts, dimensions, and respects, that they might see he was not now in
jest, that he would not nugas agere tanto conatu, take pains and care to
pourtray and describe what never was intended; and the Priests, even the Sons
of Zadock are expressly mentioned Ezekiel. 40. 45, 46.
; neither may we think it was intended for a directory to the building of the
Temple of Zerubbabel, for the directions given unto Solomon by God, were on
record; and there were many yet alive that saw the former Temple, and could
have given sufficient directions, if that had been required; and if it be true
that this in Ezekiel was ordered in relation to that of Solomon, then was it
not a pattern to Zerubbabells, for they differ not only in the direction Cyrus
gives Ezra. 6. 3.
, but in the event and execution also Ezra. 3. 12, 13.
, and therefore must relate unto that Spiritual House which God had then
determined to build among the Gentiles, as the Apostle called those believers 1
Pet. 2. 9.
a chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People,
that ye should show forth the praises of him that has called you, out of
darkness, into his marvelous light.

CHAP. XVI. The tenth Argument.
THat ought to be in every settled, well-ordered Church, that was in the first
Christian-Gospel decipit exemplar vitris imi^abile, that was to be the root and
Mother Church of all the rest; for if the root be not holy, the branches cannot
be; if the Mother be an Hittite, the issue is not of the Holy Seed; because the
first woman was to be, as she is truly called, the mo^her of all living Genesis 3.
20.
, therefore God takes especial care to build and frame her as she ought to be
Genesis 2. 22.
, wherein no error can be imagined, for his hand was rectitude, and could not
fail, in the essentials, to be sure, nothing was wanting or superfluous; now
what Eve was to all the race of mank^nde, that the first Christan Church was
unto all succeeding Christian Churches, for Jerusalem was the Mother Church, as
our Savior says, Luke 24. 47
and that repentance and remission of sins, be preached in his Name among all
Nations, beginning at Jerusalem; and as it was the Mother Church, so it was
modelled by Christ, who was Gods bosome-friend Joh. 1. 18.
, and could not but know his mind in every thing, and neither wanted skill nor
will, to do the will and mind of him that sent him, and to finish his work, as
he says Joh. 4. 34.
; what therefore Christ set in the first, should be in all, as what Moses set
in the first Tabernacle, or Jewish Church, was afterward in all succeeding
imitations and augumentations of it in aftertimes. Now Christ was the Son, and
Moses but the Servant, Christ every way as faithful and as exact as Moses Heb.
3. 5, 6.
, and had an eye unto his pattern, as well as Moses and Solomon had to theirs
Heb. 8. 5, 6
; what we find therefore in the first Church, should be in all.

But in the first Christian Gospel Church, we find some set apart to attend
and act in holy things; for it is manifest, that Christian or Gospel-Churches
began in John the Baptist Mat. 11. 13, 14.
, and he was designed unto this attendance in his Mothers womb Luke 1. 14, 15,
16, 17.
, and was not received and acknowledged among the Jews, until by express
authority of Scripture, he had assured and ascertained his calling Joh. 1. 22.
23.
, and after that his very enemies durst not oppose; for all acknowledge him a
Prophet Mat. 21. 26
: our Savior Christ succeeded John, in some respect, though in some respect he
was before him Joh. 1. 30.
, and we are certain he was set apart to attend and act in holy things; for
though the Church was his inheritance, and he might have stepped into possession,
without any sacred or solemn ordination and admission, yet he would not till he
was baptized, and declared by a voice from Heaven, to be their teacher Mat. 3.
15, 16, 17.
; and because few heard this testimony, it is again repeated in their hearing
that were designed to be witnesses thereof unto the worlds end: as the Apostle
does expressly show 2 Pet. 1. 16, 17, 18.
, and so that made good, the Apostle speaks of him Heb. 5. 5, 6.
: Christ being now established, the Master and Doctor of the Christian
Congregation, erecteth and ordains others, as well he might, for he was the
Apostle and high Priest of our profession Heb. 3. 1.
.

For the Evangelist expressly says, Luke 6. 13.
he called his Disciples to him, and of them he chose twelve, whom also he
named Apostles; there is their election, but ordination follows, Mark. 3. 14,
15.
and he ordained twelve, and sent them forth to preach, and to have power to
heal sicknesses, and east out Devils: and when they were in orders, he gives
unto them their Commission, with orders and instructions for their deportment
and government therein Mat. 10. 1.
; and because he knew very well, the Harvest was great, and the Laborers but
few, he therefore sends forth others after them, and gives them the same
security he gave unto the twelve Luke 10. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.
, and they found a blessing on their labors, which they ingenuously
acknowledge v. 17.
. Now if in the first and Mother Church, some were designed and set apart,
shall after-Churches think to be excused and at liberty? shall the Daughter
plead a privilege the Mother had not? the issue, what the Parent was not
possessed of? shall any body now be wiser in his own eyes, then Christ was?
think he writes better then his Copy, Christ has set him? presume to add or
alter what he has fixed and established? we all pretend to Gospel-reformation,
and have engaged our public faith therein: its good to eye our pattern, and
consider what was from the beginning, as Christ does in the question of divorce
Mat. 19 8.
, recalls them back to what was at the first established; and so should we, and
not adventure upon alterations of our own imagination and invention.

CHAP. XVII. The eleventh Argument.
THat ought to be in every settled, and well-ordered man disannuls, or adds
any thing unto it, as the Apostle speaks Gal. 3. 15.
: in other Governments there have been alterations and debates; but no man
makes a doubt concerning that, the Father is the Family-protector and disposer;
and therefore Paul makes his address in that case to the Father Ephesians. 3. 14, 15.
.

But God the Father has appointed some to attend and act in holy things, in
every settled and well-ordered Church; some think that God the Father is
understood in that place of the Apostle 1 Cor. 12. 28.
because its certain, in other places, the persons are distinctly spoken of in
the same Chapter 4, 5, 6.
: there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit, there is the holy Ghost;
there are differences of administrations, but the same Lord, there is the
Son; and there are diversities of operations, but the same God which works
all in all, there is the Father; however, we are sure he is included; And it
was God the Father that promised that great endowment of the Spirit, as Christ
shows Luke 24. 49
, which in another place is called, a baptizing with the holy Ghost Act. 1. 4,
5.
, and was performed in the day of Pentecost, in a solemn and plentiful manner
Act. 2. 4, 5.
; and this was done, not only to the Apostles at this set solemn time, but to
others also afterward, as Peter witnesses Act. 1^. 15, 16, 17.
, whereby they were thus solemnly inaugurated, and set apart to attend and act
in holy things.

It was God the Father that sent John Baptist Joh. 1. 6.
, for Christ and he were strangers to one annther Joh. 1. 33.
, and it was not only God the Fathers will, but also his wisdom, they should be
unknown to one another, that they might not be thought to juggle and combine;
and therefore God the Father gave John warning, that upon whomsoever he should
see the Spirit descend and abide upon him, that was Christ, which was performed
in a solemn manner at his Baptism Mat. 3. 16, 17.
; so we are sure, that God the Father sent Christ Joh. 10. 36.
, put him in power, and gave him full authority to order all things, and upon
that ground, he disposes of the dispensation of the word and Sacraments, and
orders the ministration of them into all the world Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20.
: now what the Father orders and appoints, the Son and holy Ghost do never
alter or disappoint; for though for more assurance and security, they are
divided in their testimonies or averments, yet they never differ or dissent,
but are one in that at all times Joh. 5. 7, 8.
.

CHAP. XVIII. The twelfth Argument.
THat ought to be in every settled, well-ordered Joh. 10. 30.
, and does cooperate and work together with him Joh. 5. 17, 18, 19.
; but if we will conceive him different, yet we must consider, that he is his
Son and only Child Joh. 1. 18.
, by whom, as by an Organ or Instrument he acts and moves Heb. 1. 2.
, and though he was his Heir in known and common right, as being all he has,
yet God has settled all upon him Heb. 1. 2.
, and so they might well say, this is the Heir Mar 12. 6, 7.
: now if the Father, and the Son and Heir join in a settlement, it cannot
but be good, especially if the son be come to age, as Christ was Luke 3. 23.
, and have a quiet and clear possession of it. For indeed it was with Christ,
as many times it is with other Heirs, that have indeed Estates bequeathed to
them by their Parents; but so incumbered and clogged with debts and titles, that
he must have some trouble to redeem and settle it; and the encumbrance here was
able to have pusled any body else: there are some persons, that to save their
Lands, refuse to plead unto their charge, and so endure a far more painful and
oppressing death, but cannot afterward themselves enjoy it; but Christ
redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us Gal. 3. 13.
, and yet lived to enjoy the benefit of that redemption, and make Estates to
others of it; for when he had triumphed over all his enemies, and was above
their malice and contrivements Ephesians. 4. 8.
, and was indeed become her head and Husband Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. Ephesians. 5. 23.
, he makes this over to his Church.

But Christ thus qualified, has settled upon evere Congregation, some to attend
and act in holy things: now because this is the great wheel of the cause, the
common hinge on which the controversy turns, the carrying and convincing
Argument, we shall crave leave to be somewhat more punctual and particular in
proving this; and lest our plenty should seem to any body tedious, we will
digest this settlement into these several heads.

1. By will; we have seen before his power, our next enquiry is of his will.
There is in all things three degrees of being, posse, velle, esse; the first is
power, the second will, the third being; that Christ had power to make a will
we saw before, now let us see his will: choice is an act of will, and that he
exercised in the twelve Apostles, as we have seen before Luke 6. 13.
; and for Paul, who was a special actor in holy things, he does expressly stoop
unto the will of Christ; for when he was informed of the error of his way,
told that he kicked against the pricks, he presently refers himself unto the
will of Jesus Christ Act. 9. 5, 6.
, and as soon as that was cleared to him by Ananias, ingageth in the service
instantly.

It is not easy to be sure of instruments; the Scribes and Pharisees had
gotten one of Christ's Disciples from him: now Christ gets one of theirs from
them, and of a persecutor makes him become a Preacher. And not Paul only, but
also Sosthenes is by the will of Christ annexed and conjoined in the Commission
with him 1 Cor. 1. 1.
; and as here he puts in Sosthenes, so in the next Epistle Timothy 2 Cor. 1. 1.
; he was willing they should know that they did nothing against their Masters
will in all they did, and indeed without the will of Jesus Christ, there is
nothing in the Church done; for the Church is in a special manner, the Kingdom
of Jesus Christ Rev. 1. 9.
, and his will in that Kingdom is the legislative power.

2. By deed; its true, a will allowed, becoms a deed, and has authority and
influence in Courts of Justice, because the testator is concluded, and cannot
any more revoke; if men could live again when they are dead, there would be
many alterations in their wills; yet Christ had this peculiar privilege to live
again, Rev. 1. 18.
I am he that lives and was dead, yet altered nothing, but ratified and
confirmed the same by real deeds; for after he was risen from the dead, he
gives Commissions to them of a more large extent, go teach all Nations,
baptizing them Mat. 28. 19.
, and not Commissions only, but endowments also and abilities; for he breathed
on them, and therein gave the holy Ghost unto them Joh. 20. 21, 22, 23.
: he told them, when he bad them go into all the world, and preach the Gospel
unto every Creature Mark 16. 15, 16, 17, 18.
, that no Creature should be able to annoy them; for they should take up
Serpents, and if they drank any deadly thing, it should not hurt them, which
Paul found by experience, when that venomous viper hung upon his hand Act. 28.
4, 5,
, for though it be said, God bare them witness with signs and wonders Heb. 2.
4.
, yet Jesus Christ was principal in all these wonders, as they plainly show
Act. 4. 10.
, By the name of Jesus Christ, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the
dead, even by him does this man stand here before you whole, and therefore
Peter tells Eneas plainly, that Jesus Christ made him whole Act. 9. 34.
, and Paul gives all to Jesus Christ, those mighty signs and wonders that he
did, that in a circle from Jerusalem unto Illyricum, he made the Gospel to
abound Romans 15. 18. 19.
, so that the will of Christ is witnessed unto us by his deed: not once or
twice reiterated and renewed, but by a constant course of miracles confirmed
and abetted.

3. A Deed of gift, which (they say) is the most absolute, authentic and
comprehensive of any deed that is; in bargains, if an error be committed, men
take hold of it and improve it, for the bettering and mending of their bargain;
but in gifts, it is not honorable: a noble person having given a poor man an
Angel for a shilling, the man presents it to him, that he might correct the
error; but he said no, seeing the error was his benefit, he should enjoy it; He
would not give and take: and its observed, that where men give they love, and
the more they give, the more they love: multum fuit ad amorem; dedisse
beneficium; for gifts are hostages, and pledges of our love unto them, as
Ahasuerus assures Queen Esther of his love, by offering half the Kingdom to her
Esth. 7 2.
: so Christ by giving, witnesses his love, and much improveth and augments the
same.

When Alexander had prevailed at the River Granicum, and was now ascended into
the upper parts of Asia, he sends back many gifts, to assure them of his love
in Macedonia: so when our Savior had triumphed over death, an enemy that
Alexander never conquered, and was ascended up on high, he then gives gifts
Ephesians. 4. 8.
. They that do conquer and divide the spoils, have many precious things to
give: when David had recovered his own, from those invading barbarous
Amalekites, he sends great presents to his friends in Judah, that had given him
free quarter in his trouble and necessity 1 Samuel 30. 26.
; but nothing is so precious as the persons of men and women, give me the
persons, and take thou the goods, says the King of Sodom unto Abraham Genesis 14.
21.
: so Christ selects the persons, and gives them unto his spouse; when Paul
brings in the inventory of the Churches goods 2 Cor. 3. 21, 2.
, the persons in the first place are set down, whether Paul, or Apollo, or
Cephas: so in that Legacy, and great bequest of Christ unto his Church, they
are set down first Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.
, he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers; there was variety of work, and he provides variety of
workmen. As in the Tabernacle and Temple both, though there were an invitation
unto every one that had ability, and will to work, to come and exercise the
same Exodus 36. 2.
, yet some were furnished and fitted for it: So in the Church of Christ, all
are encouraged to act that can, but some are set apart, and settled on it.

4. A gift in perpetuity, not for a term. Those that give freely, may
determine and confine themselves to what term pleases them: a Lease is a good
Deed, but will expire and die. Job says, the Mountains may decay Job. 14. 18,
19.
, and time we know is a great eater and devourer, is edax rerum, and much more
hominum; like Polyphemus, that eat up all Ulysses fellows at a few meals: but
Christ has taken care, that this great gift shall be perpetual. When the Heir
apparent of this Island was in Spain, his Father sent him Servants, not to
present their service to him, and return, but to attend and wait upon him till
he came home: so Christ gives Officers, until his Bride and Spouse return and
come home; for so the grant and Charter runs, Ephesians. 4. 13
till we all come in the Unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of
God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ. When Christ says unto Peter concerning John, that he would have him
tarry till he came, there went a rumor among the Brethren, that that Disciple
should not die Joh. 21. 22, 23.
; but that was a mistake; yet John continues in his successors, and shall do
until Christ do come again; And lo, I am with you always unto the end of the
world Mat. 28. 20
: not with their persons, for they were mortal, and waxed old as well as
others; but with them, in the followers and successors: the guides and leaders
must be continued, until the Church comes to her journies end. We send not
friends home in a dark night, with a Candle that may be easily blown out, but
with a Torch, or Candle put into a Lanthorn: so Christ sends not his Church
home through this dark world, by a Candle that is put out with every blast; but
takes care, that it should light her home. When the Apostles were to go into
Judea only, and not so much as into Samaria, he calls them Candles Mat. 5. 14,
15.
; but when they were to go out into all the world, where storms and blusters
would attend them, he does not call them Candles, although the Metaphor invited
him to that expression, having said, the Churches were the Candlesticks Rev. 1.
20.
, because he knew, a Candle would not long continue in a blustering and windy
time, but Stars: its true, the Moon and Stars may sometimes not appear, and
be obscured, as they were to Paul and his associates for many days Act. 27. 20.
, yet they are not extinguished; The Ministers may be obscured and
overshadowed, but cannot be extinguished; they thought the Witnesses were dead,
and gloried over them Rev. 11. 10, 11.
, yet they rise up again with some addition and advantage. What Christ has
settled, cannot be easily unsettled, what he has built, cannot be broken down,
or if it be, will be repaired with more magnificence: the Tabernacle rose up in
the Temple, and the ruined and destroyed Temple, in those spiritual fabrics,
that the Apostle calls the Temples of the holy Ghost: Christ leaves his Church
in every visitation of it, a great deal better then he finds it: the second
edition is evermore correctior and emendatior; look over all the Resurrections
of the Church from the beginning, and he might truly say, what Augustus vainly
did of Rome, Inveni lateritiam, reliqui marmoream.

CHAP. XIX. The thirteenth Argument.
THat ought to be in every settled, well-ordered Mat. 28. 19
, is not the least: we acknowledge creation was the foundation and ground of
all, and that for orders sake is commonly ascribed to the Father; Redemption
followed as the support and supplement of that, and that we give unto the
Son; but there was need of Consolation and encouragement to complete and
carry on the same, and that Christ leaves unto the holy Ghost. Its true, it was
not fit, that Christ should much appear, (after that great affront was put upon
him by the Jews) in his worst Clothes, that were tottered and torn by them, nam
minuit praesentia famam, presence impaires opinion and admiration; Nor that
they should be Orphans, as Christ speaks Joh. 14. 18
deprived and destitute of conduct and direction for so great an undertaking:
the holy Ghost is therefore sent and substituted, as the Oeconomus and Overseer
of the work Joh. ^4. 16, 17.
; for the completion, consummation and perfection of it. And there was
something of fitness and convenience; for the holy Ghost could act invisibly,
could see and not be seen, as Aeneas and Achates in the Cloud, convey himself
into their meetings, and discover all hypocrisies and double dealing, as he
does in the case of Ananias and Saphira Act. 5. 3, 4
; for had the holy Ghost been seen as well as Peter was in that Assembly, they
had not framed so great a lie, and made so notable and manifest discoveries of
themselves. Their minds and memories were frail and brittle, and might be
easily ensnared and overreached; Christ therefore promises the holy Ghost to
make supply of that defect Joh. 14, 15
. They were to introduce among the Gentiles a new Religion, and must look for
oppositions, and counter actings; a winged Mercury was therefore needful, that
could and would be here and there, and every where, to find out and discover
plots Joh. 16. 13, 14.
, as we find he did, before that dreadful famine in the days of Claudius Act.
1^. 28
, and when Paul was to be bound and troubled, the holy Ghost gives warning of
it to him, in every City as he goes along Act. 20. 23.
; at every turn and alteration, the holy Ghost is at one end. As Merchants that
have great stocks, and drive on great Trades, have partners every where, and
persons interested to drive it on; so God in this great work, divides himself,
(as we may say) and has some of the persons every where to further it.

But the holy Ghost has ordered and appointed some in every Church to attend
and act in holy things. That this may be the better made out, we may observe it
in these particulars.

1. Furnishing of them with proper gifts, for every season, and condition of
the Church; as in the first age, with gifts miraculous and extraordinary Heb.
2. 4.
, God himself bearing them witness, both with signs and wonders, and with
diverse miracles and gifts of the holy Ghost: these were not given unto every
member of the Christian Congregation; for we find believers that heard not
whether there were an holy Ghost or no Act. 19. ^.
; but unto such as were to be the guides and overseers of them; for to one is
given by the Spirit, the word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge by
the same Spirit, to another faith by the same Spirit, and so on as the Apostle
speaks 1 Cor. 12. 8, 9, 10, 11.
: the next age needed courage, resolution, patience, self-denial, that they
might not cowardly betray what they knew was the truth; and accordingly the
holy Ghost supplies them with it: its true, some other sects have had their
sufferers, there have been Martyrs and Confessors in all ages and estates; but
never such as these, who by their silence, patience, suffering, self-denial,
grew Conquerers, and Masters of their persecutors; for they overcame in the
blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony, and they loved not their
lives unto the death Rev. 12. 11
; and so in all succeeding ages of the Church, unto this day, some have been
qualified, and fitted for employment, to attend and act in holy things, in
their several respective Churches and Assemblies.

2. Gives them distinguishing and proper names; not only Christians and
believers, not only Saints and Sons of God, but names of Office and
Authority, as Pharaoh unto Joseph, when he raised and preferred him Genesis 41. 45.
, so Nebuchadnezer to Daniel and his three associates Dan. 1. 7.
, whereby they did appropriate and make them theirs; and so the holy Ghost
gives other names peculiar and proper unto them, as men of God 1 Timothy 6. 11. 2 Timothy 3. 17.
; others are called Gods Sons, Gods servants, Gods people, but only Ministers
are called Gods men.

So Stewards; one may have many men, but one Steward, Eliezer of Damaseus,
Abraham's Steward Genesis 15. 2.
; a name of jurisdiction and Authority; yet given commonly to Ministers 1 Cor.
4. 1. 2. Tit. 1. 7.
; Ambassadors, a name of honor 2 Cor. 5. 20.
, and given unto none without Commissions and instructions, for the mannaging
and ordering of it.

So Shepherds, a name of Office and Authority, not taken up by any of the
servants, but conferred upon some experienced confiding men, that had a special
oversight and interest in them Ephesians. 4. 2.
: so likewise they are called Angels Rev. 1. 20.
, and that by Christ, when he was in the highest Heavens, and had a clear
conception of every thing, better then Adam, when he gave names to all the
Creatures, yet Adam erred not.

3. Characters, brands and distinctions to know them by; names may be arrogated
and usurped, Jacob takes Esaus name, but had much ado to frame and counterfeit
his Character. The holy Ghost describes them therefore by their Characters and
nature, as well as names 1 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
; if the place and Office had not been peculiar, what need so much ado? could
not he have said, see they be honest godly men, and that is enough: so when he
orders Titus to take on him the jurisdiction of that Island, he gives him
Characters to know such as he was to use Tit. 1. 6, 7, 8, 9.
, and those not common unto every Christian, but proper and peculiar to the
Guides and Governors.

4. Calls and contrivements to their proper places; designs them, and affixeth
them unto their work Act. 13. 2, 3, 4.
, gives them their missions, as well as Commissions: there is no doubt but men
may preach, that are not sent; but seldom or never savingly; if God send them
not, they seldom turn men from their wicked ways, as the Prophet intimates
Jer. 23. 21, 21.
: though instruments are used and implied in the work, yet the holy Ghost does
fix them, and conclude them in it Act. 20. 28
, take heed unto your selves, and all the flock over whom the holy Ghost has
made you Bishops: no doubt in placing and displacing Ministers, the holy Ghost
presides and overrules.

5. Convenient maintenance. Gods spirit knows, that Ministers are men, and are
supported by food and raiment; Angels indeed they are by Office and employment,
but not Spirits, seeing they carry about them flesh and bones, which Spirits do
not Luke 24. 39.
; and for the most part, crasie and weakly flesh, that need more cost and care
then any other men; their sedentary lives and serious thoughts weaken their
stomachs for the most part, and expose them unto often and great infirmities,
as we may see in Tmothy 1 Timothy 5. 23.
, who is not only permitted and allowed, but commanded and enjoined to keep a
wholesome diet; and whereas other men may truck and barter in the world, plot and
contrive ways of advancement, and improvement of their Estates, only they
cannot; as Soldiers will have free quarter if pay be wanting, because they are
commanded upon duty as the men of Judah, set every tenth man apart, to fetch in
victuals for their fellow Soldiers Jud. 20. 10
; for no man that warreth intangleth himself with the affairs of this life,
that he may please him that has called him to be a Soldier 2 Timothy 2. 3, 4.
: now this would not be, if there were not use and need of Soldiers; for who
goes to warfare at his own cost 1 Cor. 9. 7.
? it is not to be spoken, what those Nations and Kingdoms save, that need not
Arms; and certainly, the holy Ghost were a bad husband, if it imposed an
unnecessary charge, if it should enjoyne a chargeable and costly Calling and
employment, that might be executed by men of Trade; but knowing how laborious
and sequestered the labors of a painful Pastor are, it takes care for their
livelihood, that he that is taught in the word, communicate with him that
teaches in all good things Gal. 6. 6.
, that whilst the Minister is plotting and contriving how to do their souls
good, they should provide for his corporeal sustenance; the very Oxes mouth,
that treads out the corn, must not be musled 1 Timothy 5. 18.
: those that have slaves bought with their money, yet give them food and
raiment, because they know they cannot work without it; and shall the Minister
be put to seek his bread at night, when he has starved and labored all the
day? great care is taken by God himself, for a clear and cumberlesse provision
for the Priests and Levites, and that not only in their month of waiting, but
all the time of their retirement in the Country; and though that president
should be sufficient, yet there is an exact and proper Ordinance, 1 Cor. 9. 13,
14.
as they that minister about holy things, live of them, so they that preach the
Gospel, should live of that: the holy things, and that administration, was meat
and drink, and the Priests, upon the matter, were but holy Cooks, and he is an
ill Cook that cannot lick his own fingers: yet God takes special care they
should be richly and liberally provided for; for he knew those that paid them,
would have interest in them. As in this Land the sovereign power did many acts
of grace for subjects and inferior persons, but never gave them aid and
subsidies, that way they had to oblige and gratify their Prince: so Ministers
have many ways to gratify their people; but God has not appointed they
should give them money, that way the people have to oblige and gratify their
Pastors, and those that pay best, profit most; for he that receives spiritual
things from his teacher, will not think much to give him carnal things; for it
is a great deal less then he receives. If a man sow wheat, and is at all the
cost and care to manage and manure the ground for such a crop, it would be no
great matter for him to reap fitches: it is the Apostles similitude 1 Cor. 9. 11
, its known, the Apostles and their associates, had gifts and powers freely
given them, were at no cost to gain and purchase their abilities; Paul with one
imposition of his hands, gave more then we can get in many years 2 Timothy 1. 6
, our youth, and precious time, and strength, and a great part of our
Patrimony, goes to purchase fitness for this great work, yet all is not
enough, without Gods blessing in a special manner on our labors, venduntur
laboribus dona, in the sweat of our brains and breast we eat our bread. The
arts indeed are called liberal, but its to those that work and wait upon them:
if therefore we sow not only spiritual, but also carnal things, is it not
reason we should reap something?

CHAP. XX. The fourteenth Argument.
THat ought to be in every settled, well-ordered been dormit qui non sentit se
male dormire, he always sleeps well, that cannot tell you in the morning how
he slept, as Alexander slept so long the morning before he fought Darius Army,
that Parmenio was forced to awaken him, and call him up: this question could
not have slept securely so many hundred years, if it had been pinched and
diseased with any clear compelling Argument; if it had layn in any bodies way,
or troubled them, they would have raised it by some means: those are and may be
reckoned useful and well-writ books, that live long, as Homer, and Plutarch,
and Aristotle, and Virgil, whereas many others in the space have been devoured
and eaten up of time, that edax rerum. Its true, what is ill laid, cannot lie
well, though it have layn long, Mat. 15. 13
every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted up: the
Canaanites possession in a sinful wicked way, was no good plea against the
Israelites, when they marched armed to invade it by Gods Commission and express
Command. Yet time does many times legitimate and reconcile a very crasie Title,
(...); there are many things ill done, that cannot be well undone, fieri non
debuit, factum valet. Jacob (no doubt) did it, to get the blessing from his
Brother, by unlawful means Genesis 27. 35.
, thy Brother (says Isaac) came with subtlety, and has taken away thy
blessing, yet being done, it could not afterward be undone; for Esau found no
place of repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears Heb. 1^. 17
; the Jews (no doubt) did very ill, to ask a King 1 Samuel 12. 19.
, yet God would not revoke the grant when it was done 1 Samuel 8. 22.
; a settlement, though not so well as it should be, is like unto a sleeping
dog, that is not for to be awakened; its hard in settlements to keep that order
and decorum that were to be desired: in common Halls and entertainments, its
hard to set down every man according to his worth and dignity; Solomon exceeded
all men then alive, in the exactness of his household Government, as is
acknowledged 1 King. 10. 5.
, yet when he looked abroad, he saw many things misplaced Eccles. 10. 6, 7.
, servants on Horses, and Princes walking as servants upon the earth, yet being
settled, he would not have us meddle in the mending and alteration of it, as it
follows in the next words Eccles. 10. 8.
: there is in Yorkshire about Whitby, a very hard Rock, that is not easily
broken by any tools, whilst it remains upon the bed and quarry where it grows;
but if it be removed into another place, the stones do moulder into dust; only
in the midst of every stone, there remains a little lump, in the shape and
figure of a wreathed Serpent; and that is so hard, that it cannot be dissolved
nor broken by any means. How much more careful should we be, when a thing is
duly settled, upon a righteous and just foundation? Deuteronomy. 19: 14.
Thou shall not remove thy Neighbors Landmark, which they of old time have
set, and because some did notwithstanding sometimes adventure for to do it, God
did appoint a solemn curse to be pronounced by common and joint consent upon
the doers of it Deuteronomy. 27. 17.
; the danger of unravelling and rumpling things well laid up, has been
observed to be so great, that many laws have passed to prevent it. It was wont
to be acknowledged, that nullum tempus occurrit regi, yet threescore years now
cuts off his claim, and possession undisturbed twenty years, a subjects, a
book-debt is discharged in six years, by time; and possession upon a fine in
five years.

But the Church has been duly seized and possessed of some to attend and act
in holy things, far above these fifteen hundred years; for we appeal to all the
Catalogues of Heretics in former ages, and if there be found any one that
questioned this, we will give up the cause: we have looked carefully upon all
the writings of our adversaries, and the first we find, were Storke and
Stubner in upper Germany, about the year 1521. and that was above fifteen
hundred years after the settlement of these Church Officers, by Christ and his
Apostles, as we have showed before. There has been of late among us, great
talk of new lights, but we have found but very few that were not raked out of
those rotten dunghils of the ancient Heretics or Schismatics, and may say
with Solomon Eccles. 1. 10.
, is there any thing, whereof it may be said, see, this is new; but this of
annulling and extinguishing a Gospel Ministry, we must acknowledge to be new,
never so much as doubted of, or called in question, till after Luthers time;
and for this only cause, may be suspected, there were some Jews among the
Captives, that returned out of Babylon, that pleaded they were Priests, and
would have been received and accounted among the Sons of Aaron, but they were
put upon this trial, to find their Register among those that were reckoned by
genealogy, and when they could not prove their lineal descent, they were put
as polluted from the Priesthood Neh. 7. 63, 64, 65.
: we crave the benefit of this Law, that it may be showed us, in any warranted
and good antiquity, that any were accounted and allowed, to attend and act in
holy things, that were not set apart to that employment.

CHAP. XXI. The fifteenth Argument.
THat ought to be in every settled, well-ordered Church, which never was denied
it, by any Orthodox unbiassed Christian. It was many hundred years before any
body questioned this truth, or pretended unto any power to attend and act in
holy things, unless they had been set apart unto it, as we have showed before:
since some have done it, but they were either not Orthodox, or not unbiassed.
The first that did adventure upon this breach, were those unruly Anabaptists,
that sprang up in Germany, about fifteen hundred and one and twenty years after
our Saviors coming into the world, and that these were not Orthodox, nor
unbiassed, will soon appear to any that shall read their story in Sleydens
Commentaries, then published, when the matter of fact was fresh in memory, and
would have been confuted, if not exactly stated and expressed; for they finding
what great things Luther did, what alterations and depopulations followed upon
his undertaking of the truth and cause of God, against the Pope and his
adherents, expected he should fatten and enrich himself with those great
booties that were discovered thereby, and offered to them; and when they saw
them not intend them, like the Jews in Esthers time, that did not lay their
hands upon the spoil Esth. 9. 10* 15, 16.
, but suffer those rich Revenues of the Monasteries and Abbeys every where to
fall unto the secular and civil Governors and Princes, in whose Dominions and
Territories they were seated, they wondered for a while, at this their foolish
bashfulness and abstinence, that such glorious and succesful Cooks as Luther
and his fellows were, should not have wit to lick their own fingers; but when
they expected long, and saw no likelihood of Luthers meddling, they resolved
with Gehasi to get somewhat 2 King 5: 20.
, but would not suddenly fall foul upon the places, but resolved first, to use
all means to work on Luther, and win him to them if it were possible, and
Muncer for that end, went often to him, unto Wittenberg, to work him to a good
opinion of their way; but when they saw they could not do it, they resolved to
carry it without him, and therefore told the people in their Sermons, that
Luthers reformation was imperfect, that he had lopt some of the branches off,
but left the roots of bitterness still growing in the ground, and that was
temporal and worldly greatness, whereby Gods people were still inslaved and
oppressed; that it was the mind and will of God, that all men should be free,
and all things common, that one man should not domineere and reign over
another; that the Princes were as grievous Tyrants as the Pope; that God would
have men's persons and Estates exempt and free, as well as their consciences and
inward man; and because it was not like that Princes, and possessors of great
Estates, would entertain these truths upon proposals and exhortations, they
should be forced to it; and that Arms in that case are not only lawful, but
expedient and very necessary.

There had been tumults and insurrections in those upper parts of Germany, some
years before the Country boors had taken Arms, and been in action against their
Governors; and though many treaties of peace had been, and many skirmishes and
bickerings, wherein the Boors and Country people had the worst, yet still they
kept up Arms, and could not be reduced and brought into conformity, seditio
irritatur remedio, sedition is a disease that is enraged by the proper remedy:
if you stroke them, and speak them fair, they think you flatter them, and are
unable to contend with them: if you suppress and cut them off, they cry out of
your tyranny: as Solomon truly says Prove. 29. 9.
, if a wise man contendeth with a foolish man, whether he rage or laugh, there
is no rest: as he said truly, non ille ire vult, sed stare non potest, Isa. 57.
20
the wicked are like the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest. When therefore
these unruly fellows heard that some Preachers did encourage Arms, they flocked
exceedingly to those Assemblies, and Muncer and Pheiffer spared no bellows to
increase this flame; whereby the reformation then began by Luther, and those
famous helpers and associates of his, began exceedingly to suffer; for these
(they said) were those things that they aimed at indeed, namely, the violation
of men's temporal and civil rights, whatever they pretended; so that Luther and
his fellows were constrained for to write expressly, and somewhat bitterly
against them, and to stir up their superiors to suppress these tumultuous and
dangerous insurrections.

When they saw Luther and the others had declared against them, and by there
published writings were engaged, they then resolved to cry them down as fast as
could be, and told the people, that Luther had only published a carnal Gospel,
and set upon a reformation, but not effected it, and brought it unto any
ripeness and maturity; that God had called and raised him up, to perfect what
Luther had begun, and to root out all the wicked of the world, and settle
righteousness; but foreseeing he must use edged tools, and that there was no
jesting with them, he thought it needful to bring men under some real and new
engagement, that might bind these Ropes of sand together, and lay some tie
upon the moveable, and giddy multitude, to keep them close together, against
the common enemy, that would be united in their properties and common interests
sufficiently: baptism is therefore resolved upon, to be the bond of this
iniquity, as being the most plausible Character that they could think of, to
distinguish these Creatures from other Christians; and because Infant Baptism
was more exposed unto exceptions, then any other point of Doctrine, they
resolve to enter at this breach, upon that stage whereon they were to act those
Tragedies they had prepared. And when after many trials and essays, they found
those Scriptures they had mounted with all their art, would not make this
breach wide enough for them to enter, they fly to Revelations and enthusiasms;
and because they found the Orthodox and godly Ministers did every where
obstruct their undertakings and attempts, they cry down them, and set up others
in their places that were mechanics, and would be tractable to any enterprise.
And this was the true rise of these opposers of a Gospel Ministry; And that
they were not Orthodox, will easily appear by their endeavors to introduce
community of all things; by preaching the unlawfulness of oaths in cases
criminal; by their refusing to bear Arms against a common enemy invading of
their native Country, as those of Zurich in Helvetia did about the year 1636.
as Spanhemius and others do relate at large, would not make use of a Sword,
commended and commanded to them by their natural and lawful Governors, and yet
would take one up forbidden: to say nothing of their other errors, set down in
that Spanhemius Book, and many others.

And that they were not unbiassed, their whole course proved, enriching
themselves with those Revenues that they robbed others of; for howsoever they
had smoother words, and better language to encourage undertaking, yet the
motive was the very same with those in Solomon, as it is Prove. 1. 11, 12, 13.
, namely, we shall find all precious substance, we shall fill our houses with
spoil: as did manifestly appear in those at Munster, who rioted and revelled
in the City, when others perished for want of bread.

And for those Arrians in Transylvania and Polonia, that sucked this poison
from them, and do manage it with greater prudence and observation, we hope, we
have to do with none that do not think them orthodox.

Whoever since have struggled and fought against this truth, have gone down
unto these Philistims, to fetch their weapons, or to sharpen them; for we deny
not, but honest men may be erroneous, and have a bias clapped upon them by the
slight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait for to
deceive, as the Apostle speaks in this very case Ephesians. 4. 14.
: we think therefore, that we have just exceptions, and grounds of challenging
this Jury, that is so ready for to pass upon us, and think it fit, the
balances wherein so great a cause is weighed, should be examined, and first
set even. That if we must boule for this prize, we have so long enjoyed and
possessed, in uneven ground, our boules may be alike, either biassed and
unbiassed.

CHAP. XXII. The sixteenth Argument.
THat ought to be in every settled, well-ordered species, or kind of being,
there must be something that compounds it, and begets a difference from other
beings; and therefore though there be, and ought to be in every man a
Reasonable faculty, yet that compounds him not essentially, and as a
constituting principle, because it does not distinguish him from Angels; but to
be a reasonable animal does, or beast, or wight, as those are called Rev. 6. 6,
7, 8.
. When some of the Philosophers had read unto their scholars, that Homo was
animal bipes implume, it is said, Diogenes pulled all the feathers off a Cock,
and turned him alive amongst the Scholars, and told them that was their Masters
Homo, for those two properties, being accidental both of them, and foreign,
could not essentially distinguish him: so that glorious founder of Winchester
School, and New-Colledge, was wont to say, that manners made a man; but he did
not mean it naturally but morally, not essentially but accidentally, that they
were the beauty, grace, and Ornament of man, but not the being of him.

But without some to attend and act in holy things, a Church cannot be settled
nor ordered well; for Pastors and Teachers were given by Christ for the
perfecting of the Saints, the work of the Ministry, the edifying of the body
of Christ Ephesians. 4. 12.
: an house cannot be settled and ordered well till it be built, settlement and
order suppose being: nothing is settled that is not se, tuor ordered, that is
not; been esse, supposes esse; so Solomon 1 King. 8. 13.
, I have surely built thee an house to dwell in, a settled place for thee to
abide in for ever; an house must be built, and then settled: so in the Prophet
Ezekiel. 40.
, the building of the house is first showed, then the beautifying and endowing
of it: some rude unhewen materials may be comported and brought together,
without this settled and orderly attendance, we do acknowledge, but cannot be
framed into a building, without an architect, there must be a skilful
Master Builder, (such as Paul was), 1 Cor. 3. 10
to lay the foundations of it, and others to build on that foundation. If we
come into an unknown Country, and meet there with well-framed and composed
structures and edifices, we conclude, that workmen have been there, and so it
is truly said, Heb 3. 4.
every house is builded by some man; but settling supposes much more then
building and being barely; for it supposes Officers, and acts, as Solomon not
only built his house, but ordered it, with many other accomodations, before he
could be said to settle it 1 King. 10. 4, 5.
: there was not only the house that he had built, but also the meat of his
Table, and the sitting of his Servants, and the attendance of his Ministers,
and their apparel: so in the Church, there is not only the building of it, but
the order and beauty to be regarded, the meat of their Table, that wholesome
food may be provided, pastors which shall feed them with knowledge and
understanding Jer. 3. 15.
; so Timothy is left at Ephesus, that he might charge some, that they teach no
other Doctrine, nor give heed to fables 1 Timothy 1. 3, 4.
; he would not have Gods people poisoned, nor fed with trash and windy meats,
which may be done by young unskilful Caterers, (if there be not some body to
oversee and take care of it) as that ignorant novice did 2 King. 4. 39, 40, 41.
. It is a dangerous thing to have men's bodies poisoned, and great care should
be taken to prevent it, and provide men wholesome food; but there is greater
danger in poisoning of the souls of men, and greater care is to be taken for
preventing that; and therefore Paul, when he was at Miletus, sends for the
Elders of the Church of Ephesus, and bids them take care of the flock, over
whom the holy Ghost had made them overseers, to feed the Church of God which he
has purchased with his own blood Act. 20. 28.
; As in a great house there are not only Cooks to dress and season meat, but
Clerks also of the Kitchen, to oversee and look that every one does what
belongs unto him.

Yea, unto settlement, there is required Officers of all sorts; as in the first
establishment, being there was much to do, there were many hands employed, Ephesians.
4. 11
some Apostles, and some ^rophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
teachers; when Paul was constrained to go from Creet, before it could be settled
and ordered well, he leaves behind him Titus, a confiding person, that he
might set in order the things that were wanting, and ordain them Elders in
every City Tit. 1. 5.
. Upon the settlement and Coronation of a King in this Nation, there was wont
to be a Champion completely armed, that should make an open challenge unto any
one that would oppose: there ought to be such in every settled, well-ordered
Church and Congregation, that may be able, by sound Doctrine, both to exhort
and to convince the gain-sayer Tit. 1. 9.
; and this is needful and essential; for non minor est virtus, quam quaerere,
parta tueri, one is not settled, till he be able to have and to hold what is
necessary for him; so Paul to Timothy, hold fast the form of sound words, which
thou have heard of me 2 Timothy 1. 13.
; for it is wont to be in this case, as it is with an Heir, that is newly come
unto a fair estate, who will be sure to have those come unto him, that will
sift him, and try what metal he is made of, whether he can hold, as well as
have a fortune and Estate; and there is some weaker place then other, in every
settlement, which they will batter and attempt; as now in Creet the point of
Circumcision was not so clear, a Law and Ordinance of God, no where repealed,
and therefore urged as unavoidable, and necessary to salvation Act. 15. 1.
, and after much debate it was evinced, and settled by consequences and
probabilities Act. 15. 28
; their mouths must be stopped, says he to Titus, not by suspensions and
deprivations, immediately and out of hand, but in debates and Arguments, and
therefore in every settled, wel-ordered Church, there should be some that are
able to manage and hold an Argument, to find out fallacies, and to discover
them to innocent well-meaning persons, which none could do, but such as have
their senses exercised, as the Apostle speaks Heb. 5. 14.
, that are used to debates, and trained up in Schools and Universities; for
innovators and disturbers, will provide for common Arguments and Answers, so
that if there be not something more then ordinary, some hole picked in their
proposition they provided not for, they will be ready to triumph, and be
applauded by the ignorant and partial auditory. It is accounted a civility,
when the standing Posers in the University, will ask the Candidates of the
questions that they have kept Acts on in the Schools, because it supposes they
have studied such: the Sectaries are dexterous in what they labor to obtrude,
and will be able to pusle and affront an abler man, that has a more diffused
universal insight into Divinity, although in that particular, which is the
others studied and Masterpiece, he may not be so ready.

So for interpreting hard Scriptures, one must be versed in a way of knowing
the original Language, conceiving of the scope and project of the Text,
discerning by what thread it is to be divided; 2 Timothy 2. 15.
study to show thy self approved unto God, a workman that needs not to be
ashamed, rightly dividing the word of God; for the Scriptures are composed of
much variety of stuff, and lie exposed unto all, as the Apothecaries Shop,
where there are drugs of all sorts; but the Minister is the Physician to order
and prescribe what is proper unto every ones condition and estate: I could not
speak unto you (says Paul) 1 Cor. 3. 1, 2.
as unto spiritual men, but as unto carnal, as unto babes in Christ, I fed you
with milk, and not with meat; great judgment is required, and great experience
in giving every one their portion, and suiting the lettice unto the lips.

And for composing and making Sermons, the Minister is compared to a Musician,
that both sets, and plays, and sings his part well Ezekiel. 33. 32.
, which a novice, never trained up unto it, will hardly do. They should be
therefore exercised in making Theames, and speeches upon other subjects, before
they be admitted Pastors, and allowed for to order men's eternal interests and
concernments; and till there be such in a Church, it is not settled nor ordered
well; as in a quire, or music meeting, they act not, that are not experienced
or versed in the art; and though singing was used commonly by all the Jews, yet
in the holy song, some were appointed and set apart, as Chenaniah was 1 Chronicles.
15. 22.
, who is expressly said, to instruct about the song, because he was skilful,
that is, had not only a raised and well-tempered fancy, fit for that
employment, but education answerable, to enable him unto the practice and
performance of it.

So those that do attend and act in holy things, ought to be Orators; for we
hold our hearers only by the ears, and cannot work upon their eyes, by
glorious and magnificent structures and statues, and beautifying of our
meeting-places and Assemblies, as the Jesuits and other Papists do: plain
dealing is indeed our Jewel, and that had need be well set, that so it may
allure, and be the more illustrious: our hearers have delicate and queasie
stomachs, and must not be offended with the sluttishnesse of the dish, or
unhandsomenesse of the garnish that is upon it.

CHAP. XXIII. Containing the first Objection, with its Answer.
HAving now finished our Arguments, we come unto the next thing, and that is,
to answer such objections as usually are brought against this truth.

Obj. 1. To attend and act in holy things, is Gods work, for its an attendance
upon the things of God, as we have showed before, and we should let God do his
own work, and not think we can do it better, unless we could imagine he wanted
strength, or were himself unwilling for to do it; but he has promised, and is
engaged himself to do it Isa. 54. 13
, and has forbidden us to meddle, saying, they shall teach no more, every man
his Neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying, know the Lord Jer. 31. 34
; and till he is pleased to consider (at the least) and to cooperate, it is
not done; for no man (says Christ) Joh. 6. 44, 45.
can come unto me, unless my Father which has sent me draw him; and
conversion is a new Creation; for if any man be in Christ, he is a new
Creature, as the Apostle speaks 2 Cor. 5. 17.
; and it is not good for to preoccupate and intercept Gods purposes.

Sol. 1. The work (no doubt) is Gods work, and he is the efficient and
overruling agent in it, yet in this, as in other acts and operations, admits
of instruments; he is, we do acknowledge, the first, principal, omnipotent, and
all-sufficient cause of all things here below, but is not willing always to be
alone, but does associate and entertain created causes, where and when he
pleases, even in those effects and operations that are wholly in the Scripture
ascribed to him, Exodus 20. 2.
I am the Lord thy God that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the
house of bondage, yet how many Creatures was he pleased to employ in that great
work? and Moses was so instrumental in it, that the effect is by God himself as
much ascribed unto him, Exodus 32. 7.
thy people whom thou broughtest out of the Land of Egypt; as if God had not
meddled in the work at all: so Deuteronomy. 4. 33
did ever people hear the voice of God, speaking out of the midst of the fire,
as we have done, and live? and yet it was an Angels voice, that God upon that
occasion was pleased to employ Gal 3. 19.
; for it was ordained by Angels: so in the holy things of God, the bringing of
us home to God Jam. 1. 18.
, of his own good will begat he us, with the word of truth; yet Paul expressly
says, 1 Cor. 4. 15.
though you have ten thousand instructors in Christ Jesus, yet have ye not many
Fathers; for in Jesus Christ I have begotten you through the Gospel. For though
there is but one supreme director and overseer of the work, yet there may be
many laborers; 1 Cor. 3. 9.
for we are laborers together with God, ye are Gods husbandry, ye are Gods
building.

2. It is not only Gods work, but a creation, (we do acknowledge and believe;)
but such an one, as does admit of instruments, Genesis 2. 7.
the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his
nostrils the breath of life: may we not well think, that here some Angel was
employed, to foul his fingers in contriving of this dust into a body, fit for
so great a guest, as afterward the soul was; for it was enough for God to add
the last perfection, to raise and elevate this dust, to a capacity nature gave
not: so in the raising and creating of the new man, the Minister may be
employed to fashion and prepare the soul for such a glorious guest, as grace,
which only God can put in and infuse, and so it seems he does; 2 Cor. 4. 6.
for God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our
hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of
Jesus Christ. For the dullness and bluntness of the tool or Engine does
illustrate and advance the skill and power of the architect and principal
efficient, as Eliahs throwing water upon the wood and sacrifice, did much
illustrate and inflame the fire, that fell at last upon it, and consumed it 1
King. 18. 38, 39.
: it is indeed a very vigorous and precious liquor, that is able to recover men
that are dead in trespasses and sins, that can open their eyes, and turn them
from darkness to light, from the power of Satan unto God; but we have this
treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God,
and not of us 2 Cor. 4. 7
: we are made use of in the work; but it is God alone that adds the ultimate
and last perfection and completion; 1 Cor. 3. 5.
who then is Paul, or who is Apollo, but Ministers by whom ye believed, as God
gave to every man. When we have acted as fellow Creatures with them, and wound
them up, as far as reason, and moral Arguments and motives will allow us, God
poure^ that living principle into ^h^ir souls, that never was in our possession
and Dominion; for neither is he that planteth any thing, nor he that waters,
but God that gives the increase 1 Cor. 3. 7
.

3. Do we do any thing herein without a call? do we obtrude and thrust our
selves upon him in the work? come we to counsel before we be called? God was in
Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their sins unto them,
and has committed unto us the word of reconciliation 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20.
: we are therefore Officers, and not obtruders in the work, (...), we bring
this Embassy, or offer, to the world from Christ, as though God did beseech you
by us, who has made us able Ministers of the new Testament, not of the letter,
but of the Spirit; for the letter kills, but the spirit gives life 2 Cor. 3.
6.
. When God resolved for to convert the Eunuch, he sends Philip on the
Embassage to him Act. 8. 26. etc.
, so likewise Ananias unto Paul, and Peter to Cornelius, and we believe, that
we are likewise put into Commission and Authority, by proper delegates, and act
by his direction and appointment, that is supreme and principal, as we have
showed before, and therefore may and do expect allowance and concurrence from
him in the work. Were we mechanic persons, not allowed, engaged and versed in
some other course of life, we might well doubt our own Authority, and fear we
were more bold then welcome; but being called, we are and may be confident.

4. As for that prohibition of the Prophet, we say it is comparative, not
positive: namely, that in the Gospel Times, the truths of Christ, and knowledge
of the Son of God, should be so evident, that men might get more of themselves,
without a teacher, then with one, in the legal administrations: as the Apostle
plainly shows 1 Cor. 3.
; for had the prohibition been express and positive, Christ had done ill to be
so sedulous in teaching, and instructing us, as he was Luke 21. 37, 38.
, and the Apostle to press the same with so much eagerness and importunity,
upon his willing and obedient Timothy 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3.
: nay, why do our Brethren that object, preach so much as they do? turpe est
doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum, when the Arrow falls upon the head of him
that shot it: we poor men think we are obliged, and woe is to us if we preach
not, as the Apostle speaks 1 Cor. 9. 16.
; but they believe they are at liberty, and all they do is but a
free-will-offering; we have been trained up to this employment from our youth,
and have nothing else to do; but they may say, as he does in the Prophet, Zach.
13. ^5
I am no Prophet, I am an Husbandman; for man taught me to keep Cattle from my
youth. We think we cannot leave, unless we be restrained, and forbidden by
Authority, and not to do it, would be to us a sin against our present judgment
and persuasion, as the Apostle shows Romans 14. 23.
; they do not think so, and so may better obey the prohibition of the Prophet.

CHAP. XXIV. Containing the second Objection, and Answer.
ITs true, God uses Instruments, but is not limited Angel on his errand, when
he pleases Judge. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4.
, and when he pleases men 1 Samuel 2. 27.
; but any man will serve; for if he finds not fit men, he can make them, Mat.
4. 19.
follow me, and I will make you fishers of men; if God sets any man on work, to
do good, to call upon his friends and Neighbors, and exhort them to leave
their evil ways, and turn unto the Lord, why should we doubt but he may do it?
for conversion of a sinner unto God, is a service, that (with Gods assistance)
any man may do, that has Gods Spirit in him, and is himself converted, as
Christ says unto Peter, Luke 12. 3^.
when thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren; and so we find they did,
for Joh^ the Baptist begets Andrew, and he begets Peter, Jesus begets Philip,
and Philip begets Nathaniel, and so they begat one another, unto the end of the
Chapter Joh. 1. 36, 37. etc.
; and therefore the Commission and Command is universal 1 Pet. 4. 10.
, as any man has received the gift, so let him minister the same unto another,
as good Stewards of the manifold grace of God; for if the work of turning men
to God, were tied and confined to some kind of men, and without an Officer and
such a kind of man, could not be done, how many precious opportunities of doing
good, would be unfruitful? therefore the Apostle makes it the business of any
one, to turn another from his error, and save his soul Jam. 5. 19, ^0,
, and accordingly they have not only allowance and authority to do it, but are
commanded and enjoined 1 These. 5. 1.
, wherefore, comfort your selves together, and edify one another, as you do:
and again, Heb. 3. 13.
exhort one another daily, whilst it is called to day, lest any of you be
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin; for it were a sad thing, if a man
durst not tell his Neighbor of his fault, or teach him truths of God, or move
him unto duty, merely and only, because he was not made a Minister; as if that
work were a monopoly, and in the power and possession of some few ordered
ordained persons; whereas God does great things by the smallest, and most
unworthy Instruments, musters the frogs and flies to fight with Pharaoh,
chooses the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and the weak
things of the world to confound the things that are mighty 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28, 29.
: the more ignorant and unlearned John and Peter were, the more their hearers
were astonished Act. 4. 13.
, nam fortius videntur dicere indocti, the less art, the more authority; when
one is eloquent, that has been educated and trained up to nothing else, its no
great wonder, but if a Cobbler or a Carpenter come up, and speak men into
holiness and goodness, i^s more remarkable; they were astonished at Christ,
because his Father was a Carpenter, and had not bred him in the University Mat.
13. 54, 55, 56.
, major reverentia e longinquo. When such have eloquence and utterance, God is
more visible, and more apparent in it; 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25.
if all prophecy, and there come one in that believes not, or one unlearned,
he is rebuked of all, he is judged of all: and thus are the secrets of his
hearts made manifest, and so falling down on his face, he will worship God, and
say, God is in you, of a truth.

Sol. 1. There is no doubt, but God may use what Instruments he will, and take
them out of any kind of men. When Moses pleaded his inabilities, Gods mighty
power was opposed, wherein he acquiesced Exodus 4: 10, 11, 12.
. Paul was the most unlikely piece of wood, to make, what he was after called,
that is, a Mercury Act. 14. 12.
: yet Ananias is commanded to ordain him, and inroll him in the number of those
Instruments that God resolved for to use Act. 9. 13, 14, 15, 16.
. In old time the service ran in a blood, if they were not of the Sons of
Aaron, they were polluted and put out; but now this bar is taken quite away,
and God may call unto this honor and Office of the Ministry, whom he shall
please, without considering what kind of men they were before, as the Apostle
speaks Gal. 2. 6.
, and if he finds them not prepared and qualified, he can effect that
preparation, either extraordinarily, as then he used, or by ordinary ways of
education and instruction, as now.

2. There Is no man barred or excluded from doing all the good he can; though he
be not called into the order and Office of the Ministry, he may work out his
own salvation Phil. 2. 12.
; build up himself* on his most holy faith, and keep himself in the love of God
Jud. 20, 21*
; and when that is done, he may exhort and quicken others to their duty, not
only equals, friends, and Neighbors, but now and then superiors and guides:
not only exhort one another; but also, and say to Archippm, take heed to the
Ministry, which thou have received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it Col. 4.
17.
. For as in building, besides the skilful Master Builder, as the Apostle calls
himself 1 Cor. 3. 10.
, there are many Laborers employed; so in this spiritual house of God, besides
the guides and overseers of the work, there may be good use of any such as have
abilities, and will do it: So though the Thessalonians are commanded to edify
and comfort one another, yet they are presently enjoined to know them that
labor among them, and are over them in the Lord, and admonish them, and to
esteem them very highly in love, for their works sake 1 These. 5. 12, 13.
: would not have those that serve the Masons, throw them down, and put
themselves into their rooms, that is a confusion, God is not the Author of 1
Cor. 14. 33.
.

3. It does not follow, God has commanded us to exercise our gifts in
teaching, admonishing, exhorting one another, therefore we are authorized,
authentic and Commissioned Officers, and may preach the Gospel, and administer
the Sacraments without control; for women were employed; Phil. 4. 3.
help those women that labored with me in the Gospel Tit. 2, 3, 4.
the aged women likewise, that they be in behavior as becomes holiness, not
false accusers, not given to much wine; teachers of good things, that they may
teach the younger women to be sober, etc. And this modest teaching of this sex
of women, is so far encouraged, that they are assured, that the effect is not
above their reach 1 Pet. 3. 1, 2.
; and we know how efficacious Timothies instruction, by his Grandmother and
Mother was 2 Timothy 1. 5. 2 Timothy 3. 15.
: nay, the wisest man that ever was, was trained up and tutored by a woman
Prove. 31. 1, 2.
; yet they might not be Ministers, may speak at home, but must be silenced in
the Church 1 Cor. 14 34, 35.
; and lest this bar should be removed or broken, by the partiality and
willingness of some to have their Company, the Apostle has rivetted and locked
it in by Arguments 1 Timothy 2. 12, 13, 14.
.

4. There are some things in the work, that private men cannot afford. 1.
Breaking the Ice, and planting the Gospel where it never was before; for that
an Officer must do, that is sent on purpose on the errand Romans 10. 14, 15.
: they that do this work, do gather Churches, as the Prophet calls it Isa. 49.
5.
, now the gatherer must be before the gathered, sheep will not find the way
unto the fold, till some man bring them Joh. 10. 16.
. 2. Laying foundations, settling of fundamentals in Religion, that must be done
by one that is a skilful Master Builder 1 Cor. 3. 10, 11.
; others may build, but they must breach, and give out patterns, as David did
to Solomon for the Temple 1 Cor. 28. 11, 12, 13.
. 3. Asserting fundamentals when they are struck at, or undermined: thus
Timothy was left at Ephesus, to charge them that they did not (...), preach no
other Doctrine; for upon that God lays a curse, by the Apostle Gal. 1. 8, 9
; and Titus in Creet, that he might stop the mouths of them that were unruly
Tit. 1. 11.
. 4. Attend upon the work continually, and give himself wholly to it 1 Timothy 4.
15.
, and that as a Watchman, that is accountable to those that do employ him Heb.
13. 17
: these private persons that have Trades and business cannot do.

CHAP. XXV. Containing the third Objection, and Answer.
BRinging men home to God, (which is the work Joh. 3. 5.
for except a man be born again of water, and of the holy Ghost, he cannot see
the Kingdom of God; and by one Spirit we are all baptized into one body,
whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free, and have been all
made to drink into one Spirit 1 Cor. 12, 13.
: this administration under which we live, is in a more peculiar manner the
Spirits work, then either Creation or Redemption were, which are more
frequently ascribed to the Father and the Son; and some think, one reason why
the sin against the holy Ghost is not forgiven, is, because no other person
works after him 1 Mat. 12. 31, 32.
; but the Spirit may be poured in as great a measure on the house of David, and
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, as the Prophet speaks Zach. 12: 10
, as on the house of Levi, and the Sons of Aaron; for it is not learning,
wit, or eloquence, that makes one able for this work, but the endowments of the
Spirit; for what man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of man that
is in him? even so the things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God 1
Cor. 2. 11
.

Sol. 1. Its granted, that the holy Ghost is mainly active in Gospel
administrations, but not excluding the Father and the Son; Joh. 5. 17
for my Father works hitherto (says Christ) and I work, and conversion is in
a special manner ascribed to the Father Joh. 6. 45
; and though the Son in person be now gone into Heaven, yet is he present
where two or three are met together in his name Mat. 18 20
, yea with his Ministers, unto the worlds end Mat. 28. 20
: nay, even acts, and speaks in them 2 Cor. 13. 3
, and by them unto others 2 Cor. 5. 20
; and so we may say, who has most of the Father and the Son, is fittest for
this work, and Ministers have more of them, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20.
has committed unto us the word of reconciliation, of whom I travel in birth
again, till Christ be formed in you Gal. 4. 19.
; as many as have been baptized into Jesus Christ, have put on Christ Gal. 3.
27.
: where we find the Minister entrusted with communicating Christ to others,
more then other men.

2. None of the persons act Gospel-Administrations immediately, and without
Instruments, as we have showed before; but especially the Spirit: for though it
be true, that the holy Ghost has been apparent, and visible in
Gospel-Administrations, as unto Christ, at his admission unto his public
Office and employment Mat. 3. 16.
, and unto the Apostles, when they were about to enter into the work Act. 2. 3,
4.
: yet has it been but very sparingly, and with ample evidence, that it was he,
because it was easier for that lying Spirit, as he is called 1 King. 22. 22.
, to imitate and counterfeit the holy Ghost, then any other person; the holy
Ghost speaks very frequently, but it is in the Scriptures, which are nothing
but the dictates, and breathings of the Spirit 2 Timothy 3. 16 2 Pet. 1. 21.
, wherein he speaks, (...), or expressly, as the Apostle speaks. 1 Timothy 4. 1.
Paul says, that the holy Ghost did witness in every City, that bonds and
troubles did abide him Act. 20. 23.
; but how did the Spirit do it? but by he Prophets that he met with in the
Cities through which he passed; for what Agabus affirmed in Caesarea Act. 21.
10, 11. Heb. 2. 4.
, others had done in other places (it is like,) and where most of the apparent
operations of the Spirit are, there doubtless are the best endowments for the
Ministry: now such endowments are more evident in Ministers and their labors,
then in others.

3. It will not follow, one has the Spirits work upon his soul, in a sensible
and saving manner, therefore he is a Minister and public Preacher, and may
administer the Sacraments; for then all Gods people should be Preachers, and
Moses needed not have made that prayer Numb. 11. 29.
; it will follow, then one is the Child of God; for as many as are led by the
Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God Romans 8. 14.
; God has many Children that are not preachers, or else that question had been
improper 1 Cor. 12. 29, 30.
; if there were no sheep, there would be no shepherds; yea then it would
follow, that women might be preachers, for their names, some of them, are in
the Book of life Phil. 4. 3.
; which would contradict the rule of the Apostle, as we have showed before.

4. Therefore, besides the spirit of grace and supplication, whereby men are
regenerate and born anew, there must be the Spirit of gifts and revelation, in
the several endowments of the soul, either in an extraordinary way, as in the
primitive times, or ordinary, as now 1 Cor. 12. 8, 9, 10, 11.
; for those men Paul found at Ephesus, had the Spirit of grace, or else they
had not been Disciples, yet the Spirit of gifts and qualifications for the
Ministry they had not so much as heard of, until Paul had laid his hands upon
them Act. 19. 6.
; and when Paul enabled Timothy for to make Ministers, he orders them to look
for other qualifications then conversion and the Spirit of grace 1 Timothy 3. 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
; so unto Titus, it was not sufficient that they were good men, but must be
also gifted men; neither do our Brethren say, that every Brother may preach,
but every gifted Brother.

CHAP. XXVI. The fourth Objection, and Answer.
WE grant, that gifts are requisite, as well as 2 Timothy 2. 2.
, nam quo quisque ingeniosior, eo difficilius docet: he must therefore be apt
to teach, as well as to learn and understand, as the Apostle does expressly
order 1 Timothy 3. 2.
; but we say withal, God can, and sometimes does enable common men with gifts,
not only of understanding and knowledge, but of utterance also, and elocution,
to the wonder and astonishment of those that hear, as Eldad and Medad in the
very Camp, though they went not with the rest unto the Tabernacle Numb. 11, 25,
26, 27, 28, 29.
, yet prophesied in the Camp to admiration: the Spirit blows, when, and where
it lists, not in the Universities, or Temples only, on the Doctors and
Students in Divinity, but on the meanest Tradesman, and mechanic, if he
please, as the Apostle shows, 1 Cor. 12. 11.
dividing to every man severally as he will.

Sol. 1. There is no doubt, but God can tak^ what Instruments he pleases, and
if he finds them not fit, can make them so; follow me, says Christ Mat. 4. 19
, and I will make you fishers of men: but Eldad and Medad were not
mean-conditioned men; for they were so far from being such, that they were such
as Moses knew to be Elders of the people, and Officers over them Numb. 11. 16.
; and therefore were able men, such as feared God, men of truth, hating
covetousness, or else they could not have been Officers Exodus 18. 21.
; such as many would have thought already fit to go into the Pulpit, without
any further inabling or assistance of the Spirit of God; and God is so curious
in the charge to Moses, as if he were sparing of his Spirit, and sought the
ablest and best-endowed men, by nature, education, industry, as Moses here was,
and David was 1 Samuel 16. 18.
: so Paul had an extraordinary fitness in his natural and unregenerate
capacity, only he wanted grace and mannagement, as the Lord tells Ananias, when
he articled against him Act. 9. 13, 14, 15.
. A gallant Horse is sooner tutored and fitted then a dullard: capacity makes
room for great endowments, quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis.

2. Certain it is, these gifts were extraordinary, for they had ordinary gifts
before, that made them Officers and Elders: their ordinary gifts made no such
noise, occasioned no wonder in the Camp, nor no complaint, had not Gods Spirit
in a more then ordinary manner seized on them, there had been no need of that
prohibition that Josua desired Numb. 11* 28.
; their gifts were part of Moses spirit, as appears Numb. 11. 17.
, and that was extraordinary, as God says Numb. 1^. 6, 7.
; now it will not follow, those may preach that have extraordinary
qualifications and abilities, therefore those may that have but ordinary, as it
will not follow, David may be preferred to wait upon the King, that was very
skilful in playing on an Instrument, therefore any ordinary fellow may, that
has no skill: neither will Mr. Robinsons inference hold, extraordinary gifts
fit one for extraordinary, therefore ordinary gifts for ordinary; for the
preaching of mechanic mean persons, is extraordinary, and if by ordinary gifts
he means saving graces, we have showed already, that is not enough; and had not
their gifts been more then ordinary, there had been no objection from them, no
more then is from others of Gods people: now let our preaching Brethren show
extraordinary gifts, we shall submit; let them speak languages ex tempore,
which we are long in getting; let them foretell, what properly is futute and
contingent, we shall acknowledge, God is in them of a truth, if not, let them
forbear to press us with such instances as these; let not Eldad and Medads
extraordinary abilities, be brought to countenance an ordinary Tradesman.

3. These extraordinary and special gifts, which Eldad and Medad had, were
rather magistratical then ministerial; for they were to bear a part of Moses
burden Numb. 11. 17.
: now Moses was not burdened in teaching and preaching to the people, but in
hearing and deciding their civil causes Exodus 18. 13, 14, 26.
: now it will not follow, a man has good abilities to manage and conduct
affairs in war and peace; therefore he is a Minister and Church Officer; for
Saul had such 1 Samuel 11.
; yet was it wondered at, when he was found among the Prophets 1 Samuel 10. 12.
. Vzziah was a very able Governor and Ruler, as appears at large 2 Chronicles. 26.
; yet was not a good Priest, nor Churchman, as appears v. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
: those Offices are diverse and distinct, the matters of the Lord in one, and
the matters of the King in another, as is showed, 2* Chron. 19. 11.
Amariah the chief ^riest is over you in all matters of the Lord, and Zebadiah,
the son of Ishmael, the Ruler of the house of Judah, for all the Kings
matters.

4. The Jewish Magistrates were much more ministerial, and ecclesiastical then
ours; for the Law of God was unto them municipal, the rule of justice upon all
occasions whatsoever Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19.
; and Josua the Captain General, is charged with the reading and study of it
Jes. ^1. 8.
* The seat and Court of Justice was the same, the Judge and Priest sat both
together on the same Tribunal Deuteronomy 17. 9.
, and so they had a mixed jurisdiction; for Phineas puts the Law himself in
execution, and is commended for it Numb. 25. 7. 8.
: so Samuel, a Judge and Prophet, Eli a Judge and Priest. It will not follow
therefore, the Jewish Magistrates had Ecclesiastical jurisdiction and
employment, as well as civil; therefore the Christian Magistrate may have the
like. Yet though they were thus mingled and joined in Commission, their
exercise and actings were distinct, and orderly, as before is showed.

CHAP. XXVII. The fifth Objection, and Answer.
BUt we find the Princes preaching, and teaching of the people, as well as the
Priests and Levites; for Jehosaphat in the third year of his Reign, sent to his
Princes, to teach in the Cities of Judah, as it is expressly said 1 Chronicles. 17. 7.
, and it is said, they did so v. 9.
; and what they did, there is no question but others may and ought to do, when
ever there is need and just occasion offered, as here there was.

Sol. 1. These Princes had a solemn and professed call, for what they did, from
the supreme and sovereign Ruler of the people of the Jews; and he being a very
godly man, and at this time stirred up with more then ordinary zeal 2 Chronicles.
17. 6.
, would not break Rules, and violate the Orders which David had appointed, whom
he was careful in all things to observe and imitate, as it is expressly said v.
3.
. Now David knew how punctual God was in the point of orders and distinctions,
by the breach God made on Vzziah, before his face 1 Chronicles. 13. 9, 10, 11.
, and because they sought not God in the due order 1 Chronicles. 15. 13.
: it is not there fore like, Jehosaphat would fail in a thing that David had so
notably miscarried in, and so carefully reformed and amended.

2. Therefore Tremelius and Junius have rendered it a little otherwise then our
translators have, namely, that he sent Priests and Levites with his Princes, to
teach in the Cities of Judah; sends Princes to reform and bring the people back
again unto the Lord, as its said 2 Chronicles. 19. 4.
, and that the Reformation might be rational, and settle better, he sends with
these Princes Priests and Levites, to instruct them; for so they render it,
misit cum praefectis suis, cum Benhail etc. ad docendum in per civitates
Jehudas, cum illis inquam hos levitas, Shemaijah and quibuscum erant Elishamah
and Jehoram sacerdotes; for though the preposition (...) does not ordinarily
signify, cum, that is, with, yet it may and does, ad, apud, juxta, by way of
opposition, or addition, as in the Title of the four and fortieth Psalm, and
many others, (...) to the song of Chorah, so here (...) ad principes, to his
Princes, that is, to go along with them, and be with them, to do that part of
the work that was proper unto them: and Mr. Robinson must not say, that
Tremelius was not acquainted with the Jewish Customs, who was born and bred a
Jew, and could not choose but see more reason for his Translation, then we can,
that stand a great deal further off.

3. Its said, 2 Chronicles. 17. 9.
they taught, that is, the Priests and Levites, that are named in the verse
immediately before; for the relative must be referred unto the next foregoing
antecedent, unless it be a subject incapable of such an accident or adjunct,
which cannot here be thought; for the Priests and Levites were as capable of
being Teachers, as the Princes, as its expressly said, Deuteronomy. 33. 10.
they shall teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy Law: the relative
therefore, they, must not go farther, and fare worse, leap over Priests and
Levites, and settle in the Princes, who were more improper subjects, and less
acquainted with it.

4. This mission and Commission, was occasional and extraordinary, to reduce
and bring them back again unto the Lord, (d) as Junius and Tremelius in their
(e) 2 Chronicles. 19. 4.
note upon this place, hos selegit, ex omnibus ordinibus, ad tempus, per quos
statum ecclesiarum recognosceret, selected these for this time, or on this
occasion, by whom he might be made acquainted with the Churches state; that
because the people came not up unto Jerusalem, as they were bound, to be
directed and instructed, Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9, 10, 11.
he sends out a walking and Itinerary consistory, that in such cases was
compounded of Priests and Princes; for, had the Priests and Levites gone alone,
their Doctrine might have been despised and contemned, as good King Hezekias
letters were 2 Chronicles. 30. 10, 11.
: now we would be glad, if in such extraordinary cases, the Magistrates would
go along with us, and help us, would tell the people the occasion of their
present meeting, and exhort them to attend unto the Law of God, which the
Priests and Levites had with them, and were ready to expound unto them; and if
any body were irregular, or disobedient, they had authority, and were ready to
restrain them.

5. Though the Priests and Princes in this solemn Message, were united and
conjoined, yet they were not bended and confounded; for it was Gods work, and
God is not the Author of confusion 1 Cor. 14. 33.
; but every one did what was proper and peculiar to his place. We may not
think, the Princes spoke and preached, and the Priests and Levites stood by as
ciphers, or vulgar auditors; but the Princes spoke what was proper unto them,
and the Priests and Levites what belonged unto them, and that was to teach
Jacob his Judgments, and Israel his Laws, as we have showed before. As in
this Nation formerly, the Bishop and Sheriff sat upon the same tribunal, yet
the Bishop spoke to Ecclesiastical affairs, and the Sheriff unto temporal; and
so indeed it was; 2 Chronicles. 19. 11.
and behold, Amariah, chief Priest is over you, in all matters of the Lord, and
Zebadiah, the son of Ishmael, the Ruler of the house of Judah, in all the
Kings matters. As in Scotland, in their general Assembly, the King had his
Commissioner or Substitute, to see that nothing was concluded to his prejudice.

6. There is no doubt, but Kings and Judges may assemble and inform their
people, when any thing is ^ut of order, as good Jehosaphat does 2 Chronicles. 19. 4,
5, 6, 7.
; and so Joshua when he was old, and likewise David, as it appears Jos. 24. 1,
2. etc.
; and so our Kings, when the Judges are to go their Circuits, charge them with
such things as they think behoofful for the public; and though our Assizes
begin at Church, and with a Sermon, yet we think it not improper the Judge
should give a charge unto the Representative body of the County, that is, the
grand Inquest or Jury: so when chief Officers in Corporations are to be chosen,
its a good order to begin at Church, and have the Electors consciences awakened
and charged home with du^y; but when they come to enter upon the execution of
their places, the Recorder, or some other Officer, does read a Lecture to them,
and branch their duties into the parts thereof; and when the sentence of death
is to be given upon a malefactor, the Judge may speak to him, and mind him of
another world, and pray for him, and fit him for his end: so when any public
evil does approach, Kings may command Assemblies of their people, and enjoyne
fasting, and solemn seeking unto God for mercy, as not only Jehosaphat 2 Chronicles.
20. 5, 6. etc.
, and Ezekiah do, but the King of Niniveh, although an Heathen and a stranger,
also does; for the King arose (m) 2 Chronicles. 29. 5. 6. etc.
from his Throne, and laid his Robe from him, and caused it to be proclaimed
and published through Niniveh, by the decree of the King and his Nobles Jonah.
3. 6. 7, 8.
: we are therefore so far from thinking this unlawful, or inexpedient, that we
wish it were done more and oftener then it is; there would be stronger lines in
their expressions, to bind the people to their duty, then any can be made by
Ministers; for where the word of a King is, there is power, as it is Eccles. 8.
4
; and their relation and Authority, would own the auditory, and obtain
attention to them.

CHAP. XXVIII. The sixth Objection, and Answer.
BUt there was allowance in the Jewish administration, wise men, as they are
called Jer. 18. 18.
; and those are reckoned by our Savior, among such as were sent upon this
great errand to the Jews Mat. 23. 34.
; and upon this account, Christ, when he was but twelve years old, was allowed
to exercise his gifts in the Temple Luke 2. 46, 47.
, and the twelve, before they were Apostles Mat 10. 5. Luke 10. 1.
, and seventy after them; and upon this ground it was, that Paul and Barnabas
were permitted for to exercise their gifts at Antioch Act. 13. 14, 15.
, and what was granted them in that administration, should not be now denied
unto any such; seeing gifts of that kind, are now more plentifully bestowed, as
the Apostle from the Prophet shows Heb. 8. 10, 11.
.

Sol. 1. Wise men are never forward to express themselves, they know, qui been
latuit, been vixit, and qui been tacuit, been dixit, and when they must speak,
use as few words as may be; for vir sapit qui pauca loquitur Prove. 29. 1. 1.
, a fool utters all his mind, but a wise man keeps it in till afterward,
and therefore Solomon says, Eccles. 5. 3
a fools voice is known by multitude of words; stultitia loquitur, is Erasmus
introduction, to his Encomium moriae: we therefore think these wise men, did
not offer and obtrude themselves, till they were really and plainly called to
it. Moses (we think) was a wise man, Act. 7. 12.
for he was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and was mighty in word
and in deed, yet was not easily prevailed with, to be a speaker, nor would not
undertake the service he was called to, till Aaron was joined in Commission
with him Exodus 4. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
; and therefore our Savior says, in the place before recited, behold, I send
unto you Prophets, and wise men; for he knew, men that were wise, would not go
on such an errand, till they were sent; and though our Savior Christ began
betimes, yet not till he knew it was his Fathers business Luke 2. 29.
.

2. These wise men, mentioned in Scripture, had something in them
extraordinary; for the Prophet places them between the Priest and the Prophet,
Jer. 18. 18*
and our Savior between the Prophet and the Scribe Mat. 23. 34
. King Solomon was one of these wise men, and well might have a place among the
extraordinary and rarest Preachers Eccles. 12. 9, 10, 11.
, and is therefore said by o^r Savior, to have allured auditors from far Mat.
11. 42
. If our opposing Brethren were such, we would acknowledge and approve them.
Our Saviors extraordinary abilities, in answering and asking questions, made
way among the Doctors, for his allowance Luke 2. 47.
; and did the like appear in any now, we should acknowledge God in them, as we
have said before.

3. For these that are acknowledged upon this ground to be received Preachers,
we think the twelve were actual Apostles, before Christ's Resurrection, because
they are so called by the Spirit of God Mat. 10. ^ Luke 22. 14.
, and had extraordinary gifts bestowed on them then; for they were to heal the
sick, cleanse the Leapers, raise the dead, cast out Devils v. 8.
: let our opponents do these things, we shall expect no other power nor
authority, though we acknowledge their Commission was afterward enlarged and
corroborated, as it might be; for though we find not, that ever they were
called Apostles Elect, yet we think, they were but young Apostles, and were by
our Saviors Company and care, much mended and improved afterward, as Paul was
doubtless an Apostle at the first appearing of our Savior to him, as he shows
1 Cor. 9. 1.
, yet had he not his furniture and full instruction at the first; for so Christ
speaks unto him Act. 26. 16
, to make thee a Minister and Witness of those things which thou have seen,
and of the things wherein I will appear unto thee.

And for the seventy, besides their wisdom, which Mr. Robinson thinks to be
enough, they had abilities to cast out Devils, to tread on Serpents, and
Scorpions Luke 10. 17, 18, 19.
; and when our Brethren do such things, we shall acknowledge them; and for Paul
and Barnabas, though we acknowledge they were wise men, yet they were sent out
by the holy Ghost Act. 13. 1.
, and had abilities proportionable unto such a call and service, as appeared in
the censure of that Jewish Conjurer Act. 13. 9, 10, 11.
, and curing a man that was a Cripple from his Mothers womb Act. 14. 8, 9, 10.
: now when these evidences of the holy Ghost appear in men desirous of our
Pulpits, we shall surrender them.

4. What privilege soever wise men then had, it was subjected to examination
and approbation; for Paul and Barnabas, though, (as Mr. Robinson observes) they
went into the seat or Pew, where such used to sit, who were provided to speak
unto the people, as it is Act. 13. 14, 15.
: yet they opened not their mouths, until the Rulers of the Synagogue were
pleased to send unto them, and request them for to speak unto the people; and
if our Brethren would not speak, till the Governors and Rulers of our
Assemblies sent unto them, we should be quiet.

CHAP. XXIX. The seventh Objection, and Answer.
WHat was done in the first Christian-Church, primum in unoquoque genere est
mensura and regula reliquorum; but private Christians were preachers in the
first Church, for we find all the Church scattered, except the Apostles Act.
8. 1.
; and all they that were scattered abroad, went about preaching the word, not
teaching and discoursing, as private men may do, but preaching (...), and their
preaching was assisted by the hand of God, so that many were gained to the
faith, and its very like baptized, and formed into a Church, as appears Act.
11. 19 20, 21.
; for though there were some sent unto them from Jesalem, yet they altered
nothing, nor added anything to what was done before, but approved, and
encouraged.

Sol. 1. The Church from whence these Preachers went, was under persecution,
and the places where they preached were unsettled, as appears by sending of John
and Peter to Samaria, where Philip preached, for to settle them Act. 8. 14, 15,
16, 17.
, and Barnabas to Antioch, where others of them had converted many, as appears
Act. 11. 22, 23, 24.
: now we must not argue from a persecuted unsettled Church, unto a settled one;
for we undertake not to determine, what may be done in times of trouble and
persecution; for in the stating of the question, we say expressly, that in every
settled, well-ordered Church, some should attend and act in holy things.

2. These were not ordinary, if private Christians, for they were of those that
were believers, when Stephen was put to death Act. 11. 19.
, and so had an extraordinary measure of the holy Ghost bestowed upon them; for
the place was shaken where they were assembled, and they were all filled with
the holy Ghost, and spoke the word with boldness Act. 4. 31.
, and we are sure that one of them, namely Philip, who went down to Samaria,
did many miracles; for unclean spirits went out of many of them, and many that
had palsies, and were lame, were healed Act. 8. 6, 7.
. Now when our preaching Brethren can show such miracles and wonders, we shall
receive them, and acknowledge them, and not before.

3. All were not scattered that were believers; for then the Apostles would not
have stayed behind; for they knew it was the property of a good S^eward, to
seek his flock, when ever they are scattered from them Ezekiel. 34. 11, 12, 13.
, and we find in the next words, that Saul made havoc of the Church, entering
into every house, and haling men and women, committed them to prison Act. 8. 3.
; so that there were left in Jerusalem, in every house, both men and women that
were believers, and private Christians, notwithstanding this dispersion, and
those private Christians and believers were not a few; for he compelled many
for to blaspheme Act. 26. 10
; and we find a Church still at Jerusalem, as well as the Apostles, as its
said Act. 11. 22
; the all therefore in the first verse, must be restrained, and is capable of
limitations.

4. By all therefore, we believe and think, is meant all Preachers and
Teachers, except the Apostles; for the enemy had found, that the Apostles were
too hard for them, by that experiment and trial they had made before Act. 5.
40.
, and were resolved to meddle no more with them; but when they saw inferior
persons meddling, as Stephen, they resolved to try what metal they were made
of, and finding Stephen malleable, as unable to resist their stones, as they
were the wisdom and spirit by which he spoke Act. 6. 10.
, they were encouraged to set upon the other Preachers; for there were many
Preachers in Jerusalem, befides the Apostles; for no doubt the seventy were yet
there, and were enabled and commissioned before Luke 10. 1, 2.
; and had their gifts augmented, according to that promise, in that great
effusion of the holy Ghost Act. 2. 4.
, and their Commission enlarged, according to that promise Luke 24. 49
; and those, which at the first were made but Deacons Act. 6. 5, 6.
, yet when they had used the Office of a Deacon well, and had by that means
purchased unto themselves a good Degree, and great boldness in the faith, they
were made higher Officers, enabled to baptize as Philip did Act. 8. 12, 13. 37,
38.
, who was also, upon farther trial, made an Evangelist, as we find him called
by this Evangelist Act. 2^. 8.
; and for the other that went down to Antioch, that are called men of Cyprus
and Cyrene, its like they were Commissioned Officers; for they planted the
Church at Antioch, which was not done without baptizing, and that only by
Officers that had Commissions Mat. 28. 19.
; and men of good judgment think, that Lucius of Cyrene, spoken of Act. 13. 1.
, was one of these that were dispersed and traveled, who is in that place
expressly called a Prophet, and ranked even with Barnabas and Saul.

And therefore Mr. Robinson does ill, to say there is nothing said, that may
insinuate they were in office; for these are strong insinuations.

CHAP. XXX. The eighth Objection, and Answer.
THose that may prophecy, may preach; for prophesying is nothing else but
speaking to men, to edification, exhortation, and comfort, as the Apostle
expressly says 1 Cor. 14. 3.
: now what do men when they preach, but speak thus unto men? or if there be any
difference, it is in this, that prophesying is more excellent then preaching;
for though the Apostle in this Chapter, does labor to prefer and set it up
above tongues 1 Cor. 14. 2, 3, 4, 5.
, yet in another place he prefers it unto Pastors and Teachers, as appears Ephesians.
4. 11. 1 Cor. 12. 28.
, in both which places, the Prophet is preferred before the Pastor and Teacher;
and no marvel; for though they agree with the Pastor in this, that they edify
and speak to men, yet they did more, foretold contingent futures, and opened
hidden and mysterious Scriptures, by Revelation, and immediate inspiration 1
Cor. 14. 30.
, which were things that Pastors and Teachers could not always do, or not
without great pains and study.

But sure we are, that all may prophecy; for all are bidden to desire it, and
follow after it, as they are bound and bidden to follow after charity 1 Cor.
14. 1.
, and it is for that end commended to them, all that Chapter over: and when
they have it, they may use and exercise it 1 Cor. 14. 31.
: ye may all prophecy, that is, employ and exercise that gift which God has
given you, as those that had their Masters Goods, concredited unto them, are
bid to occupy Luke 19. 13.
; and because we might be sure the liberty is universal, the Apostle puts in
that restraint he thought good, and that is of women, he permits not women for
to speak, but commands them to be in subjection, according to that ancient Law
1 Cor. 14. 34, 35.
. Now in restraining them, he leaves all men at liberty; as in a Corporation,
when there are Laws made, that no forraigner shall exercise a Trade in that
Town, that is not free, all freemen are thereby allowed: so here, no women
shall speak, therefore all men may.

Sol. 1. We fully grant, that all that may prophecy, may preach, and
acknowledge it to be a superior, and more excellent endowment, but think it
proper, and restrained unto Prophets only: the all in that is set down 1 Cor.
14: 3.
, is only meant of Prophets, ye may all prophecy, that is, all the Prophets,
as it is, v. 29.
let the Prophets speak two or three, and let the other judge; neither can this
restriction be refused; for whosoever does prophecy, shows thereby plainly,
that he is a Prophet; for qualified acts denominate the subject wherein they
are; he that rules is a Ruler, he that teaches a Teacher, and he that
prophesies a Prophet. Saul was a most unlikely piece to make a Prophet, yet
when he also prophesied, it could not be denied him 1 Samuel 19. 23, 24.
. Now sure we are, all are not Prophets, God indeed gave some Apostles, and
some Prophets Ephesians. 4. 11
, not all, so God has set in the Church, some Apostles* and some Prophets 1
Cor. 14. 28.
, and therefore well might ask, are all Apostles, are all Prophets v. 29.
? as if he should have said, if all be, there be more then I have set; for I
did set but some: though the eye be an excellent Member, yet if all the body
were an eye, it would be an ugly and imperfect body, as the Apostle shows 1
Cor. 12. 17.
, caput est optimum, sed non oportet ut totum sit caput Act. 11. 27. 28.
: and surely, if all the Church were Prophets, it had been very improper for to
have said, in those days came Prophets from Jerusalem to Antioch (a); for if
all were Prophets, there could no other come: so had it been to have numbered
and named these Prophets, when they were come to Antioch, and say, there were
in the Church, which was at Antioch, certain Prophets, as Barnabas, etc. Act.
13. 1.
; for they had all been Prophets; and it had been as impertinent for Moses to
have wished, that all the Lords people were Prophets Numb. 11. 29.
; and though all be bidden to desire it, and follow after it, as after charity,
yet it will not follow, therefore all attained it; Interpretation was a thing
that all were bound to seek for, and pray to God for 1 Cor. 14. 13.
; yet that was a peculiar gift, that all had not, as plainly appears 1 Cor. 14.
26.
: nay, it will follow, all are commanded to desire and labor that they might
prophecy, therefore all had it not; for what one has, he cannot properly
desire, for all desire supposes absence.

And whereas its said, women are restrained, therefore all men are allowed,
all, in that place must be restrained to the thing in hand: as 1 Cor. 6. 12.
all things are lawful, what properly and simply? no certainly; for it was not
lawful for him to take Christ's member, and make it the member of an harlot v.
15.
; but all things, that is, all things indifferent, and in my power: so let your
women keep silence in the Churches, that is, your women Prophets, who thought
they might speak as well as men, and then it follows, men-Prophets may; for
opposita sunt sub eodem genere proximo, as black and white, heat and cold: now
it will not follow, some women may not, therefore all men may, as it will not
follow, women may not be members of the Parliament, therefore all men may; but
this will follow, women, though chosen by their Countries, may not fit there,
therefore men chosen by their Countries may; for here the opposition is sub
eodem genere, so in the Salick Law in France, a woman, though she be heir unto
the Crown, yet may not wear it, therefore a man that is Heir unto it may.

2. We say, all Prophets were men in office; for they are reckoned in the
second place of such as God had set in his Church 1 Cor. 12. 28.
, and counted among those gifts, that Christ at his ascension had given to her
Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.
, and were very useful in those times of danger, to foresee, and to foretell
what was to come, as Agabas foretells the famine Act. 11. 28
, and the bonds and troubles that waited for Paul, as soon as he should come
unto Jerusalem Act. 21. 9, 10, 11.
, whereby those bonds and troubles became a great deal lighter to him, and he
was better able for to bear them, praemonitus praemunitus, a trouble or
affliction unexp^cted, is like a blow upon the bare skin; but when expected and
looked for, its like a blow upon the Armor; and therefore these praedictions
are put among those comforts of the holy Ghost, that Christ foretold, should
come unto them Joh. 16. 13.
; and so for opening mysterious Texts of Scripture, that were not understood so
well before, as that in Joel, which the Apostle, as he was a Prophet, opens to
them, and thereby frees them from that calumny that lay before upon them Act.
2. 16, 17, 18, 19.
.

3. We say, all Prophets had extraordinary and proper Revelations; 2 Pet. 1. 21
for the Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost; and as of old time, so much more in
the Gospel Times; for the old Prophets spoke with more uncertainty, in respect
of their own knowledge, and understanding, of their visions and apparitions,
then the new ones did, as the Apostle plainly shows 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11, 12.
; and Mr. Robinson has well observed, that the Revelations, and praedictions
in former ages, were not so manifest and evident, as those under the
Gospel-administrations, from that place of the Apostle Ephesians. 3. 5.
; and that these Prophets had Revelations, is manifest from, 1 Cor. 14. 30.
If any thing be revealed to another that sits by, let the first hold his
peace; and its apparent, that the Apostle compares Prophecy to tongues, and
other extraordinary gifts, throughout the Chapter: now when our adversaries are
thus qualified, to foresee dangers before they can in reason be expected; to
tell the issue and events of undertakings; whether a Parliament shall be
conclusive, and be followed with success; whether he that puts on his Armor,
may boast as he that puts it off 1 King. 20. 11.
, we shall acknowledge them for Prophets, and not before.

4. We say, the Reason why the Apostle does so much advance and set up
Prophecy, was, because, beside that which was extraordinary in it, and tended
only to conviction, as tongues did, it had also something in it that was
ordinary, and tended also to instruction and consolation 1 Cor. 14. 1, 2, 3, 4.
; for though every Preacher was not a Prophet, yet every Prophet was a
Preacher: these people had no mind to ordinary and common gifts, which many
then had, except there were something in it extraordinary, they cared not for
it: he puts them therefore upon Prophecy, that had something in it
extraordinary, to allure their appetite, and something ordinary, that commended
it, and made it useful to the Church. Now though he that had the extraordinary
had the ordinary, yet not contra, every Prophet was a Teacher, but every
Teacher was not a Prophet Mr. Robinsons reasons should here be answered, but
that it is punctually done already, by our reverend Brethren of the Province of
London.

The second Part.
CHAP. I. Giving a Reason of this second Part.
IN the former part, we have endeavored to demonstrate, that in every settled,
and well-ordered Church, some should be set apart, to attend and act in holy
things; in this we come to show, who these should be; for we have no reason to
think, that we shall be presently deprived of all attendants, some will be
ready still, to offer, and perhaps obtrude themselves, it is not want of men,
but want of Ministers, that makes us speak, not want of speakers, but want of
Preachers: nay, it is no^ want of Preachers, but want of Commissioned-Officers,
that we bewail, there are (as he said) multi homines, sed pauci milites; for
we find that Jeroboams Devils had some to attend and act about them 2 Chronicles.
11. 14, 15.
, and there were swarms of Locusts out of the bottomless pit; Friars and
Monks, that every where invaded and usurped Pulpits; and so among the wild and
wasting Sectaries in Germany, some did attend and act in things they called
holy. But we would have such, as God directs and describes in his word,
think he is able to choose his Officers, and ought to have his liberty of doing
so, without impeachment; God will not be attended with every body, he is as
curious and squemish as any are. The Officers and attendants of a Prince, are
the majesty and glory of his Court, as it was of Solomon's 2 Chronicles. 9. 3, 4.
, and he will not give away his glory unto any other: when Nebuchadnezzar was
about to form his Court, he is exact and curious in the choice and qualities of
those that are for to attend him Dan. 1. 3, 4, 5.
; for its truly said, noscitur ex comite qui non cognoscitur ex se; Ministers
are Messengers and Interpreters, as they are called Job 33. 23
, such as Mercury by the Poets is feigned and supposed to be, and ex quovis
ligne non fit Mercurius. When Princes Children are to be put to nurse,
Physicians are employed, not only to consider the constitutions and complexions
of those that are commended to the service, but also to weigh their breast-milk
in a pair of skales, that she whose milk is heaviest, may be adjudged to the
work: Gods Children, are Children of the greatest Prince that is Mal. 1. 14.
, and his Ministers are called in the Scripture Nurses 1 These. 2. 7
: its fit therefore their constitutions and complexions should be viewed, and
the milk they give should first be weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary,
before they be authorized to give these Children suck. It is observed, that
those that sell milk, have the greatest liberty for to corrupt and mingle it of
any other: and therefore the Apostle takes especial care, that those that need
it, and desire it, may be well purged and prepared; for nothing is more
dangerous then milk, received in to a filthy and infected stomach; for though
the milk be never so good, yet if the stomach be not clean, it will coagulate
and curdle in it; and then takes care, that the milk be likewise as it ought to
be 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2.
. There are two evils that milk is subject and obnoxious unto, First, to be
weakened and impaired by putting water in, to have no pith nor spirits, sap nor
savor in it, and yet for to retain the color and name of milk, the Apostle to
prevent this, would have it (...), rational and pithy, that has weight and
substance Tit. 2. 7, 8.
, having strength and spirits in it, that will carry and convince, that he may
be able by sound Doctrine, both to exhort and convince the gainsayers, as the
Apostle speaks Tit. 1. 9.
, not frothy, empty, light, uncertain, stuffed with whimsies, and discomposed
inconsistencies: the other evil is fallacious sophistry, which in another
place, the Apostle says is to corrupt the word 2 Cor. 2. 17.
; for we are not as many which corrupt the word of God, (...), that is,
corrupt, and play the hucksters with it, by blending it with worse, as Vintners
use to do their good wines: the Apostle therefore to prevent this, says it
must be (...), without deceit; for many things seem to be, that are not, have a
show of wisdom in will worship and humility, as the Apostle speaks Col. 2. 23.
, yet have no substance in them.

And the danger is the greater, where the people have been scanted and denied
their allowance, kept hungry, and their appetites thereby enraged and
exasperated; for such will venture upon any carrion, Jejunus stomachus raro
vulgaria temnit, as the people by a needless and overgreat restraint, were
occasioned to fly upon the spoil 1 Samuel 14. 32.
. Our care is therefore, that they may have wholesome food, that in stead of
being starved, they be not poisoned. Its two well known, the people of this
Land have been restrained, confined to a diet that they did not like, deprived
of Preachers, that they relished and longed for, and fed with trash and husks:
we bless God for it, that the case is altered, that our Preachers are not now
(as formerly) removed into a corner, but that our eyes do see our Preachers, as
the Prophet speaks Esa. 30. 20
; but care must be, that now they be not poisoned: when people have been long
restrained and kept hungry, they must not presently be glutted and
overcharged, though with wholesome food; but as they lost, so they must recover
their stomachs by degrees, a little of that is good, and often, is the best
rule: our business therefore now is, to keep off these obtruders and
deceivers, that our people may not be in hucksters hands, but nourished and fed
sincerely, that in Doctrine, there may be uncorruptnesse, gravity, sincerity,
sound speech that cannot be condemned, as it is Tit. 2. 7, 8.
, and that they be not overcharged with a surfeit, of that whereby their souls
ought to be nourished.

The people are indeed a weighty, but unweldy body, slow to remove from what
they are accustomed unto. The Irish will not be persuaded to put geeres and
harnis on their horses, but will have the Plough still tied to their tails.
The men of China in their late great conflicts with the Tartars, fought harder
for their hair and habits, then for their Empire and Dominions; so powerful is
usage, and so sweet our present, though perverse opinions and persuasions; but
if they be removed, and forced, or lifted from it, they are very apt to swag
unto the other side, that as they say of women, in femineo sexu nihil mediocre,
so we may of people, neutrum modo, mas modo vulgus, they never settle in the
middle gender, but from one extreme run to the other; are in the Scriptures
compared unto waters, Rev. 17. 19
quae difficulter continentur suis terminis, sed facile alienis, who could have
barred and bounded that rolling and unruly Element, if God himself had not
said, hither to shall thou come, and no further, and here shall thy proud waves
be stayed Job 38. 11
? and it must be the same almighty power, that contains the people within due
bounds; and the holy Ghost is pleased thus to join them, by the Psalmist,
Psalm. 65. 7.
which stilleth the noise of the Seas, the noise of their waves, and the
tumults of the people.

Our people have been kept a long time hungry, those Preachers silenced and
laid aside, that they affected and longed after, and by long fasting, have got
caninum appetitum, as Physicians call it, an appetite too eager and adventurous
for their weak stomachs, and feeble powers, and must for a while be dieted, and
looked well unto, that they do not over-eat themselves, that they do not
over-charge their quesie stomachs; the Devil, if he cannot bar men, and keep
them back from God, will thrust them forward, and overcharge them, and a man
may eat too much of any thing, Prove. 25. 16.
have thou found honey; eat so much as is sufficient for thee, lest thou be
filled therewith, and vomit it. We are now to be very careful of this extreme,
to beware they do not cloy themselves, and so be occasioned to vomit up all:
our Savior Christ takes notice of the want of Preachers, and bids the
Disciples pray for a supply Mat. 9. 38.
, yet wills them to consider, what they hear Mar. 4. ^4.
, and Paul, who spent himself in preaching, and enjoynes the assiduity thereof
to his successors, yet bids them, mark such as caused divisions and
dissensions, contrary to the Doctrine which they had learned, and avoid them
Romans 16. 17.
: he would not have them ravenous, like hungry dogs, to leap at any bone that
should be cast unto them; and compares false Teachers unto Dogs Phil. 3. 2.
, who swallow anything that is proposed to them.

Those that devour and over-eat themselves, are subject unto inflammations and
the itch; for the raw and unconcocted matter ingenders vapors, which laboring
to get out at the cuticula, or out-most skin, do tickle it, and so beget an
itch. The people in the Apostles days had fed eagerly, and filled themselves
with more then they could well digest, which in the next succeeding age,
engendered and begat an itch: the Apostle therefore is very careful to enjoyne
the pastors vigilance: those that are troubled and molested with an itch, are
commonly inordinate, and hurt themselves with scratching, the pleasure of it
does solicit them to overdo, and scratching lets in air and ill influences,
that pain and trouble them, before they leave them, he saw that grievous Wolves
would come among them, not sparing the flock, and of their own selves would men
arise, speaking perverse things to draw Disciples after them Act. 20. 29, 30.
, therefore he bids them watch. And when he was about to leave the world, he
reveals to Timothy a special Medicine for the itch, that he bids and charge
him to use: as great Doctors, when they are dying, give their exact and choice
receipts to their successors, for the public good, and the Medicine is
compounded of three ingredients.

1. Instant and unwearied assiduity in preaching, I charge thee therefore
before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead,
at his appearing and in his Kingdom, preach the word, be instant in season and
out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3, 4.
. This is the first ingredient, to furnish them and feed them with wholesome
food, that their hunger betray them not to those that go about for to seduce
them. The Vine and the Figtree in the parable Jud. 9. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
, are by their native sap and sweetness, secured from that bait and snare, the
bramble snatched and was choked with. Physicians say, the body should be kept
in habituathletico, a vigorous and able temper, that may be able to oppose
infections, that are offered to them: as Cities well furnished with Ammunition
and provision, can hold out till they be relieved, so Christians catechized and
instructed in the grounds of what they do profess, hold out and make
resistance, when ayry, empty, hungry souls, are snared and devoured by the
common enemy: when the Devil found the house was empty, he enters it, and puts
a Garrison that should secure it for the future Mat. 12. 44, 45.
.

2. The second ingredient must be suffering; if we obey the former Order, and
be assiduous in teaching, reproving, and rebuking, we shall be sure to suffer;
action and passion go together, omne agens agendo repatitur, especially, if we
go a little f^ster then others do: a Loader may ride through a Town a foot
pace, with sacks upon his horse, and not be meddled with; but if a Gentleman
will gallop, the Dogs will presently encounter and assault him; if men will be
assiduous, and importunate, to get men out of Satan's snares, they shall be
persecuted; why was Paul so opposed every where? but because he was uncessant
in his admonitions, Act. 20. 31
therefore watch, and remember that by the space of three years, I ceased not
to warn every one night and day with tears: its well said, laudamus monitores,
sed fugimus, no boy more hated then the monitor; and they that will not stand
to it, and suffer with Christ, shall never reign with him, as the Apostle
speaks 2 Timothy 2. 12.
; for all our doing, we may be thought pragmatical, and busy bodies, they will
think we will play our own game, until they see us lose; that we aim at ease
and honor, until they see us trodden on, and in the dirt, and then perhaps, we
may be pitied. God is the God of all grace, yet settles no body till they have
suffered, 1 Pet. 5* 10*
but the God of all grace, who has called us to his eternal glory, by Jesus
Christ, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, strengthen,
stablish, settle you.

But a little suffering will not suffice, long suffering is the ingredient; if
there be in the medicine, an ounce of doing, there must be two or three of
suffering; our Saviors and the Apostles times, were times of doing; but for
that there followed three ages, that were wholly taken up and entertained in
suffering: a cheater may lose a while, to draw the novice into a Partnership;
the stony ground endures a while, Luke 8. 13.
which for a time believe, but will not suffer long, time will discover truth,
every man's work shall be made manifest, for the day shall declare it 1 Cor. 3.
13
; the dress and garnish will wear off in time, and nothing stay, but what is
real and substantial: good men may be in danger to decline and stagger, if
the rod stays long on them, as the Psalmist says Psalm. 125. 3.
; but long is not enough, there must be large, with all long suffering: an inch
is longitude, but will not serve to make up this ingredient, if they give us an
inch, we must take an ell, and therefore the believers had need of patience,
that after they had done the will of God, they might receive the promise Heb.
10. 36.
; a Christian Soldier may have a very great arrear, Paul speaks, as if all his
pay were then to take up, when all his warfare was accomplished, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith,
henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness: its a great
trial, to have that Garland or Crown deferrd, that we have won, as those that
wrestled in the Olympic games, if when they had contended lawfully, and won
the prize, they had been put off until the next Olympiad, yet that is many
times our case, when we have rowed hard, and brought the boat unto the shore,
to be put off again, and beaten back into the billows, as the Apostle speaks,
2 Cor. 6. 3, 4.
giving no offense in any thing, that our Ministry be not blamed, but in all
things approving our selves as the Ministers of God, in much patience in
afflictions, in necessities, in distress; but yet there is this difference,
Ships that have been long out, and are forced again into the waves, do
sometimes perish in the Bay, and in view of the desired Haven; but we are sure
to conquer at the last, he that endures to the end, the same shall be saved
Mat. 24. 13.
; be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a Crown of life Rev. 2.
10.
: vincet aliquando pertinax bonitas, if one will not yield, nor give off, he
shall certainly prevail at last, and conquer. We must not think, to do as
Caesar often did, veni, vidi, vici, but shall at last prevail. When Jacob found
his hold was good, that he had taken of his Antagonist, he would not let him
go, till he had blessed him Genesis 32. 26
.

The third and last ingredient for this Medicine of the Itch, is Doctrine. With
all long suffering and Doctrine. The Itch at first has something in it of
delight, and men refuse what is offered by way of cure, and please themselves
with being clawed; but when they find that cures them not, but rather troubles
them, and puts them further off, they then begin to listen to some remedies;
all men will witness, that we have suffered, and suffered long; perhaps they
will be willing now, to admit such ointments and applications, as may with Gods
blessing effect the cure, and that must be our Doctrine; and though perhaps,
the place of Scripture we have quoted, would give us leave for to expatiate
into a large field, yet we shall limit and confine our selves unto such points
of Doctrine, as are proper for the cure of this particular disease.

CHAP. II. Making way for that Doctrine we mean to handle.
ITs said of Paul and his Companions Act. 17. 6.
, that they had turned the world upside down, yet had no Archimedes to make an
Engine, nor other way for to effect it, but by their Doctrine: they that will
turn must teach, they that will form, and alter men's persuasions, must overturn
them by demonstrations, and grounds of reason; homines duci volunt non cogi,
they may be cudgeld into a Treaty, but not into a tenet; love for to look and
see their way, before they leap; may be easily drawn, hardly driven into a
resolution and persuasion: men's wills are not the fore-horse in the gang, that
bears away the bells; but yet are capable of intimations and directions from
him; are in the opinion of the Schools, participes rationis, capable of
rational and understanding influences, can tell what reason dictates to them,
and determines. Our business therefore now, is for to guide men, and give them
grounds for what we offer and propound unto them. The former point, that some
are necessary, we have asserted, with the more assurance, because the harmony
therein is more apparent and undoubted; here we are willing to be wary, and
well advised: all will acknowledge, some must be set apart; but how this shall
be done, is not so evident. When the Jailer was awakened with the Earthquake,
and saw all the doors open, and every ones bonds were loosed, he first resolved
for to make away himself; but being hindered from that by Paul, he calls for a
light, and then goes down to see the Prisoners Act. 16. 29.
: the concussions and Earthquakes of the Nation, have at the last awakened and
rowsed us up, and we soon see, the doors are opened, and every man's bonds are
loosed, the sacred offices of ministerial administrations invaded and usurped,
all men allowed and admitted to undertake and execute that holy function, no
porters at the gates to keep them out, nor outcries raised to expel them: when
they supposed Paul had brought a Greek into the Temple, and had polluted that
holy place, the City presently was moved, and the people ran together Act. 21.
30
; but we see no such zeal amongst our people; our Savior Christ has said, he
that enters not by the door, into the sheepfold, but climeth up some other
way, the same is a Thief and a Robber Joh. 10. 1.
: if this be true (as nothing can be truer) what troops of robbers have we
seen, (as the Hos. 6. 9.
Prophet speaks) within these few years, in the house of God? yet are not
willing to go rudely and boldly in, without a light. When men find that their
houses are broken open in the night, and know not certainly but some of the
Thieves may still lie lurking, or be hidden in the house, they do not use to
rush in in the dark, at all adventures, unarmed, and unfurnished to make
resistance and defense; but call for a light, as we see the Jailer did, and
take their seconds and assistants with them, and then go in; this is our case,
certain we are, our house is broken up, nay, its the house of God, as the
Apostle calls it 1 Timothy 3. 15.
, and all the holy things are ransacked and rifled; we are not willing to go in
rudely, to consider what we have lost, because we know not whether all the
Thieves are gone, some may be lurking still there, for ought we know, and such
are always desperate, will rather die then be discovered, they know, omnis
jujuria est gravitate tutior; therefore we think it fit to take a light with
us, and make our applications by degrees and steps; and though this truth may
lie below some men's opinions and persuasions for the present, this gold and
silver Oar may be at present, out of some men's view, yet we engage, that if
they will but follow us down these few stairs and steps, that we have hewn
out, we doubt not, but they will discover it, and find it out.

1. That to attend and act in holy things, is a work of much exactness,
tenderness and curiosity, wherein temerity and rude approaches are not safe.
When Promethens first brought down the fire, the Satyr ran with both his arms
for to embrace and welcome it; but was bidden to stand off, and keep his
distance, unless he meant for to be findged. God does not love unmannerly and
rude approaches, Eccles. 5. 1
keep thy foot, when thou go to the house of God, and be more ready to hear,
then to give the sacrifice of fools; for they consider not that they do evil:
as the Judges in the Term time, will not admit of any one to plead, but such
as by their industry and education, are enabled to speak unto the point, though
there be a bar besides, to keep them at a comely distance; but God takes state
upon him, and will not be approached rudely, Exodus 3. 4, 5.
put off thy shoos (says God) from off thy feet; for the place whereon thou
stand is holy ground; and though he condescended for to come down among
them, yet he sets bounds, and makes a circle round about him, that they might
not pass Exodus 19. 21, 22.
: its true, the Sons of Aaron came a little nearer, but if any stranger were
encouraged thereby to be uncivil, he lost his life for it Numb. 18. 7.
: nay, even Aarons sons, if they presumed beyond their limits escaped not; the
first fault uses to be pardoned, especially in young men, that are by nature
apt to make adventures, yet Nadab and Abihu perish for their first fault Numb.
10. 1, 2.
; and though God may be thought to be more facile now, and easier of access, in
Gospel Times, yet the Apostle does assure us, that our God is a consuming fire
Heb. 12. 29
; it was no great fault, that Ananias and his Wife committed, yet both are
stricken dead Act. 5. 11.
. Vzzah thought no hurt, when he touched the Ark, nor the men of Bethshemish,
when they looked in, and yet there were fifty thousand of them smitten 1 Samuel
6. 19
, Scilicet in superis etiam furtiva luenda est, Nec veniam laeso minime casus
habet.

2. It is, and must be the work of man; the attendance is not to supply and
furnish God, but to secure and save man, we serve God in it, but our selves
more; we serve him, not because he wants men, but because we want Masters; God
is attended with better Servants, Psalm. 103, 20, 21.
bless the Lord, yea his Angels that excel in strength, that do his
Commandment, harkening to the voice of his words, bless the Lord, all ye his
Hosts, ye Ministers of his, that do his pleasure: it is not therefore for want
of Servants that men must be employed, but for his servants wants, that cannot
otherwise be relieved. Great men take Physic when they need it, because their
servants cannot take it for them. The greatest Queen must be in labor of her
own Children; the King writes Letters in behalf of Naaman, but Naaman himself
must wash seven times in Jordan, if he will be clean 2 King. 5. 14.
. Man marred all, and man must mend all; for since by man came death, by man
came also the Resurrection of the dead 1 Cor. 15. 21.
, that as in the fall it was homo homini lupus, so in the rise, it must be homo
homini Deus: the fall was such, as could not be recovered but by God, yet such
as God could not recover, but by man: Christ therefore, God-man, was the
restorer and reconciler of man to God; 2 Cor. 5. 19.
for God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself; the Angels are
employed to carry tidings of a Savior, but the Sav^our himself was God Luke 2.
11.
: our attendance therefore upon holy things, is necessary, non solum
necessitate praecepti, sed etiam medii, not only in regard of Gods inju^ction,
Order and Command; but also of our indigency. If God were pleased now to speak
to us from Heaven, as he did unto the Jews, yet we could not hear, his stillest
Rhetoric would be too loud for us, as they profess that had experience of it
Deuteronomy. 5. 27, 28.
: whereupon, God promised to raise them up a Prophet like to Moses Deuteronomy. 18.
15, 16, 7.
, which was made good to them in Jesus Christ, a^ a very good Interpreter
expounds it Act. 3. 22, ^3.
, and Christ has ordered men unto this work, until he come again, Joh 20. 21,
22, 23.
as my Father sent me, so I send you; gives some Apostles, and some Prophets,
and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the
Saints, the work of the Ministry, and the edification of the body of Christ,
till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the son of
God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13.
; and this is the second step, that leads unto the Doctrine we design, and
purpose to propose.

3. That the accutest, ablest, and most accomplished, and improved man, is much
below this work, I have seen (says David) an end of all perfection, but thy
Commandment is exceeding broad Psalm. 119. 96.
. All other Arts may be comprised and brought within some bounds; but Divinity
is (like the Author of it) infinite. Hypocrates and Galen may be read and
learned, Justinian bound up in a volume; but the Bible can never be fully
understood: what he said of another, is only true of this, ars longa, vita
brevis, periculum anceps, occasio praeceps, etc. No man did ever see so much,
but more was unseen to him; and here it was truly verified, that the greatest
part of that we know, is the least of that we know not: let us instance but in
one epitome, or comprehensive short compendium, and body of Divinity, 1 Timothy 3.
16.
God was manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels,
preached to the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and received up into glory.
The Apostle had given Timothy in that Chapter, a charge to try such, as
intended ministerial employments, and he gives this reason for it, that
Divinity was a very large, profound, mysterious, and abstruse abyss of matter,
whereof in those words he gives an instance; and therefore we have seen the
greatest Lamps for to have needed snuffers. Moses, a man made up of
excellencies, Sir Walter Rawley says, he was the best Commander, and leader of
an Army, that ever was, yet that was not much taken notice of, yet for his
unadvised speaking, was shut out of the Land of Canan Psalm. 106. 32.
. Paul was a chosen Vessel Act. 9. 15
, yet was in Corinth, in weakness and in fear, and in much trembling 1 Cor. 2.
3.
: therefore asks, who is sufficient for these things 2 Cor. 2. 16.
? some men's acumens are not sharp enough to enter and enucleate these difficult
abstruse mysterious labyrinths. The Apostles in their times, had only that to
argue and evince, that Jesus Christ was the Messiah, and great Redeemer and
Savior of the world, and to evince it, had all the Creatures at command, were
able to control, and contradict the Laws of nature, give Rules and limits to
the stoutest powers of the world: Mark 16. 17, 18.
these signs shall follow them that believe in my name, they shall cast out
Devils, they shall speak with new tongues, they shall take up Serpents; and if
they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on
the sick, and they shall recover: we have no such powerful, omnipotent,
convincing Arguments, what we say, must be argued from meaner topics, and
though its truly said, that posterior Dies, est prioris discipulus, that day
unto day utters speech, and night unto night shows knowledge Psalm. 19. 2.
; that the longer we live, the wiser and more knowing we may and ought to be;
yet withal, considering the exactness and ambition of every age, that thinks
it needful to out-doe what ever went before, we are as much to seek as those
that went before us: the Scripture-times, made but a very little progress in
dilating and expatiating of the truths proposed in the word of God; and the
next three ages after, were wholly entertained and exercised in bearing witness
to the truths propounded to us in the first. The fourth was a laborious and
learned age, wherein those great lights shone unto the world, Ambrose, Austin,
Chrysostom, Jerome, the Gregory's, and Athanasius; but were employed and taken
up for the most part, in encountering, and repelling of the Arrian, Nestorian,
Eutichian and Pelagian Heresies, their worth and pi^h so buried in voluminous
and vast replies unto those enemies, that the succeeding ages from that unto
the eleventh, were wholly drowned in monastic contemplations and devotions: in
the eleventh, the Schoolmen rose, and put the Fathers sense and sayings into a
method, and body of divinity; but that Text of Lumbards, who began, and was
acknowledged their Schoolmaster, was by his Scholars that succeeded, so
dilated, beaten thin, and wire-drawn, that distinctionum minutiis senteniarum
frangebant pondera, by the subtilty and smallness of the thread they wrought
with, they buried the beauty of the work, as one observes.

And though in these late Gospel glorious times, Divinity is much recovered,
and restored unto its force and purity, proportioned un^o the practices and
lives of men, made vulgar and familiar; yet withal its stretched by the
eloquence and strains of Rhetoric, in popular and common auditories, unto such
exactness, height and bravery, that it is not easy for to reach it, nor safe
to fall short of it, so that if men be not helped by education, art, and
industry, they shall be sure to meet with scorn, contempt, and contumely; if by
their care and labor, they make their Sermons strong, and well wrought, they
are accounted Orators, and over-doers; if tune their Instruments, unto the
plain song of their Auditors, that every body may conceive and carry all away,
they are accounted vulgar, and contemptible, and every Cobbler, Tailor, Tinker,
thinks he can do as much and as well. So as it was wont to be in Cambridge, if
a boy had been at Gog-Magog-hills, he was esteemed a Rachel, if he had not, a
fresh-man.

Yet all this art and excellency is not sufficient, without a supernatural and
efficacious influence of the holy Ghost, upon the powers and parts of men; 1
Cor. 2. 14.
for the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they
are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. Now who can come by all these excellencies and
accomplishments? have wit, and art, and elocution, and acumen enough for these
things? yet those will only speak him an able Orator, a Tully, or Tertullus,
make him facundus sed malo publico; for if unto all these gifts he have not
grace, he is become as sounding brass, and as a tinkling Cymball, as the
Apostle speaks 1 Cor. 13. 1.
: there is a wisdom which the holy Ghost teaches, a tincture and relish that
is put upon it, by the Spirit of God, that makes it penetrate and prick, as
Peter's Sermon, when the holy Ghost was visible upon him Act. 2. 37.
. Set all together, and it will appear, that the most able, eloquent, improved
man, is much below the work and business of a Gospel-Minister, which was the
third step or stayr in this enquiry; but we proceed unto a fourth.

4. That at every gate, avenue, entrance of the Temple or house of God, there
be established a solid, rigid, acurate, exact enquiry, scrutiny, and
examination of such as do attempt to go in, and attend these holy things. The
Apostle has restrained women, and enacted a kind of Salick Law, that this
Scepter and the dist^ff should not be coupled, 1 Timothy 2. 11.
I suffer not a woman to teach; but its not enough to be a man, for they mustal
so be so qualified as God would have them, not only men, but workmen; and not
workmen only, but workmen that need not be ashamed 2 Timothy 2. 15.
. Hence it will follow, that there must be Porters at the doors, to whom the
keys must be committed, as they were unto Peter; for when Christ had told him,
that he would build his Church upon that Rock, and the gates of hell should not
prevail against it, he adds, and I will give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven Mat. 16. 18, 19.
; for should the doors stand open, there might get in so many enemies, that
would be able to prevail against it. When the Thieves in China had resolved to
besiege Peking the Metropolis, or royal City, their Captain sent before hand, a
great number of his Army, and gave them money to buy Commodities, and so pretend
occasions to continue as sojourners and strangers; and when he had begirt, and
did assault it, to make insurrections and disturbances within it, whereby he
mastered it, with much more case then otherwise he should have done: this has
been often acted in the Church, Gal. 2. 4, 5.
because of false Brethren unawares brought in, who came in privily to spy out
our liberty, that they might bring us into bondage. To prevent these, narrow
Guards are to beplaced on all the entrances, that such may be kept out; nam
durius ejicitur quam non admittitur hospes, its easier to keep them, then
thrust them out. All men are very fearful of Witches, and very careful to keep
them from their habitations, and places of abode, because of the mischief which
they are able for to do: false Teachers, in the Apostles judgment, are no
better; Gal. ^. 1.
O foolish Galathians, who has bewitched you? these venefici, or Witches, were
wont to have their venom or hurting power in their eyes, as in the Poet, nescio
quis teneros oculos mihi fascinat agnos; but now it is fallen down into their
tongues, and its all one to say, your Child is bewitched, and to say, he is
under an evil tongue; and therefore we should be very careful to keep such out;
for he that enters ill, will ha^dly act well, qui intravit ut vulpes, regnabit
ut leo, as it was said of Hildebrand; when the Apostle had suggested to them,
that Wolves would enter, he bids them watch Act. 20. 31
, and the reason is given by our Savior Mat. 7. 15.
, because they come in the habits and garbs of sheep; till they are in, they do
not, nor will show their teeth.

There was never any body or society of men, that gave immunities and
liberties, but had some kind of trial and examination at their admission.
Plato writes on his Academy, (...), no man might enter, that was not grounded
in Geometry, that had not Euclides Elements ad unguem; others had on their
Temples, procul hinc procul este prophani, none might approach, that were
profane; but none have so much need as Christians, for there the cunning and
slight of men is greater by the deceit of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby
they lie in wait for to deceive Ephesians. 4. 14.
, and the danger more pernicious and irrecoverable; for its the subversion of
the soul Act. 15. 24.
, and what shall he get that loses that, though he win all the world beside,
or how shall he repair that loss Mat. 16. 26
? The Temple doors had therefore need to be well guarded, and the Pulpit doors
have written on them, (...), let no unworthy person enter. Vzziah was a King,
yet when he ventured, he had his fault written by Gods own finger in his fore
head 2 Chr^n. 26. 19, 20.
. The Shepherd always enters by the door, and stays until the Porter open
to him, and the sheep will hear his voice, and follow him, a stranger they will
not hear, for they know not the voice of a stranger Joh. 10. 3, 4, 5.
. God sets a Centry upon the Tree of life Genesis 3. 24.
, yet here is life and death; for death and life are in the power of the tongue
Prove. 18. 21.
: behold (says Moses,) I have set before you life and death, blessing and
cursing Deuteronomy. 32. 19.
, we should be careful therefore of these avenues.

5. Yet this exact and rigid scrutiny, must be no more exact and rigid, then
the Scripture makes it; it becoms not Servants to shut those doors their
Masters have set open. If he be willing to keep open house, we should not envy
and repine thereat, as Joshua, when we heard that Eldad and Medad prophesied,
but should wish with Moses, that all the Lords people were Prophets, and that
the Lord would pour out his Spirit on them Numb. 11. 28, 29.
: were it in our power, not only to make this way broader, and this door wider,
but even the way to Heaven also, we should be cruel if we did it not; you are
not (says Poul) straightened in us 2 Cor. 6. 12
, nor should not be by us: we are therefore willing in this, as in all things
else* to stand to the judgment and determination of the Sc^iptures, sit liber
Judex, what they say, we are ready to subscribe: yet we observe them to be very
sparing in giving liberty, and allowing any great or boundless latitude, unto
Gods dearest and most faithful servants. Moses was faithful in all the house of
God Numb. 12. 7. Heb. 3. 1.
, yet had not latitude or scope allowed him in these transactions, but patterns
given him, and others issued, for every thing he did about the Tabernacle,
Exodus 25. ^^.
according to all that I show thee after the pattern of the Tabernacle, and the
pattern of all the Instruments thereof; and this pattern, he is severely
charged to observe and imitate, Exodus 25. 40.
and look that thou make them after the pattern that was showed thee in the
Mount; it was much, God would not trust him, to make boards and Curtains, or
hooks and taches, which were plain things, yea would not venture any thing on
his imagination and discretion, but gives him patterns: so David, a man after
Gods mind and heart, exceeding prudent in matters 1 Samuel 16. 18.
, yet is not trusted in the parts and structure of the Temple, though they had
the Tabernacle to be their guide 1 Chronicles. 28. 11, 12, 13.
; and though his son Solomon was an acurate and able Architect, yet David would
not trust him with this Church-work, but gives him patterns for every thing he
had to do, and for the Officers; and when Ezekiah does endeavor to restore the
Temples Officers, yet he takes no liberty, but does all; according to the
Commandment of David, and of Gad the Kings seer, and of Nathan the Prophet 2 Chronicles. 29. 25.
. Its much debated, and not fully yet agreed on, what kind of Officer Timothy
was, whether an Evangelist only, (for that we are sure of) 2 Timothy 4. 5
, or whether besides that, he were not a Bishop; but it is out of doubt, that
he was a confiding person, one of a thousand, for his piety, and care in
spiritual and Ecclesiastical affairs; Phil. 2. 20, 21, 22.
for I have no man like minded, that will naturally care for your affairs; for
all seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's; but ye know the
proof of him, that as a son with the Father, he has served with me in the
Gospel: yet when Timothy was left at Ephesus, to give admission to these
attendants about holy things, he is not trusted very much, but has orders and
directions sent him, whom to admit, and is severely charged, not to be partial
in it 1 Timothy 5* 21.
. Titus was also a very trusty man, and had the Ecclesiastical keys of an
hundred Cities hanging at his girdle Tit. 1. 5.
, yet is not left to any prudence or discretion of his own, in this employment,
but has Rules and Orders given him in the following verses of that Chapter.
But be it what it will be, the Scripture must be our Judge, and we are willing
to be ordered, and judged by it; what liberty that gives, we cannot, we will
not straiten and confine, what that restrains, we cannot widen and enlarge.

6. The Scripture does not handle any point of Doctrine, by way of common place
or treatise, using a methodical and regular way of opening and explaining of
it; but touches upon things occasionally, as it relates to the mainscope, and
purpose of the thing intended, leaving us for to pick and fish the truth out as
we can; are called in the Apostle, and by him, oracles Romans 3. 2.
; and oracles we know, were wont to be full of sense, scant of sayings. Kings
use short speeches, as having more of majesty and vigor in them, as he said
well, imperatoria usus est brevitate; when God was pleased himself in person to
speak to men, he spoke but ten words, as they are expressly called by Moses,
that was witness to it Deuteronomy. 10. 4
; what one says of Religion in the general, is much more true of Scripture,
that it is, medicina sanabilium ingeniorum, a plaster for wits that are not
utterly incurable. We must fish out the meaning at our peril. God would not
have us sluggish and unactive, as the Poet says of Husbandry, that it was left
on purpose in the dark, to exercise and sharpen the wits of men, curis acuens
mortalia corda, Nec torpere gravi passus sua regna veterno. We must therefore
look narrowly and wisely into the Scriptures, to see what we can find
concerning this enquiry and examen; for the truth lies often in the dark, and
in a little room, as grains of gold and silver in the sands and oar; and are
allowed to weigh Gods actings in the Mosaical administrations, to compare and
measure his determinations and decisions in the like case, and to gather
grounds and Rules from any Text, that does but hint it, or hold it out
obscurely to us. He that shall read the sixth verse of the nineteenth Psalm,
his going out is from the end of the Heaven, and his Circuit unto the ends of
it, and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof, would hardly think, the
preaching of the Gospel unto the Gentiles, were there expressly promised, and
yet the Apostle does assure us of it Romans 10. 18.
: so he that should read that Law of Moses, Deuteronomy. 25. 4.
thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn, would
hardly think, that Ministers maintenance were there established, and yet a good
Interpreter assures it 1 Cor 9. 9 1 Timothy 5. 18.
. There are very many weighty points, upon which the eternal good and evil of
men, does much depend, that are but sparingly set down in Scripture, as the
Trinity of persons in the Godhead, the unity of two natures in one person: in
the second person, the subsistence of the soul, without the body, until the
Resurrection; the union of the person of Christ, with the Elements employed in
both the Sacraments; yet all these undoubtedly determined and expressed in the
Scriptures: we must not think therefore to find these pearls and precious
stones above ground; but we must cry after knowledge, and lift up our voice for
understanding: we must search for her, as for silver, and seek for her, as for
hidden treasure: then we shall understand the fear of the Lord, and find the
knowledge of God Prove. 2: 3, 4, 5.
.

7. The best way for to find out what the Scriptures have determined in
Ecclesiastical affairs, is to observe the practice of the universal or
Catholic Church of Christ, in all successions and ages, from that time unto
this; for no doubt the Apostles made known their minds to those that lived with
them, would not enjoyne what they themselves had never practiced; and we are
sure, that Timothy did know what was Paul's meaning in this particular, as he
says expressly, 2 Timothy 3. 10, 11.
thou have fully known my Doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, long
suffering, charity, patience; and he enjoynes him to deliver that to others,
that should transfuse and pro^agate the same unto posterity 2 Timothy 2. 2.
: we should therefore in matters Ecclesiastical, be guided and directed very
much, by the annals and actions of the Church, and those believers that
succeeded presently in the Apostles rooms, and bequeathed their practice unto
succeeding Generations: if doubt were made, how English Earls and Barons were
created, what Ceremonies were to attend and usher in their dignity and state,
Were not the Records of the Tower, and the practice of the Nation, good
directions? so if we would know what kind of scrutiny the Scripture does
determine, for admitting Ministers, the practice of succeeding ages, and
Records of antiquity must be consulted.

8. The only way that the Scripture intimates unto us, for admitting Ministers
to that honor, and execution of that Office, and attendance upon holy things,
is ordination. We say intimates; for we must not look to find in the
Scripture, a treatise about this subject, that shall describe it, and
distribute it into the several parts and branches of it, but only hints and
intimations, Rules and directions, patterns and presidents, that are touched on
by the by, which by the care and industry of men, may be collected and
digested, and so proposed to impartial understandings to be considered and
determined, as God shall guide and bless them in the search.

CHAP. III. Showing what we do not mean by Ordination:
THose that have many eyes upon them, had need to have their own about them;
when we know our actions will be weighed by others, we may do well our selves
to weigh them; when the Player is at home, or in the Tyring-house, he may be
negligent and careless if he will; but when he is upon the stage, he must
consider what he does. When David was a Shepherd, he might play what he would
upon his oaten Pipe; but when he was anointed King, and had many eyes upon
him, he prays God to lead him in the right way, because of his observers; for
so the word is rendered by Junius and Tremelius Psalm. 5. 8.
; for then he knew he had a vigilant and waking enemy, 1 Samuel 18. 9.
that from that time forward eyed him. Our Savior Christ came stealing into
the world, as if he were not willing it should be known; for his Mother comes
to Bethelem against her will, and there is brought to bed, in a very mean
fashion: yet because some strangers made enquiry for a Jewish King, Herod is
troubled, and all Jerusalem with him Mat. 2. 3.
; indeed his Title was but crazy, and he might well be jealous, Imbecilla se
laedi putant si tanguantur: but Solomon had as good a Title to the Crown he
wore, as God and man were able to convey unto him, and was in pe^ceable and
full possession; yet when his elder Brother Adonijah moves for an alliance,
that might perhaps in time degenerate into an insurrection, he is immediately
secured by a slaughter-man 1 King. 2. 24.
; that therefore we may take off these unnecessary jealousies and
misconstructions, we have thought it best to say in the beginning, what we mean
not by Ordination. As he that came unto the muster, with a great saddle on his
back, and the other furniture about him, thought good to tell the Muster-master
first of all, that he was not an Horse: we would not have our Readers jealous,
and therefore have resolved to tell them.

1. That by Ordination, we mean no politic or civil power. When we opened the
meaning of the terms, and did state the question, we told you, that by Church,
we did not mean a civil or political Assembly, but confined our selves to
Ecclesiastical and spiritual affairs: so now by Ordination, we do not mean any
civil or political practice, but only Ecclesiastical; an Office we confess it
is, as it is called Romans 12. 7 Romans 11. 13.
, but hardly worth the having: yea it is an honor, as the Apostle says, Heb.
5. 4.
no man takes unto himself this honor; but exceeding low and under-valued,
that no man is ambitious of it: yea it is, and may be called a power, 2 Cor.
10. 8.
according to the power which God has given me; but so feeble and decrepid,
that it is not able to resist the meanest Lanspresado in the Army. When Laws
were called Statutes and Acts of Parliament, this Ordination was not, nor in
reason could not be expected; but since they have been called Ordinances, they
have affinity with Ordination. When Valens the Emperor had forsook his godly
Fathers way, and was become a Patron of the Arrians, and a persecutor of the
Orthodox and godly Ministers, he grew extremely jealous, and suspected all that
had capacities of undermining and supplanting him, and because he had forsaken
God, as Saul did, he durst not trust him, nor enquire of him, but goes unto a
Conjurer, for to enquire who should succeed him in the Empire; the Devil is in
Chains of darkness, as the Apostle speaks 2 Pet. 2. 4.
, and cannot clearly see before him, but tells him, that his name began with
these four letters, D, E, O, D, when this was once suggested to him, he makes
enquiry into all, whose names began thus. We would not willingly be thus
enquired after, and therefore tell you plainly, we have no worldly aims, nor
Ordinances in our thoughts, leave that to the great ones of the world, as
Christ has said, Mat. 20. 25, 26.
the Princes of the Gentiles exercise Dominion over them, and they that are
great exercise authority upon them; but it shall not be so among you; we leave
that for them to scramble for, and are content to be without the Titles, that
we may also be without the troubles.

We confess, this Ordination was in former times so sacred, and so venerable,
that to be in Orders, and to be a Minister, were all one; but now the meanest
Governor in any Garrison, does give out orders with more solemnity, then the
most magnificent and glorious Prelate formerly was wont to do: therefore we
mean no such political or civil jurisdiction by our Ordination.

2. We do not mean compiling and making Canons, and Ecclesiastical binding
Edicts and decrees, though there is no question, but such a power is in the
Church, to make Laws, for the regulating and well ordering of their own body 1
Cor 5. 12, 13.
: as all, even the smallest and meanest bodies and societies have always had,
such as the Inns of Court and Chancery with us now are, as the Apostle plainly
shows 1 Timothy 3, 4, 5.
: which regulating of the Assemblies and Societies of Christians, gave the
occasion of Ordination in the beginning Act. 6. 1, 2, 3.
; and when afterward there grew debates and differences about the business of
Circumcision, the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem do make definitive and
binding Ordinances, to guide the practice of the Churches, as appears Act. 15.
28, 29.
, which resolutions of that Synod and Assembly at Jerusalem, the Mother Church,
are called the decrees that were ordained of the Apostles and Elders at
Jerusalem Act. 16 4.
; and this was the practice of all succeeding Churches, as appears by those
Canons that are called the Apostles, and others made by the Synods and
Assemblies that succeeded.

But Ordination in the nature of it, implies no such thing, is terminated in
persons, not in Rulers and precepts; tends to the conservation of the species,
or kind of Officers in the Church, whereby one Minister communicates and
deriveth to another, the power and Authority wherewith himself was vested and
endowed, as Paul requires Timothy to propagate the ttuths by him delivered, to
such as should transmit them unto others, 2 Timothy 1. 2
and the things which thou have heard of me before many witnesses, the same
communicate thou to faithful men, who may be able to teach others alsr: so
Ordination does communicate the power to other persons, that the holy seed may
be preserved, and propagated down along, from one unto another, as God has
promised by the Prophet, Esa. 59. 21.
As for me, this is my Covenant with them, says the Lord, my Spirit that is
upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of
thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds
seed, says the Lord, from henceforth, and for ever.

3. We do not say it is a Sacrament, and its marvail that we do not,
considering that for many hundred years, it has been so accounted and called
in the Church of Christ; for though the first undoubted evident record we have
for that denomination, be Peter Lumbard, about six hundred years ago, yet
surely he was not the Godfather that first bestowed that appellation on it; for
we find him inventing nothing new, unless it be distinctions and
distributions: matter we seldom or never find him minting, but only method,
for the ordering and understanding of what he found already coined, and brought
forth into the world: but if we should suppose him first, yet last we are sure
he was not, but has been followed since by all the Writers in the Church of
Rome; and not by them only, but by many Orthodox and great Divines, both
Calvinists and Lutherans; for though they do acknowledge, that if a Sacrament
be taken properly and strictly, for such an instituted Ordinance of Jesus
Christ, which fitly, by some visible and outward El^ment, represents inward
grace, and exhibiteth the same unto the soul of every worthy and true receiver,
It cannot be a Sacrament; yet if it be taken largely, and improperly and
largely, for an instituted and holy rite, or Ceremony, whereby external
Ecclesiastical power and Authority is derived and communicated from one unto
another, it may be called a Sacrament; yet these good men had never seen it
trampled and trodden on, as we have done; they never heard it called
Antichristian, nor renounced and laid aside, by those that had been formerly
ordained themselves, yet were not willing it should be stripped of any title,
that might adorn and beautify the thing; but we that have lived to see it
vilified and undervalued, should be inflamed and encouraged to set it up, and
magnify it, as the witnesses Rev. 11. 11, 12.
in the Revelation, because they were seen dead, are showed after they were
alive. When Mattathias the Priest of Modin, saw them do sacrifice unto the
Idols before his face, and vilify the holy things of God, he could not bear
it, but rose up and revenged those affronts, and by himself and sons restored
Gods true Temple-worship, that was utterly decayed; and so that zealous holy
Prophet David, Psalm. 119. 126, 127, 128.
It is time for thee Lord, to work, for they have made void thy Law, therefore
I love thy Commandments above gold, yea above fine gold, therefore I esteem
all thy precepts concerning all things to be right, and I hate every false way.

It has been usual for those that undertake the patronage and protection of
any point, to value and advance it above the literal and proper worth: when the
Apostle found the sacramental Elements so undervalued by the Corinthians 1 Cor.
11. 20, 21.
, he gives them what did properly and really belong unto them v. 23, 24, 25.
; but those good men that lived afterward, did so advance and dignifie those
Elements, that transubstantiation, and the carnal and corporal presence of our
Savior in the Sacrament, was for many hundred years undoubtedly believed; and
the like we find of many other points, that have been controverted; but we are
not ambitious of any such advancement, we are content that Ordination be
esteemed an instituted Ordinance of Jesus Christ, the door of the sheepfold,
(as our Savior speaks) whereby the Shepherd enters Joh. 10. 1, 2.
, the only way to propagate the ministerial power, and having gotten that shall
be content to wave all garnishes and dresses that set it out; for we observe,
that the more simple and single any Jewel is, the more illustrious; to clutter
a deal of gold about a Diamond, does but obscure it: its true of this, that is
said of virtue in the general, divitiis animosasuis, shines by the luster of
its own worth, and needs not borrow Clothes to go abroad in: therefore we do
not say its a Sacrament, but we say it is a sacred thing. When Hercules came
into a Temple, he found the Image or Statue of Adonis in it, but pulled it down
with this expression, certe nil sacri^es; we would not labor to erect and set
it up in the Temple and Church of God, but that we know, and do believe it is
aliquid sacris; but omnia sacra, non sunt sacramenta. We shall not strive to
lift it up above it self, and put a value on it that is not native and
essential. The apocryphal Books are many of them very good, and may be very
well commended to be read and used; but because the Papists would have thrust
them into the Canon, they have been slighted and despised more then they
needed; as Jacobs eldest son had diverse privileges, but because he went up to
his Fathers couch, his excellency was abated Genesis 19. 3, 4.
.

4. We do not say, it does confer and contribute internal, sanctifying and
saving grace, that one that was before a carnal, unconverted, unregenerate man,
is thereby made a spiritual, converted, and regenerated person: were it a
Sacrament, as properly and really as Baptism and the Lords Supper are, yet we
durst not ascribe so much unto it; for however great effects are by the
ancient, and some modern Writers ascribed to baptism, yet that was supposed to
be in non ponentibus obicem, in such as were not able to bar the door against
the power of it, which here is not to be supposed; for these must be adulti, to
be sure, grown men, as the Apostle speaks 1 Timothy 3. 6
, not a novice, and therefore able to oppose the work of God upon them; but yet
it may be said, for to confer grace upon such as come provided and prepared for
it; for the Office and Ministry it does confer, is numbered among those graces,
that are given by God unto the Church Romans 12. 6, 7, 8.
; and by the Apostle in another place is expressly called grace, Romans 1. 5.
by whom we have received grace and Apostleship, where the Office of an Apostle
is called grace, that is, a faculty and power to attend and act in holy things,
which others have not; and though Ordination do not confer and contribute a
fitness for the service, but prerequire it, and suppose it, for an internal
call must qualify the person to be ordained, he must believe, and be
persuaded, that he has inward grace, and fitness for the work, and is willing
and desirous to be employed and used in it: yet we know not what God may do in
such a case, whether the fasting, praying, laying on of hands, that must be
used in Ordination, may not bring down a shower, or at least a sprinkling and
dew of grace upon the souls of them that are there ready to be ordained: for if
we do believe, that the putting up of bills in an ordinary Congregation to the
Minister, may bring a blessing down upon the parties that are prayed for; why
should we not think, that when many Ministers and people meet on purpose, to
beg a blessing upon persons set apart for the work of God, that God will hear
and answer, and do something more then otherwise had been? If people did not
think God might be moved, they would not put up bills for people that were
undertaking a voyage by Sea or Land, that were like to be very dangerous. And
besides these general grounds, that justly move us to desire the prayers of
believers, we have special and particular assurance, that laying on of hands in
Ordination, does give something that may be called grace, or a gift in some
particular and special manner 2 Timothy 1. 6, 7.
; and it was undoubtedly believed for many ages in the Church, that Ordination
did imprint a Character on him that was ordained, that never could be blotted
out; which if true, could not be any thing else, but internal saving grace; for
if any private godly man may be assured, that if he ask, he shall receive, if
he seek, he shall find, if he knock, it shall be opened unto him, and that our
Savior gives an universal and common reason for it, namely, that every one
that asks receives, and he that seeks finds, and to him that knocks,
it shall be opened Mat. 7. 7, 8.
, much more, when diverse Ministers and other godly persons do assemble, and
meet on purpose, to fast and pray for such persons, that are now lanching out
into the Ocean, and undertaking a dangerous and tedious voyage, for to turn men
from darkness unto light, from the power of Satan unto God, that they may
receive the forgiveness of their sins, and inheritance among them that are
sanctified by faith in Christ, as he speaks Act. 26. 18
; for Ordination is a very great work, and must be carried on, multorum
manibus, both extraordinary and ordinary Officers employed in it, 1 Timothy 4. 14.
neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by Prophecy, with
the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery; for when any Company agree to ask
some special favor of God, for the glory of his name, and the service of his
Church, they are more likely to attain it, as Christ expressly says, Mat. 18.
19, 0.
that if two of you shall agree on earth, as touching any thing that they shall
ask, it shall be done for them, of my Father which is in Heaven; for where two
or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them; so
that there is all the reason in the world, to wait for and expect a blessing
upon such a meeting. All know, that the high Priests Office, in the times of
Christ, was very much degenerated and decayed; for besides that, it was often
bought and sold, as in the story of the Maccabees it does appear, and in
Josephus, it was now worse then ever; for whereas the High Priest was but one,
nor ought not for to be, as being in a special manner a type of Christ, who is
therefore called the High Priest of our profession Heb. 3. 1.
, there was at this time two, as appears Luke 3. 2.
, and they not equal in Commission, and dividing it between them, but taking it
by turns, for Caiaphas was high Priest that year, says the Apostle, to note
the irregularity and corruption that was crept into it John 11. 49.
, whereas the high Priest was to be so until he died, yet notwithstanding,
there was something still rem^ining in the Office, for so says the Apostle,
Joh. 11. 51
and this spoke he not of himself, but being high Priest that year, he
prophesied, that Jesus should die for that Nation: if therefore that degenerate
decayed office, had so much strength and vigor yet remaining in it, as to make
the Master, and present owner, to be a Prophet, how much more may we believe
and hope, that Ordination, being an Ordinance of God, remaining yet in purity
and vigor, contributeth something that is worth the having? We know our
Savior, when he breathed on them, gave the holy Ghost, and therewith power to
forgive sins Joh. 20. 22, 23.
, yet we decline these great collations and contributions, and content our
selves with certain hope, and expectation of an office power, which is
undoubtedly conferred on those that come prepared and fitted for it, though we
have no reason to straiten Gods blessed hand, but to open our mouths wide for
what soever God shall be pleased to bestow, and have a promise that we shall be
filled Psalm. 81. 10.
. Away therefore with all those foul ungrounded and unworthy calumnies, that
have been cast upon this holy Ordinance of Jesus Christ, as if we thought or
said, that whatever one was, or had been before, yet the hands of Presbyters
had power to absolve him from all irregularities, and to confer upon him saving
and renewing grace; to make the meanest mechanic person in a Country, as good
a Minister as the gravest and most learned Doctor; that the hands of Clergymen
were grown of late so fat and full, that they were able to besmeer an ignorant
unskilful novice, with ability to preach the word, and administer the holy
Sacraments, as well as any body; and that a Barber or Butler that had but lived
in a Bishops house, would serve to make as good a Minister, as need be; whereas
you see we do require a fitness in the person, and hold it to be our duty,
enjoined strictly to us, to lay hands suddenly on no man, neither to be
partakers of other men's sins 1 Timothy 5. 22.
; and if notwithstanding all our examinations and inspections, unworthy persons
do creep in, we do believe our hands do not, nor cannot possibly absolve them,
and make them whole. Neither need men fear the fatness and fullness of them; for
whatsoever they have been in former times, yet of late they have been washed
very clean, and wiped with so coarse a towel, that there is little now left,
but skin and bones upon them; what spiritual good we can, we are and shall be
willing to bestow; but for corporal and carnal, we may say as John and Peter
do Act. 3. 6.
, Silver and Gold we have none, but what we have we give.

5 We say, it is not the invitation or election of the people, we would be very
unwilling to be mistaken or misinterpreted in this; for we acknowledge people
are the purchase and possession of the Lord Jesus, for the bodies of those
beasts, whose blood is brought into the Sanctuary by the high Priest for sin,
are burnt without the Camp, wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the
people with his own blood, suffered without the gate Heb. 13. 11, 12.
: the whole aim and business of the Ministry is for the people Ephesians. 4. 12.
, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the
edification of the body of Christ, yea whatsoever incident or accidental
influence or assistance does befall us, in the progress and persuance of our
ministerial Calling, it is still for the peoples good, as the Apostle plainly
says, 2 Cor. 1. 6.
whether we be afflicted, it is for your consolation and salvation, which is
effectual in the enduring of the same sufferings, which we also suffer, or
whether we be comforted, it is for your consolation and salvation: so that we
should be injurious to the Church of Christ, which is his body Ephesians. 1. 23.
, If we should derogate from them, or deprive them of, or scant them in, any
part or portion of that power, which Christ their head and Husband, has
bequeathed to them, or estated on them: for as its said, that the three
favorites of common Law, are life, liberty, and power; so in the Canon, or
spiritual Law of Christ, his Churches Dower, is and ought to be as great a
favorite. But we must not give her more then does become her: nothing that may
be a prejudice or disparagement unto her Husband. Women in France are honored
and valued, as is well known, yet do not sway the Scepter: there be many good
Women, that are great supporters of their Husbands Honor and Estate, and are
therefore said to build up their house Prove. 14. 1.
, yet does it not become them to wear their Husbands breeches. We shall be
ready to afford unto the people, what is their due, what is their Ornament and
honor; but may not put upon them what belongs to the man, for that is still
forbidden, as well as formerly it was: Deuteronomy. 22. 5.
the woman shall not wear that which appertains to the man. We must therefore
take heed we give not too much, lest it disparage and dishonor her. But
because this is a tender point, and our Readers most of them must be the
people, We shall defer the full debate and clearing of it, unto another
Chapter, and shall set down all we know to be the peoples right, in these
particulars.

CHAP. IV. Showing what power people ought to have in Ordination.
THat we may not be injurious to those, for whom we are, and to whose good our
labors and endeavors tend; for we may say as Paul does, 2 Cor. 1. 6.
whether we be afflicted, it is for your consolation and salvation, or whether
we be comforted, it is for your consolation and salvation; Whether we be well,
or whether we be ill, it is the people that are prejudiced, or profited
therein; it were therefore very improper for us, to depress the people, that we
might press them, to deny them what we purpose and resolve to give them; in
this design and vindication of our Ministry, our scope and purpose is, to save
the people from obtruders and invaders, to furnish them with able pastors, to
shut out such as would seduce them, and may truly say with the Apostle, 1 John
2. 26.
these things we have written to you, concerning those that seduce you. We
should not therefore be true unto our selves, if we should in any thing
entrench upon the peoples Interest, oppose their good, or interpose unto their
prejudice and damage. What God alowes them, the Lord forbid that we should
disallow, or any way diminish: we shall therefore set down our sense, in these
succeeding propositions and particulars, and be (as we presume) their Advoca^es
and Patrons, make out unto them, what the Scripture does in title them unto,
and bar them from presuming beyond their bounds, unto their own and others
ruin.

1. People are under manifold capacities; what ever was entailed upon them, and
they might challenge by creation, they lost and were deprived of in Adams fall,
for that good was all conditional, and a nomine poene annexed to the failing;
Genesis 2. 17.
for in the day that thou eatest theeof thou shall surely die. By which
transgression of the first man, all was forfeited, that God has offered in
that Covenant. And though its true, and we acknowledge that there was another
Covenant made, in which there was a restitution, yet that was limited
according to the will and wisdom of the maker; for Adam and his issue in the
second Covenant, did not treat as parties, but took such terms as the Lord was
pleased to allow them, who having forfeited, did yield unto discretion, and
were willing and glad to take such Articles, as an absolute offended Lord was
now in mercy pleased to afford. And they were not alike abundant, in respect
and favor unto all the Sons of Adam.

All had a freedom from that inevitable doom, of perishing and dying presently,
denounced to them in the Covenant, as we have showed before, and were
reprieved, and admitted unto an after-game, and Heaven promised unto the
winners, in terms obscure and dark at the first publishing Genesis 3. 15.
; but after expounded, and known to be a promise of eternal life, to such as
should believe on Jesus Christ, obscurely then expressed by the woman's seed;
Joh. 3. 16.
for God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have life everlasting. Now a
conditional Covenant, becomes exclusive to the non-performers of the condition,
and therefore until men do either actually believe on Jesus Christ, or become
the Children of believing Parents, whereby a Covenant or federall holiness is
gotten, as the Apostle shows 1 Cor. 7. 14
, they are excluded from any privilege restored in the second Covenant; and in
this case, were all the Nations but the Jews, before our Saviors coming in
the flesh, who in times past, suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways
Act. 14. 16
, and so at that time, they were without Christ, being aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenants of promise, having no
hope, and without God in the world Ephesians. 2. 12.
; and in this condition, it will easily be granted, they had no right, no more
then strangers have, to make the Constables and Third-burrows in Towns and
Parishes wherein they dwell not; but when they do repent and turn to God, and
are baptized, and admitted thereby members, they have the right belonging unto
Covenanters, and visible Saints, and members of the Church of Christ; and that
not only for themselves, but for their issue and posterity, according to the
Covenant made with Abraham, Genesis 17 7, 8.
to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee; and so baptized Infants
come to have a right, to whatsoever privilege they have capacity for to enjoy,
and use, and that is receptivity of what infusions and sprinklings of the grace
of God, he shall be pleased to bestow upon them Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26, 27.
; but this will not enable them, to choose their Minister, or act at all
therein, until they have the use of reason, and it does appear by their carriage
and behavior, that their reason is mastered by the grace of God, and they
taught to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live righteously, soberly,
and godly in this present world Tit. 2. 11, 12.
.

2. When men are grown up, and have reason to believe they are converted, they
may not only work out their own salvation (as the Apostle speaks) Phil. ^. 12.
; but also take to heart, the good and welfare of the Church, may mind the good
of all their Christian friends and Brethren, if I forget thee (O Jerusalem) let
my right hand forget her cunning, if I do not remember thee, let my tongue
cleave to the root of my mouth, if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy
Psalm. 137. 5, 6.
: and because they may quickly find some places ill provided for, they may be
sorry for them, and wish them better; if they see the harvest to be great, and
the Laborers to be few, they may pray to the Lord of the Harvest, that he
would send forth Laborers into his Harvest Mat. 9. 37, 38.
; and if they be acquainted with any such as be designed and intended by
inclination, education, purpose, disposition, or desire, for that great work of
ministerial administrations, they may take more especial notice of them, and
inquire into them, and by talking, questioning, discoursing with them, may
try, whether there be any work of grace upon their souls, whereof they may be
proper Judges; for savory speeches, are good signs of grace Ephesians. 4. 29.
, and there will quickly be a sympathy, and sense between them, as the Prophet,
Mal. 3. 16.
then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another, and the Lord
hearkened and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written before him, for
them that feared the Lord, and thought upon his name; and when they have
searched and seen into them, they may record their names (if they please) or
make such other observation of them, as may occasion them to speak of them, and
when any body does enquire of a good Minister, to recommend and offer them to
those that want such; for if we may and must mark those that cause divisions
and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine we have learned, to avoid them Romans 16.
17.
; yea, note them, and set them down, and have no company with them, as the
Apostle speaks 2 These. 3. 14.
: then may we note and mark them also, that are apt and likely to do good, that
we find inclined and disposed to so good a work; yea if we find them not so
well provided and inclined, we may encourage and persuade them to it; we may
read and study men, as well as books, ye are our Epistle written in our hearts,
known and read of all men 2 Cor. 3. 2.
, and may put forward any good desire, a duty expressly required of us, Heb. 10.
24
and let us consider one another, to provoke unto love, and to good works, and
so we may be serviceable to the Church of God.

3. Being thus provided and furnished with Intelligence, we may acquaint the
Officers, and such as are employed to make enquiry, with what we know and have
observed; for Ecclesiastical, as well as Civil Governors, must see and hear,
with the eyes and ears of other men, and must receive Certificates, and
informations from other men, and should despise none that speak innocently and
sincerely, how weak soever, aliquando est olitor opportuna loqutus, the stander
by may see more then the Gamester, a little Maid, that was carried captive out
of Israel, tells Naamans Wife of the Prophet in Samaria, that would cure her
Master of his Leprosy a King. 5. 2, 3.
; and we find the most able seers in the Church, make use of other men's
abilities, to find out fit materials for these holy Vessels: Act. 6. 3.
look ye out among you seven men of honest report, full of the holy Ghost, whom
we may appoint over this business; for they may sooner and better find, what
reputation men are of, then those that are the Officers, and must ordain them;
for a Minister must have a most unblemisht reputation, a good report of them
that are without, lest he fall into reproach, and the snare of the Devil 1 Timothy
3. 7.
. Although its true, that God may, and sometimes does take those up that are
not well reported of Act. 9. 13, 14, 15.
, because he can see through it, perceive a Saint under the shape and outside
of a persecuting sinner, yet we must not adventure; they must in this be like
unto a Demetrius 3 John 12.
, that had good report of all men, and of the truth it self. How great an
Instrument was David to the Church of God? yet the first ground of all his
greatness, flows from a good report he had abroad among the Courtiers, and
servants of Saul; when Saul enquired for a skilful Harper, one of his servants
tells him, behold I have seen a son of Jesse the Bethlemite, that is cunning in
playing, and a mighty valiant man, and a man of war, and prudent, in matters,
and a comely person, and the Lord is with him 1 Samuel, 16. 18.
, a report that none of his own Family would give the Prophet, when he came on
purpose to make enquiry v. 5, 6.
: so that good soldier sends unto Christ the Elders of the Jews, who give him
such a testimonial, as did encourage Christ to heal his servant Luke 7. 4, 5.
.

4. He may be present, and assist at Ordinations, for that is not done in a
corner, but praesente, and assistente plebe, in the presence, and by the
assistance of the people, in open Assemblies and Congregations of the Saints
and people of God, attended with fasting, praying, preaching, wherein the
people may concur; yea so far was this influence and concurrence of the people
weighed and considered, that Ordination was confined and limited to four
certain times, called therefore the ember weeks, and appointed times of fasting
and prayer, to crave a special blessing upon those that were then to be
ordained; which though they be not now observed, yet the solemn meetings and
Assemblies are, wherein the people may be and are a part, where they may fast
and pray, may lift up holy hands without wrath or doubting 1 Timothy ^. ^.
: may say Amen, to what they see and hear, if they approve of it, which is the
proper business of the private person, as the Apostle shows 1 Cor. 14. 16.
; if he have any just exception against any one that is to be ordained, he may,
in an humble modest way, declare and make it known, and ought for to be heard,
and his exceptions weighed: and this is somewhat, which God gives the people in
this great work of Ordination.

5. Having thus far acted, as a Member of the Catholic and universal Church of
Christ, he is yet enabled unto somewhat, as he is capable of being planted into
some society, or particular Congregation; for if his habitation be not fixed,
he has a liberty to plant himself, where he shall think there is an able
pastor; for doubtless, those that are at liberty, may use it 1 Cor. 7. 21
, as well for the good of their souls, as the conceniency of their outward man;
when Abraham comes again into the Land of Canaan, he fastens on a place that
had an Altar Genesis 13. 4.
; though men be bound to have a Minister, and will not grow and thrive in grace
without one, for they were given for the perfecting of the Saints, and the
edification of the body of Christ Ephesians. 4. 12.
; yet they may make their choice. Clothes are an addition, or perfection of our
bodies, and therefore we are willing to have a Workman make them, that neither
he nor we may be ashamed of it: how much more careful should we be, to choose
one for to make the Garments of our souls, that is a Workman that needs not
to be ashamed, as the Apostle speaks 2 Timothy 2. 15.
? as Doves and Pigeons choose the fairest and cleanest houses, to make their
nests in, and to adventure and breed their young ones in, ad candida tecta
columbae, and the Prophet sets out believers flocking to the chiefest or
Mother Church, by this similitude, Isa. 60. 8.
who are these that fly as a Cloud, and as the Doves to their windows? and in
this sense, there is no doubt, but a servant and saint of God may choose his
Pastor; Christ's sheep may choose their Shepherd, as Christ shows, Joh. 10. 4,
5. l
the sheep follow him, for they know his voice, and a stranger they will not
follow, but will flee from him, for they know not the voice of strangers: here
the Election of the people is sufficient, for it only does appropriate that to
me, that was before established in the Church.

6. If the Pastor of the place they live in die, or be removed to another
charge, the godly party in that Assembly and society, may look out for another,
under whom they may be willing to continue, and unto whom they may be willing
to submit, or they may compromit, and make their voices over to some one among
them, whom they think have better opportunities, and abilities, to choose one
for them, and may treat with him of such concernments, as does belong unto
accomodating his abode, and exercise of his abilities among them, may go or
send to hear him, may enquire of him, and if they do agree, may move their
Governors to settle him, and fix him with them, by such provisions as are then
and there used: as when Judas by transgression fell from his Apostleship, to go
to his own place, as the Apostle speaks Act. 1. 25.
: they show the necessity of having another in his room, to be a witness of his
Resurrection, and by concurrent and joint consent, pitch upon two, that were so
qualified, as an Apostle should be, to the best and utmost of their power, yet
withal, considering that they did not look into their hearts, nor could not,
and therefore after all their care might be deceived, for humanum est errare,
they appeal by lot to him that could not be deceived, and when God had appeared
in it, he was accounted an Apostle, as it is Act. 1. 26.
: here there appears a joint concurrence and assent of all that Company,
wherein there were some common Christians, that were not Officers, as may be
gathered Act. 1. ^4.
: and certain it is, plus vident oculi, two eyes see more then one; and the
peoples information upon experience and intelligence may be of use, and must
not be neglected where it may be had. But if they know of none, already entered
and ordained, they must repair unto their Officers, and crave their aid, in
furnishing their vacant place, either by removing and fixing one among them,
that is already an ordained Minister; or if they know of none such, they must
entreat them to look among the Candidates, and persons qualified and willing to
be employed, for such an one, and to ordain and send him to them, as God in his
providence, in that Vision does seem to shadow out unto us, Act. 16. 9.
There stood a man of Macedonia, and prayed him, saying, Come over into
Macedonia and help us: and so the Grecians, when they saw their Widows were
neglected, do murmr their requests and supplications to the Officers, to be
supplied Act. 6. 1.
; and if the people should herein be slack and careless, the Officers may look
to it, and make provision for them; for what else is it to take the oversight
of them, as the Apostle speaks 1 Pet. 5. 2.
, or be made overseers as the Elders of Ephesus are said to be Act. 20. 28.
? for so when Antioch was disturbed about the point of Circumcision, the
Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem, do not only determine and decide the doubt,
but send Judas and Sylas to confirm and settle them Acts 15. 32.
; as at their first Conversion they had done Barnabas Act. 11. 22 23, ^4.
.

7. If the Governors do choose one for them, that in their judgment may be
serviceable to them, and supply them, yet they are not presently for to impose
him on them, but they must send him to be made acquainted with them, and they
with him; where the people may consider of the loudness and cleerness of his
voice, of the unblamableness of his carriage where formerly he did converse, of
the grace of God in him, and the Work of Grace upon him, for the godly people
must be Judges, where they may be; and in point of voice and utterance,
Judicium est penes auditores, the ear tries words, even as the mouth tastes
meats Job 34. 3.
; there is a relish in a good man that will quickly find the savouriness of our
discourse, or teaching, for though the Officers be overseers, yet Lords they
must be not, the people are Gods heritage 1 Pet. 5. 3.
, and must be treated fai^ly, and as becomes such; its truly said, Non
disputamus de gustibus, it might be taken for a fresh-mans act, if two should
argue whether drink were sweet or sour, strong or small; those that sell
cheese do not declaim about the sharpness and keenness of their cheese, but
keep a piece cut by them for him that cheapneth to taste; for as the buyer
says, it is naught Prove. 20. ^4.
, so the seller, it is good; laudat venales quas vult obtrudere merces: a taste
or trial is the best decider of the doubt, and umpire in it, and he that is
spiritual judges all things 1 Cor. 2 15
.

8. Because all are not good and spiritual that would be thought so, nor all
good men's palates uninfected and undistempred, there should be in the Church a
power fixed to determine doubts that do or may arise; Superintendents are
retained in many places where the Bishops are removed; the Officers and
Overseers may over-see, and so may people; where should one look for an
impartial and unstained judgment if not in Paul and Barnabas? yet these good
men were not unbiassed, for Barnabas resolves to take John Mark, with them, and
Paul would not Acts 15. 37, 38, 39.
; where was the bias? Mark was Barnabas sisters son, as ye have it Col. 4. ^0.
, and therefore Barnabas would not part with him; our Savior Christ had need
be very merciful, or that expression be blotted out, Luke 14. 26
If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and
children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be
my Disciple, for we find few of those that have the power of preferring
Ministers, to be thus rude, ungrateful, and uncivil to their kindred and
relations. Its said indeed of Levi, in that terrible Crisis about the golden
Calf, Deuteronomy. 33*
Who said unto his father and his mother, I have not seen him, neither did he
acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own children; but we have not read it of
any other Tribe; Relations, and respects bear sway with good men many times,
look after able men, but enquire, whether he will let them have good
penyworths, whether they be able any way to go beyond him, or prey upon him;
therefore there should be some uninte^ested power to overruled and keep the
balance even, to prevent this partiality, and preferring of the body be^o^e
the soul. Paul had in his time experience of this self-seeking, Phil. 2. 20,
21, 2^.
I have no man like minded, who will naturally care for your affairs, for all
seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's; when therefore he had
le^t him in his turn at Ephesus, he gives him a most solemn charge not to
prefer one before another, to do nothing by partiality, to lay hands on no
man suddenly, neither be partaker of other men's sins ^ Tim. 5. 20, 21, 22.
: it is of much concernment with whom we live, of much more with whom we feed,
most, of whom we suck and are relieved and nourished.

Object. 1. Ministers are servants to the Saints and People of God, 2 Cor. 4. 5.
For we preach not our selves, but Jesus Christ the Lord, and our selves, your
servants for Jesus sake; it will be easily acknowle^ged, that Ministers are
Christ, 1 Cor. 4. 1.
let a man so account of us as of the Ministers of Christ, and that he may
therefore dispose of them, and give them to whom he will, for what may not I
(says he in the parable) do what I will with mine own Mat. ^0. 15
? and we find he has given them already to Gods people, for when he a^cended
up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts to men Ephesians 4. 8.
; for the opening of this, two things must be demonstrated, 1. What those gifts
were, 2. To whom he gave them; for the first of these, the gifts undoubtedly
were Ministers, for so he says, Ephesians. 4. 11
he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers, and its apparent that he gave them to the Saints and
People of God, for so it follows, v. 12.
for the perfecting of the Saints, the work of the Ministry, for the edifying
of the body of Christ, that is, for the use and service of Gods people, as the
Apostle does more plainly and properly express himself, 1 Cor. 3. 21 22.
let no man glory in men, for all things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollo,
or Cephas, for it was, and still is the manner of the Eastern Countries to give
Servants, as Laban gave unto his daughter Leah, Zilpha his maid for an hand
maid Genesis 29. 24
, and Pharaoh to testify the great respects he bore unto Abraham, gave him men
servants and maid servants Genesis 12. 16
. It is the top and ac^me of the Ministers preferment, that they are called
Angels, Mal. 2. 7.
for he is the Messenger or Angel of the Lord of Hosts; so our Savior, Rev.
1. 23.
the seven stars are the Angels of the seven Churches, and the seven
Candlesticks are the seven Churches, yet even these, are ministering Spirits,
sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation Heb. 1. 14.
.

Now all will grant, a man should choose his Servants, as Saul, when he saw any
strong man, or valiant man, he took him to hm 1 Samuel 14. 52.
, and we have Statutes in every County, where men may go and choose their
Servants, as Officers do Soldiers, 2. 7.
that he may please him who has chosen him to be a Soldier: Its a unsuall
brag for men to say they have been so long in the service of the Parliament,
and when a party is overcome, to take service under him that is the Conqueror,
and its undoubted, for the people are they who do maintain them, and be it
better or be it worse, be ruled by him that bears the purse, he that gives pay
has power.

Sol. 1. Those that will lean hard, and put their weight and stresse upon a
consequence, had need to make it very strong, and that it cannot be, if it be
not drawn and flow from an antecedent that is simple, uniform, determinate in
sense and signification; for if you can discover in the antecedent, homonymous,
uncertain, significations, it will deceive you; if the sense and signification
you have trusted do miscarry, your pile and fabric will tumble down about you,
as the house on which the Philistines were gotten, to behold, while Samson made
sport, for at last he played them such a trick, as they had little reason to
rejoice in Jud. 16. 27, 28, 29.
, for the consequence is the effect or product of the antecedent, and has all
its strength, determination, and resolution from it, and cannot have more then
it receives, nor the antecedent give more then it has, for nihil dat quod non
habet; if therefore in the antecedent there be mistakes and ambiguities, the
consequence will not be certain; there was a Ship that in the North-west
passage, had ventured very far, and had many sick and fe^ble persons in it, and
came at last unto a pretty little Island, (as they thought) and the sick
persons were desirous to be a little put a shore upon the Island to comfort and
refresh themselves; the Captain of the Ship agreed, and put them out, when they
had walked up and down a little, it being cold, they needs would kindle a
little fire, when that was done, their Island was a Whale that was on sleep,
but being wakened with the fire, turned himself upon his side, and tumbled the
new Plantation all of them into the Sea. Men must be well assured of their
ground before they build upon it, otherwise it will serve them as the Image,
when it was smote upon the feet whereon it stood Dan 2. 34, 35.
; our adversaries could not have pitched upon a more ambiguous uncertain term
to build so vast a consequence upon, for a servant is a word so various, that
the Law admits it not for an addition to any person, how poor and mean soever;
a Laborer, or Spinster they may be called, but not a Servant, because a Servant
lies exposed to so many several signification^; no great man thinks it an
unbeseeming complement to say your Servant, Nabal was very great, and his Wife
a very understanding woman 1 Samuel 25. 2, 3.
, yet when David was a suter to her, by his Servants, 1 Samuel 15. 40, 41.
she arose and bowed her self on her face to the earth, and said, Behold, let
thine handmaid be a servant, to wash the feet of the Servants of my Lord: Kings
are the Servants of the Commonwealth, Rex propter regnum, non contra, as
Zedekiah to his Princes, Jer. 38. 5.
Behold, he is in your hand, for the King is not he that can do any thing
against you, he is indeed, singulis major, but universis minor, as the saying
is, yet the people do not always choose him, some Kingdoms are and have long
been Hereditary, nay, the Pope who wears a triple Crown, and does exalt
himself above all 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
, yet if he may be believed, is the greatest servant in the world, for he is,
servus servorum Dei, Gods Servants servant. If now a godly man should go to
Rome, and pray admittance into the Conclave, because every man ought to choose
his servants, and the Pope was servant unto him, he would be soon distinguished
out of that fools paradise, and sent home by weeping cross; certain it is, that
our Savior Christ was the greatest Servant in the world, for he made himself
of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant Phil. 2. 7.
, yet the people did not choose him: The Emperor of Germany is elective, yet is
not chosen by the people, but by certain Princes, who are therefore called
Electors; so the Kings of Poland are elected, but not by common, but by the
great men; but our Savior was not elected by the Princes, his own Apostles
chose him not, but he them, Joh. 15. 16.
ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you.

2. Servants are either meniall, such as make up the Family, and attend upon
the drudgery and service of it, and may be counted among our chattles and
possessions, as its well said, servi inter opes connumerandi, as Abraham's
servant says to Bethuel and Laban of his Masters goods, Genesis 24. 35
that God had given him flocks and herds, and silver and gold, and men
servants, and maid servants, and camels and asses, and these we may take and
leave, choose and refuse as we think good, but Ministers are not such Servants,
for they have families and houses of their own, as the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 3.
4
one that rules his own house well, having children in subjection, with all
gravity.

Or Magisteriall, that serve indeed, but in an honorable and magisterial way,
that tutor and teach our selves or children, as the Musick-master, the
Dancing Master, that will not stoop to mean mechanic vile employments, that
are servants in one sense, yet Governors and Masters in another. It fell out
when Athens was surprised, that among others Diogenes was taken captive, and
carried away, and the Soldier that had taken him, bad him do this and that,
and go and run, but he would do nothing but tell his Master of his faults and
errors, and that with so much patience and resolution, that the man at last
began to value him and look into his worth; yet being not resolved to follow
his directions, he brings him to the Market for to sell him to some body that
had more leisure then he had to be wise, and writes over his head, ecquis vult
emere dominum? that if any man would buy a Master there was one for him; the
truth is, the Minister is such a servant, that is more then quarter Master;
Heb. 13. 17
obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch
for your souls, they are watchmen for your souls, and so are Servants, but must
be obeyed and submitted to, and so are Masters; and so in another place, 1
These. 5. 12
to know them, which labor among you, and are over you, and admonish you; they
may be laborers, and yet be Governors and Overseers, as a Steward or Surveyor
is. As it was said by Epimanondas, that he indeed waked, and walked the rounds,
that the Thebans might the more securely sleep.

3. The Apostles words, if well considered, speak but a Complement; he does not
say, in positive, and serious terms, we are your Servants, but we preach not
our selves, but Jesus Christ our Lord, and our selves your Servants, for Jesus
sake 2 Cor. 4. 5.
, as if he should say, we do not crack and glory of our place and power, how
much we are your betters and superiors, as sometimes he does 1 Cor. 4. 15
, but humble and debase our selves below you, as Paul plainly in another place,
1 Cor. 9. 19
though I be free from all men, yet have I made my self Servant to all, that I
might gain the more; So to Philemon, If he have wronged thee, or owes thee
ought, put that on mine account, I will repay it, albeit I do not say to thee,
how thou owe unto me, even thine own self besides Phil. 18. 19
; neither will it serve, to prove the point, that people pay them, for they
did, and were bound to do, the Apostles Mat. 10. 9, 10. Luke 10 7.
, yet did not choose them, The people do, and ought to do the Magistrate Romans
13. 6.
, yet do not choose them, did not to be sure, the Roman Officers, but had them
sent unto them and therefore their wages is not called pay, but tribute Mat.
17. 24, 25.
, nor the Ministers, wages, but honor 1 Timothy 5. 17, 18.
, a Language that we use not to our Servants.

4 We say, such of the people, as have capacity, do choose their Ministers, for
they judge of the goodness of their voice, of the integrity and unblameableness
of their lives, of the peace of God in them, and the work of grace upon them;
and of all the rest, by those that are their Officers and Governors: so all
the people are said, to make Saul King 1 Samuel 11. 15.
; yet he was made before by lot, and by the Prophet, and the great Officers 1 Samuel 10. 24.
. The Kings of England in their Coronation Oath, do bind themselves to make
such Laws, quas vulgus elegerit, yet the people choose their Laws, by those
that are Trustees, and actors for them in the Parliament.

Obj. 2. What Gods people did in the first Church, they should do now; for they
had special influences and assistance then; for not only the Apostles, but the
whole Company were filled with the Holy Ghost Act. 4. 31.
; yet they chose Officers, Mathias was chosen by them Act. 1. 23.
, and so were all the Deacons afterward Act. 6. 5, 6.
, most of whom, were Preachers quickly after; therefore the people should do so
still, for they have not forfeited their privileges, by any thing since done.

Sol. 1. We have not said, the people should not choose their Officers; for we
have showed, that they may do something in it: We only say, their choice is
not, nor never was accounted and esteemed Ordination, whatsoever they did,
about the election of Mathias, sure we are, it was not Ordination, for that was
done by lot, the whole disposition whereof, is of the Lotd Act. 1. 26.
, as the wise man speaks Prove. 16. 33.
, they consented and approved, and so they may do still. And so the Deacons
were ordained by the Apostles, and not by the people Act. 6. 3, 4, 5, 6.
.

2. They did but nominate, and that also by the direction, and according to the
Rules prescribed by the Officers and Rulers; for Peter proves, that Judas place
must needs be filled up, and sets down qualifications to guide their search,
and shuts up all, by acknowledging Gods unerring Judgment in the lot. And
for the Deacons, they pitch upon the number, confine them to such
qualifications as they thought best, and then conclude the action Act. 6. 3:
: give out the patterns, as David did to Solomon 1 Chronicles. 28. 11, 1^, 13.
, and bids the people see them fitted, and that was all they did.

Obj. 3. But the people ought to have an hand in Ordination, for so we find
they had, in the first Churches planted by the Apostles, among the Gentiles,
Act. 14. 23.
when they had ordained them Elders in every Church, and had prayed, with
fasting, they commended them unto the Lord, on whom they believed: for every
body knows, that the word there used, namely, (...), does signify the
election of the people, by holding up their hands, as they do at Guildhall, in
the choice of the Lord Mayor of London, and so Calvin and Beza on the place;
both translate it and expound it, and what then they had, we must not take away
from them.

Sol. 1. Its a good Custom, that many Schoolmasters now have, to make their
Scholars parse, and explain their lessons first in English, find out the
principal verb, and set the nominative case before it, and so the substantive
unto the adjective; and sure the people will not now repine, and take it ill,
to be reduced to their English Rules; seeing they are willing to be reputed
Scholars, as well as Teachers, here is a very proper and plain example; for
according to the English, the verb must be ordained, and the nominative case,
that comes before it, they, for if one ask them, who ordained? they must say,
they, now who these they were, must be determined, by finding out the
antecedent unto they: and for that they need not go far to find it, for they
have Paul Act. 14. 19, 20.
in the nineteenth verse, and Barnabas goes with him to Derbe in the twentieth,
and to these two, all the theyes must be referred that go before; for when they
had preached the Gospel to that City, and had taught many, they returned again
to Lystra, etc. and then it follows, when they had ordained them Elders in
every Church, and had prayed, with fasting, they recommended them to the Lord
on whom they believed V. 21. 23.
: the people had not preached to that City, nor returned unto Lystra, etc.
confirming the souls of the Disciples, and exhorting; therefore the people did
not ordain them Elders in every Church; and if they will appeal unto the Greek,
wherein ordained is a participle, and must be read, and ordaining them Elders,
it will be all one; for they must be the substantive unto ordaining, and so it
will return to Paul and Barnabas, and leave the people out.

2. Though it be truly observed by those reverend men, Calvin and Beza, that
the word is taken from the custom of giving voices in the popular states, and
Commonwealths of Greece, by lifting up their hands, yet its not confined unto
that Grecian Custom; for its acknowledged, that Luke was a good Grecian, yet
uses the same word Act. 10. 41.
, for such an act of God, as could not be performed by lifting up of hands, as
it is taken properly, and its not improper to use it for ordaining Ministers,
where imposition of hands is always used; for they cannot lay their hands upon
a tall man's head, unless they do (...), extend and stretch them out; and if
this word was born, and drew its first breath in Athens, or else where, where
Thucidides does use it, yet certain we are, it died not, nor was not buried
there, but used in those Canons, that for their reverend and great antiquity,
are called the Apostles Canons, and that not for any action of the people, but
for Ordination, as it was performed by the Bishops, and that use of it is
justified by Balsamon, in his notes upon that Canon, who was afterward the
Patriarch of Antioch, where it was used by Paul and Barnabas, and could not be
unskilful in his Mother tongue.

3 For Calvin and Bezas translation and exposition of the word, we must
consider, that they were newly come out from Popery, and labored what they
could for to oppose the papal Tyranny, who used to impose what Ministers they
pleased upon the people, against not only their consent, but safety,
authorizing the Monks and Friars to invade men's Pulpits, and to preach unto
them what they pleased, yet both of them acknowledge, that the word is used for
laying on of hands in Ordination, scriptores tamen Ecclesiastici nomen (...)
alio sensu usurpant, nempe pro solemni Ordinationis ritu, qui in scripturis
vocatur manuum impositio. So Calvin and Beza to the same purpose, quidam hoc
refer malunt ad manuum impositionem, quae and ipsasit prorsus necessaria.
That is, some had rather refer this unto imposition of hands, which it self is
altogether necessary.

4 But we grant, that people ought to have an hand in Ordination, for it is not
done, but in the presence of the people, as we have showed, and with fasting
and prayer, where they may stretch out their hands to God, as that good man,
Psalm. 88. 9
Lord I have called daily upon thee, I have stretched out my hands unto thee,
and we know how powerful the stretching out of Moses hands, and holding of them
up was Exodus 17. 11, 12.
, Gods people therefore may and ought, in this kind, to lift up pure, or holy
hands, as we showed before, and likewise they may and ought to say, amen, to
what is said or done, if they approve of it, which is the proper business of
the unlearned, or private man in solemn meetings and Assemblies, as the Apostle
shows 1 Cor. 14. 16.
, and in very solemn meetings, that usually was done, with lifting up of hands,
as we find it in the practice of that great Assembly, Neh. 8. 6.
and Ezra blessed the Lord, the great God, and all the people answered, amen,
amen, with lifting up of their hands. And in this sense, we willingly allow
Gods people, (though they be not Officers) to have an hand in Ordination; but
they must have not only holy, but also humble hands; for if they lift them up
too high, they may offend, and be transgressors in an high degr^e. Poor Vzzah,
did but (...), 2 Samuel 6. 6, 7.
put forth his hand to the Ark of God, and took hold of it, for the Oxen shook
it, and the anger of the Lord was kindled against Uzzah, and God smote him
there for his error, and there he died by the Ark of God: We may lift up our
hand too high, Jeroboam was the greatest sinner (one of them) that ever was,
for it became an addition and title to him, that he made Israel to sin 2 King.
10. 31.
, which was never said of any body else, yet he began with lifting up his hand
1 King. 11 26, 27.
. When a Shoemaker takes measure of a pair of shoes, his hand must not be lift
above the ankle, ne suitor ultra crepidam, as in the Proverb; so good people in
taking measure of a Minister, if they keep not strictly to the bounds and
limits set unto them, may have too high an hand, in choosing of their Ministers;
for as their ears will still be itching after new sounds, so their fingers
after new Teachers, till they have heaped them up unto themselves, as the
Apostle speaks 2* Tim. 4. 3.
, they must therefore be knocked off in time.

CHAP V. Showing what Ordination is.
IN the former Chapters, we have endeavored to show, what Ordination is not,
We come now to show you what it is; for howsoever negatives may clear the way
unto a truth, yet they do not teach it; when men are in the dark, as the
Disciples at the Resurrection were, its something to be told as they were; Mat.
28. 6.
he is not here: the first matter, and the first mover, were very dark
enquiries, among the ancient, and it was long before they got any positive, and
fixed notions of them: could say of the matter, that it was, nec quid, nec
quale, nec quantum, nec eorum aliquid, quibus ens determinatur, nothing
determined and fixed, but something in the dark, and at a distance, which they
labored to discover and describe. So the first mover they beheld afar off,
called him, ens entium, movens non motum, could say, he was natura naturans,
simplicissimus actus, but all this while, he was unknown unto the best of them,
as Paul professes to them, Act. 17. 23
to the unknown God; so we that have the Scripture Light for to direct us, come
to the knowledge of him by degrees, per viam remotionis, as the School speaks,
find that he cannot lie Tit. 1. 2.
, that he cannot deny himself 2 Timothy 2. 13
, that he dwells not in Temples made with hands Act. 17. 24
, which are all negatives, and show us rather, what he is not, than what he is;
but we are not to sit down and acquiesce in these removals, a syllogism made
all of negatives, will not conclude in any figure, and therefore we proceed to
things more positive; a learned Doctor of this Land, pleasing himself with
these removals, and negations, in opening Gods nature and attributes, came at
the last to say, that God was nothing, that is, that nothing best resembled
him, and set him out, which was all one, as if he had said, he was not, which
was so contrary unto his being, as nothing could be more; we find amongst the
Poets, a God that was called (...), but none that ever was called (...): and
when God was desired to give out unto Moses, a notion or description of
himself, he does not say, that he was not, or that he was nothing, but rather
that he was all, that he was being, Exodus 3. 13, 14.
and God said unto Moses, I am that I am, and he said, thus shall thou say unto
the Children of Israel, I am has sent me unto you. Something (we say) has
some savor. When men intend a building, they first desire to find a bottom;
and seeing much depends in this debate on Ordination, we have need to determine
it, and fix it well, that the weight upon it sink it not.

And though it would be suitable to our proceedings in the former part, to
approach and come unto it by degrees, yet having d^ne already much that way, we
are constrained to fall abruptly on the definition, or description of it, and
affirm,

That Ordination is a sacred, solemn dedication, and investiture of a qualified
and fitted person, with Authority to attend and act in holy things, by those
deputed there unto by God.

For the opening and unfolding of this description, we desire these few
particulars may be considered.

1 We affirm, it is a Dedication: that is, an alienation, separation, or
devoting of a man to this attendance; for no man (says Christ) Mat. 6. 24.
can serve two Masters, especially when the service is attending: When men come
theref^re to be ordained, they come to be divorced, and divided from what they
were before; Christ finds some that he had a mind to, fishing, but calls them
off Mat. 4. 18, 19, 20.
, and they immediately leave that Trade, and devote or dedicate themselves unto
another. Paul was a very busy Servant to the Highpriests, and because
Jerusal^m did not suffice him, he gets Commissions for Damascus, but Christ
removes him to a better Master, Romans 1. 1.
Paul a Servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an Apostle, separated to the
Gospel of God: and we find he left all presently, Gal. 1. 15. 16.
immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood: and this no doubt, was
Ordination to him, and did devote and dedicate him to the work; Yet that it
might appear, how much God valued him, and trusted him, there is another
separation mentioned Act. 13. 1, 2
; because he was now to go unto the Gentiles, his mission and Commission is
repealed and renewed. Thus were the Levites dedicated and devoted to attend the
holy things, instead of the firstborn, who formerly had been employed, as God
says expressly Numb 3. 12, 13.
, so Hannah dedicates her son unto the service of the High Priest 1 Samuel 1. 11
, and so Timothy gave up himself to Paul, to serve and wait upon him in the
holy things of God, Ph. 2. 22.
ye know the proof of him, that as a Son with the Father, so has he served
with me in the Gospel: thus Ordination does devote and dedicate a man to this
attendance.

2 We say, investiture; Dedication does design and separate the person from
what he was before, but does not properly empower and put him in, therefore for
plainness sake, and explication, we add investiture; for if the Genus in a
distinction be not complete and full, the definition will be imperfect; and we
say investiture, because the word is metaphorical, and relates unto the mode
and usage formerly of appointing and transferring Offices, Esa. 22. 20, 21, 22.
and it shall come to pass in that day, that I will call E^iakim my Servant,
the Son of Hilkiah, and I will clothe him with thy Robe, and strengthen him
with thy girdle, and will commit thy Government into his hand, and he shall be
a Father to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to the house of Judah, and the
key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder, so he shall open, and
none shall shut, and he shall shut, and none shall open. So when Eleazer was to
succeed his Father in the Priesthood, he is put in by an invest ture, Numb. 20.
25, 26.
take A^ron and Eleazer his son, and bring them up unto Mount Hor, and strip
Aaron of his Garments, and put them upon Eleazer his Son.

Its true, that Christ in the new Testamen^, does not estate his Ministers, and
put them into Office, by investiture, yet he does something like it; the
Apostles were designed and sent into all the world, wherein there was, and is,
a very great variety of fashions, Garments of different and various shapes; it
was not therefore fit, the Apostles should be tied to any one Garb, but left at
liberty to vary as they saw occasion, and in such things, to please and
gratify their hearers: as Paul, when he was to go unto Judea, and to converse
a while with them, he puts himself into a Garb and Habit suitable; for when he
was for to take shipping, he shaves his head, and undertakes a vow Act. 18. 18.
; yet what was common to all Nations, our Savior forgets not, and that was
locks and keis; for unto Peter he says, Mat. 16. 19.
I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever thou
do bind on earth, shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose
on earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. And when this promise was made good unto
them, though we find not mention of the keys, yet we find the effects, and
operations of them, the binding and loosing given to them Joh. 20. 22, 23.
, and this is that the Apostles mean by constituting and appointing, Act. 16. 3.
whom we may appoint over this business; for though the persons may be
dedicated and designed by other means, as those Elders were Numb. 11. 24, 25.
, yet were they not empowered till the Spirit rested on them: so the Deacons
named Act. 6. 5.
, were not empowered till they had laid their hands upon them v. 6.
: so Paul enjoyneth Titus, to ordain and constitute such as were fit, by this
investiture Tit. 1. 5.
, though otherwise expressed.

3 Sacred: We have said before, it is not civil, and therefore must be sacred;
and indeed a person thus devoted and set apart, is ipso facto sacred; a field
or house if dedicated unto pious uses, was therefore sanctified, as appears
Lev. 27. 14, 15, 16, 17.
: thus the Levites were said to be offered up, by Aaron, unto the Lord Numb. 8.
11
; and every offering was sacred, and because the Priests came nearer unto God,
they had a more exact and special consecration, Exodus 29. 35.
and thus shall thou do to Aaron and his Sons, according to all things which I
have commanded thee, seven days shall thou consecrate them, which things are
there at large expressed in the Chapter. The business of a Minister, as we have
showed, is to attend and act in holy things, and holy persons are most suitable
to such attendance, and therefore Ordination has always been attended, and
accompanied with prayer; for though we find not, that Christ our Savior did
ordain by solemn invocation, and calling on the name of God; yet we find, he
spent the whole night, before he chose and settled his Apostles, in prayer unto
God Luke 6. 12. 13, 14, 15, 16.
, that God would please to give a blessing to his labors, and to that design;
so the Apostles, when they did ordain the Deacons, used prayer Act. 6. 6.
, and though (no question) Paul and Barnabas were in Commission, and ordained
before, for they are called Prophets and Teachers Act* 31. 1.
, which in a set and solemn way, they could not be without this Ordination, yet
when they are again devoted and sent abroad unto the Gentiles, they pray again
v. 2.
, that it might appear the work was totally, and altogether holy; for though
the Deputies, and actors in this work, be never so careful to examine and
exhort, yet if God help not and assist, much may escape, that should not, in
the Act.

4 Solemn: There is something of solemnity in holy actions, how secret and
retired soever they may seem to be, for they are done to God, who is a great
King, and his name is dreadful among the Gentiles Mal. 1. 14.
; yet there is more solemnity in some then others of them: the Passe-over was a
solemn fe^st unto the Lord for seven days; but yet the first and last days
were more solemn Lev. 23. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
, all holy things are solemn, but Ordination more solemn then the rest: there
were set times for many ages in the Church observed, which in your Almanacks,
were called the ember we^ks, in which times fasting and prayer, were especially
enjoined, for Gods blessing upon Ordination, which then was wont for to be
celebrated. When the Levites were to be ordained, it was made a very solemn
business, as appears Numb 8. 6, 7, 8, etc.
; so when Barnabas and Saul were to be sent abroad unto the Gentiles, the Lord
appoints it on a very solemn day, as they ministered to the Lord and fasted, the
holy Ghost said, separate me Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I have
appointed them, and when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hards on
them, they sent them away Act. 13. 2, 3
: there are 2 things in the words that argue great solemnity, first fasting;
Prayer we acknowledge is a solemn duty; but when fasting is annexed, it is more
solemn; when the King of Niniveh arises from his Throne, and lays aside his
Robes, and enjoyneth man and beast to fast, and cry, it was a solemn business
Jonah 3. 6, 7, 8.
, so when God calls the Nation to fast and pray, they knew it was a solemn
business, as it is likewise called Joel. 2. 15.
: a fast was never ordered and appointed by the Lord, but it was made a very
solemn business.

The second thing observed in the words, was, that they laid their hands upon
them, which ever argued solemnity; in that grand Character, given out upon
their going into all the world, imposition or laying on of hands is put in Mark
16. 18.
, a solemn Ceremony, to be (no doubt) retained in the Church for ever; for
otherwise we see not why it should be ranked and numbered among those l^sting
and solemn duties, and points of Doctrine, of repentance from dead works, and
faith toward God, the Doctrine of Baptism, and laying on of hand^, and of
resurrection of the dead, and of eternal Judgment Heb. 6. 1, 6.
: some use there will be therefore of laying on of hands, until the day of
Judgment, and other use of it now we do not know, but only this of Ordination;
for that of doing it unto the sick, was extraordinary, and is ceased long
since, and was left out of the direction by the Apostle, before it ceased Jam.
5. 14, 15.
; but in this of Ordination, commanded and used to the last, Timothy was a man
of very rare endowments, yet Paul lays hands upon him, for an augmentation of
his gifts 2 Timothy 1. ^
, and again the whole Assembly and College of the Presbyters, neglect not the
gift that is in thee, which was given there by Prophecy, with the laying on of
the hands of the Presbytery 1 Timothy 4. 14
: yea, Paul makes such account of this piece or parcel of solemnity in
ordination, that he puts it for the whole act 1 Timothy ^. 2.
, lay hands on no man suddenly, that is, ordain not any, till he be tried and
examined for his fitness unto that great work. And seeing Ordination is a kind
of dedication and investiture, there should be somewhat ceremonial and
complemental in it, something that leaves a Character, and an impression on the
person thus ordained; for though Ceremonies are circumstantialls, and come not
within the essence or being of the thing they are annexed to, yet they be
fostering and saving Circumstances, to lift up hands in prayer, is but a
Circumstance; yet had that influence in Moses Prayer, that when it ceased, the
enemy prevailed Exodus 17. 11, 12.
; to wash seven times in Jordan, was but a circumstance, yet healing was
annexed to it, in the case of Naaman 1 King. 5. 10.
; the bark upon the Tree, is but a Circumstance, yet such an one, as cannot
well be spared: and so effectual have Circumstantials in Religion been found to
be, that they grew in the Papacy to very great excess; and the great enemy to
goodness, now that is thrust out, would thrust out all that may be useful also,
when he cannot cumber us, and clog us with them, would leave us nothing that
might admonish and distinguish us; a bar Gown and a Cap, are counted
Circumstances in a Lawyer, and so the Coifs and Robes unto a Judge, yet they
are not willing to leave them off; we have been willing to part withal, that
were offensive, and were not justified in the word of God, but we are loath to
part with this, that has survived all the Reformations that ever yet were, and
in a manner is the only Ceremony remaining with us; And has more for it in the
Scripture, then many other things of great account.

Its good for to be gentle, easy to be entreated, as the Apostle speaks Jam.
3. 17.
; but yet we may be remiss; there are some things that we must hold fast, the
Apostle would not have us to be easily entreated out of those sound and sober
truths we have been taught, Tit. 1. 9.
holding fast the faithful word as he has been taught; for if we grant them
this, which has such footing in the word of God, and practice of the Church of
God, for all the ages of the Church, we know not what they may desire next; for
yielding sometimes makes an adversary insolent: as 1 Kings 20. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
the King granted Benhadads first demand, though his gold and his silver, his
Wives and his Children were required in it; but that did but excite and
exercise their insolency, as it is said, mendico si detur, magis mendicat, The
more you give, the more he thinks it fit to ask. The Ceremonies and forms
retained in this Nation, when Religion was reformed in King Edwards and Queen
Elizabeth's Reigns, were not directly popish, but well known to have been
received and used in the Church, in purer times, before that Popery was thought
of; Saint Ambrose, and St. Chrysostom are named in the Rubricks; and by the
subscriptions of very many godly Ministers, were known to have nothing in them
contrary to the word of God, yet we were willing for to part with them, and let
them go; but we have found, that since they went, there have been other things
demanded; we were told, that Ceremonies were the Guards and outworks of the
Church, and if we pulled them down, or suffered them for to be taken from us,
the City walls would be assaulted, if we let the circumstances go, they would
storm in time the very substance; for what have not these sturdy beggars
adventured since to ask? how boldly have they asked Infant Baptism? singing of
Psalms and Hymns, as the Apostle calls them Col. 3. 16.
; a liberty of interposing and opposing whatsoever they misliake, or understand
not in a Sermon; nay a Pulpit-liberty and license; and where it is refused and
denied, usurp it peremptorily, and invade it? yea, at the last demand our
breeding and good manners, and because themselves were bred up rudely in
Northumberland and other Northern Counties, would have all people as uncivil as
themselves: there is therefore a necessity to make a stop, and put a period to
our yielding, lest if we part with Laying on of hands in Ordination, they
quarrel at our lifting up our hands in prayer, and other acts of decency,
expressly commanded by the Aposte, where he says, 1 Cor. 14. 40.
let all things be done decently, and in order: and in a little time, our
Families will be converted into the Cabins of the Lestrigonians in Cicily, in
the Poets time, where every body were at liberty, and none regarded or
reverenced their superiors: and Noah will be extremely censured, for cursing
the unmannerliness and rudeness of his Son Genesis 9. 24. 25.
; and that will come upon us, which the Prophet threatens, as a grievous curse
unto the Jews, namely, that the Lord will take away from Jerusalem, and from
Judah, the stay and the staff, the mighty man, and the man of war, the Judge
and the Prophet, and the prudent, and the ancient, the Captain of fifty, and
the honorable man, and the Counselor, and the cunning Artificer, and the
eloquent Orator, and I will give Children to be their Princes, and babes shall
rule over them, and the people shall be oppressed every one by another, the
Child shall behave himself proudly against the ancient, and the base against
the honorable Esa. 3. 1, 3, 4, 5.
.

5 Of a qualified and fitted person; for however the solemnities and duties of
fasting and praying, wherewith Ordination is, and ought to be attended, are
powerful Instruments and Engines, to pull a blessing down upon the party to be
ordained, yet because much fitness is required, we dare not trust to that
alone, but must have persons qualified and fitted for it first; and howsoever
we acknowledge, there is a latitude in fitness, as there is in the service they
do attend on, yet every one must have so much as may suffice unto the work, and
set him up above the other ranks of men, that are employed in meaner mechanic
works.

For there must be a natural and spacious wideness and capacity in every one of
these attendants, that may receive the Rules and precepts that must guide him
in his work; you cannot pour a qua^t of wine into a pint pot, nor make
Hercules statue of a little stone; the work man may hew off and pare, but
cannot add, amo quod amputem, is here a good Rule, and that of the Poet true,
nec studium sine divite vena; a Sowes ear (they say) will never make a velvet
purse: it was Paul's great wisdom to pitch on Timothy, because he had a natural
fi^ness unto that he was employed about, Phil. 2 20.
I have no man like minded, who will naturally care for your affairs, (...),
implies a fixed disposition in his very nature; for what has a foundation in
our natures, will not be easily expelled, sed usque recurret fixa, and mutari
nescia; what was the reason Paul was such a Giant, and mighty Conqueror in all
his actings, that he labored more abundantly then they all, (as he says) 1
Cor. 15. 10.
? no doubt the grace of God was the great cause, as there he speaks; but how
came Paul to hold so much grace, to be capable of, and able to receive so great
a quantity? no doubt it was, because he was a chosen Vessel, as he is called
Act. 9. 15.
, a spacious wide capacious instrument, that held more grace, and had more
vigor in him to put it forth, then others had, as he says of Caesar, sed
vigor inillo, and virtus nescia stare loco: Pompeie was a great spread Oak,
hung all with Trophies, and signs of Victory, but now upon decaying, but
Caesar, young, and coming into the world, able, and apt for any thing he was
employed about.

But rude unpolisht nature is not enough, there must be art and exercise.
Divinity (no doubt) is strong meat, and that is for them that are at full age,
who by reason of use, have their senses exercised to discern both good and
evil, as the Apostle speaks Heb. 5. 14.
: Where there is good soil, a depth of earth, as our Savior calls it Mark 4.
5, 6.
, there are more weeds and thistles, then in barren grounds, unless by tillage
the soil be conquered and subdued: so where there are good solid parts, good
natural abilities and depths, there is most commonly a sour and crabbed
animosity, and morosity attending on it, until by art and industry they be
subdued and overcome; it is well said, didicisse fideliter arts, emollit
mores, nec sinit esse feros, a well tutored and trained education in the
Schools and Universities, will soften and sweeten those harsh and rugged
Juices, into a fitness to be used, and sometimes a pleasantness. There came
into the place, where Socrates was, a fellow that had skill in physiognomy, but
was a stranger, they prayed him, that he would well consider and declare unto
them, what he thought of that man, meaning Socrates, but not naming him who did
accordingly peruse his countenance, and all his lineaments, and told them, that
he was a very naughty man, morose and rigid, and austere, one that did care for
no body, nor never would do any good. The company knowing Socrates to be
another kind of man, fell a laughing at him, and some of them reviled him, and
told him, he had no skill; but Socrates himself reproved them all, and told
them, that the man had spoken truly; for he was naturally such an one as he had
said, but Philosophy had cured him; and as it cures and heals bad natures, that
is concocts, and vanquisheth their soureness and morosity, so it mendeth and
helps good ones; Moses had something in his very constitution and complexion,
that wan affection, first in his own Parents; for they hid him three months,
because he was a proper Child Heb. 11. 23.
; and afterward in Pharaohs Daughter, and the Midianites, yet God would not
employ him, till he had learning Act. 7. 22.
; so Daniel and his fellows had something in them, that did commend them to the
Officers that were employed Dan. 1. 4.
, yet were not used, till they were instructed and trained up in all the skill
and knowledge of the Nation. The Steward is for to divide and distribute Luke
12. 42, 43.
, and therefore must know how to do it, which without art he cannot. And they
are best tried in the Universities, where envy finds them real opposites, si
injuria nullos tibi fecit Inimicos, faciet invidia multos.

But its not enough to have good parts, improved and encouraged by art and
exercise, except they be subdued by the grace of God. Good parts improved, may
make them so much the more able to resist the grace of God, and to defend
themselves, against the great guns of admonition and exhortation: if the devil
keeps possession, and commands in chief, the more fortified the house is, the
worse it is; that was a very subtle fellow, as Paul truly says of him Act. 13.
10.
, but was withal the Devils Child. The Ci^tadel was in the Devils keeping and
possession, and so the harder to be taken. David was glad of Achitophels
advice, that he had an Oracle for to attend and wait upon him, as he is called
2 Samuel 16. 23.
; but when he was revolted unto Absalom, he was as much afraid. How terrible
was Paul, before the grace of God subdued and settled him? great care must
therefore* be taken to find this work of grace upon the soul, before they be
engaged in the employment. Paul sees in Timothy, unfeigned faith 2 Timothy 1. 5.
, and then does seize him for this service, as we find Act. 16. 1, 2, 3.
; its true, that many times this work of grace is not so visible in young men,
who have peculiar lusts and passions of their own, to tempt and trouble them,
yet cannot be admitted into this employment, till there be probability thereof
observed in them. And indede, when young men see and find, that grace is
valued and asked for, and men are not preferred, until they have it, they will
regard it more, and strive to get it, as Maids do that, which they find
commends them unto Husbands*

6 With Authority; Investiture implies an indument or garb, and a person ready
to be ordained, should be provided with all things but Authority, he should
have skill and wit, ability and aptness for the work, and should want nothing
but authority and opportunity to act and exercise it, this Ordination offers
and exhibits, as Timothy had grace and gifts descended lineally from his
Grandmother and Mother 2 Timothy 1. 5.
, and wanted nothing but authority to use it, and therefore Paul has him to
the Presbytery, and they confer it on him 1 Timothy 4. 14.
. There be some Garments, that an ordinary Tailor cannot make, 1 Pet. 5. 5.
be clothed with humility, the Tailors many times do make men proud, but
seldom humble, humility is a Garment, that seldom is in fashion: Authority is
such a Garment, Esa. 22. 21.
I will clothe him with thy Robe, and strengthen him with thy Girdle, and will
commit thy Government into his hand: when Eliah was to leave the world, he is
appointed to anoint Elisha, prophet in his room, that is, to commit his
Government unto him, as appears by those other that are joined in Commission
with him 1 King. 16. 15, 16, 17.
. Now how does he effect this anointing or surrogating of Elisha to be a
Prophet? we shall find he does it, by throwing his Garment on him only v. 19,
20, 21
: and when he begged a double portion of his spirit, because he was his eldest
soon, which was by the Law, to have a double portion Deuteronomy. 21. 15, 16, 17.
, he lets it fall down in his mantle to him 2 Kings 2. 13, 14.
, which he took up: so when qualified and fitted persons, are to be vested with
Authority, to attend and act in holy things, it is conveyed by Ordination to
them, and settled on them.

And therefore, in all the forms of Ordination, that have been used since the
Reformation in these Nations, that has been always said, take thou authority
to preach the word, and administer the Sacraments; for it is not needful, that
God from Heaven should come down, to give this power and authority to men; but
it is enough, that it be done, by his appointment; there is no question, but
Aaron had authority and honor, and was called thereunto by God Heb. 5. 4.
, yet had it from the hands of those, whom God designed and appointed thereunto
Exodus 29. 5, 6, 7.
; so there is no question but those Elders had authority, whom Paul sends for
unto Miletus Act. 20. 28.
, yet they had not any extraordinary imposition or investiture, but what was
given by the Presbytery, as the Apostle does imply 1 Timothy 4. 14.
.

7. To attend and act in holy things, that is, in the things of God, as we have
showed before at large in stating of the Question; namely, in preaching the
Word, and administering the holy Sacraments, and exercising of that Discipline
which in the Scriptures is allowed; and without which, confusion cannot be
barred out, and the Saints enjoy that sweet Communion that is their due, and
the best part of their joy and comfort here in their absence and distance from
the greatest good.

8. By those deputed thereunto by God; for as we said before, God does not need
to leave his Throne, and come down in person, to ordain and consecrate men unto
his service and attendance, but it suffices if it be done by those that are
deputed thereunto by God, as Aaron was, and after him the Levites Numb. 8.
; so that this enquiry is determined unto that one point, who those should be
that God has thus deputed and appointed unto his service.

For we acknowledge, its a great power to give authority to men over the House,
which is the Church of God, as Paul does unto Timothy 1 (...) 15.
over the holy things of God, to make one a Steward of the Mysteries of God, as
they are called 1 Cor. 4. 1.
, to deliver unto him the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, as Christ does promise
unto Peter Mat. 16. 19.
, so that none shall go in or out, without his leave; and this power may be,
and has often been misplaced and unduly given; but yet it must be done by some
body, and who those are, is now the thing to be enquired.

We are apt to find fault with whatsoever we our selves have not a hand in,
quae non fecimus ipst, vix ea nostra voco; Absalom finds great fault with all
Administrations in David's Government 2 Samuel 15 2, 3, 4.
and could think of no reformation and relief for the abused people, unless he
were made Judge; so we are apt to think nothing well done, but what is done by
us; every body can reform and form a State, but they that are employed about
it; as every body can rule a Shrew, but he that has her. It wa^ said of Galba,
Omnium consensu capax imperii nisi imper asset. Let us therefore see to whom
this power is committed to give authority to men to attend and act in holy
things, that no man's right or claim may be prejudged or prejudiced, but all
pretenders have their liberty to plead; and that we think will best be done, if
we proceed by such degrees and demonstrations as cannot be refused; any
therefore we say,

1. There is in some Christians, and in some persons in the Church, such a
power; for certain it is, that Pastors and Teachers are to continue in the
Church, until our Savior come again, Ephesians. 4, 11. 12, 13.
And some Pastors and Teachers, till we all come in the unity of the faith, and
of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man; now we are sure, those
very men that then were Pastors could not continue: There went a rumor
concerning, John, that he should not dye, as its said Joh. 21. 25.
, but it was grounded in a mistake, as there its said, for sure we are that he
and all the rest are dead, as they said to Christ, Joh. 8. 52.
Abraham is dead, and the Prophets; so may we say, Paul is dead, and Peter is
dead, and all the Apostles and extraordinary Prophets are dead, and how shall
Pastors and Teachers be preserved, but as all other men are, by propagation and
succession? so Christ himself, Behold, I am with you always, even to the end of
the world Mat. 28. 20
, with whom? not with the men to whom he spoke, for they are in their graves,
but with them in their Seed and Offspring, their Fellow Servants and
Success^rs from age to age; if therefore children must continue, there must be
fathers; if there be Harvest promised, there must be seed-time, as its said
said Genesis 8. 22.
.

2. They must be more than one; Its well observed by our Brethren of London,
that hands are laid on, in the plural number, nor in the singular or dual, and
the hands, not of the Presbyters, for that might besaid of one or two, but of
the Presbytery, which was a Coleg or Society of Presbyters, 1 Timothy 4. 24.
, for though Paul did confide this power into the hands of Titus, who was a
single person, yet he never meant he should put it in execution without
assistants, for in the exe^cise and execution of it, he restrains him to the
manner as he appointed him Tit. 1. 5.
; now sure we are, that Paul would never appoint him to ordain, otherwise than
himself was ordained, when he was sent abroad about the Conversion of the
Gentiles Act. 14. 2, 3
, where all is in the plural number, or than Barnabas and he himself di^
practice, when they ordained Elders in every Church, as it is said Act. 14. 23.
; for Ordination is not only a sacred, but also a very solemn thing, as we have
showed, and therefore should have many hands, multorum manibus grande levatur
onus, yet Timothy and Titus are pitched upon to be the guiders and leaders of
the action, the presidents and patrons of it.

3. They must be strong and able Christians; Ordination is the preservation, or
propagation of the kind or species, a kind of Spiritual Generation; Paul every
where calls Timothy his Son, not because he had begotten him unto the Faith,
for he found him a Disciple (k), his faith was in a Act. 1* 6. 1.
sort extraduce descended to him from his Grandmother and Mother, but he had
ordained him with others, and so he was his Son; now generation implies
perfection, perfectissimum naturae opus est generare sibi simile; if one must
be of age before he can beget a Son, what must he be before he can beget a
Father? if one must be strong before he can beget a Child, what must he be
before he does beget a Man? and therefore when Paul enjoyneth Timothy this act
of propagating, he bids him first be strong in the Grace that is in Christ
Jesus 2 Timothy 2. 1.
, for Ordination is a work that does not only require maturity and ripeness of
skill and parts, to make an estimate and judgment of those they do admit, to
try their knowledge and understanding in the things they are to teach, but also
to resist temptations, and bear the frowns and favors that would otherwise be
able to bias him, and bend him from his duty.

4. They must be Officers; propagation does suppose similitnde, nam partus
sequitur ventrem, do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles Mat. 7.
16.
? Its possible a Propagator may fall short, and act below his sphere, but never
above; a mountain may bring forth a mouse, but a mouse never yet brought forth
a mountain; and its most true in this particular of generation and propagation,
that nihil dat quod non habet, we cannot propagate and give what we never had;
an Officer therefore he must needs be that makes an Officer* Our Brethren of
London have observed out of Jewish Writers, that the Jewish Sanedrim or
Counsel of seventy, was perpetuated and continued from age to age, by
Ordination or laying on of hands; and it is the less marvel, because great care
was taken at the first in the choice of those that were designed to it; for God
expressly commands Moses, that he should choose none but such as he knew to be
the Elders of the people, and Officers over them Number. 11. 16.
, and wheresoever in the Gospel this is mentioned, its always spoken unto
Officers, as unto Timothy, Lay hands on no man suddenly 1 Timothy 5. 22.
, so unto Titus, For this cause left I thee at Creet, that thou might set in
order the things that are w^nting, and ordain Elders in every City Tim* 1. 5.
for seeing its a propagation, or preservation of the kind, as soon ^ay a
Jack-a-napes or a Monkey, preserve and propagate Mankind, as these now
Officers, the Pastors and Teachers in the Church.

5. Head-Officers; Paul was a Head-Officer 1 Cor. 9. 1, 5.
, yet has an hand in Timothies Ordination, as we have showed be ore; the
lowest that we read of, were Pr^phets, and Teachers in the Church at Antioch
Act. 13. 1.
, in that Presbytery that Paul speaks of 1 Timothy 4. 14
, its very like there were Apostles, for Peter, none of the meanest, thinks not
himself too good to be a Presbyter, the Elders which are among you, I exhort,
who am also an Elder, that is, a Presbyter 1 Pet. 5. 1.
; and it is no wonder that the highest did attend it, for it is the h^ghest
work, a consecrating or devoting one unto the highest honor and employment in
the Church, the matching and espousing one to Jesus Christ, the putting of ones
hand unto the Plow, from which he never must look back again Luke 9. 62.
; that there are orders and degrees of Officers appears, because the well-using
of the Office of a Deacon was (...), a good degree or step unto another place,
as the Apostle speaks 1 Timothy 3. 13.
, and the Apostles were the first or highest order or degree, as appears from
that enumeration that is set down 1 Cor. 12. 8.
, yet they think not themselves too good to ordain the meanest Officer, for so
the Deacons always were accounted, and that in a busy time, when they had
renounced secular Employments, as below them, and confined themselves to
Prayer, and the Ministry of the word Act. 6. 2, 3, 4.
: so Paul and Barnabas were the great Apostles of the Gentiles, yet thought it
not enough to Preach the Gospel, and convert men to the truth, but did also
carefully ordain them Elders in every Church Act. 14. 23
; good people therefore must not think much to leave this unto Preaching
Elders, that was never practiced by any of Gods people, either in the
Scripture, or after ages of the Church, and which is really above their sphere,
even a great deal more than they can manage, or tell how to weld, and be
content those should perform it, that are by God deputed thereunto.

CHAP. VI. Arguing the equity, that Ordination should be still continued in the
Church.
WE have showed largely, what Ordination is not, and what it is; we have
looked round about it, and beheld, as well the back parts, as the fore parts;
we have also already offered much, for the continuance and fixing of it, in the
Church: yet because we have professed a way of Argument, and presumed much upon
the strength and goodness of our Cause, we are not willing to give out, to be
any way defective in our last Act, inertis est Poetae in extremo a^^u deficere,
what therefore we have hinted and intimated formerly, we are content to argue
plainly, and adventure unto the shock, for we have no engagement of our own
that we know, for we preach not our selves, but Jesus Christ the Lord 2 Cor. 4,
5.
: may say, as he did, when the boat-man was afraid, Caesarem vehis, and
fortunam Caesaris, we carry Christ in these our arguments, and sure we are, that
he cannot miscarry; our business therefore is, to crave leave, to offer these
few arguments, to equal and unbiased consideration.

1. The Church of Christ is not a common field Psalm. 100. 3.
We are thy people, and the Sheep of thy Pasture, The Pastures are less exposed
than the common field, are hedgd and ditched in, which the field is not, yea
there was more security and sequestration, for there was a fold, that had a
Door, that was not only shut to some, and kept close, but had also Porters
waiting and attending at it, as our Savior argues Joh 10. 1, 2.
; yet that's not all, for the Church is also compared to a Vinyeard Esa. 5. 1,
2, Mark 12. 1, 2.
, and that is always strongly fenced, yea to a Garden, which is not only
fenced with Hedge and Ditch, as Vineyards use to be, but most commonly walled
in, that the eyes of strangers may be kept continent, loving does commonly
begin at looking, as in the first Garden, and so the Church is to be a Garden
enclosed (o), yea the Cant. 4. 12.
Church is Gods house, and an house is always, and ought to be a Castle: 1 Timothy 3. 15.
that thou may know how to behave thy self in the house of God, which is the
Church of the living God: But there are none of these enclosures valid, and of
use, if Ordination be removed; if the Door, or entrance be always open, who
can be kept out? and we know not any other Bar or Bolt to fasten, and shut it
up; if these Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven be once removed, and taken from the
Pastors, to whom Christ gave them Mat. 16. 19
, all will be common quickly, the Bear out of the Wood will root it, and the
wild Beast out of the field devour it, as in the Psalmist, Psalm. 80. 13.


If all were open and exposed, yet must severe whose teeth are Spears and
Arrows, and their tongue a sharp Sword Psalm. 57. 4.
, So the wise man, death and life are in the power of the Tongue Pro. 18. 21.
, Especially the tongues of Teachers, and instructers, what ever they say, yet
aliquid haerebit, the hearer will be hurt or helped by it, oportet discentem
credere, in many things, the Scholar must take the Masters word, so Paul, 2
Cor. 2. 15, 16.
we are a weet savor of Christ to God, in them that are saved, and in them that
perish, to the one, we are tho savor of life unto life, to the other of death
unto death, and who is sufficient for these things? a Ministers breath is very
influentive, is the breath always of life or death, and should be tried ere it
be trusted too; the Tree of knowledge that was in Paradise, was preferred
before the Tree of life, though both were in the midst of the Garden, as
appears Genesis 2. 9. Genesis 3. 3.
: we still itch after knowledge, and choose it rather than the Tree of Life; Man
might have taken life then, but may not now, without going for it unto Jesus
Christ, in whom it is 1 John 5. 11, 12.
; if only the death and life of the body were concerned, yet we should be very
wary, whom we trusted, for much hurt may be don, by those that are unskilful;
a young Novice goes out to gather Pot Herbs for the Prophets Sonns 2 King. 4.
39, 40.
, But brings in such, as had been death unto them all, if a miracle had not
prevented it; and in our Nation, a Cook was executed for high treason, because
some poison was put into the pot; the Deacons were designd for the service of
their Tables, which the Apostles could no longer wait upon, as it appears Act.
6. 2.
, yet were to be proved first, as the Apostle shows 1 Timothy 3. 10
, and were not employed before they were ordained Act. 6. 6.
, much less should Teachers and Instructers be, who serve the Table of the
great God, and provide food for their everlasting souls.

The Ministry (without doubt) is a place of Adrons Garments were both for Glory
and Beauty Exodus 2 28.
; and if the Ministry of the Law were glorious, the Ministry of the Gospel is
much more, as the Apostle by many Arguments concludes 2 Cor. 3. 7, 8, 9.
; for is it not an honor, to be the guider and leader of an Army? as they are
called Heb. 13. 7. 17. 24.
; to be Trustees of men's eternal interests? as Paul acknowledges he was 1 Timothy 1. 12, 13.
; to be a Steward, and have all the servants subject? as they were to Joseph
Genesis 41. 44.
; to be an Overseer of the will of God, and have the ordering of all the
Legacies? as those Elders were, that came to the (Act. 20. ^8.
Apostle at Miletus (h). If there were nothing of honor in it, it would not be
invaded and usurped, with so much eagerness, and affection; who goes a wooing
to a poor distressed Maid or Widow? veniunt a dote sagitta; ^^nelopes wooers,
would have been discharged sooner, if their entertainment had been coarser.

But honor ought not to be invaded, and usurped; Heb. 5. 4.
and no man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as
Aaron was. Adonijah was David's eldest son, when Absolam was dead, and was a
very goodly person, as appears 1 King. 1. 6.
, and could tell how to play his own game, as his Brother Solomon believed 1
King. 2. 21, 22.
, but he invaded this great honor, before his time, and therefore lost himself
in the attempt, as Absalom had done; if honor be invaded and usurpt, before it
offers and presents it self unto the owner, it is deflowred, and cease to be
Honor: for the advowson is not in the owner of it, but in the author; honor est
in honorante, non in honorato; the wearer of a Garment knows not how it does
become him, but the standers by; you spoil the gloss and luster of it, if your
own hands touch it. David was born to honor, but was not hasty to invade it,
and lay hold upon it over soon: it follows those that fly away from it, and
flies from those that follow it, sequentem fugit, fugientem sequitur; David was
one of honors way, when it was brought unto his Fathers house, he took him
from the sheep-folds, from following the Ewes great with young Psalm. 73. 70, 71.
, Joseph was further off, even in the Dungeon Genesis 40. 15.
, yet honor waited on him there, and brought him out, and set him next unto the
Throne: if he had ravenously romed after it, and ravished it, as in his mistress
offer he might have done, it would have shund him, as the wise man truly sais,
Prove. 25. 27.
it is not good to eat much honey, so for men to search their own glory, is not
glory, he does not say, to search their own glory, is not good, though that had
been more suitable unto the former member, but he says, it is not glory.
Christ was the heir of honor, as he is said to be, being made so much better
than the Angels, as he has by inheritance obtained a more excellent name than
they, Heb. 1. 4.
yet was not eager in the pursuance, as the Apostle shows, Heb. 5. 5.
glorif^ed not himself to be made an high Priest; he would not be his own
carver, even in that which was his birthright: where worth and virtue is,
honor will come at one time or another, but those that have no merit and
internal fitness, snatch at the offer of it, as the bramble in the Parable
Judge. 9. 14 15.
; God has enacted, that those who stand upon the higher ground, and are got up
above their fellows, should be thereby discovered, Magistratus indicat virum;
men should take heed therefore how they get up, especially into the Pulpit, for
that will tell tales; God would have n^o man climb unto his Altar by steps,
lest his nakedness should thereby be discovered Exodus 20. ^6.
; Its therefore fit that ordination should be still continued in the Church,
whereby this honor may be convayed as it should be; the places may not lie
vacant and exposed, but be possessed.

Ordination is the Churches Dowry, and possession, 1 Cor. 12. 28.
, take that away, and all her other furniture, and Ammunition, will be unfixed,
and unfit for service, and therefore Paul Provides for Creet a Titus, that
should not only set in order the things that were wanting, according to that
general and noted Rule of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 14. 40.
Let all things be done decently and in order, but gives particular direction
for Ordination, and ordain Elders in every City, as I had appointed thee Tit.
1. 5.
, so the Keis committed unto Peter, by our Savior Mat. 16. 19
, are those himself wore, Rev. 3. 7.
and they we are sure, were to open and shut, as other parts and offices of
Gods house, so especially the Doors of the fold, whereby the Shepherds were to
enter, as Christ has said Joh. 10. 3.
to him the Porter opens, and to others he opens not, but shuts; thus
Timothy was let in by the Presbyters, or Porters that were at Ephesus 1 Timothy 4.
14.
, and thus who enters not, is by Christ proclaimed for to be a Thief Joh. 10. 1.
: now what God has fixed thus, and settled on his Church, let no man alienat,
as Christ in the case of divorses, what God has joined together, let no man
put asunder Mat. 19. 6.
; Life, Liberty* and Dower, are the three favorits of the Common Law, this
Dower, is of the Law of God the Law is tender of the Widows right, because she
has no Husband to assist the vindication of it, but the Church is not a
Widow, or Orphan, as our Savior speaks* Joh. 14. 18
, for he is now as near as eever; if one should think a woman destitute of
friends, because her Husband was gone to London to be Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal, would he not find himself deceived, if he on that presumption should go
about to dispossess her of her rights? so those that wrong the Church, will
find her Husband is but gone to be chief Justice of the Upper Bench, or Keeper
of the Great Seal, and with a promise to be with her always, even to the
Worlds end, as he spoke unto her at their parting Mat. 28. 20.
.

Ordination, (as we have showed before) is the Paul and Barnabas were by Gods
apointment thus ordained, they are expressly said to be sent forth by the Holy
Ghost Act. 13. 4.
, and this is so essential to this employment, that the Apostle takes it for
granted, that without his sending they could not preach, Romans 10. 15.
how shall they preach, except they be sent? as Ambassadors, such as these are
2 Cor. 5. 20.
, cannot deliver the errand, and embassage they are sent about, unless they
have commissions and instructions; authority is always a Derivative, received
always from another, and it was a particular and proper Question, which they
propounded to our Savior Mat. 21. 23.
, By what authority do thou these things, and who gave thee this authority?
for they knew no body could give himself authority; the Baptist makes the Rule
general, That a man can receive nothing, except it be given him from Heaven
Joh. 3. 27.
, but it must needs be true of this, and therefore as God the Father sent
Christ, so Christ sent the Apostles Joh. 20. 21
, and they others* 2. Tim. 2. 2
The things which thou have heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit
thou to faithful men, who may be able to teach others also: and so it has
descended, from age to age, from one unto another, until these very times,
according to that great and precious promise Esa. 59. ^1.
, made by that God, that will not, that cannot lie Tit. 1. ^.
.

In all things, God is careful to avoid confusion, their Cattle might not
gender with a diverse kind, their field might not be sown with mingled seed,
neither night they wear a Garment mingled of linen and woollen, as the Lord
expressly orders Lev. 19. 19
: The distinctions of their tribes and families were carefully recorded and
preserved, as appears Ezra. 2. 62
: and those unnatural offenses, are therefore branded and forbidden, because
they brought in and begat confusion in the World Lev. 18. ^3
: Its true, the Gospel gave a greater liberty, and brake down that
Partition Wall that had a long time made a separation between Jew and Gentile,
and it was now lawful for a man that was a Jew, to come unto one of another
Nation, as Peter shows Act. 10. 28
: and in their great Charter and commission, they were commanded to go into all
the World, and to preach the Gospel unto every Creature Mark. 16. 15.
: but yet all was not set at liberty, though Jew and Gentile were reconciled,
and mingled with one another, yet Offices and Administrations were still
distinct and different Romans 12. 6, 7, 8.
, and so are set down; Some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists,
and some Pastors and Teachers Ephesians. 4. 11
: and are so distinguished by the Apostle 1 Cor. 12. 28.
, that one of them is first, another second, another third, as if they could
not coincidere; much more distinct and different, were the Pastors from the
people, the Shepherds from the sheep, the guides and leaders from the lead,
and guided: Esa. 9. 16.
for the Leaders of this people cause them to err, and they that are lead by
them are destroyed. So in our Saviors resolution of that Objection, which the
Pharisees occasioned Mat. 15. 14.
, the lead and leaders are distinguished; when the Apostle orders that their
Prophets should speak, and others judge, does he not make a very clear
distinction 1 Cor. 14. 29.
? and though it be certain there were women Prophets 1 Cor. 11. 5.
, as those Daughters of Philip the Evangelist Act. 11. 9.
: yet these were not allowed to speak in the Church, as the Apostle does
expressly show 1 Cor. 14. 33, 34.
: and all this to avoid confusion, as there its said; but if Ordination should
be removed and taken from the Church, there would be no means that we know of,
to preserve the distinction of this holy calling. The Papists have a long time
kept, not only the Clergy and Officers in the Church, distinct and different
from others, by their garbs and habits, but the several orders of their Monks
and Friars; but the Scripture warrants no such garbs in Gospell-times, unless
for order, and common decency Zech. 13. 4
: Neither will their Actions do it, for a difference in that cannot be easily
discerned, the only way to keep a difference is Ordination, whereby an entrance
is allowed, and a character or brand imprinted on them, whereby they may be
known; as Sheep, when put into a common Pasture, are always branded, that they
may be known; So, much more when they are admitted into the Church, and set
over people, should they be marked, that they may be known from others; that if
we think not fit to retain the old distinction that was wont to be among the
Shepherds, where some were Shepherds Joh. 10. 2.
, some chief Shepherds 1 Pet. 5. 4.
, yet the Shepherds may be still distinguished from the Sheep, that the
Minister or Pastor of the Church may be known (as they say) from a black Sheep,
yea from a white one also; for if there be no distinction between Sheep and
Shepherd, the Wolf may sometimes be entertained and folded among the Sheep;
beware (says Christ) of false Prophets that come unto you in sheeps clothing,
but inwardly are ravening wolves Matthew. 7, 15, 16.
. A Wolf you see may come in the garb and habit of a Sheep, but not of a
Shepherd; and though it be true that Christ says, ye shall know them by their
fruits, yet they may do a deal of hurt before their fruit discover them; if a
Wolf should be lodged one night with the Sheep, what a deal of mischief might
he do before morning? When Ulysses and his men had bored Polyphemus eye, and
made him blind, yet he resolved to take them as they went out, and be revenged
on them, for he thought a man could not be formed into the shape and habit of a
Sheep, but Ulysses tying his men under the bellies of those large and lusty
Sheep, escaped Scot*free. So if a Romish Wolf, those grievous Wolves the
Apostle speaks of Act. 20. 29, 30.
, should be tied under the belly of a Preaching-Sheep, what work might he make
in the Fold before he were discovered? Durius ejicitur quam non admittitur
hospes, it is easier by Ordination to keep them out, than by excommunication to
remove them.

We have showed before, that Ordination is a Smyrna, or Al^ppo, or some other
dangerous place, he gets the prayers of some noted Congregations in London, or
other places for him, and all acknowledge it a good assistance and security,
for the effectual fervent prayers of a righteous man avails much Jam. 5. 16.
, as the Apostle speaks; or when some great engagement draws nigh, as when
Israel in their journey were to fight with Amaleck Exodus 17. 11, 12.
, what steed was Moses prayer in? Now a Minister engaging in this common
service of the Saints and Church of Christ, does undertake a greater and hotter
service, than any other Warrior. Ungodly men are not only compared unto thorns
and briars, as the Apostle speaks Ezekiel. 2. 6.
, against which one must be fenced with iron, and the staff of a spear, as he
speaks 2 Samuel 23. 6, 7.
, but unto a Bear robbed of her Whelps, as the wise man has it Pro. 17. 12
; this the Apostle knew very well, when he does so seriously and pathetically
beg their prayers, Romans 15. 30, 31.
Now I beseech you Brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love
of the Spirit, that ye strive together with me, in your prayers to God for me,
that I may be delivered from them that believe not in Judea, and that my
service which I have at Jerusalem, may be accepted of the Saints; yet he was an
old Soldier, and had much experience of Gods in abling and assisting presence
with him, and this was but one particular and single act; how much more ought
those to beg and crave our prayers and assistance, when they are launching out
into this great and dangerous service? when they are going to fetch away the
Bears Whelps from her, to turn men from darkness unto light, and from the
power of Satan unto God Act. 26. 17, 18.
; There is no doubt but a man may pray the same thing twice, as he may write
the same thing again, as we may find it in the practice of our Savior Christ
Mark 34. 39.
, and the latter does corroborate the former, the heat and fervor of the Spirit
is strengthened by repetitions, and therefore our Savior does not prohibit
repetitions simply, but vain repetitions Mat 6. 7.
, and accordingly we find the Holy Ghost giving order for a second Ordination
of Paul and Barnabas, when they were to be sent upon that dangerous and weighty
Message Act. 13. 2, 3, 4.
; the prayers of Gods people do fill their sails, and make them wings to fly
with, both on their prey, off their danger, as occasion is; therefore if there
were no other use of Ordination, but the assisting and enabling of the ordained
persons unto their work, it were sufficient to argue the continuance, at least
in this time, when grievous wolves are entered in already, not sparing the
flock, and of our own selves do men rise up, speaking perverse things to draw
Disciples after them Act. 20. 29, 30, 31.
; Should one throw down his sword when an enemy is ready to invade him? sleep
on the guard when an assault is given? how justly do they call up Jonas to his
prayers when the Ship was tossed, and was ready to be broken Jon. 1. 6.
? when the Church and Truth is many ways invaded and endangered, to leave the
doors and gates open, and remove the Porters and Watchmen from their charges?
There is great care taken that none be approved or admitted unto Livings and
Augmentations, but only those that have upon them a work of Grace, as well as
Gifts, that have their gifts and learning sanctified and sweetened by the
influence and operation of the Holy Ghost upon them, and therefore we should be
careful of all those ways and means whereby the Holy Ghost is gotten and
given, for the Holy Ghost is worth the asking, and not attended ordinarily
without it, Luke 11. 13
If ye then being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how
much more shall your Heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?
they may contribute prayers that have nothing else to give, and as multorum
manibus, so multorum precibus grande levatur onus, as Peter when he was in
Prison, was let out by their prayers Act. 12. 5.
.

In all estates and ages of the world, Church robbing Dionysius for his
boldness in it, was abhorred every where; when that great uproar was made at
Ephesus, by Demetrius and the crafts-men, against the Apostles, the Town Clerk
wisely tells them, that they had brought men thither who were neither Robbers
of Churches, nor Blasphemers of their Goddess Act. 19. 37.
, implying, that if they had been guily either of blasphemy or sacrilege, they
had been justly called in o question. Ordination therefore cannot be removed
that has been so many years possessed by the Church; for we find it done by
Christ himself, Mark 3. 12.
and he ordained twelve, that they should be with him, and that he might send
them forth to preach, and as soon as ever he was taken from them, the first
work they do is Ordination Act. 1. 22
, so Paul and Barnabas made it their business to ordain Elders in every Church
Act. 14. 23.
, and because he could not stay himself at Great, to set right all things that
were needful, he leaves there Titus as his substitute to make supply, and
especially to ordain Elders in every City Titus 5. 7.
; and what was vested in her then, and she has worn from age to age for
sixteen hundred years and upwards, cannot be taken from her now without
manifest notorious Sacrilege; if she be stripped of Ordination, she is robbed
not of her Veil and Ornaments, as she was Cant. 5. 7.
, but of her safe guard and security, of the guard and fence that God has
granted her, and she has lived and subsisted by so many hundred years. When we
see one seize upon our Weapons, and take them from us, we make account he means
to strip us, and leave us nothing, for so it follows in the Psalmist, Why have
thou then broken down her Hedges, so that all that pass by the way do pluck
her, the Boar out Psa. 80. 12, 13.
of the Wood does waste it, and the wild Beast of the Field dothd evour it?
especially when there is little else remaining, when she has parted with her
state and dignities, her riches and revenues; when cold winds breath and blow
upon her, as those bloody Papists in the frozen valleys of the Alps, for if
there be no Ordination, in a little time there will be no Ministers, and then
no Ordinances, and then no propagating and begetting men to God, and then
confusion, and afterward destruction will ensue:

Let men therefore take heed of that luke-warmnesse that is so much practiced
in these dangerous declining times, wherein men magnify and cry up grace, that
they may with more security and silence pull down Ordination, which is the
Grandmother at least of grace. The Kings of this Land have often threatened
London with the removal of the Terms, but if they could remove the Thames,
they would soon ruin her. The Honors and revenues of the Church have often
been disturbed and interrupted, yet she has lived, but if ever Ordination be
removed, she is undone and ruined.

CHAP. VII. Containing the Objections that are commonly made against it, with
there Answers.
ORdination is a dedication and devoting of a Hannahs offering of her Son 1 Samuel 1. 11.
; now that should not be till men are well advised of it. An Hebrew might be
bound for seven years, but not for term of life, unless he were content, and
had a principle of love that did engage him, and enable him Exodus 21. 5, 6.
; it becomes not God to press men to his Wars, they are and should be
Volunteers that fight his Battles, as they are promised to be Psalm. 110. 3.
; the Temple should be built up as ^he Tabernacle was, by willing-hearted men
Exodus 35. 5.
Now there are many godly, willing, well-affected men, that are able to do
service unto God, yet will not be arraigned before an Eldership, and then
engage unto a way without all power of revocation and return, as Monks and
Friars are shut up within a Cell, and not allowed to look abroad, what ever
mind or fitness they may have to do God service in another way, unless they
will break down the Bars and Cloisters, as Musculu^, Luther, and some others
did; which Erasmus prudently foreseeing, could not be gotten for to be a Monk,
durius ejicitur quam non admittitur hospes; so when young men are engaged, and
prepossed with an Obligation, before they are experienced in it, it is
inconvenient, therefore God wills them to be very well advised before they vow,
because when they have vowed, they are obliged to perform Eccles. 5. 4, 5.
; seeing they must not make enquiry after vows, its good to do it thoroughly
before.

Sol. 1. Ordination is not the first degree or step unto the Pulpit, there must
be previous dispositions in the party, as there were in Timothy 1 Timothy 1. 18
, and a design and resolution in the Governors and Parents to devote him, if
all things suit, and education answerable, whereby his parts are widened, his
will inclined, and his resolution strengthened and confirmed in the way, and
this may be before he have a proper liberty, nam initia virtutum sunt sogenda,
a child may be trained up in the way that he should go Pro. 22. 6.
, and may be given by his friends or parents unto God, before he is aware, as
Samuel was 1 Samuel 1. 11
; yea tutored and taught the grounds of that he is designed to, as Timothy was
a Tim. 3. 15.
; for in these cases their Parents wills are substituted, and make supply, we
do not leave our children liberty to choose whether they will willingly be
Christians, but we command and over rule that, as Abraham did Genesis 18. 18, 19.
, and do engage them solemnly at Baptism, without advising with them; there was
no liberty allowed in Circumsion, but either themselves or their fore skins
must be cut off, as God precisely orders and appoints Genesis 17. 10, 11, 12, 13,
14.
; so we may purpose and design our children or friends unto the Ministry,
without advising with them, and educate them answerably.

2. Un willing persons cannot be ordained, for they are not compelled to come
to it, but every man is at his liberty; they are only fairly told, that if they
will be Ministers, they must be enabled thereunto by O^dination; as when there
is a County Feast in London, there is notice given, that if any body will
come, he must bring a Ticket from the Stewards: So when they were invited to
the Wedding in the Gospel Mat. 22. 11, 12, 13.
, it was required they should have on a Wedding Garment; so we require, that
Ordination should precede Administration, and that is all, but if they be not
willing to be Ministers, we meddle not. Indeed when Parks and Palaces were
added and annexed, there was some reason to suspect, that men for worldly ends
might be affected to the way, but now that bias is taken off, and that piece of
Reformation so exactly ordered and improved, that ambitious and worldly-minded
men, have little to invite their avaritious and inordinate affections; seeing
therefore none can be ordained but only those that solemnly profess a
willingness, and that there is nothing left for to encourage and invite
Hypocrisy and worldly aims, we may be sure, whoever now will be ordained, is
willing and resolved.

3. If by Liberty and Freedom, they intend and mean a power of revocation and
recess, if any sensuality or fancy be not sufficed and contented every way,
that they may be so amici, ut possint inimici, so friends to day, that they may
be enemies to morrow, they must be told, that such a Liberty and Freedom is
inconsistent with the nature of the service; for Ordination does entitle one
unto an intimacy with God and Christ, shall I hide from Abraham the thing which
I do Genesis 18. 17
? yea the Lord will do nothing but he reveals his secrets unto his Servants
the Prophets Amo^ 3. 7.
. Now when God has thus discovered himself unto his Servants they must not be
at liberty to open all unto his enemy. Philip de Comines was servant to the
Duke of Burgundy, and well acquainted with his State and temper, but when King
Lewis had fetched him off and entertained him, the Dukes affairs declined
immediately: Its yet well known that M. Marbery was first an eminent Preacher,
and greatly followed by the good people of this Land, then called Puritans, and
therefore attempted by the opposites, and at last prevailed with to preach
against them; who then takes liberty to reproach them, and discover those in
ordinacies which that way was attended with; as all bright bodies have a
shadow, and all exactness some exorbitancy; which this Back-slider upon all
occasions did improve, and heighthen. Our Brethren of New England, with Doctor
Ames, and Mr. Hooker, in his Survey of Discipline say, that there is the same
relation between a Minister and his Congregation, as there is between a Husband
and his Wife: Now men do not use to marry upon liking; before they may consider
if they will, but not after; the use and practice of Divorces among the Jews
was never good, as our Savior Christ has now resolved it Matthew. 19. 7, 8, 9.
; the Pharisees were glad when they had corrupted Judas to acquaint them with
our Saviors secret hants and places of resort, that they might come upon him
hand somely, and in the absence of the multitude Luke 22. 5, 6.
, therefore our Savior takes especially care that they should not plow with
his heifer any more, but that whosoever should put his hand to this plow, and
afterward look back, should be accounted unmeet for that employment Luke 9. 52.
; and those few examples which notwithstanding have been in this case, have
been made with Lots Wife, Pillars of Salt, to season all succeeding Renegadors.
and Apostates, according to that conclusion of the Apostle, Heb. 10. 38.
if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him.

4. For Popish votaries, they put Religion in their abstinence from Meats and
Marriage, and wearing certain Garbs and kinds of Garments, which God has no
way ordered and appointed, and so become a superstition and will worship in a
very great degree, as the Apostle shows, Col. 2. 20, 21, 22, 23.
for meat commends us not to God, for neither if we eat, are we the better,
neither if we eat not, are we the worse 1 Cor. 8. 8.
; but Ordination is an Ordinance of Gods appointment, as we have showed, and
necessarily antecedent unto the legal Administrations there used, and therefore
not of kindred unto Popish vows; besides, those often are of things not in our
power, or variable as the frame and constitutions of our bodies vary, as Meats,
as Paul to his beloved Timothy, 1 Timothy 5. 23.
Drink no longer water, but use a little wine for thy stomachs sake, and often
infirmities; as the constitution and temper of our bodies alter, so should our
diet, and other entertainments and accommodations alter, and we should not tie
our selves in these indifferent things, to what may be either troublesome or
inconvenient, as Paul in the like cases of Meats and Marriages concludes 1 Cor.
6. 12, 13.
; but Ordination unto those that do in end the Ministry, is not a thing
indifferent, but is enjoined, as we have showed, and therefore may be
undertaken by qualified and fitted persons, without any impeachment to their
liberty and freedom; for though our act determines and takes away our liberty
to that particular, nam quicquid est, dum est, necesse est esse, yet it no
ways hurts or wounds the faculty that was employed; when a Limbner has drawn
a Picture, he is not free as to that act, but his faculty is not impaired; when
God de^ermines any thing and is engaged, as in that solemn Oath Isa. ^5, 23.
, his liberty is not impeached by it, but rather strengthened, as habits are by
new acts, scriben do disces scribere, use legs and have them.

Object. 2. But we see but little good this Ordination does, the Bishops in
their times were great Ordainers, and still are, some of them, but did no
wonders that we hear of by it; took oftentimes their Singing-men and made them
Ministers, yea, sometimes their Butlers or their Barbers, but did their
Ordination make them ever the better? did any Oil of Grace, or any tincture and
infusion of understanding and abilities drop from their fingers on these
greasy Block heads, and debanched Serving men, to make them Holy and
Religious, or to enlighten and enlarge their parts? Paul meets a company of
Ignoramusses that had not so much as heard whether there were any Holy Ghost,
yet when he once had laid his hands upon them, immediately they spoke the
tongues and prophesied Act. 19. 6.
, if we could see this done by those that now Ordain, it would be some
encouragement unto us; so when at first the Apostles only meant to ordain
Deacons, that should serve Tables, and not be exercised in Prayer, and the
Ministry of the Word, Act. 6. 2, 3, 4.
yet their fingers were so oily and dropped so upon their heads, that we find
them preaching presently, and some of them with that wisdom and power that
could not be resisted, as its said of Stephen who was one of them Verse. 8, 9,
10.
; so when Paul laid hands on Timothy, there was by that means a Gift of God
imparted to him, that his Grandmother and Mother could not give him 2 Timothy 1.
6.
; but now we see no such effects, they that were fools before are so still, and
they that were knaves before are so still, only they are now more discovered
and known to be so; as good therefore never a whit as never the better, as good
lay no hands on, as nothing but hands, when they have something in their hands
to give, they will have customers, till then they may keep them in their
pockets.

Sol. 1. We have showed before that Ordination was not designed or intended to
convert and bring men home to God, that were before strangers and enemies unto
him, that is the Preachers part, as Christ shows unto Paul, Acts 26. 18.
now because it does not that it never was intended and designed for, shall it
be therefore thrown away? one has a good Knife that he carries about with him
to cut his meat, shall he throw it away because it will not shave the hairs
from off his cheeks and beard? it may be a good Pen, and yet not able to draw a
Picture. So Ordination may be good for that it was ordained and intended for,
though it be not good for every thing, as the Dutch man does believe his Butter
is.

2. We have showed before, that Ordination is the dedication or devoting of a
qualified or fitted person to attendance, and pre-supposed examination and
trial of their Gifts; if any Bishop or other Person presumed to ordain
unqualified persons, or such as were indisposed and unfitted, it was his fault,
not Ordinations, and could not be cured by Ordination, but should have been
prevented by a precedent or antecedent examination and probation of their gifts
and fitness; if a Physician give high Cordials to one inflamed with a
Burning-Feaver, shall Physic be no more administered? error personae non est
arti imputandus, it was his fault, not his faculties; if any Bishop did so much
forget himself, it was his own fault, not his Professions, he may be and
perhaps is punished for it, but its no good ground to abdicate and throw away
the calling, materia praeparata and disposita, is simply necessary, and if that
be neglected, the act is null and void; and therefore Paul when he enjoyneth
Timothy and Titus to ordain, adds Orders for examination and probation, as
appears 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2, etc. Titus 1. 5, 6, 7*
.

3. We answer, That if the person or subject matter be not mistaken, then there
is always good done, for they are thereby enabled to preach the Word, and
administer the Sacraments, which others are not, nor he was not before; there
is an Office-power bestowed on them which they had not before, as was on those
that the Apostles did ordain, they are made Overseers of the Flock or Church
of God, as they were Act. 20. 28.
, have a dispensation of the Gospel committed to them, as Paul had 1 Cor. 9. 17
, and may without any danger approach unto the holy things of God, and not
perish as they did in the gainsaying of Corah Judge. 11.
; now it is something to have such an amulet about one that he shall not be
smitten with Gods terrible Thunderbolts as Corah was and his Companions.

4. Good men are never altogether empty handed, especially good Ministers;
Jacob put upon Ephr aim his right hand, and his left upon Manasses Genesis 48. 14*
, Joseph was troubled at it, knowing his Fathers right hand was more oily and
dropped more than did the other Verse. 17, 18, 19.
; they never would have brought their little Children to our Savior to lay his
hands upon them but that they knew something would flow and follow from it
Matthew. 19. 13, 14, 15.
, and why should we think that Ordination does no good, when it is always
attended with fasting, praying, preaching, and encouraging? when God is sought
in a serious solemn manner, he is not sought in vain, as the Prophet speak^
Isa. 45. 19.
, when there is solemn asking, seeking, knocking, according to the will and in
the way of God, we may and should believe that there is having, finding,
opening, as Christ has promised Mat. 7. 7, 8.
.

Object. 3. But whither shall a sober dis-ingaged person go to be ordained, and
not to be made a party? good people think their choice and call sufficient, and
though our Brethren of New England would have the Eldership employed in it, yet
think the Essence of the Ministerial Call, to be in the Election and
Designation of the people; but against this the Presbyters and Prelates woefully
exclaim, alleging that the people never had this power, and therefore never
gave it; that the Scripture has neither president nor precept to enable them,
and whatsoever power is not planted by their Heavenly Father, shall be rooted
up Mat. 15. 13.
.

If to the Bishops, who have a long time had a Patent and Monopoly, the
Presbyters and People join against it, as being an usurpation tyrannically
obtruded on the Ministers by custom, the worst of Tyrants, seeing it cannot be
proved by the Scripture that any Bishop ever did ordain qua Bishop, for as for
Timothy and Titus, it was below them to be Bishops, being both of them
Evangelists, and fellow Travelers with the Apostles, to settle things they had
appointed, and were in such continual motion, that they had no leisure to sit
long in any place, and when Paul and Barnabas ordained they were Apostles and
Itinerant, as is apparent from that place Act. 14. 23.
, where they scarce had time to bid their friends farewell. If to the
Presbyters which is now the only rendevouz, the Prelates and the people cry us
down for innovators and intruders, say that our Presbyters had limits set them
in their Ordination to preach the Word, and administer the Sacraments, but
neither Ordination nor Jurisdiction in there grant, and what they never had
they cannot give, and though it should be granted that the Presbytery, the
Apostle speaks of 1 Timothy 4. 1^
, was not the Office, but consessus, or Collegium Presbyterorum, yet how shall
it appear that this Presbytery ordained? that they laid hands on Timothy is
certain, but that they might do after Ordination, as its certain that
Presbytery did to Saul and Barnabas, who were either Prophets or Teachers
before they did it, as appears Acts 13. 1, 2, 3.
, for though imposition of hands were used in Ordination, yet not only in that,
for Christ laid hands on little Children Matthew. 9. 13, 14, 15.
, and gave command to his Disciples to do it afterward unto the sick Mar. 16.
18.
; Its true, there are other instances in Scripture of Presbyteries Luke 22. 66.
Acts 23. 5.
, but should we go to such as these, they would not like us, for these were the
Civil as well as Ecclesiastical Officers and Magistrates, assured and
perpetual enemies to Christ and the Apostles, as in the fore mentioned places
does appear.

Sic ubi parts labant, summa turbatur, when parties fall out true men hear of
their goods; the safest way therefore is, to sit still until they be all
'greed, ad neutram accedeas partem fit dominus utrinsque, he that takes no
part, makes all parts court him.

Sol. 1. How far the people may have an hand in Ordination, we have showed
before at lage, when we showed what we did not mean by Ordination, whither the
Reader may repair for satisfaction in it Part 2. Chapter 3.
; for in our opinion they have no essential influence, though they may and
should be present and assistant at it, as we have showed; so that the question
and contention is between the Prelates and the Presbyters; if these could be
agreed, the work were done, and it were easy to be assured, where Ordination
might be had.

2. We shall with all our hearts compound this controversy, and never let it
go unto the Jury, for if the Bishops will grant (as very many of them do) that
Presbyters in some cases may Ordain, we shall grant that Bishops in all cases
may, but one, and that is, when a Bishop never was a Presbyter, as in Italy it
often falls out, but if the Priest remember that he was a Clerk, the Prelate
that he was a Presbyter, we shall be ready to kiss those hands that were
sometimes laid upon our heads, or on our Brethrens, for though we think that
gradus non variat speciem, those honors and embellishments amount not to
another order or degree of Ministers, yet we do not think them fatal and
annihilating of that power of Presbytery they had before; if any body therefore
doubt whether unpreferred Presbyters have power to Ordain, let him go (with all
our hearts) to those Presbyters whom Kings or other Potentates delight to honor
and accommodate with gayer trappings and endowments Ephesians. 6. 6.
. When Benhadad sent unto the Prophet a present, namely forty Camels laden
with every good thing of Damascus, as its said 2 Kings 8. 7, 8, 9, 10.
, we do not find the Prophet refusing of it, and chiding him for laying such an
heavy Obligation on him, for sure he was, that if it were too much, there were
enough that would assist him in the bearing of it; they say, religio peperit
divitias, sed filia devoravit matrem, that greatness was goodness Child, but
growing wanton kicked against her Dam; that the honors and advancements of the
Ministers and Churchmen in former times oppressed them, and made them either
dull and phlegmatic unto their duty, or rampant and untractable unto their
fellow Presbyters, but now there is a way found out to ease them, and let them
blood in case of restiveness; there is a Law made Deuteronomy. 22. 4. Exodus 23. 5.
that if one finds the Ass of him that hates him, lying under his burden, he
should not fail to help him up; but we are persuaded that if it had been one of
those-fourty Camells that were carrying of the good things of Damascus unto the
Prophet, there would have been no need of any such Law; the world is now become
so kind and civil, that there is little fear of any such oppression, if a
Churchman be overwhelmed and lie under a load of riches and revenue, he will
be quickly eased.

3. Although the Presbyters in this and other reformed Churches, did believe
and hold the Bishops Ordination lawful, and for peace and order sake were
content to take it from them when it might be had, yet they always thought they
did it not by virtue of any superior order or distinguishing degree they had,
which Presbyters had not; but as Presbyters designed in that part of the Office
to have precedence, and be always of the quorum, and accountable for any
errors committed in it, and knew very well that they were not omitted or
declined for want of any power or inability to Ordain, because they are
commanded in the rules of Ordination so to minister the Doctrine, and
Sacraments, and Discipline of Christ, as the Lord has commanded, one part
whereof they knew to have been Ordination 2 Timothy 2. 2.
; and howsoever the Bishops hands were always on the parties head to be
Ordained, yet the other Presbyters there present were not excluded, but laid
their hands on also, as well as he; and though in Ordination they do not say,
Ordain Ministers, yet that is employed, as we have showed before, for it is not
expressly said in the Ordination of a Bishop, as appears in the Book.

Object. 4. If none but Presbyters that preach, have power to Ordain, there
will be packing, that is, none shall be ordered and admitted into Office by
them, unless they be of Presbyterian principals, addicted totally unto that
party, for they will fifth and winnow them, as the Devil would have done the
Apostles Luke 22. ^1
, that whatsoever is in them shall be discovered, and if it be not purely putely
Presbyteriall, they will be shifted off by some device; as in the Prelaters
days their Chaplains had certain private marks to know a Puritan, which if
discovered in the Party to be Ordained, there was no hope of his Admission;
they had some Shibboleth or other, whereby they gathered quarum partium he was
of, and if he faultred in the answer, he was as polluted, put from the
Priesthood as they were Neh. 7. 64.
, and its no new thing but descends unto them from the Scribes and Pharisees,
that College of Presbyters that we read of that sat in Council against our
Savior Christ Luke 22. 66.
, where none were suffered to be present but those that were engaged perfectly
and of their gang, nati natorum, and qui nascuntur ab illis, Acts 4. 5, 6. Joh.
11. 47, 48.
And it came to pass on the morrow, that their Rulers, and Elders, and
Scribes, and Annas the High Priest, and Caiphas, and John, and Alexander, and
as many as were of the Kindred of the High Priest, were gathered together at
Jerusalem; here was a pack indeed, and accordingly the act was ordered, a Vote
passes that they should preach no more Act. 4. 18.
, and so in after times the Presbyters and Popes of Rome gave Holy Orders unto
none but those that were engaged thoroughly unto their way, and would preach any
thing that was proposed to them by the Conclave and College of Presbyters that
sat at Rome, as now they do, and have a Meeting weekly, de propagando fide
whereby those monsterous Heresies of Purgatory, praying for the Dead, Masses,
Monasteries, worshipping of Saints, Transubstantiation, Supererogation,
Penances, and Pilgrimages, and the like were hatched and communicated to the
world; these got and mingled that Cup of Fornication, and then send it to their
Mercenary Chaplins, to be divided among the Nations, as it is Rev. 17. 2.
, and if it happened that God at any time revealed any thing to any body, that
was eccentrick unto this Design, as he did to Berengarius, Waldus, and others
in the world, these Hornets presently so stung and wounded them, that they were
forced either to abjure or quit their Stations. Now seeing God by a mighty hand
has freed us from this vermin, should we again make nests for them to breed in
and engender? should we encourage and hatch up an interest that perhaps
hereafter we cannot manage? raise up more spirits than we can allay? its good
therefore to stand fast in that liberty whereby Providence has made us free,
and not be again entangled with a yoke which neither we nor our forefathers
were able to bear, as the Apostle speaks Act. 15. 10.
, for partiality has always been observed to be the common frailty and
infirmity of Ecclesiastical Authority, which gave occasion to the Apostle, of
that severe and solemn interdiction, 1 Timothy 5. 21
I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Elect Angels,
that thou observe these things, without preferring one before another, doing
nothing by partiality; seeing therefore this Nation that was wont to be as much
Priest-ridden as any other, is freed from that slavish and sad subjection, to
another interest, it were madness in them to let their Riders get up again.

Sol. 1. When the mind of God is known in any thing, and his will and way made
out unto us, we should not listen unto every inconvenience that may be hinted
and suggested to us, and the reason is, because God makes use of and orders
inconveniences to his own ends and honor, for as it is true on the other side,
omnis commoditas sua fert incommoda secum, that every convenience has an
inconveniency attending on it, so every inconveniency has a convenience,
either consequent or antecedent, and so its good to do the will of God, and
obey his Orders, without disputing, fiat justicia, ruat mundus, as God
commanded in the case of Tithes, that the tenth should be the Lords, and they
should not search whether it were good or bad, but should be bound to take it
as it fell Levit. 27. 32, 33.
; Christ did foretell that the preaching of the Gospel would be inconvenient,
for there should be five in one house divided, three against two, and two
against three, and yet did order and appoint it (k); God knew the Jews (l)
Luke 12. 52, 53.
would be enraged when they heard by Paul that he was sent unto the Gentiles
Act. 22. 21, 22, 23.
, yet did it notwithstanding; what God therefore does order and appoint, we
must not afterward arraign upon suspicion of inconvenience that may ensue.

2. If it be packing to have succession ordered by those in power, and of the
same interest, then all Government in Bodies and Societies of men is packing,
for in Feoffments Survivers are for to make new ones when they are reduced unto
a paucity; in Kingdoms and Estates that are Elective, the body chooses, that is
concerned and engaged in it; in guilds, fraternities, and corporations, the
present Governors do order the succession in the same body, and by these means
Societies are made immortal, as that of Venice, that by way of choosing and
ordering their own Election, have lasted now above twelve hundred years; are
other bodies by this way enabled to perpetuate themselves? and shall Christ's
body be unable to do the like? do other States and Governments live and grow,
and shall Christ's body languish and be oppressed? hark what the Apostle says,
Ephesians. 4. 16
from whom the whole body fitly joined together, and compacted by that which
every joint supplyeth, according to the effectual working in the measure of
every part, makes increase of the body unto the edifying of it self in love,
it does not break down, but build up and edify it self.

3. If it be packing for Presbyters to choose Successors of the same interest
and principles, then God himself was guilty of it, for all the time of the
Mosaicall Administration, who fixed all Ecclesiastical Authority in one Tribe
Numb. 3. 11, 12, 13.
, and the Priesthood in the Sons of Aaron Numb. 3. 10.
; here is indeed a pack of Presbyters or Priests, but God himself is he that
makes it, here is nati natorum, and qui nascuntur ab illis, for set men first
right, and then no matter how exactly they be incorporated, how firm the
building be if it be according to the Pattern and Rule that is held forth for
the directing of it, nulli penetrabilis astro lucus erat; the better an Army is
embattled, the likelier to win the victory, defendit numer us junct aeque
umbone phalanges, the Macedonian Phalanx was for a long time held invincible,
they can have no good meaning that would make breaches in it, and mix the iron
and the clay together.

4. How shall this packing be avoided in any other way? there must be some body
to give these Orders out, Christ's Body must not be ungoverned, (...), without
an head, the Spouse of Christ exposed unto rape, made common and a Strumpet,
who then shall order this election and succession, invest with Power and
Authority? perhaps you will say the Civil Magistrate, and will not he be
likewise partial? bring none in that are not engaged in the interest that he
promotes; will not he stickle for a Friend or Favorite? shall not his Kinsman
or his Houshold-Chaplain be preferred? will not he think one fit to serve
Christ that he found a trusty servant to himself? believe that he can save
souls that knows how to sell Lands and raise his Lords Rents? if Bishops hands
have been thus byast toward a servants or a Chaplains head, why should we
think a Justice of the Peace, or a Lord of a Manor, altogeher undeclinable?
were not the Crafts men spoken of by Luke Acts 19. 24, 25.
, engaged as strongly in a combination, as any Presbyters can be? the Chief
Priests, Scribes, and Elders, made up that Society Luke 22. 66.
; and were the Civil Magistrates and the ordinary Governors and Rulers of the
people, as they are called Acts 23. 5.
, yet biased sufficiciently, and fixed to an interest, directly contrary unto
our Savior Christ John 11. 47, 48.
? as good therefore be content with Gods appointment, as make a worse one,
believe as God does, that Parents are the best instructers of their Sons, and
will not wrong them nor abuse them in their information, as Paul taught
Timothy, so let him deliver that good thing in trusted to him, unto other
faithful men in his opinion, and they to others, and so successively from one
to one; and its observable, that as among the Priests the Son did always
succeed the Father in the Priest hood, so it was also among the Prophets, their
Scholars and Disciples are said to be their Sons 2 Kings 4. 38.
, for as the Father imprints upon the Son his own similitude and picture, so
the Teacher does in some degree and kind upon the Learner; its certain the
Corinthians 1 Cor. 4. 15
, and all those whom the Apostle by his Ministry converted, were his Sons and
Daughters, yet those two special Instruments that he made use of in Ordaining
Ministers, he calls his Sons more frequently and more affectionately, Phil. 2.
22.
ye know the proof of him, that as a Son with the Father, so he has served
with me in the Gospel; so when he was resolved to entrust Titus with Ordination
Titus 1. 5.
, he does in the verse before bestow a Sonship on him, Verse 4.
to Titus mine own Son, after the common faith, he gives this power unto none
but unto Sons that should be bound to carry on Gods Interest and Design. Seeing
therefore partiality will cleave unto Authority, be sure the Authority be fixed
where it should be, seeing every entity and being in the world, is apt for to
augment and magnify it self, according to that saying of the Philosopher,
(...), what one has he labors for to heap, its good to follow God, and hope
the best of things.

Object. 5. If Ordination thus descends from Presbyter to Presbyter* from one
to one in a succession, line, and uninterrupted course, we see not how the
Popes of Rome can be declined and excluded, for they are Presbyters, what Peter
was, they say they are, for claim to be his Followers and Successors, and
though some have been Cardinals that never were Presbyters or Priests, yet
certain it is, there never was a Pope that was not first a Priest or Presbyter
1 Pet. 5. 1.
, (...), the Presbyters which are among you, I exhort, who am also a Presbyter,
or Elder, not only a single and simple Presbyter, but a Presbyter in
composition or combination; and if it once be in the Pope, it must come from
him, for he for many years has looked on himself as the root and fountain of
all Ecclesiastical and Spiritual power, and to be sure there were no
Presbyters for many ages and successions in the Church, but what received
Ordination from his Authority and Influence, and if the persons Ordained be the
Sons of those that do Ordain, as has been said, then our Presbyters at this
day must be Popes Sons, for indeed Papa is but Father in other words, only used
because of the affinity it has with other Foreign Languages, so that the Pope
must needs be not Godfather, but Father to all the Presbyters that are now;
and forasmuch as in the judgment and opinion of all our Presbyters, to be sure
of those that be of the Province of London, the Pope is Antichrist, we see not
how his Sons and Children can be freed from being Antichristian, for if they go
about for to evade by shifting and distinctions they will be found to be as
arrant Sons as formerly, only more dis-ingenuous and disobedient to their
Parents, they should be honester in our opinions if they would do as one in
this Nation, who chose rather to be accounted, as he was indeed, a Noble man's
Bastard, than an ordinary man's Son, as otherwise he might have been.

Sol. 1. The Popes of Rome are not the first nor only Antichrists, for there
were such in the Church when Rome was Orthodox, and far enough from being
Antichristian, for the mystery of iniquity began to work in Paul's time, as he
says 2 These. 2. 7.
, and some began to love pre-eminence in Saint John's time John 3. 9.
, which is the great piece of Antichristianism that is objected to the Pope;
nay so modest were the Popes of Rome, that they contended not for the Title of
Universal Bishop, until John Bishop of Constantinople, went about to snatch
it from them and affix it unto that Seat, about the year of our Lord five
hundred ninety five: Now when they saw it would be gone, they put in for it and
prevailed; and for that other part of Antichrist which is to be Heterodox about
the Nature and Offices of Christ, according as Saint John determined it Joh. 2.
22.
, there were many of that spirit and persuasion in the Church before John the
Apostle wrote his Epistle 1 John 1. 18. 1 John 4. 3.
, and Arrianism and Photinianism that flatly and plainly denied Christ's
Divinity, were almost every where before they were at Rome, for it is well
known that Rome was Orthodox, cum ingemuerat orbis, and miratus erat se factum
esse Arrianum, when the whole World groaned under that opinion; now shall we
account those Antichristian that have received Ordination from the Successors
of those Arrian and Photinian Bishops? if so, then all the Eastern Churches
ever since were, and still are Antichristian, then those good Bishops that made
up the four first O^cumenical or General Councills must be Antichristian, for
Ordination came to them in this respect from Antichrists.

2. God is the Father of all Believers, as we are taught Matthew. 6. 9.
, yea, we are bidden to own no other Father, Mat. 23. 9.
call no man Father upon earth, for one is your Father which is in Heaven; this
is the Original and root of all the Church, as the Apostle plainly shows Ephesians.
3. 14, 15.
, and sure we are, that he was long before the Pope of Rome; and if we be
examined further, and looked on as we are Presbyters, yet here we are more
ancient than the Pope, for not only did God set Teachers in the Church, 1 Cor.
12. 22.
, but when Christ ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts
to men, that is, he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers Ephesians. 4. 8. 11.
; There were therefore Pastors and Teachers in the Church before the Bishops of
Rome were called Popes, or pretended unto that Universality of Jurisdiction or
Ambition of being above all, that justly brought upon him the suspicion of
being the Antichrist or Man of Sin, signified by the Apostle in that signal
place 2 These. 2. 4.
, yea not only in other parts of the World, but also here in England, Pastors
and Teachers were established before the Popes of Rome had any interest or
anthority among us; three Bishops sent from hence unto the Synod of Arles, when
Constantine the Great was Governor and Ruler here, before he was made
Emperor, the whole Synod with the names of the Bishops sent from hence, may be
seen at large in the First Volumn of Sir Henry Spelman's Councills; its true,
that this Land was much afflicted partly by the venom of the Arrian and
Pelagian Heresies, partly by the barbarous cruelty of the Northern Nations that
were Pagan-Idolaters; for the recovery and relief of whom, Gregory the Bishop
(not yet Pope) of Rome, sent over Austin and other Ministers, not to plant the
Faith and Gospel, which was done long before, but to reclaim and reconcile the
jarring parties that were found among the Britains, that were forced into
Wales for their security, and partly to work upon the Saxon Kings, that then
were little better than Pagans; for Austin found in those parts both Bishops
and Presbyters that told him of his pride, and refused to be subject to him;
our Ministers therefore in those times were not the Popes Sons, unless it shall
be granted that a Son may be before his Father.

3. It will not follow we had our Ordination from Rome, therefore we are
Antichristian, for though it be granted that many things in Rome were
Antichristian and out of order, yet all was not, their errors razed not the
Fundamental and Essential Powers bestowed on them by their godly
Predecessors, for we have the same Scriptures which they had, and in some
periods and parts of the New Testament by them repaired and recovered, as
Calvin and others have observed; the same Baptism with water, and in the name
of Father Son, and Holy Ghost, which Form they constantly retained, though many
other things were superadded, so the same Orders of Bishops and Presbyters,
though many others orders and abuses were supperadded; for as in natural
Generation a Father begets not qua good or wise, but qua man, and so a wise man
may beget a Fool, as Solomon shows Eccles. 2. 18, 19.
, for as the errors and abuses of the Church of Rome, were not in the
Foundation and Essential constitution of it, but grew upon it afterward
through the negligence of those which then were Pastors and Watchmen in her,
for while men slept, the enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat, and went
his way Mat. 13. 25
, so did the substance and truth of Office and Authority remain and stay all
that time in her, as the Wheat did in the Field all the times the tares grew,
and as that wheat winnowed and purged from the tares was good seed, and would
if sown, produce and bring forth wheat, so the Ministry of Rome reformed and
cleansed from their errors, might beget, as they have done, good Ministers.

4. If it be granted that we were Ordained by Bishops that succeeded Papists,
and that the Head and Fountain of our Ordination was in Italy, yet was it still
by men in Office; what if the Prenotory or Keepers of the Great Seal were
naughty men, yet a Writ or Patent signed and sealed by them is good and valid?
shall a Decree in Chancery, or in the Rolls, be contradicted or rejected,
because the present Officer is rotten and corrupt? was Naamans Gold and
Garments ere the worse because he had been a Leper? surely Gehasi that was the
Prophets man, thought not so, for then he would not have purchased them so dear
2 Kings 5. 27.
; was Circumcision ever the worse because Jacobs Sons had much abused it, to
over reach the Shechemits Gen 34. 30.
? so the Baptizing and Ordaining power in the Church of Rome remained good and
valid in the Church of Rome, though the persons Baptizing and Ordaining were
degenerated and grown bad; if a man in his youth be wanton and have Bastards by
diverse Women, if afterward he sees his errors and is sorry, and reforms, and
takes a lawful Wife, shall not his Children begotten after, be lawful and
legitimate? suppose the Presbyters and Prelates in the Church of Rome be wanton
and unclean, shall not their successors that renounce their errors and
abominations, be received unto mercy, and assured of their Patrimony and
Possession, though derived from them? has not God said, that if the Son
renounce the errors of his Father, he shall not suffer for them Ezekiel. 18. 14,
15, 16, 17.
? if a man himself be honest and legitimate, shall he lose his Lands? because
some of his Ancestors and Predecessors have been Bastards. There were
bickerings between the Houses of York and Lancaster, but we find it not
objected unto them of Lancaster, that they were the Offspring and Posterity of
John of Gaunt, by Katherin Swinford, who was not his lawful Wife.

THE THIRD PART:
CHAP. I. Showing the scope and purpose of this Part.
IN the former Parts we have endeavored to clear that there is a Ministry, and
that Ordination is essential to the constitution of it; we intend in this, to
show what is the duty of ordained Ministers, they are not Ordained to be for
ciphers; when a candle is lighted up, it is for service, not for secrecy, as
Christ says Mat. 5. 13.
; Ministers are ipso nomine* Actors, and in service, and it is on all hands
granted, that they are to attend and act in holy things; but that is a little
too universal, we must therefore in this Part descend unto particulars; there
be four things commonly assigned, wherein the Ministers of Christ are
entertained and employed; praying, not only privately, and in relation to his
personal concernments, for that is common unto them with other christians, for
all are called upon for that, and are not promised more than they ask; but also
publicly to offer up the prayers of the congregation, as a Priest and public
person, in which regard Prayer is called a Sacrifice Heb. 13. 15
, and this the Apostles set down as a special part of their service, from
which they would not be diverted, Acts. 6. 4.
; yea there were gifts to be obtained by prayer that much enabled and disposed
them unto their work, 1* Cor. 14. 13.
Let him that speaks in an unknown tongue, pray that he may interpret, for
being Officers and Servants unto God, they shall have manifold occasions to
petition him.

2. Preaching, which in that place before quoted, is called the Ministry of the
Word, Acts 6. 4.
but we will give our selves continually unto prayer, and the Ministry of the
Word, that is, to open and apply the Scriptures, for that Paul shows to have
been the special end of his conversion and Ordination, 2 Timothy 4. 17
so Christ Ordained twelve, that they might be with him, and that he might send
them forth to preach Mark 3. 14
.

3. Adminstrating the Sarcaments, to set to the Seals of God, unto those
evidences, that he has given men of their eternal interests; Baptism, Matthew.
28. 19, 20.
go teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost; the Lords Supper, this do in remembrance of me Luke
22. 19, 20. 1 Cor. 11. 24, 25.
, and these are ordinarily acknowledged to be the business and employment of a
Minister, by all that own the Office, or make them different from other men,
and we acknowledge these are great things, and say with the Apostle, 2 Cor. 2.
16.
who is sufficient for these things? we feel the weight of these
Administrations, and covet not a greater load, but are suspicious; there is yet
another thing expected from us, and required of us, and that is the use and
exercise of Discipline; namely, observing and applying the rules of Gods Word,
unto the carriage and condition of those that are under our charge, that if
they do not as they should do, we do admonish and acquaint them with it, and
let them know the danger of it; but this is not so easily allowed us, because
it has affinity with politic and worldly greatness, and has bin dangerously
abused by the Pope of Rome, to the prejudice of the affairs and interests of
Christian Princes and States, but we do not think that we for that are wholly
acquitted and discharged of that part of our Office and Employment, no more
than we are from Preaching and Administering the Sacraments, because both these
have been highly abused by him.

We are therefore constrained to add this Part, wherein we only purpose to
declare how far we think our selves obliged and engaged in the exercise of
Discipline, toward those that are entrusted to us.

CHAP. II. Showing what we mean by Discipline.
DIscipline is a large and comprehensive word, including whatsoever does belong
unto the Office and employment of a Minister, used by our Savior in that grand
Commission, Matthew. 28. 19, 20.
Go, t^eah all Nations; (...) discipline all Nations, of (...), disco, doceo,
to learn and to teach, and so the Christians, when converted and brought home
unto God, are called Disciples Act. 15. 10*
, and so all Arts are called Disciplinae, or (...), and some more properly, the
Mathematics, because of the exactness and sureness of their rules; but we
intend no such extent, and ample understanding of the Word, but take it for
that part of the Ministerial Office that is not directly and properly included
in the particulars before expressed; for howsoever Preaching and Administering
the Sacraments have in them much that may be called, and is materially
Discipline, for in them Laws and Rules are showed for regulating and ordering
of men's behavior, yet those things are not what we mean by Discipline, for by
Discipline we mean that ordering and guiding of our people that stands in
admonitions, directions, and corrections that are made out and offered to them,
upon occasion of their own miscarriages and errors, and may be thus described.

An humble, careful, wise, Administration of the rules and censures of the
Word of God, for the spiritual guiding of the Church, unto her everlasting
happiness.

1. We say it is an Administration; for though our Savior Christ when he made
his Last Will, had no Executors, yet we think he had Administrators or
Overseers of it, to take order that the Debts and Legacies, therein due, and
bequeathed, be so disposed as he has appointed in his Holy Word; so Paul, 1
Cor. 4. 1.
Let a man so think of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the
Mysteries of God. As the Steward is entrusted with the goods and substance of
his Master, to order and dispense it for his Masters honor and advantage, so
are the Ministers, as the Apostle plainly shows, 1 Cor. 9. 17
if I do this thing willingly, I have a reward, but if against my will, a
dispensation is committed to me, (...) I am trusted with a Stewardship,
economy, or dispensation; what he was, all his Successors are, Administrators
and Trustees in those Affairs; and howsoever men are free before, yet after
Ordination, they are not free, but tied and engaged to this Administration and
Employment.

2. We say, an humble Administration; we acknowledge, Administration is a word
of a low inferior import, implies accountablenesse and service, yet argues
the Death or Absence of the Lord or Owner of the goods, and is therefore apt to
make one insolent and inaccessible, as those citizens, as soon as ever their
Lord was gone, rebel against him Luke 19. 14
, and that Steward, (o) my Lord delaieth his coming, and shall begin to smite
his fellow (q)Matthew. 24. 48, 49.
servants, as Maids that serve a Batchelour or Widdower, and have no Mistress,
are apt to be exalted and lifted up; so when the Apostles did but hear of
Christ's departure from them, they presently began to think who should succeed
him in the Sovereignty, but our Savior in stead of gratifiing their fond
ambition, does read a Lecture of Humility unto them Mat. 20. 25 26, 27, 28.
, as we have showed; so Peter, 1 Pet. 5. 3.
neither as being Lords over Gods inheritage, but being examples to the Flock,
implying, that same aptitude that is in men, to reign and Lord it over those
they administer unto; but we disclaim all Lordliness and exaltation, and leave
it to that man of sin and Son of Perdition, that has had possession of it, and
holds it, as the Apostle shows, 2 These. 2. 3, 4.
and that Man of Sin be revealed, the son of Perdition, who opposes and
exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is Worshipped, for there
is nothing more cross and contrary unto the Service of God, than pride,
because God is bound to oppose them, James 4. 6.
and its ill with a Servant when his Lord and Master does oppose him.

3. We say it should be careful; care is an anxious, un quiet thoughtfulness,
about the good and welfare of those we are engaged and obliged too, as a Parent
for his absent Son, 1 Samuel 10. 2
thy Father has left the care of the asses, and sorroweth for you, saying,
What shall I do for my son? so a good Minister is careful for his Flock,
thinks that besides his preaching to them, and praying for them, and
administering the Sacraments, there is a care incumbent on him for them, that
continually affects him, with all their weakness, and wants, with all their
wanderings and deviations, as the Apostle speaks, besides those things that
are without, that which comes upon me daily, the care of all the Churches,
who is weak and I am not weak, who is offended and I burn not? 2 Cor. 11. 28,
29.
as in the Family, if any Child or Servant be amiss, the Father or Master is
in care about it, and therefore the Apostle makes that the pattern, 1 Timothy 3.
4, 5.
one that rules well his own house, having his children in subjection, with
all gravity, for if a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take
care of the Church of God? there is a wages due to Ministers, as well as unto
Husbandmen, Shepherds, or Soldiers, as the Apostle shows, 1 Cor. 9. 7 8, 9,
10.
yet they are not to be esteemed Hirelings but owners of their Flocks, and
accountable unto the grave and universal Shepherd for them, and therefore are
affected with the good and evil of them, as men are with their own Flocks, or
those they are to make good, as Jacob was, Genesis 31. 39
for he is an Hireling and not the Shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, Joh.
10. 13.
Ministers are such as feed their own Flocks, not other men's.

4. Wise; prudentialls in a Steward are essentialls, and the want of that
begets a nullitie Mat. 24. 45, 46.
; a man observes what servant has been wise, and picks him out to be his
Steward; the Family concernments are so many and importunant, that without a
deal of wisdom and discretion they cannot be dispatched, and therefore
sometimes the Servant is preferred before the Son, is made Executor or
Administrator, and the Son neglected, Pro. 27. 2.
a wise servant shall have rule over a son that causes shame, and shall have
part of the inheritance among the brethren; God has as foolish sons as any
body 1 Cor. 1. 27
, and therefore had need of wise Servants; for though Grace much improves the
subject wherein it is received, yet it alters not the constitution; there had
need therefore be some wiser than some, or else the house will not be ordered
as it should be; our Savior made this out unto the twelve, when he told them,
he sent them out as sheep in the midst of Wolves Mat. 10. 16
, in such a Journey the sheep had need be well advised how he walks; so had a
Minister, his oppositions and encounters are so many, that without a deal of
wisdom and sagacity he hardly will be able to evade, as the Apostle shows in
several particulars 2 Cor. 6. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
, to see the dangers at a distance Pro. 22. 3.
, and make provision for them, to give to every one what properly is his Luke
12. 42
, and to give in a good account of what has been committed to him, in all
which, wisdom is required.

5. We say, of the rules and censures in the Word of God; for Discipline is not
an arbitrary dispensation, but limited exactly, and bound up to the Will; and
therefore Ministers are rather Executors than Administrators, because they are
confined to the rules and orders expressed in the Will, the patterns of the
Building are given them, as we have showed before, and little or nothing left
unto discretion, Timothy was a very wise and careful Governor, as Paul shows
Phil. 2. 20.
, yet has rules and directions given him, for his behavior in the Church of
God 1 Timothy 3. 15
, and is severely charged not to be partial in the administration and
application of them, 1 Timothy 5. 21 22.
I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Elect Angels,
that thou observe these things without prejudice, (...) doing nothing by
partiality, that is, applying these rules of government and censures that I
have set down all along in this Epistle. The Lord forbid that we should
arrogate an Arbitrary dispensation; no, we acknowledge we are straightly and
precisely bound up in these transactions and executions; so as respects,
relations, and affections, are to be abandoned and shut out, 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3.
feed the Flock of God that is among you, (...), taking the oversight thereof,
not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind;
neither as being Lords over Gods Heritage, but being examples to the Flock; ye
see under how many rules, restrictions, and limitations, the Commissions are
assigned and granted out unto them. Erastus argues against Excommunication,
that seeing men cannot give Salvation, they cannot take it from us; seeing they
cannot remit, they should not retain sins; a gros^e mistake, as Mr. Beza shows,
for we assume no such Authority, but as the C^yer in the Court pronounces what
the Court or Judge determines, so do Ministers, what God the Judge of all
concludes; if a Malefactor at the Bar should quarrel with the Clark of the
Assizes, for reading his Indictment, because he had no power to indict him; it
would ^e answered, he only was the mouth or Servant of the Jury that had done
it; so we may say, we are but Gods mouth, as the Prophet in relation to such a
dispensation, is expressly called Jer. 15. 19.
; we are stripped of all ability to gratify our dearest Friends, must say with
Levi, whom in this we do succeed, Deuteronomy. 33. 9.
Who said unto his Father and Mother, I have not seen him, neither did he
acknowledge his Erethren, nor knew his own Children* The Popes of Rome do now
at last begin to send away their Nephews, and will not be persuaded to receive
them; if they had been so uncivil some years, or rather ages before, perhaps
their Chairs would have been better assured and secured to them.

6. We say, for the guiding of the Church; the complete and adequate Object of
our Administration is the Church; that is, Gods people that are picked out of
the World, and make profession of subjection to his Will and Way, for our
Administration does extend no further; we do not, nor cannot extend our line
beyond that limitation or jurisdiction, beyond that just proportion that God
has set out to us; not only this, but all Administrations are, Ephesians. 4* 12.
, for the perfecting of the Saints, the Work of the Ministry, and the edifying
of the Body of Christ, and this of censures more especially, 1 Cor. 5. 11, 12,
13.
If any man that is called a Brother, be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or an
Idolator, or a Rayler, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with such an one, no,
not to eat, and he does not only give the rule as Judicatories and Courts do
use to do, but does also give the reason of the rule, for what have I to do to
judge them also that are without, do not ye judge them that are within? but
them that are without God judges, the most and utmost that we can do, is but
to exclude and shut them out, Mat. 18. 17
but if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen man,
and a Publican, that is, excluded and barred from all the Assemblies and
Societies of Gods people, as the Publicans and Heathens were among the Jews,
unto whose custom and practice our Savior here alludes.

7. We say, for the guiding of it; that is, to oversee and mark what way the
Church takes, and if she goes not right, to guide her; the Ministers indeed are
called Guides, Heb. 13. 7. 1^. 24.
, first, because they have spoken unto us the Word of God, that is, have opened
and declared to us the way of God, what way God has appointed for man's
Salvation, for the Word of God is but a Directory to Salvation, and the
Ministers employment is but to open and apply this to the people, and this is
so apparent in the Ministers employment, that the Devil himself is forced to
acknowledge it Act. 16. 17
; as a Guide gives rules and marks to know the way by, and endeavors for to
make them understand it; but lest they should not, therefore secondly, he has
an eye unto them, and watches over them, which ground is given in the
seventeenth verse, for they watch for your souls, as those that shall give an
account, there is a difference between a mere guide that is taken up on the
way, merely to show the way, and an Officer that has the conduct of a Party
committed to him, for which he is accountable unto the general; such guides are
Ministers, that if the company mistake or misapply their rules, he may reform
them, and reduce them before their errors be incurable; such Overseers were
those Elders that Paul assembles at Miletus, and instructs Act. 20. 28
; and then lastly, he bids them salute them, and embrace them in some
distinction and diversity from other Saints, as the Soldiers, when they have
been guided and conducted well, salute their Officer and Commander in Chief, in
a different manner from their Fellow Soldiers, as the Greeks did Zenophon, at
their return from that dangerous Expedition against the Persians.

8. We say, the spiritual guiding or conduct of them; we do not meddle with
their Temporalls, no more than Christ our Master would in the dividing of that
Inheritance, which was proposed and submitted to him Luke 12. ^^* 14.
; we leave this interposing in Affairs of State, and meddling with Civil
Interests unto the Popes of Rome, and their political Incendiaries; as for that
distinction of in ordine ad spiritualia, in relation and subordination unto
their Souls good, there is no question of the truth of it, but only of the
extent and application, for on doubt we ought to meddle with their bodies, in
ordine adspiritualia, though the body be a carnal thing, 1 Cor. 6, 15
Know ye not that your bodies are the members of Jesus Christ, shall I then
take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an Harlot? God forbid;
their money is a carnal thing, yet if Simon Magus will employ it to purchase
power of conserring the Holy Ghost, it shall be accursed to him Act. 8. 18, 19,
20, 21.
; so if the Churches state require it, it may be laid down at the Apostles feet
Acts 4. 34, 35.
; so Garments are carnal things, yet in some cases, he that has two. Coats
may be ordered to impart unto him that has none, and he that has meat let him
do likewise Luke 3. 11.
, and so Believers send relief unto Judea, and leave it to the Elders to
distribute, as its said Act. 11. 28, 29, 30.
; but under this pretense for to invade the Magistrates employment, is a
confusion more fit for the Synagogue of Satan, than the Church of God, seeing
the Word of God exacts obedience unto Civil Powers Romans 13. 1, 2. 1 Pet. 2.
13, 14. 1 Timothy 6. 1, 2.
, and sharply censures all Rebellions and Insurrections.

9. We say, unto her happiness; the scope and end of all Administrations, is
the happiness and welfare of the Church, even God himself makes all ends
subject and subordinate to this, as the Prophet shows, Isa. 43. 3, 4.
I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Sheba for thee, two of the
wealthiest Nations in the World, yet casts them away upon the Church; yea not
only Countries and Nations, but also people, as there it follows, since thou
wast precious in my sight, thou have been honorable, and I have loved thee,
therefore I will give men for thee, and people for thy life; and that
disposition in God is nothing abated by length of time, for all things are
yours, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the World, or Life, or Death, or
things present, or things to come, all are yours, and ye are Christ's, and
Christ is Gods 1 Cor. 3. 21. 22, 23.
, God gives all to Christ, and Christ unto his Church, ask of me and I will
give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance, and the uttermost ends of the
earth for thy Possessions Psalm. 2. 8.
, so God gives all the Kingdoms of the earth to Cyrus his Anointed, and his
Successors Ezra 1. 2.
, and one of them gives all unto his Spouse Est. 9. 12, 13, 14.
.

It is a rule with Politicians, to pretend all for the public good; no body
but says Suprema lex esto, salus populi, but Church Officers are they that act
it really; the Churches happiness is that they level at in all they do, and
suffer, 2 Timothy 2. 10.
Therefore I endure all things for the Elect sake, that they may obtain the
salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory, and does not do it
grudgingly or with dejection and sorrow of heart, but with rejoying Col. 1. 24.
. Politicians cry up the peoples good, the peoples interest, till they are made
their trustees, and have the peoples power confided in their hands, and then
they tell them they cannot make them happy unless they may have leave to ruin
those that undermine them, and oppose them, as Tiberius was nothing but Romes
great Servant, but could not serve her as he would, until he had destroyed the
best and most deserving of his blood, and the noblest and stourest Senators;
but Gods Ministers are careful to guide the Church unto her happiness, though
with much unhappiness in this World unto themselves, that whatsoever power and
authority they have, they have it for the Church, not for themselves, as the
Apostle does profess, 2 Cor. 10. 8. 2 Cor. 13. 10.
according to the power which God has given me for ed^fication, and not for
your destruction; those that employ their power to silence, to restrain the
preaching of the Gospel, to butcher and oppress the conscientious people of
their Jurisdiction and Dominions, shall be in due time called to a severe
account, as Heathen Rome already has been, and Papal Rome shall one day be.

10. We say, unto her everlasting happiness; these guides and convoy is not to
leave her in any danger, but to attend her to her long home, Ephesians. 4. 13.
till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of
God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ, when there are no more Rocks nor Robbers, neither sins nor sinners to
afflict and undermine he; when there is no Lions or Bears to rend and tear her,
nor sleight of men, and cunning Craftiness, whereby they lie in wait for to
deceive, as the Apostle speaks Ephesians. 4. 14.
, when there are no grievous Wolves to enter in among them, not sparing the
Flock, nor of their own selvos men arise, speaking perverse things to draw
Disciples after them Act. 20. 29, 30.
, they may be sent away; this guard and centry is to continue so long as Christ
her Husband is absent, and at a distance from her, yet in his powerful
protection with her, and that is, always even unto the end of the world Mat.
28. 20
, when there shall be an end of all things, there shall be an end of this, when
God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain, for the
former things are passed away Rev. 21. 4.
; when Paul had told the Thessalonians of their convening and congregating unto
Christ, and of the Glory that was immediately for to succeed that, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
15, 16, 17.
they were so taken and transported with this good news, that they began to
undresse themselves, and open all their pores to let it in, were so exceeding
ready to take this fresh air, that Paul was glad with much ado for to restrain
them, and entreat them to keep on their Garments and their arms also, for that
a dangerous Winter was behind 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.
, wherein it should be a blessed thing to have their Clothes on, Rev. 15. 16
Behold, I come as a Thief, blessed is he that watches and keeps his
Garments, lest he walks naked, and they see his shame; the last times, as in
some respects, they are the best, so in many they are the worst, This know
also, that in the last days perilous times shall come, for men shall be lovers
of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents,
unthankful, unholy, with a world of other wicked dispositions and infections 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
, which are unquiet and malignant qualities, that cannot rest, as the Prophet
speaks Isa. 57. 20, 21.
; the Apostles when they saw Christ risen from the dead, and that storm over,
that had so much astonished and afflicted them, thought there would be no more,
as in a fair day we are apt to think the clouds are gone to bed, and we shall
hear of them no more, yet find, the hotter the gleam is, the sooner comes a
storm, Wilt theu (say they) at this time restore again the Kingdom of Israel
Act. 1. 6, 7.
? but were not answered unto their minds; yet because they were not chidden for
enquiry, nor answered with a pure and perfect Negative, the Primitive
Christians did hug and cherish that conceit, that Christ would come in their
times, and framed very carnal and sensual constructions of that reign of
Christ, that seems to be assured for a thousand years; so the godly Ministers
of the third Century were glad to cry it down, and call it Heresy; yet in
Luther's time it rose again so vigorously, that John Becold and his Associates
in Munster, adventured all upon it; so willing are Christ's Soldiers and
Servants to leave and be at liberty, that every Sunshine flatters them to be
in a looseness and carnality; but we have no such ground to go upon, the
Church will be here unto the Worlds end, and whilst its here, be militant, and
whilst it lodges in a Camp or Wilderness, it must be guarded and attended,
and that must be until she come unto her Everlasting Happiness.

CHAP. III. Showing our willingness to be well quit of this Part of our Duty.
WE have declared what we mean by Discipline, and do believe it is essential
to our undertaking, but shall be glad to be convicted of the contrary; we
should be very glad this Branch of our fails were but opinion, that assents cum
formidine alterius partis, so thinks a thing true, that he fears it may be
false; for besides the cumber, trouble, and annoyance, that it brings, it is
attended with the envy of some great preferment and acquest; we acknowledge we
cannot be Christ's Disciples unless we learn of him, to deny our selves, take
up our cross, and follow him Mat. 16. 24
, but if any man will roll that cross out of our way, and not allow us for to
touch it, why should we be offended? we have often thought when Bishops
governed, how well it was for us to be secluded, and leave them to enjoy the
quarrels and contentions of the Common people, to be the Objects of their blame
and envy, and were afraid when we saw the State about for to remove them, that
what we greatly feared, would come upon us, as he speaks Job 3. 25.
; we did not, nor could not think we should have been so innocently, and so
long at rest, and ease as we have now been; let them have trouble and disease
that love it, and desire it, dulce bellum inexpertis, every body can rule a
Shrew, but he that has her; it is observed, that if an Horse by jadish trick^
have once prevailed to begin to throw his Rider, he will not easily be cured of
that quality; if we may believe our Savior Jesus Christ, his yoke is easy
mat. 11. 30:
, but when Ephraim has been unacustomed unto it, as the Prophet speaks Jer.
31. 18.
, he will not willingly receive it, and submit again unto it, and we are not
ambitious to have the mastering and taming of a sprightfull people put upon us;
our Task (we think) is heavy, and hard enough already, when we have studied
all the Week, and prayed and preached on the Lords Day, together with those
incident and undeniable invasions of foreign and family affairs, we cannot but
acknowledge with that laborious and painful Patriarch, Genesis 49. 1^
that rest is good, and be more willing to repose, than rush into a
consistorian Combat, with some of our unquiet people. The Olive, Vine, and
Fig Tree, found more sweetness in their proper and beloved privacy, than
could be fancied in the offer of promotion that was made unto them Judge. 9. 9,
10, 11, 12, 13.
; it is long since determined by the Philosopher, that contemplation was more
amiable and desirable than action; we do not think so, yet believe there must
be somewhat in it, that has led captive so many great minds, and made them part
with all for to pursue it; the Poet would not change his learned leisure, for
all the riches of the Arabians, Nec otia divitiis Arabum liberrima muto. Hor.
and we must not esteem it vile; it was a good saying of that bad man, that he
got nothing by being made the Emperor of the whole World, nisi ut occupatior
interiret, that he might perish and expire with more ado; not that we are
unwilling to be worn out in our Masters Service, to give our youth, and
strength, and time, and ease, to him of whom we had it, and for whom we both
have and hold it; we know its damage to detain them when he requires them, but
to be senseless of them is not seeming; should we be never so tired and
dispirited with labor, yet if some overture of profit and advantage to our
people were made unto us, we should most gladly run to make it known; when the
Leapers found the Camp of the Assyrians empty, they thought if they deferred
the telling of it until morning, some mischief would befall them 1 Kin. 7. 9.
; but if Discipline be that we have for to discover, they will not thank us; If
a Schoolmaster should bemoan himself unto his Scholars, that he was faint and
weary with fetching Rods, they would believe he might (if he had pleased) have
spared his pains; our people are herein become as very children, 1 Cor. 3. 1.
I could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto
babes in Christ. Discipline is now imagined a (...), or Bugbear, and frighteth
those that are not willing to be counted Children; Tribunalls of the lowest and
meanest rank are counted Tyrannies, for men are apt to think that power cannot
be contained, velle putant quodcunque potest, that every body will do all the
injury and villainy they can, and that it is not want of will but of ability
that makes men honest; and indeed it may be said of most men, as was of one,
nil boni quia non vult, nil mali quia non audet; the Jesuit that framed the
answer unto that Book called Deus and Rex, says, if the Writer had not
intended really to be a Tyrant, it was ill done of him to be the Patron and
Protector of such a Piece; when Ecclesiastical Discipline and Government was
but discoursed of by them that were in power, before it was formed in the womb,
or had any lineaments or features bestowed on it, it was traduced and opposed,
yea though as innocent as the child that is unborn, yet was arraigned and
condemned under the odious nickname of Persecution; we have heard of some
that have been crowned in their Mothers belly, but never of any that were
Arraigned and Condemned as this was, until now.

We make no doubt but the Infants of Believing Parents may be admitted Members
of the visible Church of Christ, before they be able to give a rational
account of their Regeneration, for Christ has said, Mat. 19. 14.
suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is
the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, the visible Church of Christ consists of them
and such as they be, and if any body shall imagine that these that are called
here (...) were grown up unto some maturity and ripeness, because that word is
used for a Maid that was about 12 years of Age, Mar. 5 42.
yet Luke says, they brought unto him Infants that he should touch them,
(...), which word is never used but for very little children Luk: 18. 15.
, and the Apostle does assure us, that they are holy 1 Cor. 7. 14.
, that is, within the Covenant and pale of Christ's Church; and this makes
Government so hard and heavy to us, when we must look to all that are brought
down to us in the streams of Baptism; the Apostles in their times admitted none
that could not give some probabilities of their believing, as the Eunuch did
Act. 8. 37.
, and though their Families did crowd in with them, and were accepted Act. 16.
15.
, yet they were sure one of the Governors were good, which was a very great
advancement of their Work, and eased them of much care; if we admitted none but
such as Timothy was, who had learned the Holy Scripture from a Child 2 Timothy 3.
15.
, what a deal of pains and labor would be saved, and yet our Congregations
governed with ease and honor? facile est imperium in bonis, an easy thing to
manage well-tutored and trained people, quo semel est imbuta recens servabit
odorem testa diu, the liquor will have some relish of the Cask a long time; but
alas, with us all is Fish that comes to the Net, the Kingdom of Heaven is like
unto a Net that was cast into the Sea, and gathered of every kind Mat. 13. ^7
; we cannot pick and choose, but must own and receive both strong and weak,
until they do discover and seclude themselves; Our Brethren of the
Congregationall way, have herein much advantage of us, that they take none but
such as have some evidence of goodness in them, can take an estimate of their
opinions and dispositions, and if they find them like to be untractable, can
slight them, and reject them, but we with the Apostle, think we are bound to
receive those that are weak in the faith Romans 14. 1.
, we think with our Savior, that we may not break the bruised reed, nor quench
the smoking flax Mat. 12. 20.
, refuse no offers that are made us, though little profit be like for to
accrue; for if they will come in and take the Yoke of Christ upon them, we know
not but they may be taught in time to draw, for this we find to be the
Shepeards duty, in the Prophet, Isa. 40. 11.
he shall feed his Flock like a Shepherd, and gather the Lambs with his arms,
and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young;
therefore we cannot make such speed as those that have none but fat and lusty
Weathers in their Flocks. Esau was urgent that his Brother Jacob would mend his
pace, and they would go together, but Jacob said, My Lord knows that the
children are tender, and the Flocks and Herds with young are with me, and if
men should over-drive them one day, all the flock would die Genesis 33. 13
; Hence is it, that our Government goes on so flowly. Geneva was a small but
well compacted Commonwealth, more independent and accomplished than any other
of her neighborhood; yet what a while was it before she could be settled in a
church way? Scotland, a poor remote neglected Northern Nation, where Papacy and
Prelacy did never flourish, yet long before it could be settled in her
Ecclesiastical and Church way, Magnorum rerum tarda molimina, great businesses
move slowly, when there are many wheels, some will be always out; the
Israelites, when in the Wilderness, were so assured of Gods power and
presence, that the Government was Divini Juris, of Gods own ordering and
appointing, and that in all particulars and circumstantials, that nothing could
be more apparent and conspicuous; yet the mixed multitude that was among them
so disordered all, that Moses is discouraged and impatient Number. 11. 1^, 1^, 13,
14.
, and was not pacified until assistance were allowed him

We do believe, and are persuaded, that every Pastor by his place and calling
is a Governor and Ruler, as afterward we think we shall demonstrate; but we do
not think that every Minister is presently a Moses, made up of governing and
ruling parts, all ages bring not forth such; when one told the Duke of Parma
that he had shot Sir Philip Sidney, in stead of a reward, he cursed him, for
that he had destroyed a man that England had not paralleled in former ages. A
States man is not bred Extempore, non omnis fert omnia tellus, are all not made
of one mould, for to one is given by the spirit the word of wisdom, to another
the word of knowledge by the same spirit, to another faith by the same spirit 1
Cor. 12. 8 9, 10.
, to al some, to none all, yet all must be acknowledged Governors, though it
seems there was but here and there one, that both ruled well, and also labored
in the Word and Doctrine 1 Timothy 5. 17.
, yet none of them could be excluded; and indeed in all Societies and
Corporations, a few will serve to guide the action, to be the eyes and tongues,
the leaders and directers of Affairs; all met in that great Synod that is
described by the Evangelist Act. 15. 7. 13.
, but none speak to the point in question, but James and Peter; its a good gift
of God for to know when for to hold his peace. In a great Assembly of the
Greeks, one never spoke, and being asked why he did not, told them, because he
desired it may be known, that in Greece some knew how to be silent.

Its more than manifest, by the experience of above three hundred years, that
the influence of his Civil Power is not essential unto this jurisdiction and
employment, and were our Governors as far off Christ, as they were, we should
not doubt but to do well without them; but seeing God in his infinite mercy
has been pleased to Circumcise and Christianise the Civil Sword, we hold it
manners and our duty, rather to stay and wait till they can be at leisure, than
for to go without them; being well assured, that their company will be
exceeding useful to us, and that they in time will be persuaded and believe,
that they ought to be nursing fathers and nursing mothers unto Sion, as the
Prophet long since has engaged they shall Isa. 49. 23.
, when they shall see, that only those Nations thrive and flourish that
entertain Christ in all his Offices, and consider how greatly God has pleased
now of late to own and honor all his Ordinances in this Land, and to blast and
shatter all those insurrections and endeavors that have undermined and opposed
Jesus Christ, and be well assured, that these two Powers will and do support
one another, and in case ours should be excentrick, they know their Sword is
much the longer, and the sharper; it was proposed to the Hollanders, to be all
one with us, that Joan should be as good as my Lady; but they would not
entertain the proposition, because we would soon become the Husband, they the
Wife; as Henry the seventh said, when the Match with Scotland was proposed,
that England was like to be the giver, because more puissant. Why should a
Christian Magistrate be loath to own his own denomination in the Word of God,
Romans 13. 4.
for he is the Minister of God to thee for good, (...), he is Gods Deacon, a
Church Officer; God does assure us, that he is not the Author of Confusion 1
Cor. 14. 33.
, yet has he twisted Church and State together, and mingled interests, that it
is not easy to unravel them; the Priests, and Levites, and the Judge, must be
enquired and consulted with Deuteronomy. 17. 8
, and when David would bring up the Ark of God into his place, he consulted
with the Captains of thousands, and hundreds, and with every Leader, to send
abroad unto their Brethren every where, and with them to the Priests and
Levites, which are in their Cities and Suburbs, that they might gather
themselves unto them, to bring again the Ark of our God unto us 1 Cor. 13. 1,
2, 3.
, and till this Harmony can be accomplished, we are content to hang our Harps
upon the Willows and sit still, to distinguish and dispute our selves into a
little rest and quiet, that we may attend and act with more authority and
animosity, when we shall see and hear that blessed time to be approaching,
though we believe their absence does not utterly absolve us, and acquit us, as
in the next and only remaining Chapter we are afraid it will appear.

CHAP. IV. Showing upon what account we think our selves obliged unto the
Discipline, as well as Doctrine of Jesus Christ.
WE have showed that we are not eager and inordinate in an ambition after
meddling and interposing in affairs, that we could be well enough content to
be at ease, that we are aware, and do consider what it is that has been
hitherto forbidden and denied; and surely could our ease be innocent, and our
secession be secure, and free from guilt, we should not hastily be courted out
of it* but duty we believe solicites us, and makes our quiet and retiredness
uneasy to us, disturbs our rest, and marrs the Music of our peaceable
enjoyments; we find, that man is born to trouble Job 5. 7.
, and know not where Gods Ministers have been exempted from the common lot.

Be pleased therefore, we beseech you, to give us leave to set down those
inducements that we have, to think our selves obliged unto Discipline as well
as Doctrine, and when we have done that, if we be not willing to be quite,
account us troublesome.

Argu. 1. What was allowed in the Mosaicall administration, cannot be well
refused in the Evangelical, for the Church of God is still upon improvement,
the second edition is always more corrected and enlarged, natura incipit ab
imperfectioribus; what a rude lump was all the World at first, yet formed
afterward into a comely piece? how little knew the first beginners in the
Worship and Ways of God Genesis 4. 26.
? for what we render, to call upon the name of the Lord, the Jews to this day
do translate to f^ll from God, as Maymonides their most learned Rabbin does
observe; and though Israel be truly said to be Gods Sons, even the Eldest and
Firstborn as he is called Exodus 4. 22.
, yet he was first young, and under Guardians, as the Apostle plainly shows
Gal. 4. 1, 2.
. Now what is granted to a little Child, is not to be refused to one grown;
what privilege and power is allowed unto a Schoolboy, is not to be denied him
when married and at man's estate, as the Apostle plainly speaks, Gal. 3. 24, 25.
The Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we might be
justified by faith, but after that faith is come, we are no longer under a
Schoolmaster. What power therefore was exercised in and by the Jewish Church,
ought to be in, and exercised by the Christian, as being now a great deal older
and riper than it was then; so Moses was faithful indeed in all the House of
God, and accordingly was trusted very much by God, yet but a Servant Heb. 3. 5,
6.
, but Christ was faithful as a Son; now there is no reason that we should deny
that power unto a Son, which was granted formerly unto a Servant.

But in the Mosaicall Administration, there was allowed Discipline as well as
Doctrine, he ordered Offices and Garbes by Gods direction, was so exact and
punctual therein, that nothing was at liberty, and it was precisely to the
last observed, that the Administrators do glory in it, that they were Moses
Disciples at the last, when it was much worn and in decay Joh. 9. 28.
; and we may not think the Mosaical had greater privileges than the
Evangelical, especially if we consider that Moses was indeed persona mixta, had
Civil Power as well as Ecclesiastical, commanded their Armies and Forces, as
well as their Orders and Administrations; whereas the Evangelical Church was
for diverse hundred years, not only deprived and destitute of that great aid,
but opposite unto it, and therefore doubtless had more need of proper and
internal Power; we do therefore humbly offer this, that seeing the Servant
was allowed to Command and Govern, the Son may not be still a Schoolboy,
seeing Moses had his Discipline as well as Doctrine, Christ may not be abridged.

Argu. 2. What was allowed unto John the Baptist, and by him exercised and
owned, cannot be fairly refused and denied unto Gospel Ministers, seeing he was
but the Harbinger and Usher unto Jesus Christ, and that Christ has said, he
that is least in the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, in the Evangelicall
Administration, is greater than he Mat. 11. 11
, for indeed John was but the (...), or Morning Star, unto that Sun of
Righteousness that did immediately arise, as was long before foretold Mal. 4.
2.
, and it is improper that any Star should be more illustrious and glorious than
the Sun, which when it rises, shuts all them under hatches, and makes them
ashamed of themselves:

But John had Discipline, as well as Doctrine, came upon the Stage in quite
another Garb, he was indeed a Priests Son, and circumcised Luke 1. 59.
, but threw away his Garments, and betook himself unto a new exotic Garb,
that none of Aarons Sons had ever worn before, for he had his garments of
Camels hair, and a leathren girdle about his loins Mat. 3. 4.
, and though himself were circumcised, yet he is allowed to appoint and
institute another solemn Sacrament in stead thereof, which at the last did wash
away and drown the other John 1. 33.
; and these things he did not only act and exercise himself, but also order and
appoint unto his Scholars and Disciples, who were so resolute and rigid in
their imitation and observance of them, that they would not yield unto the
Jewish Ceremonies, but contend and quarrel with them, as it is in the
Evanglist Joh. 3. 25.
; and is in all these things commended and confirmed by Jesus Christ John 5.
34, 35.
; what therefore John had, must not be grudged unto us; what was allowed to the
Prodromus and Messenger, that only brought the news and tidings of the Messiah,
as he is called by the Prophet Mal. 3. 1.
, must not be thought too much, for those that follow and succeed him; John's
Ministry was but a blaze, and lasted but a little while, as he says, John 3. 30
he must increase, but I must decrease; what he had therefore, we ought much
more to have and enjoy, what was accounted and acknowledged a virtue and grace
in him, must not be esteemed and judged a fault in us.

Argu. 3. What Christ has ordered and enjoined, we may not utterly reject and
lay aside, for God has put all things under his feet, and given him to be the
Head over all things to the Church, which is his Body Ephesians. 1. 22, 23.
; as therefore the body does not refuse the dictates and determinations of the
Head, no more does or may the Church, what Christ's determines and imposes; he
had good shoulders when he was a Child, and God was then pleased to lay the
Government upon them Isa. 9. 6.
; but when he had born it long, if he should be pleased to lay it upon us, we
may not argue nor dispute our orders, but undergo it as well as we can, and be
content, for he is in all these things, the Dominus fac totum, the Apostle and
High Priest of our Profession, as he is called Heb. 3. 1.
, that gives out all determinations and instructions without control; so that
what he is pleased to require and order, we are obliged to receive and
entertain.

But we think he has imposed Discipline, as well as Doctrine on us; enjoined
government and rule, as well as information and instruction; and for this
persuasion we desire the grand Commission and Authority may be considered,
which he gave to the Apostles and their Successors unto the worlds end, as the
Evangelist has set it down Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20.
; wherein three things do induce us to believe we are engaged in Discipline as
well as Doctrine.

1. Because he tells them, that now all power both in heaven and earth was
given unto him; he had been very tender hitherto of meddling with the Jewish
and Mosaical Administrations; for when he cleansed Leapers, he bids them go
unto the Priests and show themselves Luke 17. 14.
; he went into their Synagogues and behaved himself with all submission and
respect unto their rules; but now he orders them to erect and set up another
way, to institute another Sacrament, to affront their consultations and
conclusions Act. 5. 20, 21.
; and seconds all attempts upon Mosaicall Rites and Ceremonies, by an
overruling influence of the Holy Ghost on all occasions, for that is it they
witness against Stephen, that he should say, that Christ would destroy that
place, and change the customs which Moses had delivered Acts 6. 14.
, which was no such great blasphemy as they conceived.

2. He uses another word for teaching, than he was wont to do in other
missions Mat. 10. 7. Mark 3. 14.
; for though we render it, and read it Teach, yet the word is (...), Disciple
all Nations, that is, instruct and institute them in the Discipline that I have
ordered and acquainted you withal, in these forty days I have conversed with
you upon earth Acts 1. 3.
, for a Disciple properly is one that is engaged in some particular service,
institution, and observation, as it was among Philosophers of old; the
Peripateticks differ from the Platonists, the Pythagereans and the Stoics from
them both, for though the word (...), was sometime particular to the
Mathematics, because of the exactness of their Rules, yet it was afterward
indifferently used for any Science, Art, or Mystery, that young*men were
instituted and trained up in, as appears by that known position in Isocrates,
(...), so John had his Disciples, who were distinguished from our Saviors, and
the Pharisees, by their peculiar and proper institutions and observations, as
appears by that question propounded to our Savior Luke 5. ^3.
; we think therefore, that when our Savior did enjoin them to make all
Nations their Disciples, he laid upon them Discipline as well as Doctrine; so
we find the converted Nations are called not Followers, Professors, or
Confessors, but Disciples Act. 15. 10
, that is, men interested and engaged in a Discipline, or way of serving God,
that was not common and ordinary to other men.

3. He says, teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded
you, that is, to administer the rules and censures that I have left upon record
unto you; now what else do we conceive and understand by Discipline, but an
humble, careful, wise administration of the rules and censures God has left
unto us in his Holy Word, that is, an observance of all things which Christ
has commanded to us; and if this be punctually and posi^ively imposed and laid
upon us in our Grand Commission, what need is there of Foreign Arguments for to
ass^rt it? and hence it is, that the Apostles every where commend the Churches
for remembering and observing the traditions delivered to them 1 Cor. 11. ^ 2
These. 2. 15. cap. 3. 6.
, which were not matters of Doctrine, as the Papists would persuade us, but of
Discipline, as appears in that place of the Corinthians, for he spends the
Chapter in directing their habits and behavior in their public meetings;
seeing therefore Discipline is commanded and enjoined in ^ts proper place, that
is, in the very words of ou^ Commission, we see not how it can be shifted or
evaded by us.

Argu. 4. Ministers are compared to, and called Shepherds, our Savior saw the
people were as Sheep that had no Shepherds Mat. 9. 36. 37.
, not properly, but metaphorically; as people are not properly Sheep, but as
Sheep; so Ministers are not properly Shepherds, but as Shepherds; so the
Prophet of Christ himself, I^a. 40. 11.
he shall seed his flock like a Shepherd, and gather the Lambs with his arms,
and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young;
Now by all these metaphorical expressions are meant teaching and guiding of
them, as it is in Mark Mar. 6. 34.
, where its said, he began to teach them many things; its true, they are called
Pastors frequently Jer. 23. 1, 2. and Jer. 3. 15.
, but that is but the Latin word made English, for what the Prophet calls
Pastors in the first and second verses, he calls Shepherds in the fourth
verse, and the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 11.
he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers; now Shepherds we know are the guides and rulers of their
Sheep, for when they feed them, they do not put the Grass and Hay into their
mouths, but lead them and drive them where it is to be had, as David says,
Psalm. 23. 1* 2, 3, 4.
he makes me to ly down in the green Pastures, he leads me beside the waters
of comfort, so thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me; what can be more
magisterial than a rod? as Paul, 1 Cor. 4. 21.
Shall I come unto you with a rod, or in love, and in the Spirit of meekness?
the Crook and the Dog are inseparable companions, and attendants of the
Shepherd; for though it be certain that the Sheep do know and understand their
Shepherds voice or whistle, as our Savior speaks John 10. 3, 4.
, yet they will not be corrected and restrained without his rod or staff; what
Solomon says of our Servants, that they will not be corrected by words Pro.
29. 19.
, is true of Gods Servants, who though they hear they will not answer, though
they understand you, will not act accordingly, unless they be restrained and
compelled to it; and therefore the same word does signify to feed and rule,
Matthew. 2. 6.
and thou Bethelem, in the Land of Judah, art not the least among the Princes
of Judah, for out of thee shall come a Governor, that shall rule my people
Israel, (...), shall rule, or shall feed, as it is in the margent of our
Bibles; yea, sometimes it signifies to rule, and not to feed, Rev. 19. 15
he shall rule them with a rod of Iron, (...), the same word, but no body will
think that Sheep can be fed with Iron; we should think those very strange
Sheep that should eat the Iron on the Shepherds Crook. Sir Thomas More in his
Eutopia says, That the Sheep of England have eaten up whole Towns, yet we do
not think that they were Ostritches, to eat the Iron in them; but the Rod and
Iron will restrain and rule them, keep them within due bounds, and lodge them
on their owners Lands; its not for want of feeding and pasturage, that we in
this Country of Northampton, are forced to maintain so many Shepherds, but for
want of Govenment, that they feed not in the grounds of other men, or in the
several, not open and allowed to them, or in moist or mor^sh grounds, where
they may catch the ^ot and be corrupted; it was our Saviors great injunction
unto Peter, when he was to leave them and the world, John 21. 15, 16. 17.
that he would feed his sheep, and that if he loved him; where we may not think
that there was nothing meant but teaching and instructing, for Peter himself
expounds it otherwise, 1 Pet. 5. 2.
feed the flock of God that is among you, take the oversight or guardianship
thereof, (...), playing the Bishops with them, that is, ruling and guiding of
them, correcting and reforming when there is need; what ever may be thought of
other Ministers, yet Bishops ever were accounted Governors; so Paul, when he
sends for the Elders of Ephesus unto him, Act. 20. 17.
bids them take heed unto themselves, and unto all the flock over whom the Holy
Ghost has made you Bishops, (...), to feed the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own blood, that is, to govern them and rule them as Bishops
and Visitors do use to do, especially if it should be true, that a very learned
Brother does affirm, that all these Elders were Diocesan-Bishops, and came to
Ephesus, as to the Metropolis or Archbishops Sea, to take instructions from
the Apostle for the Government of their several and particular Stations and
Jurisdictions; but some kind of Bishops we are sure they were, and
Jurisdiction and Inspection we are sure they had; and it is notorious that the
Kings and Emperors among the Heathen were called Shepherds, Isa. 44. 28.
that ^aith of Cyrus, he is my Shepherd, aad shall perform all my pleasure,
even saying to Jerusalem, thou shall be built, and to the Temple, thy
foundation shall be laid: What a Magnificent and gallant Fellow is Agamemnon by
the Poet said to be? yet he calls him in the Illiades (...), the Shepherd or
Pastor of the People, many times, so that they were not mad without color of
reason, and antiquity, that made their Bishops and Pastors Princes in Germany,
and other parts of Christendom, in former times; neither could that Order and
Injunction of Christ to Peter, to feed his Sheep, have raised the Pope to that
transcendant pitch he still is at, if feeding had not in it something that
signified to rule and govern; and the Prince and Priest among the Egyptians and
Midianites, were so near of kin to one another, that our Translators knew not
whether to translate the Hebrew word Priest or Prince, but put the one in the
Text, and the other in the Margent of our Bibles Genesis 41. 45 Exodus 2. 16.
, and sure we are, that he who at the first was Pastor, was afterward Priest,
or (...) 1 Timothy 5. 17* Romans 12. 8.
, and Princeps at the last; if there had not been some settle or bottom to
stand on, they would have been called down before ever they could have clamberd
up so high.

Argu. 5. What a Father or a Master of a Family is unto his Children and
Servants, that every Minister of the Gospel is unto the Church of God; for
Families were not only the first Societies or Corporations in the World, but
also the Fountains and Originalls of all succeeding Corporations and Societies,
and cannot but have some savor of, and resemblance to the Womb wherein they
first were bred; Kingdoms, the most magnificent and glorious Societies and
Corporations, are called Families, for what the Psalmist wishes unto Kingdoms
Psalm. 79. 6.
, the Prophet long after wishes unto Families, without altering any word but
that Jer. 10. 25.
, and as Kingdoms so the greatest Commonwealths; a Decree is passed in the
Senate, that Tully for his eminent service in the case of Catiline, should be
styled the Father of his Country; and indeed the Church of Christ in
Gospell-times is often called by the name of Family or Household, Ephesians. 2. 19.
ye are no more foreiners and strangers, but Citizens with the Saints, and of
the household of God; and again, Ephesians. 3. 14, 15.
of whom is named the whole family of heaven and earth, that is, the Catholic
or Universal Church of Christ; for as in a Family there is a clue or thread
that runs through all, and binds the members fast together, by some relation
or compliance of Brothers, Sisters, Fellows, Friends; so in the Church, there
is a tie or common bond that knits the members into one Society, 1 Cor: 12* 13
for by one spirit we are all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or
Gentiles, whether we be bound or free, and have been all made to drink into one
spirit, that is, have been engaged and obnoxious unto one another, as the
members of the same Society and Body are.

But Fathers and Masters of Families are ^harged and obliged unto Discipline,
as well as Doctrine; Abraham had in his House three hundred and eighteen
Servants that were so well trained up and Disciplined, that they rescued
captive Lot, and brought again the goods and persons that were taken from the
King of Sodom Genesis 14. 14 15.
, and its worth the nothing, that the word translated trained, in a Military
way, does also signify the instruction or teaching that is used by Parents to
their Children, Pro. 22. 6.
train up a child in the way he should go, or as in the margent, Catechize; and
he did not only train them up, but order and command them, as appears in what
God says of him, Genesis 18. 19
for I know him, that he will command his children and household after him, and
it seems to be a duty that is laid in general upon all Parents, that they
bring up their Children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord Ehp. 6. 4.
, (...), and for want of this Discipline, this nurture and admonition, Elie and
his House were utterly destroyed and ruined, he preached as good Doctrine to
them as could be wished, 1 Samuel 2. 23, 24, 25.
nay, my sons, for it is no good report that I hear of you, ye make the Lords
people to transgress, but did not exercise that Discipline that God in a
solemn Law enacted against disobedient and rebellious Children Deuteronomy. 21. 18,
19, 20, 21.
, and has charged upon all the Parents in the world, for which both he and his
were utterly destroyed and rooted out, as God expressly says 1 Samuel 3 13*
, and therefore the Apostle might well make that a Character or qualification
of a Minister, that was fit to be Ordained, 1 Timothy 3. 4, 5.
one that rules his own house well, having children in obedience, with all
gravity, for if one know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take care
for the Church of God? which is so pregnant and plain an instance, that we see
not how any body can be exempted, nor who can acquit us, and release us of this
charge: for it is put in as a necessary qualification of a Minister, and should
be well considered and weighed before they do presume (that are entrusted) to
ordain, although its possible a lawful Minister may not be so well able to
rule and govern, as to teach, yet the one is as well his duty as the other.

Argu. 6. Those that are furnished and fitted for Discipline, as well as
Doctrine, are charged with Discipline as well as Doctrine, for God does not
furnish men with Arms and Ammunition, as we do sometimes, for Ornament and
Ostentation, as Darius Army that came first down against Alexander, and fought
at Olyssus, in the Straites of Cilicia, which looked rather like a May Game,
than an Army; but for use and execution, for so says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 10.
4, 5, 6.
the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the
putting down of strong holds, casting down imaginations, and every high thing
that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every
thought to the obedience of Christ, and having in a readiness to revenge all
disobedience; these weapons are nothing else but the proper and manifest gifts
and graces of Gods Spirit, which are always given for profit and employment 1
Cor. 12. 7.
; how does Paul exercise and use these weapons against that wretched Conjurer,
that would have rescued the Governor whom Paul had conquered and taken
Prisoner for Christ? his Belt and Sword were not put on for ornament only, but
also for use and execution. It was known who was the Consul among the Romans,
by the Rods and Axes that were born before him; and the investiture of Knights
and Barons is done by girding on their garbs and arms, as that great Officer,
And I will cloth him with thy robe, and strengthen him with thy girdle, and
will commit thy Government into his hands, and he shall be a father to the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to the House of Juda, and the key of the House of
David, will I lay upon his shoulder, so he shall open and none shall shut, and
he shall shut and none shall open: for as God does not require us to act and
exercise before we have abilities and instruments; so when we have them he
would not have us idle, wherefore I put thee in remembrance to stir up the
gift of God that is in thee, by the putting on of my hands; for God has not
given us the spirit of fear, but of power, of love, and of a sound mind; for
its truly said, use legs and have them, so as truly, have legs and use them.

But God has furnished and fitted Ministers as well for Discipline, as
Doctrine; for the Word of God which Ministers are to manage and apply, serves
for the one as well as the other, is profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in right eousness, that the Man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, where he is furnished and
fitted for Discipline (we see) as well as Doctrine; reproof, and correction,
a^e terms of Discipline, and howsoever words are counted wind, yet the words
of Ministers are more, Jer. 5. 14.
behold, I will make my words in thy mouth fire, and this people wood, and it
shall devour them; some men have very sharp tongues; he that was famous for
abuses stripped and whipped, had nothing but his tongue to whip them with; and the
Holy Ghost assures us, that there be some whose teeth are spears and arrows,
and their tongue a sharp sword Psalm. 57. 4.
, and therefore it was no Soloecism nor improper Phrase, when the Apostle bids
Titus rebuke them (...) cuttingly, that they may be sound in the faith Titus 1.
13.
; Peter was a good Sword-man, as did appear when he cut of Malcus ear, although
he was not on the Pillory, and he was not dull in handling of the Spiritual
Sword, for when Ananias and Saphira would adventure to jest with edge tools, to
play the Hypocrites in so select and sacred a Convention, they found that Peter
did loquill apides, spoke like the piercing of a Sword, as the wise man
expresses it Pro. 12. 18.
; they found his doom and sentence was quickly followed with execution Acts 5.
3, 4, 5.
; what did Paul mean think we, when he threatens the Corinthians to come unto
them with a rod 1 Cor, 4. 21
? was it not the same, that a Schoolmaster does mean when he calls for a rod
or ferula? its true, that Schoolmasters should study all diversions and ways
of ordering their Scholars and Disciples without this open execution, but if
the rod be not expected, they will do nothing, they will be baffled and
despised, which will evacuate all his instructions, he shall find his Doctrine
quickly slighted, if it be not edged and improved by Discipline, as Paul to
Titus, Titus 2. 1
these things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all authority, let no man
despise thee; as it is said of Kingdoms and Commonwealths, that contempt is
always the forerunner of insurrections and confusions; as in the Fable of the
Frogs, and the Beam that Jupiter let fall among them; at first they trembled
and durst not look at it, but when they sound they might approach without
danger, that they might lacessere impune, they wholly fell into disorder, and
cast off all respect and care of duty to him; some Schoolmasters have thought
it proper instead of whipping Boys, to restrain and lock them up in the
School, when all their Fellows go to play, where they shall lie if they will
not learn. Gods Ministers are furnished for this way, have given to them the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, that Key of David, that opens and no man
shuteth, and shuteth and no man opens Revel. 3. 7
, whereby they are enabled to shut out those that are unruly and unquiet in the
Church; Christ promised those keys to Peter Mat. 16. 19.
, not only the Key of Doctrine to open and explain the Scripture to them, but
also the key of Discipline to open and shut, remit and restrain their faults;
as the Master when a Scholar cannot say his Lesson, or has committed some
notorious crime, locks him up in the School, until he have expressed his
remorse and reformation: so Gods Ministers when any of their people are
exorbitan^, restrain and bind them to their good behavior, exclude them from
communion or enjoyments of the Ordinances, until repentance do solicit their
release; and therefore when Christ did give the Keys unto th^n, he used those
terms of b^nding and loosing, remitting and retaining, whose soever sin ye
remit, they are remitted to them, and whosoever sins ye retain, they are
retained; which is not only a declaring and discovering whose sins God does
remit or not remit, but God has vested in them power and authority to do it,
as proper Judges in the Case; as at the Assizes, there is almost no body but
can tell who is cast or quit, who is to dye, and who not, yet none have power
to order execution but the Judge himself, who is in Commission, and has
authority derived to him for that end. Peter did but declare what was resolved
by the Holy Ghost, in the Case of Ananias and Saphira, but he did it as a
Judge, and execution followed; so Paul with that in destuous Corinthian, does
not only discover and declare what was to be effected and done by God, but does
it* shuts him up in a Dungeon, and sets the Devil to be his Jailer until by
true repentance he moved compassion in the Apostle, and was released and let
(out; not that this power in the Minister is absolute and independent, for if
he walk not according to his rule, judge not according to that Royal Law that
is to guide him, it binds not, but is reversible and lies open to an appeal;
but if he walk according to his rule, and shut up, alave non errante, there is
no man in the world can release him or let him out. The Commissioners at
Lambeth, had their Prisons for men's bodies, and Lollards Tower is yet
remembered, but had they acted according to the rules of Christ, and set the
saddle on the right horse, they had not needed corporal and carnal prisons;
had the weapons of their warfare not been carnal, they would have been more
mighty than they were, but leaving their rule, they lost their efficacy.

Argu. 7. What was given by the Bishops unto such Ministers as they Ordained,
and laid their hands upon, should not be grudged or denied to them by any body,
for they were never accounted lavish or over liberal unto them, especially in
point of Jurisdiction, that was always a very tender point, and had a guard
and centry always on it; for conceiving themselves the sole possessors of it;
they were not willing to admit of Parteners; what ever they indulged in other
points, yet they said of this, as Pharaoh unto Joseph, Genesis 4. 1. 40.
only in the Thron, I will be greater than thou; yet Bishops granted unto all
that they ordained Presbyters, the use and exe^cise of Discipline as well as
Doctrine, as appears in the Book of ordering Bishops, Priests, and Deacons,
where one of the Interrogatories propounded to the party to be ordained is,
Will you then give your faithful diligence always so to minister the Doctrine
and Sacraments, and the Discipline of Christ, as the Lord has commanded, and
as this Realm has received the same, according to the Commandments of God; so
that you may teach the people committed to your care and charge, with all
diligence to keep and observe the same? which a reverend and learned Brother
not observing, would confine all Jurisdiction unto Diocesan-Bishops, because
Presbyters had it not committed and conveyed unto them in their Ordination; but
not only is it given to them in this Book, but also in the English Lyturgy or
Common Prayer Book, in the large rubric before the Communion, the Minister or
Curate is directed to keep back from the Sacrament such as be open and
notorious, evil livers, or have done any wrong unto their Neighbors, in word
or deed, until they openly prosesse repentance and amendment; what is
Discipline if this be not, to bar them and shut them from the Sacrament,
until they openly repent and mend?

Argu. 8. What is granted and allowed to Ministers by the Laws and Customs of
this Nation, cannot be reasonably denied; for the Laws of England have never
favored Usurpation in the Clergy of this Nation, but stickled and contended
against the innovations and invasions both of Foreign and Domestic
Jurisdictions, especially since William the Norman did separate the Courts, and
set the Clergy by themselves, who before were always in the same Court, and on
the same Bench, with the Civil Governors, as appears by the several and
frequent prohibitions that were granted by the Judges of the Upper Bench, and
by the Lawyers pleaded for; but the Laws and Customs of this Nation, allows
unto the Ministers of England the use and exercise of Discipline as well as
Doctrine; for such of them as have Parsonages or Rectories, are in all Process
and Proceedings called Rectors, which in English is Governors, whence some
have thought that Rectories indeed were by Divine right, but not Vicaredges,
because they find it among the institutions that God has set in the Church, 1
Cor. 12. 28
, and God has set in the Church, first Apostles, secundarily Prophets, thirdly
Teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healing, helps, Governments,
(...), that is, say they, such Parishes as now are called Rectories; we are not
of their mind, nor do think that Parishes were then so fixed and determined as
now they be, but think them notwithstanding lawful, and of great antiquity,
and see not why any body that is Baptized and does profess Religion, should
be excluded by his habitation. There was one in the West that contended with
Mr. Samuel Hieron, about the iniquity of Parochial bounds, and said they never
were of Gods making, and it was not injury to give their dues to other
Ministers, and not their own; he told him that he met a poor Fellow on the
way, who begged something for Gods sake of him, he asked him what he meant by
that Hatchet that he carried at his girdle; the Fellow told him he was a Cooper
by his Calling, and when he saw a young Ash in a Hedge, he took his Hatchet and
cut it up, and carried it along with him, to make an Hoop; Mr. Hieron asked him
how he durst steal another man's Ashes; O Master (said the Fellow) God never
made Hedges; but we think what the Laws and Customs of a Nation makes,
should not be cut up by any private person, unless they shall be judged by
Authority evil and unlawful, and by the same removed; we lay on this no
greater stresse than it will bear, think this and the precedent argumenta ad
hominem, such as may stop their mouths that go upon such grounds; but we think
all the former binding, and our selves engaged unto Discipline as well as
Doctrine, until we see them fairly and clearly answered.

FINIS.

