Something in Answer to a Book called CHOICE EXPERIENCES, Given forth by one J.
TVRNER.

Also the Copy of a Letter sent to the Assembly of those that are called
Anabaptists in Newcastle.

Wherein the simple minded ones may see the deceit of those people, who take up
the practices of others, by imitation and tradition from the Scriptures, not
having the same commands themselves, as the Saints always had, from the spirit
of the Lord.

And that Christ in the Saints, which is their hope of glory, is the same
Christ that was crucified by the Jews, who is the Lamb slain from the
foundation of the World.

Also the difference between the Saints who wait on the Lord for the moving if
his Spirit to he acted, when, and as he please; And Formalists of these days,
who in their own wills and time practice their imitations of Duties and
Ordinances, which the Lord abhorres.

By a Servant of the Lord, named of the World Edward Borough.

Printed in the Year of the worlds account, 1654.

I Have met with a Book called, Choice experiences, given forth by one I
Turner, who by John Spilsbery in his Epistle, is called, a Daughter of Syon;
and her self declares in the 109. page of her Book, of being brought out of
Babylon into Syon, but all along through her Book, her language is one and the
same, before her coming out of Babylon, and in Syon (as she says) her
language is the language of Babylon wholly, and she is yet a servant in bondage
in Babylon unto the Mistress of Witchcraft, and never came to witness freedom
in Syon; for I know her voice, its the language of her City where she now
dwells, which is in confusion in Babylon. And whereas she declares of some
particulars which she calls Deceits, whereby she was deceived, in the 109 page
in that which she calls, the fifth note of experience, concerning notions and
pretended spiritualities in which Satan transformes himself into an Angel of
light, and how the Lord was pleased to recover her out of deceit. I answer, It
is plain to the spiritual man which discernes of truth and deceit, that she is
yet deceived and unrecovered out of deceit; and here I charge her that she
belves the Lord, for he has not recovered her out of deceit, for she has
(...) him in that work, as is made appear in her Book; and she is now in
notion, and not in power, and in pretended spiritualities and not really in the
spirit; and Satan is now transformed in her into an Angel of light by which she
is deceived; and whereas she talks of her choice experiences, death yet
reigns in her, and is no whi^ subdued; I speak as in the presence of the
Lord, who am moved to lay open her deceit to the simple, who does blaspheme the
God of Heaven in his Saints, in calling truth error and calling that deceit,
which by the spirit of the Lord I own to be truth, and calls those, corrupt
principles which was owned by the servants of the Lord in former generations,
and which is owned now by them which witness the same spirit; which spirit of
Christ she makes appear, she knows not who has de^yed him, and salvation by
him, within; Whereas she speaks of Satan envying her happiness, and waits his
opportunity to catch her as a Fish in the Water, covering his hook with a
bait of Mystery and spiritually, I answer. She is yet in the power of Satan,
he has already catched her with his covered hook, which is covered with a
very fair outside, a fair form of truth a likeness of it, with the
likeness of a Church, and of a Baptism, and of a Fellowship etc. is she
beguiled already and is unhappy through the opportunities which the Devil has
waited over her; for she is under the curse, lying in the fall and enmity. And
whereas she speaks. Of having of es^a^ed him in his former appearances as a
Devil yet now transform himself a an ^ngel of light. I answer. She has not
escaped him as a Devil* and here she is a liar, for his appearance (...) her,
in ly ng and in speaking evil of those things she know^s no^; and he is
transformed in her as an Angel of light, but she (...) but lies in darkness,
in the my fiery of in^^^ty (...), and the pretense of spirituality. And she
(...), (...) are, so deceived are the fittest Agenes to prome^^ (...) K^^g^^m^^
I answer. Here it is made manifest, she who (...) Devil does much promote his
Kingdom, (...) hands of evil doers, who through her (...) hearts against the
truth. Whereas she speaks. O^ (...) ^^^ing persons by corrupt principles, which
they would (...) at the thought of, before they had such principles I answer
^^^is is her own condition, she is drawn by Satan to follow (...) principles,
which if she did see she would tremble at (...) of them. And she says God was
not only pleased to (...) from such things but to discover the wa^ by which
person (...) brought to such things. I answer, Here again I charge her that
she belies the Lord (which is blasphemy) for he has not (...) her from corrupt
principles: he would, but she has refi^^ed him; and the discovery from God to
her, will be pl^gr^^ and woe; for death and darkness raigne^ which makes
manifest themselves in her, which is her discovery. She speak (...) avoiding
those ways and forewarning others to avoid them likewise. I answer She has
not avoided the waves of darkness but has chosen them, and has avoided the
way of truth* as is made manifest, which has dented salvation by Christ
within; and as she has avoided the way of truth her self, so she casts a
stumbling-blocke in the way of the simple to a avoid it likewise. Whereas she
speaks, of discovering Satan under these vayles and says, by harkening to the
voice of the tempter she was deceived, and beguiled by him in some particular
things.

I answer, Satan is not yet discovered to her, but lies under his veil in
Flesh deceiving her; and by her hearkening to the voice of the tempter, she is
now deceived by him, not in few things, but in many: I speak it as in the
presence of the Lord which shall judge of her and me. And she speaks of ever
being humbled in the presence of God for it. I answer When the dreadful God
shows his presence, she cannot stand, but shall be confounded, who does here
speak to the dishonor of his name: True humility she knows not, for the man
of sin is exalted in her above all that is called God And whereas she speaks of
beginning to be somewhat confused in her judgment; and she speaks, of not
being swallowed up with confusion. I answer, She is in confusion, and has
never been out of it, as to every single eye may appear; she is not somewhat
in confusion, but is rolled and swallowed up in it; and it is long since it
began in her. Whereas she speaks of being weak in Principles. I answer, It is
true, the Principle which is of God, is, and has been weak in her, for it is
over-powred by the Principle of deceit which is not weak, but strong, and
which rules and guydes her in her own will. Whereas she speaks of being with a
people, and by them being deceived in some particular things: naming only
three things; the first whereof is,

That godliness being a Mystery, that it did consist of something within, and
not of something without: and that the Saints were to expect life and salvation
from a Christ within, and not from a Christ without.

I answer. Godliness is a mystery; the Image of God, which is godliness is a
mystery hidden from the eye of I. Turner and from all vulterous eyes; and this
mystery is within, in life and power, consisting of the new man Christ Jesus,
who is the Image of God made manifest within the saints, in whose Image man is
like God godly; and this mystery is not in outward things, in word or
declaration, or outward practice though where this mystery is made manifest,
godly practices will flow from it to without; but yet the power, life, and
mystery of godliness is within, and cannot be seen with the carnal eye, nor
comprehended with the carnal mind. And here I charge I. Turner, in the
presence of God, that she knows not the mystery of Godliness, who
blasphemously calls this a corrupt Principle; and here it is made manifest,
that she is in Babylon yet, and is deceived and bewitched by the Devil: I
bear witness to the truth, and to this particular, and against her who denies
it. And the saints has life and salvation from Christ made manifest within,
which is the same Christ which suffered without; and this I affirm, that till
Christ be revealed within, there is no salvation nor life partaked of. The
Scripture says, they were reprobates in whom Christ was not; And the Apostle
said, Christ in you, the hope of glory; and Christ lived in him, which was his
life and salvation. Where Christ is not made manifest within, the Serpent is
Head, and the Devil is King in the heart; and this I witness, and does
declare it, as in the presence of God, that t^ll Christ was made manifest
within me I was not saved nor had n^^lig^^s to God, though I was high in
profession and Knowled^^ outwardly. And here again I Turner h^th showed (...)
blindness and sottishness to all and may (...), and confess that she is a be
nos^^^e in Bab^^^ (...) a corrupt Principle, which is the very power (...)
Religion and salvation, which is Christ Jesus wi^h (...) ^^^fest in the saints,
which takes away sin and (...) Works of the Devil; and she and all others,
wh^ w^l^es and (...) the flesh following the lusts and desire^ of it living
(...) own wills in the broad way, and talks of salvation by (...) thing
without, will be deceived for nothing will pre^^nt (...) b^t the righteousness
of Jesus Christ revealed, which takes away sin, and sets free from it.

And now for the second Principle, That Saints were not to do duties by, or
from a command without but from a command within; and that the Word command in
Scripture, was not a command to them, till they had a Word within them.

I answer, That is no command from God to me, what he commands to another;
neither did any of the saints which we read of in Scripture act by the command
which was to another, not having the command to themselves: I challenge to
find an example to it; they obeyed every one their own command, one was sent
to Baptism and to Preach the Gospel; another was sent, not to Baptize, but to
Preach the Gospel. And thou I. Turner, or any other, who goes to duty, as you
call it, by imitation from the Letter without, which was commands to others, in
your own wills and time, your sacrifice is not excepted. but is abomination to
the Lord; for you go without the moving of the spirit, in your own wills and
strength, which God hates, and which his wrath is upon. And I charge her here,
as in the presence of the Lord, that she knows not what a command from God in
spirit is: but is ignorant and not a daughter of Syon; and let her mouth be
stopped, and let shame strike her in the Face, who professes her self to know
the Lord; and let all be ashamed of her who proferses themselves members joined
with her in Church; she has made manifest the ignorance of them all.

Now for the third particular, That as to the time of doing duties, they were
to wait for the moving of the spirit, to carry them forth to it; and this they
called, Waiting for a power; and till they had such a power, they were to do
nothing but sit still, and wait; and this not only in private duties, but in
church also; not owning any Ministry by way of g^fts, of Office, but to come
together, and there sit st^ll and wait t^ll they had a power, and then to
speak whether man or woman.

I answer, Who dare call this a Principle of deceit none but who are led by
deceit, and such is I. Turner, who puts light for darkness, and darkness
for light; all duties as she calls them whatsoever if the moving of the spirit
do not carry forth to act them; then the movings of the corrupt will and vain
mind carries forth; and who act from such Principles, are accursed from God.
And I. Turner, and all who denies to wait for the moving of the power of the
spirit to carry forth, but goes before the moving of it all their Prayers,
Preachings, Ordinances, and Churches, I do deny, and declare against, by the
Eternal spirit of God, they are odious and abomination in the eye of the Lord,
and is no duty which he accepts, whether they be done in private, or in the
Church. And that Ministry which is not carried forth by the moving of the
spirit of God, but of man, and in the will of man, which ministry is hated of
God; and she which denies waiting upon God, till power be given in from God to
act and speak for God, has denied the way of God, and the practice of the
saints in former generations; and woe is unto her, which makes the simple
believe this to be deceit: whereas she says in these particulars, which
carried such a face or show of spirituality, she was corrupted, but did never
fully own them in judgment nor practice. I answer, O blind deceived spirit,
which calls these but a show or face of spirituality; she calls the substance a
show, and the show or likeness, a substance; And woe unto her, which calls
good evil, and evil good; these particulars by the eternall-spirit, I own,
and warke in; but that spirit of deceit, and Antichrist in her, has denied
them and calls them deceiveable, and says by them she was corrupt; let her be
ashamed, and all of her faction; it was the Principle which led her from these
things, by which she was corrupted, and which hindered her to own them and
practice them, and which now makes her declare against them; which Principle is
the spirit of the false Prophet, which now rules which I know will never own
nor pract^ce these things She also says, She did oppose those Principles which
led to looseness either in conversation, or in slighting the Churches or
Ordinances of Christ, though she believes such Principles naturally follow the
others. I answer, She did, and does oppose the Principle of God, which would
have led her out of pride and ^ust into an holy conversa^ion; and out of false
Churches into ^^e church which is in God. And I charge her here that she
believes lies and utters what she believes, which is bl^^phemy* who says she
believes that wicked Principles naturelly follow the three named by her. And
whereas she says, As to that Principle of waiting* yet could never come up to
it in practice, in private duties she could not stay so long from duty* till
she had such a power, but did frequently go to duty when she had it not.

I answer. Here I do believe her she speaks truth* with her lying spirit; she
never yet could wait upon God, to act for him, but has run in her own will,
which is abomination to him, which is no acting for God, but for self, and for
the the Devil; and here has she shut her self out, from the holy men of Gods
practice, who waited upon him to be led by him, by the power of his spirit; and
she shows her self openly to all, that she went to that which she calls duty
in her own power and time, and knew not the power of God, nor his time to be
acted in; and all her duties, as she calls them, is no more but imagined and
imitated from the letter without, acted by the serpents strength and wisdom
in her; and she has here plainly discovered she knows not what waiting upon
God is, in truth and sincerity.

She says, She thought sometime she had had it; and says, she thought she had
had communion with God. I answer, Her thoughts I do deny, who calls truth
deceit; and she did, as now she does, live in thoughts and conceivings, by
which she is beguiled; that spirit which rules and speaks in her, never had
communion with God, but is contrary to him; nor never was acted in the truth of
God, but against him. She says, She knew no Scripture-ground for the practice
of weighting to be acted by the power of the spirit, and led to duty. I answer,
The saints ground of acting, is not the outward letter, but the spirit which
gave forth the letter; but the Scripture does declare of such, as waited to be
acted by the spirit and power of the Lord: Dare any say, the Saints Prayed or
Prophesied, without the movings of the spirit and power of the Lord? here she
has sh^t her self among the Heathens, who knows not God, nor what it is to
be acted by his spirit and power. She speaks of losing her peace, and having
little or no communion with God, nor scarce any thing to speak to, or for God.
I answer, True peace in Christ she never knew, for there is no peace to the
wicked; neither have any, who denies waiting upon God, as she has done, any
communion with God, nor nothing to say to, or for God, but through deceit, and
in deceit is I. Turner. That which brought her into trouble, and let her see
the confusion (which she speaks of) which she had lived in before, but saw it
not till then; that witness I own, and it shall witness for the Lord and the
Truth of what I say eternally; though she have shine the ^^^^^sse, yet it shall
arise to her co^^^nati^^, and her everlasting misery. And whereas she says,
Some labored to persuade her it was a despensation of God, and that the Saints
after brought out of Egypt, must be in the Wilderness, before they come to
Caraan. I answer, I bear witness by the eternal spirit, the truth of this
particular, as having witnessed the same condition; and she which has denied
this to be of God, has openly showed her self to be of the Devil, denying
the truth of Scripture. She says, this did not at all satisfy her, but she
continued in a sad condition. I answer. She here has showed what spirit she is
of, of the viperons generation which fled the wrath which came upon her, and
could not abide the judgment; and of the spirit of them which would have been
back in Egypt, which murmured, and therefore, with them, she entered not, but
is perished with them in the Wilderness. Whereas she says, She was never so
troubled with temptations, as at that time. I answer, Here she has showed her
self to be the stony ground, which when temptation came, withered away. She
speaks of a particular remptation, which was, Questioning the being of God. I
answer. That which was troubled, wrought the temptations, and not that which
troubled; and here she shows her ignorance, which cannot discern the ground of
temptation, but lays it upon God, which is blasphemy; for he tempts none to
evil. Whereas she says, this was the sad fruit of her straying from the pure
ways of truth. I answer, Here again she shows her blindness, who knows not
that temptations are for good: That which she calls, straying from the pure
ways of truth, it otherwise; for the stronger man came to dispossess the
strong man, and then began the war, and happy had she been, if she had
patiently endured to the end; but not abiding under the judgment, but starting
aside, she is cast out, and must not enter; for the second beast whose deadly
wound is healed, is alive, which makes war with the Lamb, which exereiseth all
the power of the first Beast: and here I. Turner is under the dominion of the
second Beast. She speaks of blessing God that she strayed no further. I answer.
She who has denied to wait unto Prayer and Praises, but praise in her own
strength and time, her praise is abomination to the Lord and she calls that,
straying from God, which was leading unto God, and so has forsaken the right
way and has c^^^ the way of God behind her back, and re^^sted him, who would
have lead her out of darkness, and out of confusion. Whereas she speaks of
God remembering her. To which I answer, he will remember her to plague her, who
has brought dishonor to his great name, and has called his way, the way of
error, and of deceit; and his real truth, a show or notion; she has chosen
her own way, the way of destruction. Whereas she speaks, being turued from
owning these particulars* she was restored to these joys that once she had. I
answer. She is returned with the Dog to the vomit, and with the Sow to her
wallowing in the (...), and there is her joy; and she now joys in the earthly
dust, in forms and traditions, and likenesses of things, and knows not what it
is to joy in God the substance, as by her writings it is made manifest, who
has denied salvation by Christ within, and has denied to wait upon God for
the power of his spirit, and calls them deceitful Principles; she has chosen
the way of death rather then the way of life, and has taken her self to
follow shaddows and likenesses, and neglected the substance, which is Christ
within, the (...) of ^lory; her latter end is worse then her beginning and the
P^^^^ is ^^^filled upon her. And she speaks in the 126. page of (...) being
d^servered under his veil; and in particular, as to that ^f being saved by a
Christ within, and not by a Christ with ut; and the Lord was pleased to show
her it was quite another thing, differing from the Gospel, and that it was
attended with this evil consequence, to overthrow the whole Gospel, and to
deny the Lord that bought them. I answer. I charge her here, as in the presence
of God, with belying the Lord, and with horrible blasphemy; who says, That
that which the saints and servants of God witnessed, who Preached the Gospel
and establi^^^ed it, (Christ within manifested) is quite another thing
differing from the Gospel, and that it is attended to overthrow the wh^^^
Gospel: O horrible blasphemy, and belying the Lord, who says, that the Lord
was pleased to show her it: did ever he show any of his, lies? all take notice
of this wicked and horrible blasphemer; the Lord rebuke that unclean spirit of
Antichrist in her, She goes on and says, then secondly, as to that of waiting
for a power to Pray, and that here was no command but from within; concerning
both these, the Lord was pleased to show that it was not according to his
mind, but a mere invention of Satan; and that it was attended with this evil
consequence to slight Scriptures and commands of God, and to expose the soul
to Satan's deceivings, to walk by the imaginations of their own heart, in stead
of the motions of the spirit. I answer, The Saints waited for the moving of the
spirit, which was power in them to help them to pray; they knew not to Pray as
they ought without it, and this command and help, they had not without them,
but within them: And I again here charge her with belying the Lord and with
notorious blasphemy, who says, that that which the saints witnessed (waiting
for the power of the spirit to Pray) is not according to the mind of the Lord,
but an invention of Satan; and she is not ashamed to say, the Lord showed her,
and the same which they witnessed, which spoake forth the Scripture, and which
walked in the commands of God, tends to slight Scriptures and commands of God,
and to expose the soul to Satan's deceivings: this is blasphemy and error, and
corrupt principles: and she which has denied waiting, to be led by the motions
of the spirit, is led by the imaginations of her own heart, and is under the
power of Satan's deceiving, and speaks contrary to what the Scripture speaks,
and so slights it, and the commands of God she has blasphemed the God of
Heaven, and accordingly will the Lord requite. And thus have I for the simple
ones sake declared the truth, and every single eye may see, who it is is led by
corrupt principles; and what I have written shall she eternally witness to be
true, and all her copartners. And I pass by the rest of her Book, as not
worth answering, for it is nothing but a^ery imagination and confusion, and
death yet reigns in her, and in her Book is spoken out by her; and she knows
not the Baptism of Saints, nor Communion, nor the true Church of Christ; to
that witness in her conscience do I declare, and when it shall arise, it will
eternally Witness me,

Whose Name in the Flesh is Edward Borough.

The Copy of a Letter, etc.
FRiends, (for so I call you) I was moved of the Lord to come unto your
Assembly, to declare the truth from him, coucerning you, as by the eternal
spirit was revealed to me; and I do acknowledge it, it was a mercy from the
Lord that I had that small liberty which I had, to clear my conscience amongst
you, and to discharge my duty, in obedience to the Lord, and to every ones
conscience am I made manifest, whether you will hear, or you will forbear:
truly friends, there is something among you which I own, and which is owned
of my Father; but yet many things has he against you, and as I said, I now
again say from the mouth of the Lord, that your covering is too narrow to hide
your shame, and your bed too short to stretch your selves upon; Now friends,
the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, which you act in, (you say) in obedience to
him, I do not speak against, but does witness them in life and power;
neither do I judge such amongst you who have extered in at the door, by the
Principle of God, to the Ordinances, (if any such) but you I do declare
against, and does judge by the infallible spirit, who have in your own wills
thrust in your selves, and acted by imagination and imitation from the Letter
without, and not having received the command from Christ into your selves; such
I judge to be in deceit, deceived by the Serpent, which deceives the simple, by
the likeness of a thing, and you that limit the Lord to any outward visible
thing, that without such can be no salvation, you I judge again to be in
deceit, and my judgment shall stand; for nothing is avayleable, that which God
once commanded, nor that which was not commanded, but the new creature, which
is borne of the immortal seed, contrary to the will of man. Truly friends,
you are acting in darkness, and there is no separation in you betwixt the
precious and the vile, betwixt the clean, and the unclean; for that which did
convince you of false hirelings, and of their deceitful worship, (which is
owned of my Father in you) has not b^^n ^beyed by you, but your minds have
been drawn forth from within, to obey a thing without; and herein have you
been bewitched from the obedience of the truth within, to obey the letter
without; as they wore which the Scripture speaks of; and you are acted in
another forms, and likeness then you were before, and which some are acted in
yet, but by tho same spirit; and you have a zeal, I bear you record, but it
is not according to knowledge: I declare against that spirit, by which you are
now acted, as knowing it to be the spirit of Anti Christ; and that which is
owned by my Father in you, is oppressed by you, by your wisdom and ^^^sen
which stands above, and is head, and rules amongst you, which is for
destruction, and for the Lord to accomplish his wrath upon: and happy were you
if you knew the day of vengeance, which is the acceptable year of the Lord;
but you are yet full and rich, and think you have need of nothing; and has a
name that you li^e, but you are dead, and empty, and miserable; your form is
corrupted, and you se^k the living among the dead, and you act in the form,
but w^lkes at liberty in your own wills, despising the daily cross of Christ,
which if you walked in, would bring down the high mind, and high nature in
you; and through the Cross, that which is low in you, would be exalted, and
the witness of your Ordinances would you have within, which you are seeking in
the letter without. And now Friend, to thee who was the Speaker when I was
present among you; thy Name I know not, but by thy nature and spirit, thy
spirit is the same which they speak from, which thou seems to d^^y as false
spirits; and by that spirit have thou been deceived and now at works by thee
to deceive others; and that spirit infallibly, by the eternal Spirit do I
judge; for the time is come, that by the Saints, the great Wh^re must be judged
which has wade all the men of the Earth drunk with the Wine of her
Fornteat^^^^ and which has deceived the simple. And whereas thou did (...),
what one thing I will deny as untruth which you had (...)? I answered then, as
now I do; I do deny thy v^yee and (...), for it is the voice of the stranger,
and not of Christ: and though you swear by that spirit, The Lord lives; I say,
surely thou swears falsely; and the false Prophets which used their tongues,
and said, The Lord says it, when the Lord had not spoken unto them, speak the
same words of the true Pr^phet; but he that had the true spirit judged the
false spirit, and so it is now. And therefore Friend, out of love to thy soul,
I do advise thee to be silent before the Lord, and wait upon him, te^^ he
manifest himself to speak in thee, and by thee; for Friend, thy Ministry is
in the will of man, and thou ministers death unto dead minds; and the Ministry
which is to the Seed, thou art ignorant of: to that in thy conscience I speak,
which shall witness for me before the Lord, who is appearing in his power, to
utter his thunders, and all Flesh shall tremble at his presence; and all Forms
of Worship will he dash to pieces at his appearance; And yours, who is the
purest Form, shall be broken to pieces, that he may rule, who is without form
and comeliness. Now Friends, for the Seeds sake have I speaken and written to
you; and to that in your consciences have I cleared my conscience, in the
presence of the Lord, which you shall Eternally witness, whether you will
hear or forbear: By a Servant of the Lord, who is named of the World,

Edward Borough.

FINIS.

