Power JURIDICENT, and JURITENENT: OR, Power of Law-making, and
Law-administring, DISCUSSED;

And Humbly Presented to the PARLIAMENT OF ENGLAND, By WILLIAM BALL Esquire.

woodcut of water fowl in flourishing border

Printed by H. T. 1650.

Power Iuridicent, and Iuritenent, etc.
Temporal Power, or Dominion, is either Natural or National: Natural, as
that of Parents over their Children, for their education and preservation, (for
God has ordained Parents not only Temporary instruments of B^ing, but also of
well-being; in which Office they ought to imitate the Heavenly spirits, amongst
whom the superior illuminate by Intellectual communication * the inferior in
Verbo mentis.
Degree with perpetual Amity, not with Rigor and severity, as it is probable
the Devils do domineer one over the other, for our Savior says, they have a
A note for Rulers.
Kingdom:) National Power is that, which after the fall of Man, God by his
fore knowledge and providence for the Rule of worldly affairs preordayned, and
ordered to be changed according to place, time, and circumstances, etc. This
National power is either Rational or Imperial: Rational, as when a People,
or Province of self-accord, * agree to have such Laws and Rules, as they
conceive In this is included the Magisteriall Power of Masters over Apprent^ces
and servants.
convenient for their Good and Preservation, to be administered by one or more.
Such was the ordinary Government of the Jews; sometime by Princes, or rather
Elders of the People, sometime by Judges, sometime by Kings, sometime by a
great Council (or Sanhedrim) somewhat resembling the State of Venice, sometime
by Dukes or Chiefetains: and such was and is to this day the several
Government of the Nations, whom God admits to make use of ordinary means
(however determined hy his Divine will) for their Politic and Civil welfare:
so God admitted the Romans to change their Government from Kings, to Consuls,
to Triumviri, Decemviri, and the like; too tedious it were to instance the
several Presidents, both ancient and modern, which History, and the Records
of Nations abundantly manifest. Power Imperial is that which many times is
induced upon a Nation, partly by force, and partly by Acceptance or Condition.
As when a People or Province being invaded, and in part actually overcome, or
otherwise in great danger to be enslaved by a conquering Enemy, do submit
themselves to his yoke, upon such conditions as their exigency and necessity
will admit: so did the Jews and many other Provinces submit themselves to the
Romans: and amongst other Nations the English, to William Duke of Normandy,
afterward called the Conqueror. This Power Imperial, is called Legal, for
that it is comprehended by certain Laws or Rules, compacts, and conditions:
under this Imperial or Legal Power, do all Nations Christian, or the major
part live: albeit some in better, some in worse conditions of servitude: for
the Polack Nobility are masters over their Kings; and the French Kings are
masters (I will not say Tyrants) over their Peasant subjects: in our Country of
England, heertofore Kings had the highest power Juritenen^, or
Law-administring, and a partial Power Juridicent, or Law-speaking; for the
Requests and desires of the Commons were heretofore by Kings ratified or
consummate: Notwithstanding the House of Commons being the Peoples
Representatives, were the chief Juridicent, or Law-speaking Power; for our
Kings were tied by Oath to propagate and conserve Justas Leges and
consuetudines quas vulgus elegerit, the just Laws and customs which the
People may or can choose hereafter: The Verb must needs be construed in the
Potentiall mood, not in the Optative nor Subjunctive, because there is neither
Adverb nor Conjunction; and in the Potentiall mood it must needs be construed
in the Future tense, otherwise it were against Reason, that any King should
swear to conserve Res indefinitas quondam in potentia praeterita: viz. the just
Laws which the People might have chosen, would have chosen, should have chosen,
or ought to have chosen; every Oath in nature of compact or condition, ought to
be de Re determinabili, of a thing Determinable, not of a thing indeterminable
never in Act, nor producible into Act, the People being not able to choose,
their choice being past (if elegerit be taken in the preterperfect tense) nor
the King able to conserve what they might have chosen, they omitting to choose
it. In other things concerning this subject, in my Answer to Mr. David Jenkins
his Tenants, I have sufficiently cleared all doubts, (as I suppose, in that no
Answer or Replication is made to me by any) and also made it appear, (at what
time there was a King) that salus Populi, not Majestas Imperii, was the
ultimate object and end of Government: and that the People their
Representatives, or Trustees, are and ought to be Judges of the Laws Jure
primitivo, or primario: for confirmation of this last, and the Peoples
interest, I now further argue: First,

The Power Juridicent, or Law-speaking, must chiefly reside in the Power
Active, which formerly tied and obliged by Oath, not in the Power Passive,
which was tied and obliged by Oath.

The People are the Power Active, which formerly tied and obliged by Oath, our
Kings to conserve the just Laws etc: which the People may hereafter choose.

Therefore, the Power Juridicent, or Lawspeaking, must chiefly reside in the
People, their Representatives or Trustees.

The major or precedent is manifest in Reason and Law, between Covenanter and
Covenantee; the minor or subsequent is evident by the words of the Oath.
Secondly, Power Juritenent or Law-administering, is ordered Juridicent or
Law-speaking, as the means to the end (the less noble to the more noble) for
all Ministers of Law from the highest to the lowest are intended only for
conservation of Law and Rule; but the Power Juridicent or Law-speaking orders
the Power Juritenent or Law-administering, as the cause, the means, (the more
noble, the less noble) for all Law-speaking intends Law-administering for
its own conservation, as aforesaid.

Wherefore, I can not but marvel that some Divines by alleging some Texts of
Scripture appropriated to Kings, as they were Monarchs without qualification or
tie by Oath to the people [not one Text of Scripture mentions that the Kings of
Juda or Israel took, or were obliged to take an Oath to the People] should
persuade this People or Nation of England, that they were, and ought to be
wholly devoted to the will and pleasure of their Kings, and that in no case
they might withstand, or oppose their Commands, though destructive to their
Fundamental and Primitive Rights: Such men should first consider the nature
and difference of Kings; for some Kings either by the Peoples admission, or by
usurpation had a domineering, or the highest power (in civil or mundane
affairs) both Juridicent or Law-speaking, and Juritenent or Law-administering;
but the Kings of England had no such, for they could make no Law at any time
without the consent of the Peoples Representatives, etc. and even in their
Juritenent or Law-administering Power they were restrained and limited, and
their proceedings were questionable by Parliament. And whereas some allege
that Kings writ, and do write themselves Kings Dei gratia, etc. And from
thence they would infer that Kings are as it were specially appointed by God
himself, and no way entrusted by the People, or tied or obliged to them; such
men are herein greatly mistaken, for the reason why Christian Kings and
Potentates write Dei gratia, etc. Is, or should be, to show their humility and
thanks toward God, to acknowledge him the Author (according to the Text, By
me Kings reign) by his free gift, of their Dignity and Power, whether more or
less qualified and limited, and that they should not arrogantly attribute
their Dominion to themselves, as either causers, or otherwise sole deservers of
it, as did Nabucadonezer, saying, Is not this Babylon? etc. As also Sapores the
proud Persian, with diverse others; so do some of the Asian and African
Monarchs, or rather Tyrants at this day. Thirdly, where the Power Juritenent or
Law-administering de facto (by irregular exorbitancy, or wilful defect) to
the Power Juridicent or Law-speaking (being the more noble) there the Power
Juridicent may determine the Power Juritenent, and constitute and apply such
other means as shall seem convenient for selfe-preservation, that being the
very end of all Regulated Government.

If it be said, that sometime the Power Juridicent (the People their
Representatives or Trustees) has erred, and may err in constituting and
applying means for selfe-preservation; It may sometime be so, I grant it: but
as beyond the highest Heaven there is no Mathematical, or farther Dimension,
so beyond a National Of Government generally ad^itted by the Nation.
constitution of Government, there ought to be no farther Progression
Political, or farther Progress, but all men of the same Nation ought therein
to acquiesce: I shall conclude with this,

Supra Regis Diadema,
Gentis salus Lex Suprema:
Quin and Parlamenti status
Est saluti Gentis datus;
Et a Gente fic creatus.

WILLIAM BALL.

FINIS.

