Gospel Worship: OR, The Right manner of Sanctifying the Name of God in
general.

And particularly in these 3. great Ordinances, viz. 1. Hearing the Word. 2.
Receiving the Lords Supper 3. Prayer.

By JEREMIAH BURROUCHES, The Gospel-Preacher to two of the greatest
Congregations in England, viz. Stepney and Criple-gate, LONDON.

LONDON, Printed for Peter Cole and R. W. at the sign of the Printing-Presse
in Cornhill at the Royal Exchange. 1648.

To the Reader.
OUR purpose in this Preface, is not to speak either of the eminent worth of
the Author, whose memory is blessed in the hearts of all the godly in this
Nation; or of this Piece it self here published: But only to assure thee that
it is His. And although it rises not up to that exactness and perfection that
might have been in them, had he published them himself. Yet with that different
allowance which is to be given Notes taken from his mouth in ordinary and
frequent Preaching, We doubt not but that in their use and benefit, they may be
as profitable to the Saints as other of his Writings, being as full of weighty
and Divine materials, having also the impresse of the Spirit and language of
this holy Man (one of the greatest Preachers of this age) stamped all along upon
them.

We (to whom this our Brother was most dear and precious) being entrusted with
the publishing of his Sermons, have thought good first to usher abroad these
few, which if they receive that welcome they deserve, many other excellent
Pieces of his may soon after have encouragement to appear in public view. The
points treated of in these, are of great concernment, and therefore we
conceive, the Author though in handling of them, he had room enough for the
discussing many of the controversies of the times, yet he purposely waved it,
and bent himself to the single delivery of that which tended most to
edification, and best suited with such a popular Auditory as that was to whom
he spoke. The Lord of heaven bless them to thy spiritual advantage, and
enable thee by such means as these to sanctify his Name in the use of all his
Ordinances, which is the desire of

Thomas Goodwin. William Greenhill. William Bridge. Sidrach Simpson. Philip
Nigh.

Sept. 15. 1647.
Gospel Worship: OR, The right manner of drawing nigh to God in general. And
particularly in those three great Ordinances: Viz. 1 Hearing of the Word, 2
Receiving the Lords Supper, 3 Prayer.
LEVITICUS. 10. 3. Then Moses said unto Aaron, This is it that the Lord spoke
saying, I will be Sanctified in them that come nigh me, and before all the
People I will be glorified: And Aaron held his peace.
THESE words are the speech of Moses to Aaron his Brother, endeavoring to
quiet and comfort his heart, which was (no question exceedingly troubled upon
that sore and great affliction that was upon him in the strange death of his
two Sons, Nadab, and Abibu, the story is this:

After Aarons Sons were consecrated to the Priestly Office, they coming to
attend this their Office, the very first day after their consecration to offer
Incense unto God, they ventured to offer incense with strange fire, with other
fire then God had appointed Upon that the fire of Gods wrath broke out upon
them, and slew them both presently in the very Sanctuary before all the people,
for it was a solemn time: being the beginning of the solemn Consecration of
the Priesthood. Upon this the spirit of Aaron could not but be exceedingly
troubled, to see his two Sons thus struck. Now Moses comes to him and says,
This is that which the Lord spoke, I will be Sanctified in them that draw nigh
me, and before all the people I will be glorified. And upon this Aaron held his
peace.

We read that once fire came down from Heaven in a way of Mercy to consume
the sacrifices: but now fire comes down from heaven in a way of Judgment to
consume the sacrificers, even Nadab and Abihu: they were Aarons sons, the
sons of a godly man, the sons of the High Priest, they were his eldest
sons, for Aaron had other sons besides Nadab and Abihu, Eleazer and
Ithamar, but these were his two eldest sons: they were two voung men, they
were struck in the very prime of their age, they were two that were newly
consecrated in the Priests office, for so you find it in the 9. Chap. And they
were two men of renown in the country and before all the people of Israel, two
men that God had much honored heretofore; as you shall find in the 24 Chap of
Exodus and the beginning, this Nadab and Abihu were men of great repute and
great renown, that God did much honor in former times; for when God called
Moses and Aaron with the Elders to come up to him, He singles out Nadab and
Abihu amongst the rest and names them. And he said unto Moses, Come up unto
the Lord, thou and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and 70. of the Elders of Israel.
Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu are only named, and then 70. of the Elders in
general, but Moses, Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, as if these were the four
eminent men of renown among all the people of Israel, he names none of the 70.
Elders but these two, besides Moses and Aaron: therefore these two that were
consumed by strange fire, were renowned men and newly consecrated into their
Office.

What was their Sin?

Their sin it was offering of strange fire, so the Text says that they
offered strange fire, which God commanded them not, in the beginning of the
Chapter.

But had God ever forbidden it? where do we find that ever God had forbidden
them to offer strange Fire, or appointed that they should offer only one kind
of fire? There is no Text of Scripture, that you can find from the beginning of
Genesis to this place, where God has said in terminis, in so many words
expressly, You shall offer no fire but one kind of fire. And yet here they are
consumed by fire from God, for offering strange fire. I find in the 30 `of
Exodus ver. 9. that there they were forbidden offering strange Incense, but I
do not find that they were forbidden offering strange fire. In Levit. 6. 13.
and diverse verses in that Chapter we find that God had appointed that they
should keep constantly the fire on the Altar burning, and never to let it go
out: Now that was it seems Gods intention that therefore they should make use
of that fire, and that fire only. God would have them to pick out his meaning:
God sent fire down from heaven upon the Altar, so in the latter end of the 9.
Chap. God sent down fire from heaven, and gave them a charge to keep that fire
on the Altar constantly, and never to let it go out: so that it seems God
would have them pick out his meaning, that because he had sent down fire from
heaven upon the Altar, and gave them power to keep that constantly, God would
have them therefore to understand, that what Incense or Sacrifice he would have
the use of fire in, it should be only that fire and no other, though God did
never say to them directly in these words, You shall make use of this fire and
no other, but God would have them to understand this. That Is their sin
therefore in offering of strange fire. Now fire comes from the Lord and does
consume them. Some think this fire came from the Altar, but surely it could not
be any ordinary fire that did consume Nadab and Abihu at this time for you
shall find in the next ver to my text, That the bodies of Nadab and Abihu were
not consumed by the fire, no, nor their clothes, they were killed by the fire
and yet their clothes were whole. therefore it was not an ordinary fire, it
was some Celestial fire struke into them to slay them, for so says the text
in the 4th ver. Come near, carry away your Brethren from before the Sanctuary
out of the Camp: and so they went and carried them in their coats out of the
Camp, so tht their clothes and bodies were not consumed, only they were killed
by the fire: they were struck with a sudden death, and that in the presence of
the Lord: such a death as God had never threatened in the Word before, God had
never threatened the Priests and said, If you Offer strange fire you shall be
consumed by fire: but yet God smites them with death by fire they had not time
to seek God, no not so much (as we use to say) as to say Lord have mercy upon
me: they had no time to promise amendment at all: now upon this heavy
judgment, the heart of Aaron could not possibly but be very much troubled, yea
and the spirit of Moses too, for Moses was their uncle, and Aaron their
father, they could not but be exceedingly much greived: but Moses being the
brother of Aaron, seeing his spirit (no question) exceedingly troubled, being
under such a sad affliction, and that such a Godly man even as Aaron was should
have such a sad judgment befall his Children: Moses comes and speaks
comfortably to him, and labors to support his spirit: and how does he do it?
He comes not as ordinarily you use to visit your brethren, Oh! you must be
content with this: no, but he comes and applies the Word of God, and shows how
God must be sanctified; and by that he comes to quiet the heart of his brother
Aaron: This is that which the Lord has spoke says Moses: He seeks to stay
the heart of his Brother with that which God spoke.

But where do we find that God spoke this?

It Is hard to find in any Scripture these very words in ter minis before this
time: and therefore Augustine thinks it was only the word God spoke but not
written, and so they had it from hand to hand by tradition as many other
things, as the Prophecy of Enoch that the Apostle Jude speaks of, you do not
find it written in the Book of God, and yet the Apostle speaks of it, so that
indeed it was from hand to hand: yea and we find in the New Testament when Paul
speaks of a thing that Christ should say, how that our Lord says, It is a
more blessed thing to give then to receive; you find it not recorded in the
Gospels that Christ said so. So, this is that which the Lord said, though it
was not written from the beginning of Genesis to this very place, or otherwise
though it be not recorded in express terms, yet something is recorded to the
same purpose and effect: and so it may seem to have reference to that
Scripture Exodus 29. 43. there we have a Scripture comes as near to it as any I
know. And there will I meet with the children of Israel, and the tabernacle
shall be sanctified by my glory, that is as much in effect, as I will be
sanctified in those that come nigh me, in those that come to Worship me in my
Tabernacle, I will be sanctified in all things that concern my Worship, I will
be sure to be sanctified there.

I will be sanctified] I will be Hallowed, for it is the very same that you
have in the Lords Prayer, Hallowed be thy Name, only that is the Greek word,
and this is the Hebrew: but if you would translate this word into Greek, you
must translate it by the same word that Christ spoke when he taught his
disciples to pray hallowed be thy name, Hallowd and Sanctified is all one.
Lord let thy Name appear to be Holy: so I will be Sanctified, that is, I will
have my Name appear to be Holy, I will be made known unto my People, and to
all the World that I am a holy God: that is the meaning of I will be Sanctified,
I will be known to all the world that I am a Holy God.

And before all the People I will be Glorified, so it is in the latter part of
the verse: as if God should say, I account it to be my glory that I should be
manifested to be Holy before all the World.

I will be Sanctified, that is I will have my People to demean and carry
themselves so as to hold forth their acknowledgement of my Holiness so, as by
their carriage I may appear to be a Holy God. I will be Sanctified by them, or
otherwise if they shall not in an active way Sanctify my name, that is, if they
shall not demean themselves so as to hold forth the glory of my Holiness,
then I will be Sanctified upon them; I will demean and carry my self toward
them so, as by my actions upon them, I will make it appear what a Holy God I
am: So God is Sanctified two ways, either by the Holiness of his People, in
their carriage toward him holding forth the glory of Gods Holiness: and so in
that 1. Pet. 3. 15. Sanctifye the Lord God in your hearts, the Saints do
sanctifye God in their hearts when they fear God as a Holy God, and Reverence
him and Love him as a holy God: and so Sanctify him in their lives, when their
lives do hold forth the glory of Gods Holiness, then God is Sanctified.

Put then if we do not do so, then God Sanctifies himself, that is in ways of
Judgment upon those that do not in ways of holiness Sanctify his Name. And
thus you have it Ezekiel. 28. 22. And say, Thus says the Lord God, Behold I am
against thee O Zidon, and I will be glorified in the midst of thee, and they
shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall have executed judgment in her, and
shall be Sanctified in her. And this is all one with I will be glorified in the
midst of them. And in the 38. of Ezekiel. 16, 23. You have to the same purpose,
And thou shall come up against my people of Israel, as a cloud to cover the
Land: it shall be in the latter days: and I will bring thee against my Land,
that the Heathen may know me, when I shall be Sanctified in thee O Gog, before
their eyes. And in the 23. ver. Thus will I magnify my self, and Sanctify my
self, and I will be known in the eyes of many Nations, and they shall know
that I am the Lord, In the way of the execution of Judgment: thus I will
Sanctify my self, so I will be Sanctified in those that draw nigh me.

In those that are nigh mee] Nigh ones, so it may be read: that is, especially
the Priests that did approach to God. Ezekiel. 42. 13. they approach to God
especially. But it is meant generally of all those that shall have to deal in
my Worship, whosoever shall come to Worship me let them look to it; they must
Sanctify my name, they must so demean themselves in my Worship, as to hold
forth my Name to be Holy: or otherwise I will manifest my self against them in
the ways of Judgment, for I will appear to be a holy God. I will have the
glory of my Holiness one way or other (says God) in those that come near
Me, As if God should say, Though it is otherwise with men, they indeed will be
ready to favor those that are near them, but I will not do so. Men will
sooner pass by the offenses of those that are near them then those that are
not as suppose that a stranger commits an offense, you would be severe toward
him; but suppose it were one of your own Children, or kinsmen, what would you
do then? Do not we see that men will rather favor their own kindred then
strangers, though the offense be the same? But I will not do so says God.
Suppose it be one of your own family, will not you be ready to excuse them?
Suppose it were your own Child that should commit such an offense, Oh! what
friends would you make to take him off from punishment? Though men will do so
toward their own, yet be bitter and severe toward strangers; Yet I will not
be so says God: Let those that are near me look to it, I will be Sanctified
by them. I will be sanctified in those that draw near me.

Now upon this, when Moses said thus, That God would be sanctified in those
that draw near him: this was Moses scope to Aaron, as if Moses should say,
Aaron, though I confess the hand of God is heavy upon you this day: Yet it is
fit for you to submit to God, it is fit that God should be glorified what ever
becomes of you; you are dear to God, but Gods Name is dearer to him then you
are: what ever the lives of your Sons were, yet it is fit that God should be
honored, and his name Sanctified what ever becomes of your Sons, or of your
Comforts, and therefore let your heart be quieted, you have had a great loss and
affliction upon you; but God has had glory; God has glorified himself. How
has God glorified himself? Very much by this way; for God by this way has
done an act to make all the People of the Land fear before him; to cause them
to Worship him with all reverence. All the people of the Land seeing such a
Judgment as this, and hearing of it; they will learn for ever to fear and
Reverence this God: they will say, How shall we appear before this Holy God?
We had need take heed how we appear in his presence, and Worship him
according to the way that He himself would be Worshipped; As if Moses should
say, This Honor that God has by this means in the hearts of his people it is
that, that you should account a greater good then the Lives of your Children,
what ever they are. This is the Scope of Moses speech to Aaron. Now upon this
the Text says:

Aaron held his peace] He was silenced. It may be before, He was expressing
himself in grief: and sorrow'd exceeding much in words; but now he was quiet
and had nothing to say: he did by his silence acknowledge, his Children were
dear to him, but it is fit that God should be glorified what ever becomes of his
Children, and therefore Aaron holds his peace.

But the word that is here translated Holds his peace, It has more in it then
mere silence; for the Hebrews have another word to signify mere silence of
speech: but this signifies a staying of the heart, that it does not further
proceed in any trouble of Spirit, a silence in the very heart, and staying of
it; a staying of the motions of the heart. I find the same word to be used in
Scripture, when Joshua said to the Sun si and still, stay thy self on
Gibeon, Jos. 10. 12. It Is the same word that is here translated and Aaron held
his peace, that is, he was stayed from further vexing or troubling of himself,
or being disquieted. Whereas his heart was in a strong violent motion: Now
Moses speech did stop him, and gave a stop to his heart to make it stand still
in a wonderful manner, as the Sun when Joshua spoke to it to stand still. As
if the Lord should have spoken to his heart, Aaron thy heart is in a mighty
strong motion, but consider that I must be Sanctified in those that draw nigh
me and let all those motions of thy heart be stopped and quiet. Thus now you see
the meaning of the Scripture, and the scope of it. Now in this scripture you
have these three special and notable points.

1 That in worshipping of God, there is a drawing nigh unto him.

2 That when we do draw nigh to God, we should take heed to our selves that
we Sanctifye Gods name.

3 If we do not Sanctifye Gods name in our drawings nigh to him, then
certainly God will Sanctifye his own Name upon us.

These are the three points that I intend to handle; And especially the second
to handle largely among you. I confess upon another occasion in one Sermon I
have spoke out of these words, but now I intend not only in general, to show
you how you should sanctify Gods Name in Worship, but likewise in the
particular Acts of Worship: As Sanctifying his name in Prayer, in Receiving the
Sacrament, in Hearing the Word in the several chief parts of the Worship of
God how his Name should be sanctified: For in all these you do draw nigh to
God. And for that end I have pitched my thoughts upon this Scripture. But before
I come to these three great Points, that are the principal points in the words
read unto you I shall take up diverse other notes of observation that ly up and
down as it were scattered that are of great use: and will help us further to
make use of this scripture in the other points that I shall come to afterward,
and handle more largely.

The first Note is this, 1 Observe.
That in Gods Worship there must be nothing tendered up to God but what he
has commanded: what soever we meddle with in the Worship of God, it must be
what we have a warrant for out of the word of God.

For this speech of Moses is upon occasion of the Judgment of God upon Aarons
Sons for offering strange fire: They offered fire that God had not commanded.
Hence I say that all things in Gods worship must have a warrant out of Gods
word, must be commanded. It Is not enough that it is not forbidden. I beseech
you observe it it is not enough that a thing is not forbidden, and what hurt is
there in it? But it must be commanded I confess in matters that are Civil and
natural, there this may be enough: If it be but according to the rules of
prudence, and not forbidden in the word we may make use of this in Civil and
natural things. But now when we come to matters of Religion, and the Worshipp
of God; we mu^^ either have a command, or somewhat out of Gods Word by some
Consequence drawn from some Command wherein God manifests his will either a
direct command, or by comparing one thing with another, or drawing consequences
plainly from the Words. We must have a warrant for the Worship of God. One
would have thought that these Priests offering Incense to the true God, what
hurt was there in taking other Fire? But there was no Command for it, and
therefore it was not accepted. It Is true there are somethings in the Worship of
God that are Natural and Civil helps, and there we need not have any Command:
As for instance; when we come to Worship God, the Congregation meets, they must
have a convenient place to keep the Air and weather from them: now this is but
a natural help, and so far as I Use the place of worship as a natural help, I
need have no Command. But if I will put any thing in a Place beyond what it
has in it is own nature, There I must look for a Command. For if I account one
place more Holy then another: or to think that God should accept of worship in
one place rather then in another: This is to raise it above what it is in its
own Nature. So that when any Creature is raised in a Religious way, above what
it has in it by Nature if I have not Scripture to warrant me I am therein
Superstitious. It is a very useful rule for to help you: If any Creature that
you make any use of in a way of Religion beyond what it has in its own
Nature, If you have not some warrant from the Word of God (whatsoever specious
show there may be in it) it is Superstition. As now for the place, there was a
place that was Holy, but then it had an Institution from God. And so for
garments to use those that are decent the light of reason is enough: but if I
will put any thing upon them beyond what there is in them in their own nature,
as heretofore in a Surplis; what, had that any more decency in its own
nature, but only man's Institution? Now when man shall put a Relgious respect
upon a thing, by virtue of his own Institution when he has not a warrant from
God: Here Is Superstion, we must al be willing worshippers, but not Will
worshippers; We must come freely to worship God; but we must not worship God
according to our own wills, and therefore what ever we do in the Worship of God
if we have not a warrant for it, when this is said, Who requires this at your
hands? It will stop our mouths another day. In Matthew 15. 9. In vain do they
worship me teaching for Doctrine the commandments of men. In vain: it is a vain
thing to Worship God when there is nothing but a commandment of man for this
Worship. If you would Worship God, you must have a Commandment of God for the
Worship: And in Isa. 29. 13. there is a place to the same purpose, that shows
how the Lord is offended with any man that shall teach his fear by their own
precepts, Wherefore the Lord said, For as much as this people draw near me with
their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have removed their heart far
from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precepts of men: Mark it:
Now if this be so, the Lord have mercy upon us in this thing. You have cause to
be humbled every one of you, I believe, in some degree or other, this
Congregation very much, and most Congregations that have had the fear of God
taught them by the precepts of men: How many things have there been in the
Worship of God that you can show no warrant in the Word for? A great many
things merely man's inventions, however they are now cast out, because Authority
came in and cast them out, and so you submit to it; but that is not enough for
you to submit to it because Authority would have it so: but you ought to be
humbled before God for all you Will Worship, for all your yeildings to any
thing in the Worship of God, that was taught by the precepts of men; You see
how severe God was to Nadab and Abihu for but taking other fire then that which
God had appointed to offer up Incense, though there was no direct commandment
against it. If the Lord has spared you, and not manifested any displeasure
upon you, you have cause to acknowledge Gods mercy, and to be humbled for all
your false Worship; certainly God does expect it from this Land to be humbled
for their Will Worship, or otherwise they few among thorns: All the
Reformation that is among us, if there be not an humiliation before for our
false Worship: it is not enough that we set up now the true Worship of God, but
we must be humbled for our false Worship. And that is the first Note; That in
the Worship of God there must be nothing but what God commands.

The Second Note is, 2 Observe.
In the matters of Worship God stands upon little things: Such things as seem
to be very small and little to us, yet God stands much upon them in the matter
of Worship. For there is nothing wherein the Prerogative of God does more
appear then in Worship: as Princes, they stand much upon their Prerogatives,
now God has written the Law of natural Worship in our hearts, as that we
should love God, fear God, tru^ in God, and pray to God: this God has written
in our hearts: but there are other things in the Worship of God that are not
written in our hearts, that only depend upon the Will of God revealed in his
Word, which were no duties except they were revelead in his Word. And these are
of such a nature as we can see no reason for but only this, because God will
have them. As now, there are many kind of Ceremonies to manifest honor to
Princes that there is no reason for them at all, but merely because it is a
Civil Institution so appointed: so God would have some ways for the honoring
of him that the creature should not see into the reason of them, but merely the
will of God to have them so, now God stands much upon little things, though men
would think it a little matter whether this fire or that fire, and will not
this burn as well as that? But God stands upon it: And so for the Ark, when
Vzza did but touch the Ark when it was ready to fall, we would think it no
great matter; but one touch of the Ark cost him his life. There is not any one
minnum in the Worship of God, but God stands mightily upon it: In the matter of
the Sabbath, that is his Worship, for a poor man to gather a few sticks, what
great matter is it? but God stand upon it. And so when the men of Beth-shemesh
did but look into the Ark, it cost the lives of fifty thousand threescore and
ten men. If it be a matter of a holy thing that concerns his Worship, he would
not have it abused in any thing. Let us learn to make conscience of little
things in the Worship of God, and not to think, O how nice such are, and how
precise and nice in such small things! Thou do not understand the nature of
Divine Worship if so be thou art not nice about it; God is nice and stands upon
little things in the matter of his Worship.

Another Note is this; Observe.
That there are no privileges or dignities of men that can secure them from
Gods stroke.

First Moses the man of God, he was their Uncle; Aaron that great instrument of
Gods glory, he was their Father: They were men that were newly consecrated to
the Priests office they were renowned, men that God put much glory upon; yet if
they will venture but to offend God in this little thing, Gods wrath breaks out
upon them and kills them presently. Let us take heed then of venturing, and do
not think that any services that we have done heretofore can bear us out; If
the greatest cannot be bore out with all their Privileges, how dare we poor
worms venture upon the displeasure of God? Thou that art a worthless creature
of no use at all in the world, dare thou provoke this God, when as the Lord
is so angry against men that are of great use and service, to let out his wrath
upon them suddenly? If you should see a Prince not spare his Favorite, or his
Nobles that are about him, but upon one offense that we think is but a little
offense, that the Princes anger should be so much against them as to cost them
their lives; what cause is there for poor people to tremble then when they have
done that which may incur the anger of their Prince? You see all outward
privileges and greatness will not excuse from the stroke of Gods Justice, it
should not excuse from the stroke of man's justice: It Is true, among men poor
people they go to it if they offend, but if great men offend they escape; but
it is not so with God, for Nadab and Abihu were great and renowned men.

The Fourth Note is, Observe.
That the more the dignity of men is, the more is their danger if they look not
to it: And this Note I gather from hence, That Nadab and Abihu were the two
eldest sons of Aaron, and we find in the Scripture that Eleazer, and [ thamer
that were the two other sons of Aaron, they escaped and were not thus consumed.
Why? Because the two elder sons had the dignity and privilege to come and
offer the incense, and having greater dignity then the younger, and not being
careful to behave themselves as they ought to do, the Lord smote them, and the
younger they escaped. And so many times those that are in a meaner condition
they escape, when those that are in a higher condition they are struck. Let men
that are in higher conditions then others look to themselves, for their danger
is greater: And you that are in a meaner condition, envy not those that are
higher, for you may be more safe in that mean condition which you are in, then
they in theirs.

The Fifth Note is this, 5 Observe.
That the beginnings of things of high concernment, do meet sometimes with
great difficulties and interruptions. This Note I gather from hence, That Nadab
and Abihu were struck at the very beginning of their Preisthood: as now,
suppose there were a new office erected in a Commonwealth that concerned the
Public good of the Kingdom, and in the very first erecting of the office there
falls out some hideous accident that rung throughout the whole Kingdom, as if
God from Heaven had done some thing against them in that office. As now,
suppose that the first time the Judges should come at the Bench, that God
should strike them from Heaven dead at the very Bench, it would be a mighty
matter to darken the glory and honor of that office. So one would think that
it should have been a mighty matter to have darkened the glory and the honor of
the Preisthood always: But God stands not upon that many times the beginnings
of great things are darkened by sad accidents, and therefore let not us be
offended though we see some sad accidents to fall out at the beginning of great
things, for though accidents fall out sadly at first, yet God may prosper it
afterward as he did the Priesthood.

The Sixth Note is, 6 Observe.
That those that enter into public places, and especially such places as
concern the Worship of God, they had need have the fear of God much upon them
when they first enter into those places. Now this were a very good point if I
were to Preach to an Auditory of Ministers. You see Nadab and Abihu upon their
first consecration the Lord smote them for this little miscarriage as we would
think, and that is a Sixth Note which especially concerns Ministers and
therefore I pass it over.

The Seventh Note that we have, 7 Observe.
and that is very useful for us all, God would have us all to pick out his mind
from dark expressions in his Word.

Though he does not express his will fully, and in express terms; yet if
there be any thing in his word whereby we may come to gather the mind of God,
God expects that we should gather his mind out of his Word, and if we do not
it is at our own peril.

The mind of God about this strange fire that these offered, you will say, They
were to pick it out: How could they have known that it was Gods mind that they
should not offer any fire but that on the Altar?

They should have reasoned thus with themselves, What has God let sue come
down from Feaven upon the Altar, and has he commanded that that should be
preserved on the Altar for his service? Surely, this must be Gods mind then
that we should make use of this fire rather then any other fire: God expects
that they should have reasoned thus, but because they did not pick out Gods
mind by reasoning after this manner, therefore the hand of God came out upon
them. They offended, and it may be it was through ignorance, but it was at
their peril, if they were ignorant of the mind of God when it might be known,
though it were but darkly revealed, and were to be picked out from several
places compared together, it was at their peril. It is a point that we have a
great deal of need of, for this is the vain heart of man, That if there be any
thing that God would have that is not suitable to his own ends, he will stand
wrangling against it, and cavelling at it; How does it appear (will he say) can
you bring express Scripture for it? Bring me express Scripture in words for
to prove it and then I will believe it, and so stands out till you bring so
many words of Scripture that forbids such a thing, or commands such a duty. Now
my brethren if you be of this temper, That you will forbear nothing, nor set
upon any thing but what you have directly express words of Scripture for, you
may run at your own peril into woeful dangers, into woeful sins: know that God
has so revealed a great part of his mind as it is only to be known by
gathering one thing from another, and by comparing one thing with another. And
God expects this from you, That if upon examination of Scripture that one thing
appear more likely to be his mind and will then another; you are bound to go
that way that is more likely. I told you before, That in matters of Worship we
must have warrant from the Word; but it does not follow, That we must have a
direct express warrant in every thing: As it is many times in some kind of
picture, the great art it is in the cast of the looks; you cannot say it is in
the drawing of this line, or the other line, but altogether; it is the cast of
the looks that causes the beauty of the picture: So in the Scripture, you
cannot say that this one line, or the other line, take it single that proves
it, but let them be laid all together and there will be a kind of aspect of
Gods mind, that we may see that this is the mind of God rather then the other,
and we are bound to go that way.

Now so far Nadab and Abihu might have seen, that they should rather have taken
fire off the Altar then any other fire, But they presumed because they had not
express Word, and you see it was at their peril. O take heed of standing out,
and wrangling against what is required because you have not express words: the
Lord has laid things so, and especially in the New Testament, for the ordering
of the Church in the New Testament as you have not express command for
abundance of things, but sometimes an example in some things, and sometimes not
a clear example neither; but compare one thing with another, and that which
seems to be nearest the mind of God, that should be bond enough to us, to tie
us to go according to what the mind of God seems most probable to be in the
Scripture; and an humble teachable heart will soon be convinced when another
man will not.

We find it clearly, That such things as are most suitable to men's own ends, a
little matter will serve the turn to persuade men to it, though one might argue
against it: I could easily show it, but that I think it not so convenient in
Pulpits to meddle with such things as those are. Those things I say which are
suitable to men's own ends and ways, them they will close withal: but other
things that do cross the flesh, that are most opposite to loo senesse and
would bring men most under the government of Christ, those things men stand out
against, and they must have clear and express words express and clear warrant
out of the word in so many terms, or otherwise by no means they will not so
much as yield to it: That Is a point that if God would but settle it upon our
hearts might be of very great use; A gracious heart will see the truth through
a very little crevis: But it is marvelous to consider what a do there is to
convince a man before he is humbled of some part of Gods will; and how easy it
is to convince a man after he is humbled.

The Eighth Note is this, 8 Observe.
That s^nners may meet with some judgments of God that were never threatened in
his Word.

God did never threaten before hand and say, Whosoever offers strange fire, I
will consume them with fire from heaven; But they meet with a judgment that
was not threatened: Consider of this, it may be when we come and speak out of
the word and show you plainly how God does threaten such and such fins, you are
afraid then; but know if thou venturest upon ways of sin, thou may meet
with dreadful judgments executed that never yet were threatened: Besides all
those judgments that are threatened in the Book of God thou may meet with
judgments unheard of unexpected: As God has Mercies beyond what he has
expressly revealed in his Word, for never was it heard since the beginning of
the world what God has laid up for them that love him: So God has judgments
beyond what is in his Word, Sometimes when the Ministers of God do open the
threatenings that are in Gods Word, you think that they are terrible: But know
that God in the treasury of his judgments has more dreadful things then yet
ever has bin revealed in his Word and therefore learn to tremble not only at
what is revealed in Gods Word against thy sin, but tremble at what there is in
that infinite Justice, Power, and Wisdom of God to find out and execute upon
sinners; for thou that art a sinner, and especially if thou be a bold and
presumptuous sinner, thou may I say expect to meet with whatsoever evil an
infinite wisdom is able to devise, and that an infinite power is able to bring
upon thee that thou art capable of: Thou committest such and such a sin,
perhaps thou do not know of any particular judgment that is threatened
against it: but think thus, I that do provoke God by my sins, what may I look
for? It Is more then I know to the contrary but that whatsoever the infinite
wisdom of God is able to find out, and what misery so ever I am capable of,
that the Lord may bring upon me. Consider of this and take heed of sin.

The Ninth Observation is this, 9 Observe.
That God is very quick with some in the ways of his judgments.

It may be he may spare others for a long time, but concerning thee he may say,
Thou shall not offend twice. If thou will venture the first act, God may strike
thee with death, he did so here with Nadab and Abihu, for they were but newly
consecrated, so I find it by Interpreters, That they were to be in consecration
for seven days, and this was the first day that they came to their place, and
in the very first act that they did, God did siute them. (...) tremble, the
Lord is quick toward some, he is patient toward others, but do not thou
presume because he is patient to others, he may take thee in the very first act
of thy sin, and be quick with thee.

The Tenth Note is this, 10 Obser.
That the holiness of a duty will never bear a man out in the miscarriages of
a duty.

This was a holy duty, they were the true Priests of God, they came to offer
Incense to the true God. It was right incense that they offered, there was but
this one miscarriage, They had not the same fire that God would have; now this
miscarriage God comes upon them for, and all the good there was in the Duty it
would not bear them out.

Consider of this you that perform many holy duties, take heed of giving way
to your selves in any miscarriage, for do not think, that because your duties
are very good and holy, that by doing thereof you may venture upon mixture;
take heed of mixing any evil, any miscarriage in a holy thing, though you have
performed a thousand holy duties, yet it will not bear you out in the
miscarriage of them.

The Eleaventh Note is this, 11 Obser.
That the Lord is very terrible out of his holy places.

The Note is the same that you have in Psalm. 68. 35. The Lord is (...) out of
his holy places: When we have to deal with God, who can stand before this holy
God? Our God is a consuming fire: The Lord manifests himself here most
dreadfully to strike with fire these two Priests, as in Ezekiel 9. 6. Begin at my
Sanctuary, says God. God is terrible, terrible toward those that shall dare
to approach into him, and yet are wicked or ungodly in their approaching he is
terrible to those that are near unto him, God would have us all to tremble at
his presence.

In the Twelfth place, 12 Obser.
Gods judgments are often very suitable to men's sins.

Here they sinned by fire and they are consumed by fire. They offended by
strange fire and God strikes them by a strange fire. The judgments of God are
very suitable to the sins of men oftentimes. As here by fire, so another time
we find it by water: Pharaoh he sins by drowning the infants of the people of
Israel in the waters, and God drowns him in the Sea. If you will be drowning by
water you shall have water enough says God: And so here, if you will be
meddling with strange fire, you shall have strange fire says God God does many
times proportion judgments to sinners that his righteousness might the more
appear those very creatures in which we sin, many times God makes them or
others of the same kind to be the executioners of his wrath. So it was with the
Jews, they would fell Christ for 30 pieces of silver, and they were sold 30 of
them for a penny atterwards: And so the story of Adoni-hezek in the first of
Judges, that was so cruel in such a way to cut off Thumbs and Toes of Kings,
even so he was served in the like kind: and it is ordinary for men that are of
cruel fiery spirits, to meet with cruel fiery spirits too.

And I would apply it in this particular, You that are stout Children to your
Parents, if God lets you live you many times meet with the very same in your
Children, and when you that are Parents meet with stubborn Children, you should
reflect, Does not God come righteously upon me? And so you that are Servants,
you are stout to your Masters, why afterward when you come to have Servants
they will be so to you; and perhaps you were unfaithful to your Governors,
afterward when you come to have Servants, it is a thousand to one but they will
be so to you. Now you should strike your hand upon your heart and say, It Is
just with God that it should be so, and that he should come upon me in mine own
kind.

Another Note is this, 13 Obser.
They offered strange fire. Lets take heed all of us, how we bring strange fire
into Gods service.

Bring strange fire into Gods service, What Is that?

I find diverse writers speaking upon this, says Am^^rose, Lusts, and
covetousness are this strange fire. That which I would have you consider of it
this, Above all strange fire take heed of the strange fire of Passion and
Anger, and especially in the Worship of God and at any time when you find your
hearts heated and fired with Anger when you are about to Worship God remember
this scripture, Nadab and Abihu were consumed by God, with fire from God for
coming into Gods presence with strange fire: Now, O Lord, how often have ^^
come into thy presence with strange fire! Perhaps your hearts have bin burning
hot with Passion when you have bin coming into Gods presence: You are to pray
with fervency, for so the Scripture says: we are indeed to be heat in Prayer
by the Holy Gho^t in our hearts, but certainly not to come with the fire of
Passion and Anger: Lift up your hands without w^ath and doubting. If you have
been Passionate and your hearts have been heat that way, be sure you get your
hearts cold before you go to Prayer. And so when you come to hear the Word, if
your hearts have been heat with Passion, be sure you get them cold before you
come to hear the Word: Receive with meekness the ingrafted Word that may save
your Souls.

And so when you come to the Lords Supper, take heed of coming with Wrath and
Malice, for then you come but to offer strange fire. It Is a special
Consideration for Ministers that come to Preach, they should take heed of
bringing strange fire into their Pulpits: that is, of venting their own
Passions. That has been ever a rule that I have been convinced of since I knew
any thing of Preaching, That that man that is appointed to reveal Gods wrath,
had need to conceal his own wrath that is certainly a rule for all Preachers,
for the Lord sends his Preachers to make known his wrath against men's sins, but
now the more they make known his wrath, the more they should conceal their own;
and so by that means when they come in the openest way to manifest Gods wrath,
the more their Preaching would be accepted. Now it is true, a carnal heart would
be ready to think, That when a Preacher speaks out of true zeal to God, he will
be ready to say, That he has aiming at himself: Take heed of that, I believe
you have had but little occasion of such a temptation in this place: But
however this I know, it is the duty of the Ministers of God to be sure to bring
nothing but the fire of the Spirit of God, the fire that they have from the
Altar; their tongues being touched with one of these coals, and not that they
should come with their own Passions to further the Righteousness of God, no,
the wrath of man does not accomplish the Righteousness of God; there are some
other particulars which being laid down, we shall come to the 3 main points.

SERMON II.
LEVITICUS. 10. 3. I will be Sanctified in them that come nigh me.
WE began these words the last day, Stepney, Nov. 16. 1645.
and showed the scope of them, and opened the meaning of them, and spoke of
diverse Notes of Observation that we gathered from this story of Nadab and
Abihu, and of Gods dealing with them. From the general story of it, there were
many Points of notable Observation that were drawn from thence: I Will add some
few now, and so come to the main Doctrinal Point in the Text.

A further Note of Observation is this, 14 Obser.
That many times even the dear Saints of God do meet with very sore and
grievous afflictions in their Children.

That the most eminent Saints of God are not freed from very grievous
afflictions even in their Children; It was one of the sorest afflictions that
almost ever any Saint of God met withal in his Children; this affliction of
Aaron at this time, That two of his Sons, and (as I told you the last day)
renowned men in Israel, newly consecrated to the Office of Priesthood, that the
very first day they came to offer in their office, they were struck before all
the people with fire from heaven and consumed: Oh what a sad affliction was it
to Aaron their Father when he saw his Sons in such a manner destroyed by God
himself! Consider of this you that have Children, and are ready to murmur and
complain of every little affliction that is upon you in respect of your
Children: If so be that your Children be but a little sick, or there be any
miscarriage of them, you think it is a heavy hand of God; But especially if God
take away your Children by death, then you mourn and will not be comforted: Yea
but though God have taken away your Children by death, yea perhaps it may be by
a violent death, as being drowned, etc. yet they have not been stricken with
fire from heaven by God, and they have not been of such public use. These here
were renowned men, and taken away in their very sin too, your Children which
have gone upon their lawful employments and God has taken away their lives;
there is no such cause of murmuring here, but when God takes away Children in
their sins, and in such a way as by fire from heaven; thus God took away Aarons
Children, and he was as dear to God as you are: And yet thus God deals with his
Saints; with Aaron in regard of his Children, and with his Elder Children and
with two of them together. This example may be enough to still and quiet the
hearts of men and women that are afflicted in respect of any calamity befalls
their Children. You see what a hand of God is against the very Children of
Aaron.

A further Note is this, 15 Obser.
That Gods judgments we see sometimes, though the effect of them be visible,
yet they come in an invisible way.

For you shall find if you read on in this story, That they were smote with
fire from heaven, but it did not appear what fire, for it did not so much as
consume their clothes, nor their bodies, but went through and struck them dead,
and no body could tell how. Gods judgments do come in a way that is invisible:
if it had been in a visible flame of fire all would have seen it, and it would
have burnt their clothes, or their bodies: but you shall find in the 5 verse,
That they were carried away from the Sanctuary in their cleaths, they were not
burnt.

Another Note is this, 16 Obser.
That though the lives of men be dear and precious to God, yet they are not so
precious as his glory.

The Glory of his Name is a thousand thousand times more dear unto God then the
lives of thousand thousands of people; the lives of Nadab and Abihu must go
that God may be ^anctified: If it comes so in the way (as I may so say) he
lives of men and the Sanctifying of Gods Name, the Glory of God must pass on,
and mast have its course let the lives of men go which way they will.

We think much to have the lives of men taken away; but if we know (...) Glory
of God meant, and what infinite reason there is that God should be g^^ned, we
would not think it much that the lives of never so many men should go for the
Glory of God (...) It Is mercy that our lives have not gone many times for Gods
glory: How often might God have glorified himself in taking away our lives?
We have cause to bless him, that our lives have been preserved so long as
they have.

Again Note, 17 Obser.
That the nearer any men are to God, the more they had need take heed that they
glorify him, for they must expect to be spared the less if they sin against
him.

Nadab and Abihu the Priests of God, and they came near to God, yet by their
transgression: though I told you We do not find in any place of Scripture
directly in words that this fire is forbidden, but they should have gathered
Gods mind by consequence, And therefore by the way I only Note, That we must
not think to urge upon men in all things strict commands in very words, but if
it be commanded so as we may draw it by any consequence, it is a command, as now
here for the Negative, they had not a Negative prohibition in words, yet they
had it by Consequence; So for the Affirmative, though we have not the
affirmative in express words, yet if we may have it by consequence it is an
affirmative as well as the negative, when we have it by consequence. But now
the Note of Observation is, That the nearer any comes to God if they sin
against him, they must not expect to be spared. Do not think that God will
spare you the more because you are professors of Religion, or because you do
often worship him: I suppose you that are acquainted with Scripture know that
place in Amos 3. 2. You only have I known of all the families of the earth:
therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities.

Another Note is this, 18 Obser.
That when a judgment is exemplary, then we should have recourse to the Word
of God, to see how God does make his Word good in that judgment.

So Moses does, This is that which the Lord has said. Do you see any
remarkable hand of God in the execution of a judgment upon one, have recourse
to Gods Word, and presently begin to think this, What is there in Gods Word
against that sin that this man has been guilty of? If you see a judgment of
God upon a Drunkard, remember the threats in the Word of God against
drunkenness, and so the judgments of God upon unclean Persons, swearers,
Sabbath breakers, liars, or any profane and ungodly persons, have recourse to
the judgments of God threatened in the Word against such; and so likewise
concerning Scorners and Opposers of Religion, remember what is said in the Word
of God against such, and so learn to Sanctify Gods Names. We might have
mentioned some particular threats of God against particular sinners for the
helping of you, that when you see exemplary judgments, to have recourse to the
Word of God. But we let that pass.

A further Note from this story is this, 19 Obser.
That the great honor that God intends to his Name, It is the making of his
Name Holy. I will be Sanctified in them that draw nigh me, and before all the
people I will be glorified.

As if Moses should say in Gods name, Why, I must have glory from the people,
and how? By making my name appear to be holy, this is the glory that I stand
upon above all other things that my Name may appear to be holy, that I may
appear to be a holy God. I beseech you brethren consider of this, God stands
upon nothing more then to appear to all the world to be a Holy God, there is the
glory of Gods Name in an eminent way, God does not so much stand upon this, to
appear to be a strong God, to appear to be a powerful God, to be a God of
patience, long-suffering, God does not so much stand to be an Omniscient God,
though these Attributes are dear to God, but that he may appear to be a Holy
God: that he stands upon. Whatever glory of the Name of God, that God shall be
content to have eclipsed in the world for a while, yet he is resolved he will
have the Glory of his holiness above all things: and therefore the Angels when
they are celebrating the glory of God, they do not say Lord Almighty, Almighty,
Almighty, or Lord Omniscient, Omniscient, Omniscient, but Holy, Holy, Holy.
Those three together, the Holiness of God, therein appears the glory of God
above all: God stands upon it that he will appear to be a Holy God.

Oh that those who profess themselves to be the Servants of God, that they
would especially endeavor to hold forth Gods Holiness; you that are near to
God, you that hope you are Gods Children, and make profession of his Name,
labor you to hold forth the glory of his Holiness above all things, in your
holy lives and conversations: for God stands upon this, To have his Name to be
Sanctified I will he Sanctified says God, and I will be Glorified, so he does
interpret the glory of his Name by being Santified. As if God should say,
That Is the glory that I look for, That my Name may be extolled as Holy: And
therefore the very first Petition that Christ teaches us to pray in the Lords
prayer, it is, Hallowed be thy Name, which is all one with this, Sanctified be
thy Name; Oh let the Name of God appear to be holy in the World: that is another
Note, that these two are joined together, I Will be Sanctified in those that draw
nigh me, and I will be Glorified before the people.

Again observe, 20 Obser.
That it is the part of true friendship, to help friends in their distresses,
and seek to comfort them from the Word.

Though we our selves be in afflictions, yet we should seek to comfort our
friends that are in greater afflictions, and to comfort them by the Word, for
so did Moses: Moses comes to comfort Aaron and applies the Word, This is that
which the Lord has said, I will be Sanctified. Now mark, no question Moses was
afflicted upon this heavy hand of God, for he was their Uncle; but though it
was heavy upon the Uncle, yet it was heavier upon the Father, and therefore
though Moses was troubled, yet he knew that Aaron was more troubled, and
therefore he goes to Aaron and seeks to comfort him, and he makes use of the
Word in his comforting of him. Learn this then, to go and comfort your
brethren, for Aaron was Moses brother; go and comfort them in their
afflictions, and think not because that you have some afflictions upon you,
that therefore you should not be a comfort to your brethren: their affliction
is greather then yours, and when you come to comfort, them, come not in a mere
carnal way and say, Brother you must be content, but you must come and apply
somewhat of the Word of God to comfort them and say, This is that which the
Lord has spoke; and to that end you should labor to be exercised in the Word
of God, that so you may be able to go to your brethren and comfort them in any
affliction; for there is no particular affliction but there is some word of God
that is suitable to that particular affliction, and those who are well
exercised in the Word of God, they can apply some word to every affliction: And
indeed this is an excelent friend, and such a friend is worth his weight in
gold, that can come to another friend in any affliction and ever more has some
what of the Word of God to apply to that affliction.

The Last Observation is this, 21 Obser.
That Aaron held his peace.

From whence we may Note, That there is no such way to quiet a gracious heart
under any afflictions in the World as that God will fetch out his honor by it.

It is grievous to me, but God fetches out his glory and honor by it. The
applying of the Word, and the consideration that God has his way to fetch out
his glory in our afflictions is the only way to quiet a gracious heart. All
these Points might take up a great deal of time, but I will let them pass and
come to the main Point of all, I will be Sanctified in all those that come nigh
me. There are these Three Points in these words:

1 First, That in the Worship of God, men and women draw nigh to God.

2 Secondly, That we ought to Sanctify Gods Name in drawing nigh to him.

3 Thirdly, That if we do not Sanctify it, God will Sanctify his own Name
upon us.

First, That in Worshipping of God, there is a drawing nigh to God.

Quest. Why is not God in every place?

Answ. Yes certainly, we can never be in any place but we are nigh to God, God
stands by us and looks upon us It is not only when you are Worshipping of God
that you are nigh him, but when you sin against him: when thou art swearing
profaning his Name his Day, God stands and looks upon thee thou art nigh him:
And it may be said or written upon every place, what was said of the City in
the last words of the Prophecy of Ezekiel. 48. 35. The name of the City was
Jeh^^ab-Shammah, that is, the Lord is there, the Lord ^ehovah he is there, he
is present in this place: Oh that you would remember when you are in any place,
that the name of that place is ^^chovah-Shammah, The Lord is there. In him we
live, we move (...) being therefore we are always nigh him yea but though we
are always nigh God in regard of that essential presence of his, yet there is
a more peculiar and special drawing nigh to God in the duties of his Worship,
and that the Scripture seems to hold forth unto you. First I Will show you how the
Scripture holds it forth, and then in what respects the Creature may be said to
draw nigh to God in holy duties of Worship; for so it was here, they were
coming to offer Incense.

1 That we do draw nigh to God in holy Duties, That we draw nigh to God in Holy
Duties.
see Jam. 4. 8. Draw nigh to God (so that you may be nearer God then you were)
that is, by holy Services, and holy Duties, and hence it is in Ps. 95. 2. Let
us (says he) come before his presence with thanksgiving, so that there is a
more peculiar coming before Gods presence when we come to Worship him then at
other times: And v. 6. O come let us Worship and how down, let us kneel before
the Lord our maker. So in Psalm. 100. 2. Let us come before his presence with
singing, for that is one part of the Worship of God. But the Scripture is plain,
that there is a special coming before God when we are coming to Worship him,
and in this respect the Servants of God in Psalm. 148. 14. are said to be a
people near to God. It is a very remarkable expression and lets forth much the
honor of the Saints of God: There Is the commendation of the excellent estate
of the Saints. He als(...) the h^rn of his people, the praise of all his Saints
even the children of Israel, a people near unto him. The Saints of God, the
Children of Israel, the Church of God are said to be a people near to God; Why
near him? Because that they Worship God, they are much exercised in the Worship
of God. This is one respect though there may be diverse others mentioned, yet in
respect of their coming so much before God in his Worship, therefore they are
near God.

Quest. Near him, Why, in what respects may a man be said to draw nigh to God
when he Worships him?

Answ. To that I Answer, There are three respects in which a man when he is
Worshipping of God may be said to draw nigh to God:

1 First, Because when we come to Worship God, we come to tender up that homage
and service unto him, that is due from us as creatures to the infinite Creator
that is the very end of Worship. If you would know what it is to Worship God, it
is this:

You come to tender up that homage and respect that is due from the creature to
the Creator. What it is to worship God.
Now when a Subject comes to tender up his homage to his Prince, he comes
toward him, when he does it immediately: So we have none to tender it up by
but Jesus Christ, and when we tender it up we must come our selves too, for
Christ does not take our service and tender it up to God and we be absent, but
we must come with Christ, and Christ takes us by the hand and so tenders it up
to the Father while we are in presence, so that we are said to come nigh to God
in that respect, because of the immediate tendering up of that Worship of ours
to God; I call it immediate in respect of any creature: But in respect of
Christ indeed he is a Mediator to do it, but yet he does it in a spiritual
way, and we have to do with none but God through Jesus Christ in the tendering
up of our Worship to him: We may make use of an institution that God has
appointed, but we do not tender up our Worship to God through that creature,
but in the use of that creature we do come to God, and our souls are to tender
up that respect we owe to God immediately. Therefore in Levit. 21. 21. it is
said of the Priests in their Sacrifices, when they were to come to Worship God,
No man that has a blemish of the seed of Aaron the Priest shall come nigh to
offer the offerings of the Lord made by fire. So that when any come to offer
any offerings of the Lord made by fire, it appears he came nigh to God: he
came to bring a present to God: therefore he comes nigh. So when we come to
offer our spiritual Sacrifices unto God, we come nigh to God to offer, it is
the offering of a Sacrifice to God. And that is the first thing, because the
creature comes to bring a present to God, therefore he is said to draw nigh.

And Secondly, The Second respect wherein the Soul is said to draw nigh to God
in holy duties.
the Soul is said to draw nigh to God in holy duties, because it does present
it is self before God in those ways through which God does use to communicate
his choice, precious, most excelent and glorious mercies to his people: I say,
when we come to Worship God, we come to set our selves before God in those
ways that God does (...) to communicate the choice, most excelent and glorious
rich mercies that he has to communicate to his creature.

When we have to deal with creatures, as meat and drink, and our outward
businesses we have to do with God in them; but when we come to Worship God, we
come to present our selves before him in those things that he does use to let
out himself though in a more special and glorious manner to the souls of his
people. What Is the reason why heaven is said to be the presence of God, and why
those that are in heaven are said to live with God? There they behold the face
of God and are before him in a special manner, therefore when Christ teaches
us to pray he teaches us to look up to heaven and to say, Our Father which ^rt
in heaven, etc. Now certainly the essential presence of God is on earth as
truly and really as in heaven, and God is not so as to have one part in one
place, and another in another, but All God is in every place, but the reason
why God is said to be in heaven, it is because the Lord makes known himself
there in a more glorious manner then in any other place, and therefore heaven
is the presence of God in a more special way. Now then if the communication of
God unto a creature be enough to make the presence of God more special if this
be enough to make a creature to live with God, and to be before his face,
because they are there where God does most communicate himself, then certainly
when we come to Worship God, we come to be near God, and be with God because
the duties of his Worship are those means that the Lord has appointed for the
letting out of himself in the glory of his goodness and mercy to his people:
You may expect other manner of communication of Gods goodness through the
duties of his Worship then in any other way: And that is the Second respect
wherein you may be said to draw nigh to God in holy duties.

Thirdly, You may be said to draw nigh to God, because then we should (and if
we Worship God as we ought, we do) act our faith and humility, and all the
graces of the Spirit; We do act them, as it were, upon God, when we come to
Worship him: That Is required in every duty of Worship, that you should stir up
the faculties of your souls, and all the graces of the Spirit of God, and you
should act them upon God when you are Worshipping of him. It Is not enough to
come with grace when you come to Worship God, but there must be an acting of
that grace upon God.

And so we find in Scripture, that the acting of grace upon God, it is a
drawing near to him, therefore in Isa. 29. 13. the Lord complains there, This
people draws near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me, as
if God should say, Indeed they come and speak to me, and therefore they think
they draw nigh to me, but I expect that their hearts should be acting upon me,
that is the meaning. And in Zeph. 3. 2. God complains there of his people that
they did not draw near to him as they should: And it appears plainly, it was
from hence, that their graces did not act so upon God as they ought, She obeyed
not the voice: she received not correction: she trusted not in the Lord: she
drew not near to her God. So that acting faith upon God is a drawing nigh to
God, and so acting any grace upon God is a drawing nigh to God. Now when is
there a time for the acting of our graces upon God so as when we come to
worship God? And therefore in Isa. 64. 7. the Lord complains there, That no man
did stir up himself to take hold on him. When we come to Worship God we should
stir up our selves to take hold of God. And thus you see in what respects the
Soul may be said to draw nigh to God when it comes to worship him.

Now for the Application of this point and it is in diverse particulars. The
First is this,

Hence learn what you do when you come to Worship God, Applic. 1
and consider of it every time you come to perform any act of Worship. Truly
this one thing would be of marveilous use, and it would help forward to the
next Point of Sanctifying of Gods Name. This you are all convinced of, That it
is your duty to Worship God, when you pray you come to Worship God, when you
come to hear his Word you come to Worship him, and when you receive the
Sacrament you Worship him. Now if I should come from one end of the
Congregation to the other, and ask every one of you this Question, It is your
duty to Worship God, is it not? Yes: that you will all be ready to answer. And
what do you do when you Worship God? I fear that this Second Question would
gravel many. You will say, We must pray to God, and serve him, and hear his
Word, and go to the Communion^ yea, but what do your Souls do in this Work of
Worshipping of God? This should be the answer, and so you should think with
your selves, and charge this upon your own hearts, I am now going to Worship
God, either in Prayer, Word, or Sacraments, I am now going to tender up that
homage that is due from a creature to the infinite Creator, so that I must so
pray, as I must manifest that high respect that I owe to God as my Creator; but
that I shall speak to more afterward: only now remember this, That you do
profess every time you go to Prayer, That you go to tender up that homage that
you owe unto God and so every time you come to hear the Word, there is a
profession that you come to tender up that respect and homage that you owe to
the infinite God: And so likewise when you come to receive the Sacrament. Now
when we come to offer a present to men, we know how we prepare, and with what
suitable presence we desire to offer: but of that afterward when we come to
speak of Sanctifying Gods Name.

2 Secondly, Remember, when I come to Worship God, I come to set my self before
the Lord in those ways that God does let out the choice of his mercies to his
people in: I have many mercies from God in the enjoyment of the creature, but
when I come to Worship him I expect the communication of his mercy in another
way then through any creature in the World. The duties of his Worship are the
chief cha^nels that God does let out the choicest of his mercies to the hearts
of his people through, and now I am going to Worship him, I am going to present
my self before God. Indeed there is a little glimmering of the light of God
through other creatures to me, but the glorious beams of the light of God is
through the duties of his Worship.

3 And then Thirdly, I am now going to act my Soul upon God, so that if I have
any abilities to close with God, to act my Soul upon him, it must be put forth
now at this time; I am indeed at all times to labor to enjoy communion with
God, when I see the creatures, the Sun and Moon and Stars to labor to lift up
my heart to God, and when I see the glory of God in the Sea, and for my meat
and drink I am to bless God, and to acknowledge God in all; but now when I
come to Worship God, then all the strength of my Soul is to be acted upon God
in a more special manner; I must then above all labor to stir up whatsoever I
have in my Soul to act upon God, this is now to Worship God.

Secondly, Applic. 2
If to Worship God, be to draw nigh to God, hence we see the reasons why guilty
consciences have little mind to the duties of Gods Worship. When a man or woman
has given liberty to any licentious way and sinned against their consciences,
if they have any light in their consciences, it is one of the tediousest things
in the World to come to the duties of Gods Worship: they had rather do any
thing then to come to holy dutys, as to Prayer and especially to secret prayer.
A man or woman that has an enlightened conscience, and is under the guilt of
sin, the coming to God in holy duties, is a very grievous burden to them: Why?
Here Is the Reason, Because to Worship God is to draw nigh to God, and the guilt
that is upon them has made the presence of God terrible to them, and therefore
they had rather go into their company and be merry, eat, drink, sport, or any
thing rather then to come into Gods presence. We know how it was with Adam,
when God appeared in the garden and called to him, he ran to hide himself; Why?
Because he had guiltiness upon him: Oh the evil that the guilt of sin brings
upon the Soul, it makes the presence of God terrible! The presence of God it
should be more comfortable to us then our lives but our sin makes Gods presence
grievous and terrible. A Child sometimes when it has offended the Father and
is conscious to its self of the offense that it has given the Father, it had
rather be in the Kitching among the Servants, then to come into the Hall or
Parlour where the Father is, because it has offended him: and so it is with a
guilty conscience, when it is conscious to its self of some haunt of evil that
it has given it self unto, it has no mind at all of coming into the presence
of the Father, but hangs off. My Brethren, the very presence of God in the
communion of his Saints is terrible to a guilty conscience, the very looking
upon a godly man is terrible to a guilty conscience. When as thou have bin
abroad etc. bin loose etc. wicked in thy ways, I appeal to thy conscience,
when thou come into the presence of some holy gracious man or woman that
lives close with God, does it not daunt thee? Now is the presence of God in the
very faces of his Saints terrible to a guilty conscience? How terrible is the
presence of God in his Ordinances then? Indeed those men and women whose
consciences are not enlightened, but are ignorant and sottish, they can sin
against God and go into his presence without any trouble; you shall have men
swear and be drunken over night and come to the Sacrament the next day, What Is
the reason? Because there is no light in their consciences, their consciences
are in darkness, they are besotted in their sin; but I speak now of one who
has an enlightened conscience, the presence of God is terrible to such a one.

A Third Use is this, Applic. 3
Here is the Reason why Hypocrites do meet with such vengeance from God as they
do: I confess we shall meet with this more especially afterward, only by the
way take notice of it; Hypocrites above all men may expect the severest
judgments of God upon them, because they come so nigh God, for they come often
to the duties of Gods Worship; now they that will come so nigh Gods presence,
and come with base and ungodly hearts, to cloak their villainy, of all in the
world they must expect to have the severe vengeance of God let out upon them;
they that stand nighest the bullet must expect to have the strength of it to be
the more upon them; so when the wrath of God proceeds out upon sinners, wicked
men that stand nighest him they have the greatest strok of Gods wrath; but of
that more when I come to the Third Point, That God will be Sanctified in those
that draw nigh him.

The Fourth Use is this, Applic. 4
If to Worship God be to draw nigh him, then to neglect Gods Worship is to
depart from him, that must needs follow, and this is a dreadful thing, it is
the sentence that shall be at the last day of judgment, Depart from me. Thou
now art willing to depart from God, Oh consider of this you that neglect
Worship, the Worship of God in your families, and in your closets, and in the
congregation, in the communion of the Saints, thou have little minded or
regarded the Worship of God it may be all thy days, what have thou been doing
all this while? thou have been departing from God all this while, and when thy
conscience shall be but enlightened and awakened to see how far thou art from
God, how terrible will it be to thee? Remember this you that have no mind to
the duties of the Worship of God but love the Commission of sin, you neglect
Gods Worship, you were wont to Worship him in a constant way in your closets
and families, but now you grow more loose, and so you grow more dead every day
then other, you go off from God more and more. Surely there can be no good to
neglect Gods Worship. And those that are loath to Worship God because they
cannot Worship him as they ought, from this Point it appears plainly, That
there can be no good gotten by neglecting Gods Worship, for it is departing
from God, whatsoever plea there may be by any temptation to neglect Gods
Worship, certainly there is danger in it, and therefore never listen to any
such temptation as shall draw your hearts from the duties of Gods Worship.
There are a Generation of wantons in these times that make little matter of
continuing the duties of Gods Worship, they were wont constantly to worship
God, and to attend upon the Word, but now it is nothing to them, and they are
even ready to thank God for it that they make not such conscience as they were
wont to do in the duties of the Worship of God: It may be they will say, That
heretofore some slavish terror did carry them on in the duties of Gods Worship
more then the understanding of the freeness of the grace of God would admit
of: But shall the understanding of the freedom of the grace of God carry thee
on less then thy slavish terror did? Oh blind and wanton spirit that know
not the ways of God, nor the freeness of the grace of God, nor the riches of
it! Oh what a dishonor art thou to Jesus Christ and to the freeness of his
grace, that now can go up and down from day to day and never Worship God! Did
Jesus Christ come into the world to that end for to cause thee to depart more
from God? It Is plain out of the Word, That the duties of Gods Worship are those
duties whereby the Soul comes to draw nigh to God: And I beseech you brethren
observe these men, whither there be that holiness in their lives, that
spiritualnesse as there was wont to be; no, you shall find them by degrees to
grow loose, yea run sometimes into gross sins, grow many times to lying and
deceiving, and to drunkenesse and company keeping; yea to worse things by
degrees: Perhaps they are at first ready to say, Is thy Servant a dead Dog that
I should do this? But by departing from God they grow dead to holy duties: We
find it by experience, That the professors of Religion have not that holiness,
heavenlinesse, spiritualnesse, as they were wont to have in former times. And
no marveile, for now they keep not so nigh to God as they were wont. You that
are Seamen and Travelours, sometimes you are near the Sun, and then you are
hot but the further off the Sun you go, you grow to be colder and colder: And
so those that neglect the Worship of God, they go from the warm Sun, they go
from the light of Gods countenance and from the presence of God and so they
grow cold and chill, and by degrees they grow to profaneness, and it is to be
feared that many of them will grow to mere Athisme.

Another Use is this, Applic. 5
A Use of Exhortation, that we would be encouraged to Worship God, and to be
much in the Worship of God. In Heb. 10. 22. Let us draw near (says the Text)
Who would not draw near to God? Oh what a good thing is it to be in the
presence of God! Is not the Lord the fountain of thy life? Is it not a sweet
thing to be in his presence? We think it a sweet thing to be in the presence of
godly men; Oh 'that we might always live with such men, and be nigh them! That
Martyr Doctor Tailor rejoiced in this, That ever he came into Prison to be
acquainted with that Angel of God holy Master Bradford, and as I remember some
among the heathens that professed they would rather be in prison with Ca^o then
be in the greatest glory with some other: It is a blessed thing to be in the
presence of God, to be with him that is the God of our lives, and the fountain
of all good; let us draw nigh to God often, let us know that it is a mercy that
we may draw nigh to God; we might have been banished from the presence of the
Lord long e're this time.

This is that that the happiness of the glorious Church is set out by in Rev.
22. 4. They shall see his face and his name shall be in their foreheads. This
is the Privilege of the Church. And that it is such a blessing to draw nigh to
God you may see it by that in Ephesians. 2. 18. For through him we both have an
access by one spirit unto the Father.

Through him] Through Christ we have access by one Spirit unto the Father, and
now (says he) Ye that were strangers and forreiners, are made fellow Citizens
with the Saints, and of the household of God: and verse. 13. But now by Christ
Jesus ye who sometimes were a far off are made nigh by the blood of Christ, and
you have access through Christ: So our coming nigh to God is such a privilege
as cost the blood of Christ; and will not you improve it? You were far off in
your natural condition, but now you are nigh through his blood; Lay but this
text warm to your hearts this morning, That I that was far off am made nigh by
the blood of Christ, made nigh to God, it will be a means for ever to draw your
hearts to all those ways whereby you may draw nearest to God. By drawing nigh
to God often we incre^se (...) gr^^ts.


And by drawing nigh to God often, you will come to increate your graces
abundantly: your graces how will they act the presence of God will draw forth
the acts of grace as the presence of the fire draws forth our heat, so the
presence of God will draw forth our graces.

And by this means we come to live most holy lives. We come to live holy lives
We read of Moses, he was upon the mountain forty days with God, and when he
came down his face did so shine, that the people were not able to bear it;
what is the reason? it was from hence, because he was so nigh to God: would you
have your faces to shine in a holy conversation before men? converse much with
God, be often with God, be nigh to him, and that will make you shine as lights
in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation. We find it so with some
that converse much with God, there is a shine upon their very countenances.

And further it is a special sign of our adoption to love to be nigh to God.
A special sign of our adoption.
What should a Child love most but to be in the presence of his Father? Would
you know whither you have received the Spirit of adoption yea or no? I can
hardly give you any one sign so clear as this, for to love to go into Gods
presence, as David said, I was glad when they said, Come and let us go up unto
the House of the Lord. You shall have many that love to be in Gods presence, so
as they think on it overnight, and long for the time while it comes; I never am
better then when I am with God, me thinks when I get into Gods presence, either
in Prayer or any duty of Gods Worship, I find my heart warmed and quickened,
etc. They are ready to say with Peter, Master, it is good being here.

And that is another thing, We come to be put in mind of the life of heaven
It is that which will put us in mind of the life of heaven, it is the only
thing in heaven to be in the presence of God. Why, the more thou art nigh God
in the Duties of Worship, the more thou art in heaven, and do not thou pray,
That the will of God may be done in Earth as in Heaven? Now the Saints and
Angels are always before God Worshipping of him; then be as much as thou can
in the presence of God, If thou would be in heaven, be there: Many of the
Saints they find it so, It is not so with carnal hearts, they are weary
presently, when they are in Prayer, or hearing the Word, it is not so to them:
yea, that is because thou have not the presence of God, as in Mal. 1. what
weariness is there? thou can be a gaming till one or two a clock at night,
and though thou should lose thy supper, or the work of thy family, it is not
tedious to thee to be exercised in those things that pleases the flesh; but
when thou come to Worship God, how quickly art thou tired now what will thou
do in heaven where there is nothing else done to all eternity but Worshipping
of God?

And then it must needs be delightful to God that thou should come nigh him:
Our drawing nigh to God delightful to him,
There is nothing in the world more pleasant to God then to have his Saints
come into his presence. What does a Father more delight in then to have his
Children about him? never did any Father or Mother love to have their Children
by them, so as God loves to have his Children come nigh him, and be often with
him. And the truth is, one great reason that God suffers you to fall into
afflictions so much is that you may come running to him: How does the Child
come running to the Father or Mother when it is afraid? why, the Lord is
willing to permit men to do you wrong that you may run to him, that he might
have more of your presence: Thou that art such a poor creature, yet thou
hear this day that there is nothing in the world that God takes more
pleasure in (next to the presence of his own Son Jesus Christ, and his Saints
and Angles that he has with him in heaven) then to have his Saints come nigh
him, to have them always to be under his wing.

And then by coming often into Gods presence in his worship there will grow a
sweet and blested familiarity between God and thy soul, By coming into Gods
presence there is a blessed familiarity betwee^ God and the soul.
for thou will be speaking to God, and God will be speaking to thee too: We
know many times that dear friends who are very nearly linkt together, yet if
they be long absent one from another there grows a strangeness, and so by
degrees their friendship is deaded; but now when they are together every day,
and there is an intercourse of love and friendship, then their friendship is
kept active and quick, but now if they be absent long; Indeed if they be absent
in another Country when they cannot come together, that they are sure it is not
through any neglect, then it will not damp their friendship; but when they are
near and come not one to another, then they think it is out of neglect and so
they grow strange. So it is with the Soul, if there were no possibility of a
coming into Gods presence, then it would not hinder the sweetness of the love of
God to us. But now when we have those duties of Worship wherein we may draw
nigh to God, if we neglect them our familiarity with God will quickly be lost,
Acquaint thy self with God and be at peace. God is willing to be acquainted
with his Servants; the Lord loves to be familiar with the poorest of his
Saints, and wilt not thou maintain that sweet familiarity with God? These two
benefits will follow upon thy familiarity with God.

First, Our familarity with God makes us to be potent with him.
Those that are most familiar with God they are most potent with God; As now a
strnger cannot prevail in any Petition so as a familiar friend can: Thus my
brethren, when strangers come into Gods presence, God does not so much regard
them; but when his familiars come into his presence, the Saints of God that
keep close with him in constant communion and converse in the duties of his
Worship, God does take them as his familiar friends, and they will prevail
much with God.

Secondly, By our communion with God the terror of death will be taken away.
By this means the terror of death will be taken away, there is no such way to
take off the terror of the thoughts of death as by keeping familiarity with
God, death then is joyful to those that converse with him. That Reverend
Divine that is now with God (Doctor Preston) when he was to die he had this
speech, I shall but change my place, I shall not change my company; whereas its
otherwise if thou growest estranged from God, when death comes it will look
with a terrible face, for then thou have to deal with God, thou art then to go
into the presence of the infinite dreadful God, into whose presence thou never
had any mind to go before, but says death, I must now carry thee into the
presence of God. As thy Body returns to the dust so thy Soul must return to God
that gave it; that is, to receive its eternal doom, etc. But now says a
Saint, what must my body return to dust and my Soul to God that gave it? it is
he which I have bin with every day, and can say as he said, My Soul go forth,
go forth, why art thou unwilling to go forth to him that thou have conversed
with all thy days?

And then what safety is there in being near to God, Safety in being near to
God.
especially in these dangerous times? In the time wherein we live it is safe to
be near God; in Psalm. 22. 11. Be not far from me, for trouble is near, says
David: Lord, trouble is near me be not thou far from me; It Is a blessed thing
to have God near is when trouble is near us, trouble is near many of you,
perhaps there is not a spans breadth between death and us, what a blessed thing
is it then to have God to be near us? when the poor Chickin sees the Kite come
near it to seize upon it, and is like to be surprised, if the Hen be near, it
runs to the Hen, and the Hen covers it and keeps it safe; so it should be with
us, for so Christ says of Jerusalem, How often would I have gathered thee as a
Hen gathers her Chickins? There are a company of Kites abroad in the world,
and we are poor shiftlesse creatures; now how happy are we then if we can run
under the shadow of Gods wing? there is a kind of shadow in the presence of
God in the enjoyment of the creature; but the shadow of God that we have in his
Worship that is as the shadow of his wing. There is the shadow of a Tree, and
that may help from some kind of troubles but there is another manner of shadow
under the shadow of the wing of the Hen, because that nourishes the Chickin:
The men of the world they have the shadow of the Tree, as it were, Gods
general providence which is over all creatures; but the Saints of God that
draw nigh to God they have the shadow of Gods wing, like the shadow of the Hens
wing to the Chickin, which does comfort it and safeguard it; let us by the
duties of Worship thus draw nigh to God, and keep nigh unto him.

SERMON III.
LEVITICUS. 10. 3. I will be Sanctified in them that come nigh me.
I WILL only add one particular more Stepney, Nov. 30. 1645.
to what we said the last day and then proceed.

If in the duties of Worship we are nigh to God, Applic. 6 Great honor God
puts upon his servants.
then hence appears the great honor that God puts upon his Servants that do
Worship him Certainly the Worshippers of God have great honor put upon them
because the Lord vouchsafes them to draw nigh unto him, they are such as are
precious and honorable in his eyes. I will not enlarge my self in this, only
give you three Scriptures that show the great honor and respect that God puts
upon those that he does admit to come and Worship him.

The first Scripture is in Deuteronomy. 4. 17. There Moses speaking of the People of
Israel; and the great respect that God showed to them more then others; for
says he, What nation is there so great, who has God so nigh unto them, as the
Lord our God is in all things that we call upon him for? What Nation is there
so great as you are? ( So great) How does it appear that the Nation of Israel
is a greater Nation then other Nations are? how? That has God so nigh unto
them in all things that they call upon him for: herein any man or woman, or
nation, may be said to be great, that is, greatly honored by the Lord God, in
that they have the Lord nigh to them and they are nigh to him, here is the
greatness of a nation; you would think that if one would describe the
greatness of a nation, it should be in their great wealth, their great trading
and traffic that they have and the fertile place that they live in; no, this
is not the greatness of a nation, But what nation is there so great that has
the Lord God so nigh to them? There Is the greatness of a nation, and so a
spiritual heart would account greatesse to consist in having God to be nigh
unto it.

The Second Scripture is in Numb. 16. 9. There we have Moses speaking unto the
Sons of Korah rebuking them for their sin, and he brings this aggravation to
them of the greatness of their sin, says he, Seems it but a small thing unto
you that the God of Israel has separated you from the congregation of Israel
to bring you near to himself? That is, That you should come to Worship him, is
this a small thing to you? is not this honor enough? As if Moses should have
said, Why do you contend for any more honor, the Lord has separated you to
bring you near to himsef?

Object. This you will say was spoken to the Priests?

Answ. But it may be said of every gracious Soul, for every Believer Christ
has made a King, Priest, and Prophet unto himself; now there is no Believer
but Jesus Christ has separated him or her from the rest of the world to be
near unto God. This is the dignity that God has put upon thee that thou art
separated by his grace to be one near to him, whereas others of the world they
depart from him, continually depart more and more from him; but I say the Lord
by his grace has set thee a part for himself, as he says in Psalm. 4. 3. The
Lord has set apart him that is godly for himself: Thou art separated from the
world, to what end? It is that thou might be near to him, this is thy
privilege, and thou should account it thy great honor: thou have not that
honor and respect in the world as others have, but thou art one of Gods
separated ones that thou art near to him.

A Third scripture is in Psalm. 33. 28. There you may see how the Prophet David
did highly esteem of that great honor that the Lord did put upon him in this,
in being near to God: But it is good for me to draw near to God. Mark how he
speaks, But it is good for me: Why? For lo, they that are far from thee shall
perish: thou have desiroyed all them that go a whoring from thee. As if he
should say, There are some that did seem to be near unto thee heretofore, that
were as the wife to the husband, but they are gone a whoring from thee; base
Hypocrites, base Apostates, they are gone a whoring from thee, their hearts
being carnal they did not find that contentment and satisfaction in thy
Worship as thy Saints do, and therefore they are gone a whoring from thee, but
it is good for me to draw near to thee: It is an excellent Scripture, do you
see any young ones, or others that were very forward not many years ago, and
would speak of good things, and seem to rejoice in the word, but now they are
gone a whoring, they are departed from God and his ways, and the pleasures of
the flesh has taken their hearts? Thou will destroy them (says David) that go
a whoring from thee. So thou should think with thy self; Oh miserable is the
condition of those who once were forward in the profession of Religion and now
are gone a whoring from God, but it is good for me to draw near to God, they are
gone from thee, and thou will destroy them, but it is good for me to draw near
to thee; I bless my self in drawing near to thee the Lord, and bless the time
that ever I did draw near to thee, and that ever I knew those ways wherein in
my soul has drawn near to God. Such a Worship God aright, and do delight in
the worship of God they are such as have a great honor put upon them, they do
draw nigh to God; And thus we have finished the First Point.

The Second Point is that will hold us some time, and that is,

The Sanctifying Gods Name in our drawing near to God. Doct. 2.


When we Worship God we draw nigh to him, but let us take heed how we draw
nigh, Heb. 10. 12. Let us draw near with a true heart. Look to thy feet when
thou come into the house of God, Eccle. 5. 1. Now for the Sanctifying of Gods
Name in drawing nigh to him we shall endeavor to open it;

1 First in showing you wherein the Sanctification of Gods name consists, or
what we should do that we might Sanctify the Name of God in drawing nigh to
him.

2 The Reason why God will have his name to be Sanctified in those that do draw
nigh to him.

How we should sanctify the name of God in drawing nigh to him, it is under
these two heads:

First, There must be a due preparation unto the Worship of God that we
exercise our selves in at any time.

Secondly, A right behavior of our souls in it: in these two things consists
the Sanctifying of Gods Name in his worship. Now under these two heads all that
I shall speak about the opening of the Sanctifying of Gods Name will be
contained. At this time I shall only speak of the First:

The due preparation of the Soul unto the duties of Gods Worship; Therein
consists a special part of the Sanctifying of Gods Name in drawing nigh to
him. And that it is so, we find it in Scripture, That preparation for worship
it is called the Sanctifying of our selves; and by finding this in Scripture it
hinted me upon this head, to speak of the preparation unto worship in our
Sanctifying Gods Name, because I find in Scripture that the Sanctifying our
selves for worship, and the preparation of our selves for worship are all one:
I Will give you these two texts; In 1 Samuel 16. 5. you shall find there, that
Samuel when he was sent by God to Anoint David in Bethlem, the text says, I am
come to Sacrifice unto the Lord, Sanctify your selves and come with me to the
Sacrifice, Do you come peaceably say they? Yes; what then? Sanctify your
selves and come with me to the Sacrifice: That Is all one, as if he should have
said, Prepare your selves and come with me to the Sacrifice: and so in Job. 1.
5. there you shall find that the holy man Joh when his sons had been feasting,
he was some what afraid least there should be some miscarriage, and that they
had sinned against God in their feasting; as it is very hard to give liberty to
please the flesh and not to sin, not to transgress bounds; therefore Job
though he did not hear of any notorious abuse of their feasting, yet he was
afraid least they should sin, he knew how dangerous it was to have so much
satisfaction to the flesh and not to transgress bounds, therefore it is said
he sent to his sons and sanctified them. It was so (says the text) when the
days of the feasting were gone about, that Job sent and Sanctified them: that
Job sent unto them to prepare them to offer Sacrifice, to prepare them for the
Worship of God: So that the Scripture holds forth this then, that to prepare
for worship it is, to Sanctify for Worship, and so it is one special thing
that is required in our sanctifying of God, in our drawing nigh to God, to make
a due preparation for his holy worship. Now for the orderly handling of things;

1. First, I shall show you, That we must prepare for the worship of God.

2 Secondly, I shall show you, Wherein this preparation for the Worship of God
does consist.

3 Thirdly, The excellency that there is in this, or what great good there is
in preparation for Gods Worship.

4. Fourthly, I shall Answer a case of Conscience or two.

5. Fifthly, I will show you what is the behavior of the Soul in Sanctifying
Gods Name.

6 Sixthly, The Reasons why God will be Sanctified in the duties of his Worship.

First, That there must be preparation to the Worship of God.

For First, that God that we come to Worship, Reason 1
is a great and glorious God, and we having to deal with such an infinite,
glorious, dreadful Majesty, it is fit that we should make preparation when we
come nigh unto him: therefore in Exodus 19. 10. when God came among the people
to give them his Law, he did require that they should be Sanctified to day and
tomorrow, and that they should wash their clothes and be ready against the
third day, for the third day the Lord would come down upon mount Sinai in the
sight of all the people. God did not so much stand upon their clothes, but it
was to signify an inward washing. Now my brethren, if when God came to give
the Law they were so to prepare, then certainly when we are to come to Worship
God in the way of the Gospel, we are to prepare as well as they, because God is
coming. For that that is observable is, why they were for two days together to
make such preparation, the argument is because of the presence of God; The Lord
said to Moses, Go and Sanctify the people to day and to morrow, and let them
wash their clothes and be ready against the third day, Why? for the Lord will
come down in the sight of all the people upon mount Sinai: The Lord will come
down the third day and therefore let them be Sanctified. So when thou go to
Worship God, thou expectest or should expect that God will come to thee, and
that thy heart shall be drawn to God, and therefore thou should make some
preparation (For the time of preparation we shall speak to afterward when we
come to the cases of Conscience about preparation for Worship.) And so in 1
Chr. 22. 5. 14. David makes preparation for the house of God because it was the
house of God that he had to build, though he could not do it himself in his own
time, yet being the house of God what great preparation was made by David? The
morral of which is this That the house of God being a Type of the Church and
the worship of God, as well as of Christ; it shows that there should be much
preparation when we have to deal with God in his Ordinances.

Secondly, Reason 2
As God is great that we draw nigh to, so the duties of Gods worship are great
duties, they are the greatest things that does concern us in this world, and it
is a sign of a very carnal heart to slight the duties of Gods Worship, to make
account of them as little matters: Carnal hearts ordinarily the things that
concern their businesses in the world they think great matters; Oh I may not
neglect that, I may not neglect that, I may not neglect such a business, or I
may not neglect to visit or gratify such a friend but now for the worship of
God it is good indeed, but whither it be done or not it is no great matter,
therefore they can put off prayer; if they have any business the time of
prayer must pay for it; they can put off that upon any slight occasion, they do
not account the duties of Gods worship great matters; My brethren I beseech you
learn this lesson this morning, to account the duties of Gods worship great
matters, they are the greatest things that do concern you here in this world;
for they are the homage that you tender up to the high God, as you heard, and
those things wherein God communicats himself in his choice Mercies, now being
such great matters there is cause that we should prepare. For that one thing of
prayer, says Luther, It is a great work, and a difficult work, and therefore
there had need be preparation for it: Business of great consequence we make
preparation for, indeed if a business be a slight business we can fall upon
it on a sudden, you make not preparation to go in a Boat in the Thames, but to
go a voyage you make great preparation. Now if men and women would but
understand the duties of Gods worship to be great, they would see a necessity
to make a preparation; Many men for want of preparation to duties they lose a
great part of the time, when they come to perform a duty of Worship in prayer
they spend half the time that is convenient to be spent in prayer before they
begin to pray; and so in hearing the word, they are a long time before they can
settle themselves to attend to the word, or in any other kind of Worship; I say
a great deal of time in the worship is spent ordinarily before we can get our
hearts to close with the worship; now that is a sore and a great evil to lose
any part of the time of worship: Christians, I beseech you account highly of
the time of your worship, you have bin so long time at prayer, yea but how much
of it has been lost because you have not prepared before hand for it? perhaps
you kneeled upon your knees, but you were a long time before you could get your
hearts warm at your work, why you should have been warm before you had come: It
is so oftentimes with many men, when they meet together and there is no
preparation for their business, they come together and they are a long time
before they can buckle to the business that they came about, because there was
no preparation, but if there be preparation made, that every man knows before
hand what his work is, they can fall to it, and they can dispatch as much in
one hour as others do in two or three; but of that we shall speak more
afterward.

Thirdly, Reason 3
There must be preparation because our hearts are naturally, exceedingly
unprepared for every good work, we are all naturally even reprobate to every
good work, the duties of Gods Worship are high and Spiritual, and holy things,
but by nature our hearts grovell in the dirt, and we are carnal, sensual,
drossie, dead, slight, sottish, and vain, altogether unfit to come into the
presence of God: Oh that we were but apprehensive and senfible of the
unfitness of our hearts to come into Gods presence! Perhaps because thou
know not God thou can rush into his presence without any more ado, but if
thou know thy self, and God, thou could not but see thy self altogether
unfit for his presence, and so as to wonder that the Lord should not spurn thee
out of his presence every time thou come unto him, there had need then be
preparation because we are so unfit to come into his presence.

Fourthly, Reason 4
There had need be preparation because of the great hindrances of the Worship
of God. This business and the other business would hinder; the intanglements,
they would hinder; the temptations of the Devil, they would hinder; sometimes
the indisposition of our bodies does mightily hinder; and the stirrings of the
passions of our minds they hinder: if there be any business falls out amisle in
the family, and any thing go but cross, how are we put off the hinges and made
unfit for holy duties! There had need be preparation therefore because there
are so many hindrances in the way, many of you will complain that you are much
hindered, but do you do what you can to make preparation before hand? Do the
hindrances that you complain of put you on to be so much the more careful to
make due preparation for holy duties.

Fifthly, Reason 5
We find that the heathens themselves by the light of nature when they did but
worship their Idol gods, they would make some preparation, such as was suitable
to those gods that the worshipped, therefore they would wash their flesh and
purge themselves, but though their preparation was but very poor, yet they
taught us thus much, That they were convinst in their consciences that when God
was to be Worshipped, people should be prepared.

The Sixth and last reason has a great deal in it, Reason 6
which I beseech you consider of; we find that the Scripture does make the
uprightnes of the heart much to consist in preparation for worship; and does
make the falsenesse of the heart to consist in this, that men do not prepare.
Perhaps you have not so much thought of this, but yet it is of excellent use
unto you. We shall find the Scripture does make the very uprightness of the
heart to consist in the preparation for duty; and the falsenesse of a man's
heart to consist in this, that he makes not conscience to prepare his heart for
God and his worship. And this I will show unto you very plainly and clearly,
take these two examples. The first of Rehoboam, and the second of Jehoshaphat,
one a wicked man whose heart was false, and the other a godly man whose heart
was right with God. The falsenesse of the heart of the one is in 2 Chronicles. 12.
14. there you have what Gods thoughts of Rehoboam were in the verses before:
but now he brings the reason of his sentence upon him, and says the text, he
did evil because he prepared not his heart to seek the Lord; there were many
good things that Rehoboam did; I might show you some things; as how he did obey
the Prophet of God when he was seeking to avenge himself upon those that did
rend themselves from his obedience: the Lord did but send his Prophet, and
though he had an army ready to revenge himself upon those that in a way of
Rebellion did rend themselves from under his government, and he obeyed the word
of the Lord but for all that he did evil in the fight of the Lord God looked
upon him as a man that had no uprightnes in him, why? for he did not prepare
his heart to seek the Lord, says God, I look upon all Rehoboam did as nothing;
I look upon his ways as evil and himself as a wicked man, Why? Because he did
not prepare his heart to seek the Lord if his heart had bin upright with me he
would have prepared his heart to seek me. I beseech you now lay this text to
your hearts do you prepare your hearts to seek God? when you go to prayer can
you say that you take pains in preparing your hearts for it? and in hearing
the word, and so likewise for receiving the Sacrament.

Now for Jehoshaphat a godly man in 2 Chronicles. 19. 3. there you may see what the
Lord says of Jehoshaphat that was godly. Nevertheless, there are good things
found in thee, in that thou have taken away the greves out of the land, and
have prepared thine heart to seek God. Jehoshaphat was found guilty in joining
himself to wicked men too much, the Prophet comes and says to him, Would
thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? therefore is wrath
upon thee from before the Lord. Jehoshaphat here we see was very faulty in
joining with those that were wicked, and is rebuked by the Prophet from the
Lord; What will thou join with the wicked? the wrath of God is upon thee:
Well, but for all that, (I beseech you observe it) That at that time when the
Lord is most displeased against Jehoshaphat, and sends his Prophet in his name
to pronounce this, that the wrath of God is out against him; yet for all this,
God cannot but take notice of this, that he had an upright heart, though he
failed in that particular, yet there is some good found in thee, in that thou
have prepared thy heart to seek God. Indeed through some sudden temptations
thou art drawn aside in this particular act; Yea, but it has been thy care to
prepare thy heart to seek me, and in that regard I do look upon thee as having
an upright heart: And thus you see how much the Scripture puts upon the
preparation of the heart to seek God. And so in 1 Samuel 7. 3. you shall find
that the Scripture makes the uprightness of the heart to consist in this, And
Samuel spoke unto all the house of Israel saying, If ye do return unto the
Lord with all your hearts, what then? why then, put away the strange gods, and
Ashtaroth from among you, and prepare your hearts unto the Lord, and serve him
only: As if Samuel should say, If you will return indeed to the Lord, if indeed
your hearts be upright according to what you seem to profess in turning to
God, why then prepare your hearts to seek the Lord. You do not in truth turn
to God except you make conscience to prepare your hearts: Therefore you that
yet never knew what it was to make conscience to prepare your hearts for holy
duties, know that you have not turned with all your heart unto the Lord, there
has not been the true turning of your hearts unto the Lord. Thus now you see
there is much lies upon preparation to the duties of Gods worship: Well, you
will say, seeing there lies so much in it, I pray open it wherein it does
consist. To that I Answer, It consists in these five things, which I shall but
briefly name.

First, In the possessing the heart with the right apprehension of that God
before whom we come to tender our duties; Then do we make conscience to prepare
our hearts, when we labor upon our going to worship God, to get our hearts
before hand possessed with right apprehensions of the Majesty of that God that
we are going to Worship, and of the greatness, and weight of the duty that we
are setting about the nature of it, the manner how it is to be performed, the
rule by which we are to be guided, the end that we are to aim at: Meditation
is a good preparation to holy duties. And these are the general heads of our
meditation for our preparation to duty. Viz.

What God He is we have to deal with meditate of God in his Attributes and then
meditate of the weight of our duties, and the nature of them and the rule of
them, and the end of them; get your hearts possessed with meditations of this
nature, and in this as a special thing does consist your preparation to holy
duty, and that is the first thing.

2 The Second thing wherein the preparation to a duty consists, it is in this,
In the taking off of the heart from every sinful way, the endeavor at least,
If there be iniquity in thine hand or heart labor to put it out: When thou are
come into Gods presence, do not bring into the presence of God the love of any
sin in thine heart, but labor to put it from thy heart: In 2 Chronicles. 29. 5. We
find there what is required to preparation the Text says, Hezekiah said unto
them, Hear me, ye Levits, sanctify now your selves, and sanctify the house of
the Lord God of your fathers, and carry forth the filthiness out of the holy
place: that is sanctifying a thing to carry forth the filthiness out of that
thing that we would sanctify so the Sanctifying of our hearts it is by
carrying forth the filthiness out of our hearts, so as to be fit for a duty.
And in Job. 11. 13, 14. If thou prepare thine heart, and siretch out thine hand
toward him: What then? If iniquity he in thine hand, put it far away, and let
not wickednessed well in thy tabernacles: These Two must be together.

3 A Third thing is this, The Preparation of the heart it is the disintangling
of the heart from the world, and from all occasions and businesses in the
world. I am to worship God, but how is my heart ensnared and entangled in this
and the other business? Now when I come to worship God I must lay aside all,
for there is the preparation of the heart, the separating of it for such a work,
for that is the nature of Sanctification, the separating of a thing from a
common use I am to worship God, now I must labor to separate my heart from a
common use: At other times God gives me liberty to let out my heart to common
uses; but now when I come to worship him, I must separate my heart from all
common uses, that my heart may be wholly for God. I remember it is said in the
story of Cieil which was Lord treasurer, that when he went to read, he would
lay his gown off and say, Lie there Lord Cieil: So when we go to duty, we
should say, Lie by world: (and by laying aside the world I mean, laying aside
of all household affairs, or affairs in trading, etc.) I must be as one that
has nothing to do in the world for that time: It is true, the time cannot be
said to be holy for this, as the time of the Sabbath day is holy.

You will say, Why may not any time be said to be holy that I spend in holy
duties? No, that is not enough to make time holy, for the time that God makes
holy, it is not holy because of the duties that I perform in it, but the duties
that I perform then are more acceptable because they are done in such a time,
and so that makes a place holy, not because it is appointed for holy duties and
uses, but because it is so appointed by God, and the performing a duty in that
place is more acceptable to God then in another place: But now though we cannot
make our time holy in that second sense, yet in the first, it is time set apart
for a holy use, and in that regard it is holy, and so we should look upon it as
not to have our outward business to devour that time that is holy in that
regard, as Nehemiah When Tobiah and Sanballat sent to him to come and confer
with them; No, says he, I cannot go for the work is great that I have to do:
So we must not entangle our selves to meddle with other things when we are to
come to worship God, for our work is great.

The Fourth thing for Preparation is, To Watch and to Pray: We should watch
over our hearts least they be made unfit for duties. So we should prepare for
Prayer all day long in this sense, that is, we should watch over our hearts
that they be not let out so far as to hinder us in prayer when we come to do
it. I remember that Tertullian says, That the Christians did so sup as if that
they were to pray, so when thou art in company thou should watch unto
Prayer; Oh that you did so, you cannot but be conscious to your selves that
oftentimes when you have bin in company your hearts have been put out of tune
and frame, that you have been no way fit for prayer; when you come home your
house and family finds it so; you that take such delight in company and fitting
up late, I appeal to your consciences whither you can come home and find your
selves fit either in your family or closet to go and open your hearts to God.

This is one Note by the way whereby you may come to know whither you have been
immoderate in company at any time; God gives not men liberty to be busy in any
outward occasions in the world so as to unfit them for his service. preparation
consists in that, in watching over your hearts, that you may not be unfitted
for any holy duty when God calls you to it, but that you may be ready even to
every good work.

The Fifth is this, Preparation consists in the readiness of the faculties of
the soul and the graces of the spirit of God, presently to act upon the setting
upon a holy duty. When a man or woman shall find the faculties of their soul
and the graces that are in them, to be ready to act as soon as ever they fall
upon duty, just as you see a company of Ringers when they have made all
preparation for the raising of the bells, then in an instant when they begin to
pull, all the bells go in that tune that according to their skill they set them
in. And so it should be with our hearts, the faculties of our souls and graces,
though now we are not upon duty, yet we should be so ready that as it were upon
a pull, all the faculties of our souls and graces of Gods Spirit should work in
a melodious way; There are those that keep their hearts so prepared as at the
very first moment that they set about the duty of Worship, all faculties and
graces begin to act and to stir and are working toward God, as a fire, when
all the matter is ready laid, presently it comes to be kindled and flame out;
and thus it should be with our hearts: So that now you see wherein preparation
of our hearts to duty consist^.

The next thing is the Excellency of the preparation; and that may be in way of
Application to you to make you to be in love with Preparation for holy duties.
There is abundance of good in it.

First, By this means we come to make every duty of worship easy to us,
things are difficult when we come upon them unprepared, If you have a friend
come to dinner or supper to you, and should come suddenly, and you have nothing
prepared there would be a great deal of stir in the house, but it you have
every thing prepared, it would be carried on in an easy way; and the reason
why people e^mplaine so much of difficulty in duty, it is because their hearts
are not prepared. Indeed we have naturally many things to keep us off from God
but now when the heart is prepared for a holy duty, it goes off as easy to God
even into the infinite ocean of All mercy and goodness, as a ship goes off to
be lansht when you have made preparation for it and the heart can go with a
holy boldne e to God when you have made preparation for holy duties. In Job 11.
the place which I quoted before for the work of preparation, do but consider a
verse or two further, and you shall find what abundance of good there comes
upon the keeping of the heart prepared in things that are good. Verse 13. If
thou prepare th^ne heart, etc. And then Verse. 15. Then shall thou life up thy
face without spot, yea, thou shall be steadf^st and shall not fear: When the
heart is prepared for that that is good, when it comes into the presence of God
it is able to lift up its self without fear, in a steadfast comfortable way,
and this will quit the cost of any labor.

2 Secondly, if the heart be prepared, it will do a great deal in a little time
In 2 Chronicles. 29. 36 it is said, That Hezekiah rejoiced, and all the people, that
God had prepared the people for the thing was done suddenly. The thing came off
freely and suddenly when as that they were prepared: Hezekiah rejoiced and
ble^ed God for such a mercy as this was it is a great mercy to have the hearts
of people prepared unto a good work. And so in 2 Chr. 27. 6. the text says,
Joth^m became mighty because he prepared his waie^ before the Lord his God.
Joth^m, he grew mighty by this, and so certainly the way to grow to be very
strong and mighty, to be able to do a great deal in a little time, it is to
make preparation, there may be as much work done in one hour ^^, as in ten
times to much time when the heart is not prepared for it. In Ezra 7. 10. you
shall find that the reason is given why Ezra had such good success in his
journey, it was because he had prepared his heart. Make preparation for holy
duties and you shall have success in holy duties There is a notable Scripture
for that in Psalm 10 17 where the holy Ghost says, that God prepares the heart
and what then? when God does prepare the heart, he does then cause his ear to
hear. There was never a prayer made wherein the heart was prepared for it but
that prayer was heard, they go both together, Lord thou will prepare their
heart, and thou will cause thine ear to hear: it God has once prepared thy
heart, thou will be sure to be heard then: Is it not worth a world for to know
ones self to be accepted of God in every duty of Wo-ship that we tender up to
him? this one Scripture Psalm 10. 17. will show it. Oh the excellency that there
is in Preparation to duty!

There is one thing more that is very observable, and that is this, Where the
heart is prepared to duties, there the Lord will pass by weaknesses and
imperfections in duties. When thou come to perform holy duties thou art
troubled, will the Lord have regard to such a duty as this is? thou may have
certain assurance that the Lord will have regard if thou can make this point
good to thine own soul, that it was thy care to make preparation for this duty
can thou say, Lord I have endeavored and done what I could to fit my heart
for duty, but O Lord, I find when I am at it, wonderful distractions, much
deadness and vanity, what shall I do? Why can thou make good the former and
appeal to God that indeed it was thy care to make preparation? I Will give thee
one cripture then for the quieting of thy heart in this: That the weakness of
the duty shall be pardoned and past by, where there is care to prepare before
hand the ^cripture is in 2 Chronicles. 30^ 18, 19. But Hezekiah prayed for them
saying, The good Lord pardon every one, what every one? every o^e that
prepares h^^ heart to seek the Lord God of his fathers, though he be not
cl^aused according to the purify ^tion of the Sanctuary As if he should say,
Oh Lord, there are many things amiss in this people, they are not in many
regards purif^ed according to the order that thou have set, but Lord, if thou
do but see any heart prepared to seek thee, though the^ fail in such
particulars, Lord heal them and pardon them: and did God hearken to his prayer?
Mark the following words, And the Lord hearkened to Hezekiah and hea^ed the
people. Nay says God, I will not stand so much upon the purification of the
Sanctuary if they have prepared their hearts to seek me. Take this Scripture,
know it is written for thine instruction, and thou may make use of it to
thine own soul this day, if thou can appeal to God that thou art careful to
prepare thy heart, though thou should not have that pureness of thy heart
as thou do desire, the Lord will pardon thee and hea^ thee, make conscience
of Preparation to holy duties.

Again furthe, by being careful to make Preparation for duties, within some
little time thou will bring thy heart to such a frame as it will always he
ready for duty without much ado; Indeed at first it is somewhat hard.

You will say, Are we bound to spend sometime every time we go to prayer before
hand, or every time we come to the Word? That should have been one of the Cases
of Conscience, but I cannot come to Answer that, but this we may say, Be
careful to prepare for duties, you that are young beginners, or you that have
made profession a longer time, but yet have not had the weight of this duty
upon your spirits; now be careful for a while to prepare for every duty of
Gods Worship, that God calls you to, and I say within a little time thou may
bring thy heart into such a temper as thou may be ready at all times to
perform holy duties: because you shall be able to come to that temper and
frame that the Apostle exhorts to, Pray continually, for indeed so it should be
with us, we should be always prepared either for Prayer; hearing the Word, or
receiving Sacraments. Now because Sacraments are so rare, those that have any
enlightened conscience they think they dare not but prepare for Sacraments, but
you should be always in a preparation for the receiving of the Sacraments, as
the Primitive Christians did. And those that have been acquainted with this
Point that I am upon, of preparing for duties, they have come to such a frame
of Spirit, as that there is not so much time required of them as of others, for
they are in a constant fitness, so that there is no instant of time in the
whole day but if God calls them to Prayer they could presently fall down upon
their knees and pray so as to Sanctify Gods name in Prayer, that were an
excellent temper indeed if you could find it so, that you walk so spiritually
and holily before God as there could be never a quarter of an hour from morning
to night, nor from the beginning of the week to the end, but if you were called
to pray, or to receive the Sacrament, you had your heart fitted, that you could
come into Gods presence with a prepared heart, and were able to Sanctify Gods
Name in the duty. Acquaint your selves with this work of Preparation, and so
you may have hearts ^itted to come into Gods presence at any time.

SARMON IV.
LEVITICUS. 10. 3. I will be Sanctified in them that come nigh me.
WE proceed now to what remains. Stepney December. 7. 1645.
There are only for the perfecting of this point two Cases of conscience to be
resolved: And then we are to proceed to other things.

The first is, whither we ought at all times to set apart some time for
preparation to every duty of Gods Worship?

Secondly suppose we do not find our hearts prepared as we do desire; whither
it were better to leave off the duty then perform it?

For the first of these, Viz. Whether we are always bound to set some time
apart for preparation to the duty that we are to perform.

The answer to that is this; we must distinguish of persons; There are some that
are exercised in the way of godliness, and do keep their hearts close with God
in the ways of holiness; now for them it may be supposed that through their
exercise in the ways of godliness, and keeping of their hearts constant with
God in communion with him walking with God closely, that they are at all times
prepared to every good work, and (...) fulfill that command of the Apostle, pray
continually, that is, in the disposition of their hearts, they are fit to pray
at any time, there is no day in the week, nor no hour in the day but they (if
God call them to it) could fall down to solemn ^raier. And indeed this is an
exellent condition and a good evidence of the hearts walking close with God
that there is no time but they are fit to pray, and fit for any Ordinance, yea
to recive the Sacrament of the Lords upper. It is posible to keep the heart so
close to God, as to be fit for prayer, and for the hearing of the Word, and for
receiving of the Sacrament every day, or any hour in the day but this needs a
very close walking with God and communion with God and the truth is this is
very rare; most men let out their hearts so much to other things, as their
consciences cannot but tell them, that if God call them to prayer at such a time
in the day, they are altogether unfit for it: If they were called to receive,
the Sacrament, their consciences would fly in their faces and tell them, they
are unfit for it but it is not so with those that walk close with God, though
they be in the world.

You will say if a man have business in the world how can this be? Yes though
they have bu^^ne^e in the world, yet they carry the heavenlinesse of their
hearts along with them; our conversation is in heaven says the Apostle Phil.
3. Now the word that is translated our conversation, it is a word that
signifies our City converse; our trading is in heaven when we go to the City or
the Exchange, or about any business; yet our trading is always in Heaven. But
now there are other sorts of people that had need at all times to look to their
hearts in way of preparation. As,

First, those that first set upon the duties of Religion: young beginners, that
begin at first to set their faces toward Heaven, to worship God they had need
look to their hearts they should spend some time in Preparation when they come
to holy duties, and the truth is, when the conscience of a man or woman is at
first enlightened, and awakened, they will be very careful in preparing to
holy duties, the fear of God it is mighty upon their Spirits at first, and it
should not be less afterward the constancy of Gods fear should bring their
hearts to such a holy temper as to make them fit for holy duties always.

Secondly, Those men and women that at any time shall sin against conscience,
shall commit such sins as shall in a kind even lay wast Conscience, shall break
their peace between God and their Souls; they had need spend some time in
preparation for holy duties, they cannot come into the presence of God to enjoy
communion with God, but they had need before hand be very serious in the
examination of their hearts, and to endeavor the working of their hearts into
mourning for their sin, and to labor to possess their Souls with the
presence of God even before they come. These two sorts of people, such as have
not been acquainted with the ways of godliness, or such as have broken their
peace with God by some evil carriage of theirs toward God in some vile way, I
say it is required of them to be more solemn in the work of Preparation.

2 But now for the second case which indeed is the main; Suppose when we come
to duties, and begin to examine our hearts, and begin to bethink our selves
whether we be prepared yea or no to holy duties, and we do not find our hearts
prepared according to that that we do desire, whether then we may let the duty
go for that time, and forbear the performance of it, as suppose Prayer, or
receiving the Sacrament, or coming to the Word or any other holy duty?

And the reason of this doubt is, because when any man or woman is
conscientious, they think with themselves that they must Sanctify Gods Name in
holy duties, now if they cannot find their hearts in a f^t disposition to
Sanctify the name of God in holy duties, they are ready to think thus, Were it
not better to neglect this duty and lay it aside for the present, will God
accept of a duty when I perform it, and am not fit for it?

Therefore for the Answer to this, because it is a temptation that sometimes
carnal hearts have, and they are ready to take this temptation, and willing to
neglect the duty upon such a thought as this, that they are not prepared: And
the truth is, they are more glad to let the duty fall, then they are sorry for
want of the preparation of their hearts for the duty. I beseech you consider of
this, whether you have not found it so, that sometimes when you have not been
fit to perform a holy duty, there has not been a more secret willingness of
the heart to let the duty go, then a sorrow of the heart because you are not it
for the duty. This is a very evil sign that the heart is very much distempered.
Those that are godly indeed when they find not their hearts prepared for the
duty it is the trouble of their souls, it is that that goes near to their
hearts, when they think with themselves that they are now like to lose a duty
of the worship of God, they are now like to lose their communion with God in a
holy duty, they even look upon themselves in an evil case in regard of this;
and it makes them watchful for time to come to take heed of those things that
have put them in such an unpreparation as they find their hearts to be in at
this time: Now if it be so with thee it is a good sign that thy heart may be
upright with God though through infirmity it comes at such a time to be
unprepared for the duty.

But yet suppose I find I am not prepared, I am greiv'd and troubled at it,
(for that must be premised) whether were I better to leave the duty for this
time then to fall upon it in such an unpreparation as this is?

Now for the Answer to this Question.

1 First, That which I would Answer to it is this, The omission of a duty, or
the laying of a duty aside, will never fit the Soul for a duty afterward it is
no way to make thy soul more fit afterward because thou have laid it aside now
for the present; do but observe your own hearts that way, and you will find
this by experience: Such a time you have been busy in the world, and occasions
have hindered you so as your heart is out of temper and frame for a duty, you
lay it aside, now are you more fit the next day? If you do neglect duty in the
morning upon any business, are you fitter to perform duty at night because of
it? you will not find it to be so: the forbearing a duty now will not make the
Soul fitter for a duty afterward; therefore is no wisdom to forbear a duty
for want of preparation, because the forbearance will never help to further
preparation, but will make the Soul more unfit for duty. It is an excellent
speech that I read that Luther has concerning himself, I have learned this by
experience, that the oftener I do omit duty, the oftener do I make my self the
more unfit for duty, and cause I have to abhor my self. It is not the
deferring that makes thee the more fit.

2 Therefore consider that this is but a temptation, and that is the Second
thing that I would propound to those that shall omit a duty because they are
not prepared, That this is but a Temptation to keep thee from it, to tell thee
that thou art not prepared: and if thou shall forbear it because thou art not
prepared, in this thing thou do gratify the Devil, and the Devil has what
he would have, and so would be encouraged to tempt thee another time because he
has now what he would have in causing thee to forbear the duty; First, he
labors to unfit thee for it, and then he tempts thee to forbear it because
thou art unfit, this is the subtilty of the Devil. From whence is it that thou
art unfit but from the temptation of the Devil? And I and Luther again, that
was a man that had as much converse with God as any in his days, and a man
that had as much to draw his heart away, as many temptations, and as many
businesses as any, for indeed the great Cause of Christ in all the Christian
world in a great measure under God lay upon his shoulders, and yet says he, If
any one think that prayer must be deferred till the Soul be purified from impure
cogitations, he does no other then help the Devil who is powerful enough; he
thinks to be wise in deferring the duty because he is not fit, and he has many
ill thoughts and troubles in his Spirit, he does nothing else says Luther, but
gratify the Devil that is strong enough without this. Oh let us take heed of
gratifying the Devil in his temptations, therefore remember it is a temptation
for thee to omit a duty merely because thou art not prepared for the duty.

3 In the Third place, that which I would Answer to this Question is this, If
any one perform a duty of Worship in that sincerity and strength that he is
able to do it, though he be not prepared as he ought, yet it is better to do it
then to neglect it. It is true, some do perform a duty in a mere formal way,
and to satisfy their consciences, or to cloak and cover their sins and the
like: perhaps they may so perform it as it might be better to be unperformed
then to perform it as they do, but if you do endeavor to the uttermost of
your strength to do it, though you be not prepared as you do desire, yet it is
better to do it then to omit the doing of it, and you will find it so, for one
duty does prepare for another. Though it be not done as I desire it should be
done, yet the doing of it as well as I can at this time will help me to do it
better at another time, that is certain as one sin does prepare the heart for
another sin, so one duty prepares the heart for another, as now, suppose a man
commits a sin, and he has a conscience that is enlightened that does hinder
him from committing his sin with that full strength that he would do it many a
man has a mind to sin but through the inlightening of his conscience he cannot
sin with that delight as he would, because his conscience flies in his face
and does interrupt him, but yet for all this through the strength of his
corruption he will break through to that sin: now though at first they cannot
commit that sin with that delight and freedom as they do at other times yet if
their corruptions be so strong as to break through the light of their
consciences, the next time they come to the committing of that sin they will
commit it with more freedom and ease a great deal.

This is evident by experience, there is none of you but if you well observe
your hearts you will find this, A Temptation comes to a sin, now you cannot do
it with so much freedom as you would, but yet you break through it, you will
find that the next time you will commit it with more freedom, and so one sin
will prepare for another, and it may be you have some trouble of Conscience at
first, but the next time you will have less trouble, till at length you can
commit it freely without any trouble of Conscience at all. As it is in sin,
so it is in godliness many times in some degree at the first you have a motion
to a holy duty, but through the stirrings of your corruptions you are not fit
for it, now do you but break through that difficulty, and the next time you
will be more fit, and the next time after that you will be more fit, and so
still more and more fit as it is in sin, If a man when he has some trouble of
conscience would but listen to his conscience and would not commit that sin,
his conscience would grow stronger upon him, and strengthen him against that
sin, so if any man or woman listens to the temptation to defer duty and put
it off because they are not prepared, why after that the corruption will grow
more strong, therefore set upon the duty, and the performance of one duty will
prepare for another.

4 In the Fourth place, while men and women are struggling with their souls and
the corruption of their hearts, and do not fall upon seeking God, they by their
very struggling to prepare themselves many times, do ensnare themselves: It may
be thou have thoughts of Athisme or other wickedness, the very struggling with
those thoughts may ensnare thy heart; now the better way were to fall upon
prayer, and to cry to God to help thee again them, for while thou art struggling
and striving with those thoughts thou art striving with the corruption of thy
heart and with the Devil all alone, but now when thou fallest to the duty thou
call in the help of God and of Jesus Christ, and that is a great deal
better, while thou art musing, plodding, and troubling thy heart that way, I
say thou art struggling alone but now when thou fallest upon the duty then thou
call in help from God and so thou art more able to the performance of the
duty then thou were before. And therefore it is the best way to fall upon a
duty though thou can not find thy heart prepared as thou do desire the
very falling upon it will fit thee for it. And thus much for the Answer unto
those two Cases of Conscience.

Now then we are to proceed further in the opening of the Sanctifying of Gods
Name in holy duties. Thus much for the preparation of the heart. But when the
heart comes to it in what manner should the duty be performed so as the name of
God may be sanctified in the duty or what is the behavior of the Soul in the
^anctifying of Gods Name when it is in the very act of the duty?

To that ^ Answer. First in general thus, When the Soul labors to perform
duties so as God may have such glory from the duty as is fit for a God to have
in some measure: then do I Sanctify Gods name.

You will say this is a very hard thing to perform a duty so as that we should
give God the glory that is fit for a God to have: Certainly this is not done by
every manner of performance of a duty of Worship: yet you shall hear this
opened to you, and I hope you shall have it made very plain before you.

First therefore I shall show you, that when we are to perform a duty of
worship, we should set our selves to glorify God as a God, that is to do it in
that manner that God may have that glory that is fit for a God to have. As now
in the duty of Praise Psa. 66. 2. make his praise glorious, that is, do it so
as you may lift up His Name in it, and that God may be glorious in your praise.
And Romans 1. 21. there the Apostle speaking of the Heathens; he does rebuke
them; For what? It was for this, because that when they knew God, they
glorified him not as God, neither were thankfull^ now this is spoken especially
of the worship of God: for he says afterward ver. 23. that they changed the
glory of the incorruptible God, into an image made like to corruptible man etc.
So that it is spoken of the worship of God; that they glorified not God as God.
That is then to sanctify Gods Name, to glorify God as God: and therefore our
Saviovr in the 4. of John when he spoke to the woman of Samaria, he tells her
that God is a Spirit, and must be worshipped in spirit and truth, that is we
must labor to suite, our worship to what there is in God; that our worship may
be proportionable in some measure even to the nature of God himself; And
therefore God being a Spirit, his worship must be a Divine worship. I have read
of some of the Heathens that did worship the Sun for a God, and they would
offer to the Sun somewhat suitable; therefore because they did so admire at the
swiftness of the motion of the Sun, they would not offer a snaile to the
sun, but a flying horse, a horse with wings; now a horse is one of the
swiftest creatures, and the strongest creature to continue in motion for a long
time together; and they added wings to the horse, and they thought that suitable
to be a sacrifice for the Sun. So when we come to worship God, that is, to
sanctify his Name, we must behave our selves so as to give him the glory that
is fit for a God to have. As now in those three particulars which I opened to
you when I showed you wherein we draw nigh to God. This was one, I told you
that when we come to worship God, we come to tender up some present to God, now
then we must tender up such a present as is suitable to Gods excellency. If a
man should come to a poor man to give a present, If it were not worth twelve
pence, yet it may be taken well; but if you were to tender up a present to a
Prince, a Monarch, an Emperor, then you must tender a present that is fit for
the quality of the person. Therefore Mal 1. 8. When the Lord rebukes them for
their Sacrifices that they were such poor things: Go says God and tender up
this to your governor and see whether he will accept of it or no. So certainly
that which may be accepted of by a mean man, would be accounted a scorn, if
you should tender it up to a Prince or an Emperor. Now when we are to worship
God we must consider that we are to tender up our service to God, who is the
great King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. But you will say, is it possible for any
creature when it comes to tender up it is worship to God, to tender up that
which is fit for a God to have? This may rather be a discouragement unto prayer
or any other duty of worship, then an encouragement.

To that I Answer thus, though we be very poor and mean, yet it does not
hinder but we may tender up that to God which God will acknowledge to be
suitable to his infinite excelencie, as

First, if we tender up to God all that we have. Though we be never so poor
and mean, yet if God has the strength of our souls, God accepts it. For we
are to know that God does not stand in need of what we have, or of what we do;
but that we might show our respect to him: Therefore if we give all that we
have God accepts it. As a child if it puts forth all it is strength that it has
to do a business which the father bids him, whether the business be done or no,
the father looks upon it and accepts it as suitable to the child's strength; and
it shows the respect that the child has to his father. And as it is storied
of an Emperor that when a poor man had nothing to offer him but a little
water that he had taken up with his hand, he having nothing else the Emperor
accepts of it. So that is that which God looks for, that the Creature should
lift him above all. If therefore when thou come to worship God, God has more
of thy heart then ever any creature in the world had, God accepts of that, and
that you must look unto; Can you say so, when you go to Worship God, Lord it is
true there is much weakness in my spirit, but thou that know al things
know, that thou have more of my heart then ever any Creature in the World
had. This is suitable to God: God will account this (in the Covenant of grace)
to be a present suitable to himself. As in the Law, when they offered to the
building of the Temple, every one could not offer gold and silver and precious
stones, but some came and offered Badgers-skins, and some women did spin and
offered Coats-hair to the building of the Temple, and so God accepted of that
being the most they could do.

2 In the Second place, When we do not only offer unto God the most we can, but
when we add to this the grief of our Souls that we can do no more, when the
Soul shall strive to the uttermost it can, and when it has done all, says, I
am an unprofitable Servant, Oh that I could do more! This is suitable to God.

3 Thirdly, The people of God though they be weak, yet the weakest Servant of
God is able to offer up to God somewhat that is suitable to the infinite
Majesty of God, upon this Third Ground, because that there is a kind of
impression of Gods infinitnes in those services that a gracious heart does
tender unto God, and therefore suitable unto God.

You will say, God is an Infinite Glorious God? Be it so; He is Infinite that is
certain but the duty of Worship that a gracious heart tenders unto God, it has
an impression of Gods infiniteness upon it. How is that? If that can be made
out, then indeed we may be encouraged to worship God. Thus, That that a
gracious heart tenders up to God has an impression of his Infiniteness in this
regard, because as God has no limits of his Being, so a gracious heart when it
comes to worship God will not propound any limits or bounds, but in the desires
of it would fain be enlarged infinitely if it could. If it were possible for a
creature to be enlarged to God infinitely it would be. Here lies I conceive the
maine difference between the most glorious Hypocrite in the world, and one
that has true Grace, yea that has but the least degree of Grace: The most
glorious Hypocrite in the world, who it may be for the outward act does more
then one that has true Grace, yet such a one does limit himself, he does great
things, but he does it so, as he limits himself, that is, so much as may serve
for such and such ends of his, so much as may serve his turn, either to
satisfy his Conscience, or to get credit and esteem, to be accounted eminent
in such a way, so much he does do, but his duty is always limited within such
bounds and if he could conceive that he might go to heaven, and that he might
have as much credit and honor, and as much peace of conscience with doing
less, he would do less. But now one that has Grace, though but little though
but the least dram of Grace, he goes farther: Indeed says he, though through
the little Grace that I have, I cannot do what another can do, yet this does so
enlarge my heart, that I would have no bounds set in what I do for God, but I
would have it enlarged to the uttermost Latitude, if it were possible beyond
what ever yet was done for God in the world; and the more I do, the more I do
desire to do. That Is now a kind of infinitnes that there is in the heart where
Grace comes: I say, Grace inlarges the heart to a kind of infiniteness that the
more it does, the more it would do: there is no Hypocrite but will have his
periods, he will rise thus, and thus, and thus high; ordinarily you shall find
that if he lives in some company there he is high, but if he lives in other
company, there he is lower; Now there is nothing does limit a gracious heart,
but to all Eternity it would work and work more and more for God. Here now is a
Worship that is some way suitable to the infinite excellency that there is in
God: Here Is a kind of proportion (as I may so speak) even between the creature
and God himself in this thing, but it is the grace of God in the creature, here
is the Image of God indeed, because grace does so enlarge the heart even to an
infiniteness as it were for God. And thus you see in the general what it is to
Sanctify Gods Name, to tender up to God that which is some way suitable to the
glory of the infinite God.

2 You know there was a Second thing, viz. That then I do Sanctify Gods Name
when I come so to worship God as my heart works, and follows after God as a
God, so as it does beseem the soul of a Creature to follow the infinite
Creator, and to work after the infinite Creator: So David in Psalm. 63. 5. My
Soul follows hard after thee, O God, and (mark it is a very sweet Scripture)
thy right hand upholdeth me. Those whose hearts follow hard after the Lord,
they have the right hand of God upholding of them: It is a mighty encouragement
to put forth the heart to the uttermost, because when thou do so the right
hand of God upholds thee: so that thy heart must follow after God more then it
followed after any creature.

3 When I come to draw nigh to God, I come to present my self for the
Communication of the choicest of his Mercies, so then I Sanctify Gods Name
when I labor to prepare and open my heart for God as for the choicest Mercies
that God has to bestow upon his Creature. When there is such a temper of heart
that my conscience tells me it is suitable to that that is fit for a Soul to
have that expects to receive the choicest Mercies from God: but that we spoke
too more in the opening of our drawing nigh to God Now we are to come more
particularly to this, to open the Sanctifying of Gods Name.

1 First, In what particulars the behavior of the heart may be discovered to
be suitable to God in respect of Gods greatness and glory.

2 Secondly, What the behavior of the heart should be as suitable to the
several Attributes of God.

It will cost us some time to open the particular things in the behavior of
the heart as in reference to the Greatness and Majesty of God, considered
more generally; as in Psalm. 48. 1. Great is the Lord, and greatly to be
praised. And so in Mal. 1. 14. Cursed be the deceiver which has in his f^ock a
male, and voweth, and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing. Why? for I am
a great King says the Lord, and therefore cursed is he that does not offer a
Sacrifice suitable to my Greatness? And in 2 Chronicles 2. 5. we find that Solomon
when he was preparing for the Temple, he would build a great Temple, why?
because God was a great God that he would build it too: So that the Worship of
God must be some great thing because the Lord is a great God, and it must be
suitable to his greatness. Now if you ask me in what particulars does the
behavior of the Soul consist that is very suitable to the greatness of God in
the general? there are many things in this:

1 The First is, You must be careful to bring a Sanctified heart. You cannot
tender up a worship suitable to his greatness except you bring a Sanctified
heart with you, there must be holiness in the heart: Under the Law you know,
if any one came to offer a Sacrifice in his uncleanness, he must be cut off:
and so it must be here, we must look to it that we offer not to God in our
uncleanness: Wash you, and make you clean. in Isa. 1. and then come let us
reason together: There is no coming to God without washing and making clean:
in Psalm 93. 5. Holiness becomes thine house O Lord for ever: Holiness
becomes the presence of God for ever, we must look to get a Sanctified heart.
Sanctification consists in those two parts, Mortification, and Vivification:
there must be a mortifying of the lusts of the heart: We read in the Law, that
every Sacrifice was to be salted with Salt; that did signify the mortification
of our hearts when we come to offer up our selves as a Sacrifice to God the
Salt did eat out the raw humors, and kept the flesh from putrefying; so does
the Grace of God in mortifying our Lusts: In Heb 9. 14. you have a notable
scripture for the clen^ng of our hearts when we come to offer any service to
God, How much more shall the blood of Christ who through the eternal Spirit
offered himself without spot to God, purge your Consciences from dead works to
serve the living God: So that you cannot serve the living God until your
consciences be purged from dead works: And how comes your consciences to be
purged from dead works? It is through the blood of Christ, who through the
eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, he must purge your
consciences. So that here is the way of Sanctifying Gods Name by applying of
Jesus Christ who was offered to God without spot that our consciences might be
purged from dead works, that we might be purged from that natural filthiness
and uncleanness in which we all were; for the whole world does lie in filth,
as a carrion does lie in his slyme. Now if we would worship God so as to
Sanctify him, we must apply Christ to our Souls, and get our consciences
purged from dead works, and to have the Spirit of Christ in us to quicken up
our hearts in the ways of holiness; to have the image of esus Chri^^in us,
whereby we may be holy according to our proportion even as he himself is holy,
this is the Sanctifying of the heart There must be an habitual Sanctification
and an actual Sanctification of the heart: An Habitual, that is that the
heart must be changed through the work of Regeneration there must be a
Regeneration in the heart, there must be Divine principles of the Graces of the
Spirit of God in the heart.

But you will say, May not an unregenerate man Pray?

To that I Answer;

It is true, it is his duty to pray, Pour forth thy wrath upon the Heathen,
and upon the families that call not upon thy Name: But it is as true, that they
cannot Sanctify Gods Name in doing of it: But if we would Sanctify Gods Name
in it there must be an Habitual holiness in the heart, for every thing does
act according to its principles, in nature it is so; and so does the heart when
it comes to Worship God, it does act according to the principles that it has.

And then there must not only be Habitual Sanctification, but Actual
Sanctification likewise, as in Exodus 19. 10, 11. there you see what a do there
was to fit them for the hearing of the Law, because God was to come among them:
God is to come among us, and we are to come to God when we are to perform holy
duties; therefore it is not enough to have Grace, but there must be an
improving of Grace, there must be an acting of Grace not only when you come to
receive the Sacrament, to think that then there must be an acting of Grace but
every time you pray and hear there must be an acting of Grace; A purging out of
your corruptions and acting of Grace. So that one cannot Sanctify Gods Name in
holy duties unless he come thus far, to be able to say, Lord, thou that
know all things, know, there is nothing that thou do reveal to be
contrary to thy will, but my heart is against it, that is the least; thou can
not have any peace of conscience in drawing nigh to God, until thou come thus
far, to have thy heart to work thus against sin, and to be set upon every good
that God reveals to be his mind. You know when a man of quallity comes to your
house what a deal of stir there is, not only in sweeping, but in making all
things as clean and tite and shining as possibly can be: Thus it should be when
thou come to God.

And the Reason why there must be this Sanctifying of the heart is.

1 First, Because the Lord does first accept of the person before he does
accept o^ the Action: Men indeed do accept of the persons of men because they
do good actions but God accepts of the actions of men because their persons are
good If indeed we see a man do good, then we love him and accept of the person
of the man, but God first will accept of the person before the Action: As the
Lord accepted of Abe^ first, and then he accepted his offering: So you must
look to that, to have your persons first accepted of God before any duty can be
accepted: You think though you be wicked and sinful, yet if you amend your
life God will accept of you, you go that way to work; but certainly that is the
wrong way; you must first look after means of acceptance of your persons,
which is through the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, and through the
Sanctification of his Spirit, whereby you come to have his Image and life, and
so are accepted, and then all that proceeds from you comes to be accepted.
There is not any action which comes from you that comes to be accepted to
eternal life, until your persons be accepted before God, and therefore there
must be a Sanctifying of the heart before there can be a Sanctifying the Name
of God in the duties of his Worship: Therefore when you come to perform any
duties of Gods Worship you should co^^der this, Is my heart Sanctified? I must
Sanctify Gods Name, and how can I do that, except my heart be Sanctified?

2 Secondly, Our hearts must be Sanctified because the Lord does look more to
the principle from whence a thing comes, then at the thing it self. As indeed
were our hearts right as they should then all the good things that come to us,
we would not so much regard what the things are, that we do enjoy from God, as
what the principle is from whence they come, that is, Whether what we do enjoy
from God is from the love of God in Jesus Christ or no? Whether it be from the
general Bounty and Patience of God, or from the special ^oue of God in Jesus
Christ? ^ur hearts would regard that mo^^ if we were Spiritual: now then look
as a godly man is not satisfied with enjoying any good thing from God except he
knows it comes from a principle of love to him jesus Christ; So God is not
pleased with any thing that comes from us, except he knows that it comes from a
principle of Love, Grace, and Holiness in our hearts.

3 Thirdly, According as the heart is, so will the Service be; Certainly if the
heart be unclean the duty will be unclean; perhaps the words may be fine and
brave, but if there be an unclean heart, the duty will be unclean: As it is
with a man that has the Plague, suppose he makes a brave Oration, yet his
breath is infectious: so it is in our Services with God: If so be that our
hearts within us have the plague, then certainly the breath that comes from us,
all our duties will be unclean, and therefore that is the first thing that we
are to look for in the Sanctifying Gods Name in holy duties: Look to have thy
heart Sanctified, and consider from what principle it comes it is for want of
this that thousands of our duties are cast aside and God never does regard
them: But this is the first Particular, there is many more to speak of.

SERMON V.
LEVITICUS. 10. 3. I will be Sanctified in them that come nigh me.
WE proceed. Stepney Dec. 14 1645.
The next thing therefore for the behavior of the Soul in the Sanctifying Gods
Name in Worship is this,

When we come to Worship God, if we would Sanctify Gods Name, we must have
high thoughts of God; we must look upon God as he is upon his Throne, in
Ma^estie, and in Glory as in Isa 6. 1, 2. you shall find that the Prophet saw
the Lord upon his Throne: It is an excellent thing when all who come to Worship
God, every time they come to Worship him, have their eyes darted up to heaven
and behold the Lord God sitting in his Glory upon his Throne: So you shall find
in Rev. 4. the 24 Elders that Worshipped God, they saw him upon his Throne in
his Glory and so they Worshipped him they Worshipped God to purpose indeed when
they saw the Lord in that Majesty as he was; we should at all times have high
thoughts of God: take heed of having low thoughts and apprehensions of the
Infinite Majesty of God at any time, but especially when thou art to Worship
the great God, then look upon the Lord in that infinite distance that there is
between him and thy self, yea that infinite distance that there is between him
and all Creatures in the world, look upon the Lord as lifted up in Glory, not
only above all Creatures, but above all excellencies that all Angels and men,
in heaven and earth are able to imagine: Look upon the Lord as having all
excellencies in himself, joined in one, and that immutably; look upon him as
the fountain of all excellency, good, and glory that all Creatures in the
world have. And look upon the lord every time thou come to Worship him, as
that God whom Angels do adore and before whom the Devils are forced to tremble:
behold him in this his Glory and this will help thee to sanctify his Name when
thou come to him.

The great Reason why people come and Worship God in a slight way; it is
because that they do not see God in his glory, it is a great Mercy for God to
give unto us a sight of himself, a sight of his glory here in this world while
we are Worshipping of him, this would keep our eyes and our thoughts from
wandering, if we had a sight of the glory of God, and had high thoughts of God.
What Is the reason why we wander so as we do? but merely because we see not God
as now suppose you were in your house, and looking after every feather that
were flying up and down if you should hear that the ^ing were come into the
^oom, or any great person, it would compose your spirits because you have ^igh
thoughts of such as or those that are above you: So let us look upon God as in
his excellency, and his glory, and have high thoughts of him, and this is that
whereby we are to Sanctify Gods Name when we come before him in holy duties,
And that is the Second thing: First a Sanctified heart and then high thoughts
of God.

3. A Third thing is, High-ends, Raised-ends in the Worshipping of God: Prove.
15. 24. The way of life is above to the wife: it is on high in this respect,
when he Worships God his heart is lifted up on high: there is a holy raising of
the heart which is well pleasing to God: Our hearts should be on high in regard
of the high ends that we aim at in holy duties: Lift up thy prayer says
Hezekiah to the Prophet in another case: so I may say lift up thy Soul when
thou come to Worship God in regard of the high ends that we aimest at: when
we are Worshipping God we should have our hearts above al creatures, and above
ourselves. Let not our hearts then be grovelling upon the ground, mingled with
base and drossie things, when we come to Worship the Lord indeed it is fit that
we should have our hearts low (as we shall show hereafter) in regard of
humility, but not low in regard of any baseness of Spirit to mix with any base
and low ends: Now there are low and base ends in Worshipping of God, As.

First, We must take heed we do not subject the Worship of God unto our lusts,
that is a cursed thing, thou art far from Sanctifying Gods Name in Worshipping
of him that shall subject his Worship to thy base Lusts, this is an abominable
and a cursed thing indeed: You will say, Who does thus? who is the man or where
is he that will do this subject the Worship of God to his base lusts! To that I
Answer, Whosoever does make use of any duty of Worship, as Prayer, Hearing the
Word, or what ever it be, to cloak any kind of wickedness, whosoever is
conscious to himself of any kind of secret wickedness, and yet shall think to
cover it by the performance of duties, and shall reason in this manner, who
will think me to be guilty of such a vile thing, when I pray so as I do, and am
so careful to hear the Word? and I hope I shall cover some wickedness this
way: If there be any in this place whose conscience tells them that they subject
the Worship of God to such a base end as this is the Lord rebuke them this day,
and speak to their hearts, If I knew any, I would set mine eyes upon them and
say as the Apostle to Simon Magus, I perceive that thou art in the gall of
bitternes^e and in the bond of iniquity; and as he said to him that did seek to
draw the Deputy from the Faith, O thou child of the Devil, and full of all
subtilty, to damn and undo thy self eternally, that seek to cloak any
wicked way by any duty of Gods Worship; Is it a great evil for a man or woman
to make use of any of Gods creatures to be serviceable to their lusts as meat
and drink etc. What a damnable thing is it then to make use of any duty of Gods
Worship sometimes extraordinary worship, as Fasting and Prayer, to be a cloak
to cover their wickedness! Thou art so far from Sanctifying Gods Name, that
thou pollutest Gods Name: thou do what in thee lies for to cast even dirt in
the face of God himself that do so.

The Second Base end, is to subject the duties of Gods Worship to the praise of
men, as to perform duties of Gods Worship for the esteem of men, and because
we shall be well thought of; take heed of this you young ones, and others, you
would fain be e^eem'd well of by those that you live withal: It is a
desirable thing to have a good esteem from those that are godly: but take heed
that you do not subject the duties of Gods Worship to this. Indeed it may be an
encouragement to you, as David says, I sal. 52. 9. This is good before thy
Saints: David did encourage himself to praise God, because it was good before
Gods Saints; and I confess it may be an encouragement because holy duties are
good before Gods Saints: but take heed that this be not thy highest end that
thou aimest at, and that which carries thee on in the work, merely to get the
praise of men, and that they shall think that thou have good gifts and parts,
and therefore thou art enlarged in that regard take heed of that, know that now
thou do not Worship God, but thou Worshippest men, thou do make the
praise of men to be thy God, for whatsoever thou do lift up in the highest
place, that is thy God, whatsoever it be: therefore if thou liftest up the
praise of men and make that thy end, thou make that thy God, and so thou
art a worshipper of men, but not a worshipper of God

Thirdly, Take heed of making Self thy end there are some that are not so base
and low in their hearts, as to make the praise of men their end, but they aim
and look at themselves, that is, they aim at their own peace, and satisfying
their own Consciences in the performance of duties; now though it is true, when
we perform duties of Gods Worship, we may expect to receive some good to our
selves, and we may be encouraged to the duties by the expectation of good to
our selves; yet we must look higher, we must look at the honor and praise of
God, that the name of the blessed God may be honored: Now I am going to
Prayer, Oh that I may pray so as I may lift up Gods Name: I am going to Hear,
Oh that I may hear so, as God may be honored by my hearing: it is this that
carries me on to hearing the Word, and makes me rise readily and to go forth
cheerfully: I hope that God may have some honor by my hearing this day, and
God knows that this is the thing that I aim at I do not come for company nor to
be seen of men, neither do I come merely to satisfy mine own Conscience:
Others go and hear such Truths of God as do good to their Souls, and if I
should neglect them merely for mine own ease, my Conscience would not let me be
quiet howsoever there are many whose Consciences will be quiet enough; though
they lose am opportunity in the Worship of God; but yet there are others whose
Consciences cannot do so their Consciences would tell them when they are lying
and turning themselves upon their beds, how do you know but that God had some
thing to speak to thy heart this morning, that may never be spoken to thy heart
at any other time? therefore they cannot be at quiet except they attend upon
God in the duties of his Worship: but still this is not enough merely to
satisfy Conscience; thy main end it must be that thou may this day know
some part of the mind of God, that God may speak to thy heart, that so thou
may be fitted to honor the Name of God that thou may be enabled to live
to his honor the week following so much the better. As in this manner thy
thoughts should be, Lord, I find a drossie carnal heart, I am busy in the
world in the week time, and I find that my heart is fullied and defiled with
the business of the World, and entangled but lord, thou have appointed thy
Sabbath, and Word, to be a means to Sanctify my heart, and to cleanse it; Oh
Lord, communicate thy grace to my Soul through thy Ordinances upon this day,
that so I may be enabled the week following the better to live to thine honor,
Lord, I come into thy presence to that end, that I might know some part of thy
Will, and that I might get thy Spirit to be conveyed through this Word of thine
into my heart: this should be thy end when ever thou come and not only Self.
I will give you two or three Scriptures to show that God regards little any
duties where self is the highe^ end; the First is in Hos. 7. 14. They howled
upon their beds, (says the Text there,) but they cried not to me: The Lord
there did acknowledge that they were very much affected in their Prayers, but
what was it? it was but a howling upon their beds: and how so: it was because
only they did cry for themselves, They have not cried unto me (says the Lord)
with their heart, when they howled upon their beds: It was but merely for Corn,
and Wine, and Cyle, but not unto me, they aimed at themselves and not at me:
And in Amos 5. 22. there the Lord professes that he did reject the fat of their
peace offerings: Though ye offer me says he) bur^^t offerings and your meat
offerings I will not accept them, neither will I re^ard the peace offering of
your fat beasts. They were careful to offer their fattest beasts in their
peace offerings, and will not God regard them? It was in their peace offerings
that they offered their fat beasts, and there they were to eat a great part of
it themselves: Indeed the burnt offering was wholly offered unto God, God had
all that, but the peace offering, those that did offer it, they did eat a great
part of it themselves: now they were very careful in those offerings that they
should partake of themselves to offer fat beasts; you do not see that the Holy
Ghost takes any notice of fat beasts in their burnt-offerings. Now the Note
from hence is this, That in those things where men are interested themselves,
they will be very careful to have the best things. But now the Lord rejected
the fat beasts of their peace offerings: says God, you were very careful to
offer fat beasts in your peace offerings where you may feed your selves, but
for those offerings wherein I have all, there you are not so careful, and
therefore I regard them not. The Third Scripture is in Zach. 7. 5. there they
did keep many days in seeking of God, (it is an observable Scripture for these
times,) Speak unto all the people of the land, and to the Priests saying, When
ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh month, even those seventy years,
did ye at all fast unto me? even unto me? Mark the phrase you fasted in the
fifth and seventh month, and for seventy years together, but says the Lord,
Did you at all fast unto me? and then mark how it is doubled, To me? even unto
me? Noting that when we fast or pray, or do any thing in the Worship of God, we
should be sure to aim at God more then our selves, that God may not say of us
another day, Do you do it to me, even to me?

You may ask me this Question, How may I know that I am acted by self ends in
holy duties? for it is a hard thing for one to know ones own heart, when one is
acted by principles of (...), and when we aim at God in holy duties. Now for
that I will give you these notes to try whither you be acted from your selves
or no.

The First is this, If a man loves holy duties (though he find no present good
comes in by them) because they are such things as God requirs, and therefore
though I get nothing by them, yet this is enough to carry me on, and to carry
me on readily and willingly in the worship of God: those that can delight in
Gods worship, even at that time, though they find nothing coming into
themselves. But now when we find not that coming in that we do desire, we begin
to be weary of worship; and say, Why have we fasted, and thou see it not?
This is an Argument that thou art acted by Self rather then by God.

Secondly, To know whether we be acted by self ends, or rather by high ends for
God: Those men that can rejoice in others that are able to honor God in holy
duties more then themselves, they may have a good evidence to their own Souls,
that when they worship God, they are acted by higher ends then self, but now,
such as are straightened themselves, and when they see others more enlarged in
the worship of God, they rather envy them, are greiv'd and troubled; know that
Self is a great ingredient in those duties that thou do perform: if thy
heart were raised high to God, though thou can not thy self be enlarged in
holy duties, yet thy soul would be glad that any others are, though I have a
wretched and vile heart of my own, yet blessed be God that there are any others
that can worship God better then I can.

Thirdly, A man that is acted by self in holy duties, he regards holy duties
but little, save in time of extremity, in time of fear, or of sickness, or in
dangers. But now, one that has high ends in holy duties, makes the duties of
Gods worship to be the joy of his soul in the midst of his prosperity, and
that is an evident sign that thou art not acted by self ends but by higher ends
Can thou in the midst of thy abundance say, Lord, thou give me all
conveniences in this world and all outward things that I want but Lord this is
that which is the ^oy of my Soul, this is that which makes my life comfortable,
even communion with thy self, in the duties of thy worship, that I have free
access unto the Throne of thy Grace to worship thee the Lord, and there meet
with thee when I am in the performance of holy duties. O Lord, thou that
know all things, know that this is the thing that makes my life
comfortable; It is not that I have a Table furnished with variety of dishes,
and that I can have liberty of time to go into company, and spend according as
I please but Lord those incomes of thy Spirit that I do find in the duties of
thy worship those are the things that makes my life ble^^ed indeed unto me?
Such a man as is able thus to appeal to God, surely when he worships God, he
is acted by high-ends, and not by self ends: And that is the Third thing that
is necessary for Sanctifying of Gods Name in holy duties, thou mu^^ have a
Sanctified heart, high thoughts of God, and high ends.

In the Fourth place, There must be much reverence, and much fear when thou
come into the presence of God to worship him thou do not glorify God as
God, except thou do come into his presence with much fear and reverence of
his great Name; Fear in worshipping of God it is so necessary, that many times
in Scripture we ^^nd that ^he very worship of God is called The fe^^ of God,
they are put both for one, I might give you diverse Scriptures for it and hence
it was that the Name of God was called the fear of Isaac, Jacob did swear by
The fear of his father Isaac, because Isaac being a great worshipper of God,
kept his constant times to worship God, and worshipped him in such a constant
way, as except David and Daniel, we do not find mention of the constancy of any
in the worshipping of God as we do of Isaacs; for it is said, that he walked
but into the fields in the evening as he was wont to do, to Meditate, and to
Pray; and therefore God is called, The fear of Isaac. In Psalm. 89. 7. is a
notable Scripture for this drawing nigh to God with fear: God is greatly to be
feared in the assembly of the Saints, and to be had in reverence of all them
that are about him: God is to be had in reverence of all them that are about
him, but in the assembly of his Saints he is greatly to be feared, he is
daunting ^errible (so the words are) in the assembly of the Saints. When thou
come nigh to God, thou had need have thy heart possessed with much fear. So
in Psalm. 2. 11. the Kings and Princes of the earth are called upon to (...) the
Lord with fear: Let them be never so great, yet when they come into Gods
presence, they must serve him with fear: And so in Psalm. 5. 7. In thy fear will
I worship toward thy holy Temple. Now this fear of God, it must not be a
servile fear, But a ^liall and reverentiall fear; For my brethren, there may be
a great deal of savish fear, where God is not honored; there may be fear from
some terrible apprehensions of God, which ^er is not owned by God to this grace
of fear: He give you Two notable Scriptures for that, in Deuteronomy. 5. 23, 24
compared with the 29. It came to pass (says the text verse. 23.) when ye heard
the voice out of the middes^ of the darknes^e, for the mountain did burn with
fire, that ye came near unto me, even all the heads of your tribes, and your
elders, And ye said, Behold the Lord our God has showed us his glory and his
greatness, and we have heard his voice out of the midst of the fire: we have
seen this day, that God does talk with man, and he lives, now therefore why
should we die? for this great fire will consume us: If we hear the voice of the
Lord our God any more, then we shall die. See with what a terror they were
struck at the apprehension of Gods appearance; you would think surely these men
did fear God much, but mark in verse. 29. O that there were such a heart in them
that they would fear me. Why, did they not fear the Lord? Were they not struck
with such fear that they thought they should die? they saw his presence so
terrible that they were afraid they should die and yet, O that there were such
a heart in them that they would fear me! So that it appears by this, that one
may be struck with much terror in the apprehension of Gods presence, and yet
have no true fear of the Name of God: So some of you it may be in time of
thunder or danger, are filled with terror; but yet may it not be said
presently after, O that there were the fear of God in the heart of this man or
woman, this youth or maid: They are terrified sometimes, but yet there is not a
filial and reverential fear of God in them. And I find in 1 King. 19. (where
you have the story of Gods appearing in that most terrible manner unto the
Prophet Elijah by Fire, by thunder, and in a mighty Wind) the Prophet was not
so struck with fear of Gods presence when he did appear in the mighty wind or
earthquake or fire, as when God did appear in the small still voice, therefore
in verse 13. it is said, And it was so when Elijah heard it: that is, the soft
voice, after the fire and earthquake, and the mighty wind) that he wrapped his
face in his mantle and went out and stood in the entering in of the Cave, and
behold there came a voice unto him and said, What do thou here Elijah? Then
his heart was more struck with fear where was most of Gods presence, (though it
was in a soft voice) then when the fire and earthquake did appear: It is a good
sign of a gracious fear when the soul can be struck with more fear from the
word, and from the sight of God in enjoying of communion with him in his
Worship, then when God appears in the most terrible way of his works; or when
there is terror in a man's conscience through fear of hell, when God appears as
though he would send him down presently to hell, though God expects to be
feared then, but when the Soul in enjoying communion with God in holy duties,
and the more communion he has with God, the more is he struck with reverence
and the fear of God, this is a sign of Sanctified fear, and then does the heart
Sanctify the Name of God indeed when it is so possessed with fear in the
duties of worship. Now this fear of God should be indeed in the Soul, and
expressed outwardly when you are in the assembly, by such reverent carriage in
prayer, as if a heathen should come in he may see Gods Name Sanctified, and may
say, How great is this God that this people do worship! And in your Families, a
reverant carriage, not lying all a long in prayer, upon the elbows sleeping,
but carrying your selves so that if a heathen should come into your families,
they may say, O how great is this God that this people do worship! And likewise
this fear it must be an abiding fear, not only at that instant when you are
worshipping of God, or speaking of any of Gods Titles and Names, but a fear
that must abide upon your hearts after duty is over; that is, after you are
come out from your Closets one may perceive the fear of God upon you, and so
walking all the day long in the fear of God, as it becomes those that have been
solemnly setting themselves to worship him: Now this fear and reverence is
contrary to the slightness, vanity, the boldness and presumptuousnesse that
there is in the hearts of men and women when they are Worshipping of God.

Fifthly, The duties of Gods worship must be full of strength, for they are not
suitable to God else, because God is a God infinite in power and glory himself,
therefore God cannot endure vain Worshipping. In Isa. 1. 13. I hate vain
oblations: Vanity of Spirit in Worshipping of God is very hateful to God, it
does defile the Name of God. God is dishonored by the vanity of men's Spirits.
Now this strength is Three fold:

1 First, The strength of Intention.

2 Secondly, The strength of Affection.

3 Thirdly, The strength of all the Faculties of the Soul, and the strength of
Body too, as much as we are able should be put forth in the Worshipping of God.

1 First the strength of Intention. We must intend our work as if it were for
our lives: If ever we were seriously Intentive or Attentive about any thing, it
must be when we are worshipping of the Name of God. When you are coming to
Pray, be Intent about it. You shall see some when they are going in the street
when they have much intention about their business, their friends meet them,
and they never mind them; one may perceive as they are going, that they are
mightily intent about their business. My Brethren, look upon every duty of
worship as a great thing which you must be intent in your thoughts about, and
not give way to the wandering of your thoughts. I have read of one Martyr, that
when he was to die, and the fire a kindling, says an Officer, What will not
you speak when you see the fire kindling? says he, I am speaking to God: that
is, he was praying, and he minded not at all what they were doing. O what
little things do take our thoughts away from holy duties! When every toye,
every feather, every light matter calls them off; Is this to Sanctify Gods
Name? Would not we account it a dishonorable thing, if we were talking to one
about serious business, and when we are talking, every one that comes by he
should be looking after them, and turning aside to talk with them? If a
Superior be talking with you, he does expect that you should mind what he
says. But when God is speaking to you, and you are speaking to God, every vain
thought that comes by, you are turning aside too: as if it were a greater thing
to talk to vain thoughts and temptations, then to the great and glorious God.
Therefore now that is the very time that the Devil chooses for to bring
temptations when we are in holy duties, for the Devil knows then he does two
works at once: he does disturb us in our duties and call off our hearts to that
that is wicked, and does aggravate our sin exceedingly. It may be thou will not
dare to commit that sin that the temptation does turn thy thoughts upon, yea
but the Devil has spoiled the duty by it. The Lord does expect that there
should be strength of Intention when thou art upon the duty: and there is no
time to parlie with temptations now, what ever thoughts come in. The truth is,
though they be good thoughts that should come into thy mind, and that time that
thou art Praying, yet if they be not pertinent to the duty thou must cast them
away as the temptation of the Devil.

You will say, Can any thing that is good come from the Devil? Certainly that
that is materially good, and coming unseasonably, may be from the Devil; the
Devil may take advantage by what is in it self materially good, and bring in
that in an unseasonable time, and so he may turn it to evil: As now when thou
art hearing the Word, it may be the Devil thinks he cannot prevail to cause
thee to have thy heart running about uncleanness; yea, but says the Devil, If
I can inject good thoughts, I will put into their minds some place of Scripture
that is no way pertinent to this, only to divert them: The Devil gets much by
this; therefore look to it, and know that God expects the strength of thy
Spirit in duty: that is, strong intention; thou art a worshipping of God, and
therefore thou hadest need be intent about what thou art a doing. Indeed
sometimes before you are aware, evil thoughts will come into your minds as
when a man is keeping of a door, and there is a crowd of people without that
would come in, perhaps the man does open the door for some Gentleman that he
hears is at the door, but when he opens it for one that is to come in, forty
others will crowd in: and so it is many times with the Soul, that when it opens
the door for some good thought, a great many evil thoughts will crowd in:
those people might come in if they would stay their time, but they should not
now come in. So about worldly businesses that are not in themselves unlawful,
if they will stay the time they may come in; but they must be barred out now at
this time. There is required strength of Intention.

2 Secondly strength of Affection is required also: That is, the affections
must work mightily after God striving with God in prayer: If ever thou hadest a
heart inflamed in any thing, it should be when thou art praying or attending
upon the Word; as the Heathens that worshipped the Sun sometimes I have told
you that they would not have a Snail, but a f^ying Horse, they would offer that
that was swift so when we come to the living God, we must have living
affections, our affections boiling; and that will be the way to cure vain
thoughts; as the flies will not come to the honey if it be boiling hot, but when
it is cold: So if the heart be boiling hot, and the affections a working, it
will keep out vain thoughts and temptations: It is a sign of the breath of life
when it is warm, but artificial breath you know it is cold; as now, the breath
that comes out of the body that is warm, but the breath that comes out of a
pair of bellows that is cold: So the breath of many people in prayer, it is
discovered to be but artificial breath, because it is so cold but if there
were spiritual life then it would be warm. There must be strength of Affection.

3 Thirdly, There must be likewise the strength of all the Faculties: We should
stir up what ever we are or have, or can do to work in prayer, then the bent of
mind, and conscience, and will, and affection; yea, and the body should be put
to it too, and those that worship God to purpose, they spend their bodies in
nothing so much as in the worshipping of God. It will be a sad thing another
day when this shall be charged upon many, Thou have spent the strength of thy
body upon lusts, but when did thou spend any strength of thy body about any
holy duty? What a riddle is this to most people, to tell them of spending the
strength of their bodies in prayer, or hearing of the word, or Sanctifying a
Sabbath; they think the Sabbath is a time of rest, I confess it is a time of
rest from an outward labor, but it is a time of spending strength in a
spiritual way; and those that shall worship God aright on the Sabbath, will
find it a spending of a great deal of strength, and blessed is that strength
that is spent in the worship of God rather then in the ways of sin, as most
spend their strength: If God gives thee a heart to spend thy strength in his
worship, thou may think thus, Lord, thou might have left me to have spent
my strength in sin, how much better is it spent in the worshipping of thy Name?
There is one notable Scripture in Jer. 8. 2. that shows how much strength the
Idolaters put forth in the worshipping of their Idol, they would not do it in a
slight and vain way, but their hearts were much in that false worship, says
the text, And they shall spread them before the Sun, and the Moon, and all the
host of Heaven, (mark now) whom they have loved, and whom they have served, and
after whom they have walked, and when they have sought, and whom they have
worshipped: All these are put together in reference to their Idols; Oh that it
could be said so of us in reference to God, when we come to worship him, whom
we have loved, and whom we have served, and after whom we have walked, and whom
we have sought, and whom we have worshipped; there is all these several
expressions to show the strength of their spirits in following after their
Idols: And that is the Fifth thing in our Sanctifying of Gods Name.

6 The Sixth is, If thou will Sanctify Gods Name in Worship, there must be an
humble frame of Spirit, worship him with much humility of Soul: Abraham did
fall upon the ground before the Lord, and dust and ashes (says he) has begun
to speak unto thee; yea, we read of Jesus Christ grovelling upon the earth, and
the Angels they cover their faces in the presence of God, and so should we be
humble when we come before the Lord: there is nothing more abases the Soul of
man, then the sight of God; and the great reason of the pride of all men's
hearts, is because they never knew God: If thou did but see God, thy heart
must needs be abased; and when does the Soul see God if not when it comes to
worship him? In Job 42. I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but
now my eye sees thee, wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and
ashes. Now this humility must be in the sense of our own meanness and
baseness. Ps. 34. 6. This poor man cried to God: They are poor Souls that come
into Gods presence that Sanctify Gods Name most; even those Souls that do
apprehend and are senseable of their own baseness and meannesse before God.
This poor man cried to God: we use to say, Give that poor man some what. It
does affect the heart of God when he sees much poverty of Spirit: when we come
before him we must be senseable of our Infinite dependence upon God. Come as
the woman of Canaan, O Lord, even dogs do receive c^ums, and though I be a
dog, yet let me receive crumbs; here is humility of Spirit. Now this humility
of Spirit appears in these things.

1 First admiring Gods goodness that we do live at this time, and that we have
liberty to come before him: we might have been past praying and worshipping of
God: think thus, What a Mercy is it that we are not banished out of Gods
presence that the Lord has not spurnd us out of his sight as filth, and cast
us out as an everlasting abhorring, while others have bin praying we might have
bin yelling under the wrath of the eternal God: Come with this apprehension of
thy self, and adorre Gods goodness, that thou art alive to pray, and alive to
hear Gods word. And that it is not only a duty, but a rich privilege and
mercy that God will admit of thee to come into his presence. Again, it is the
goodness of God, that he will vouchsafe to look upon the things that are done
in heaven, then if the Lord does humble himself to behold the things that are
done in heaven, then how does the Lord humble himself to behold me a poor vile
cative as I am in my self: and yet that God should not only behold me before
him, but invite me to come into his presence; What mercy and goodness is this!

2 Our hearts must be taken off from the thoughts and apprehensions of all
excellencies in our selves; we must not come in the pride of our hearts,
because we have abilities more then others, what do all thy parts commend thee
to God; thou have ability in expressing of thy self in Prayer: why do thy parts
commend thee to God? What ever is natural in any of our duties is nothing to
God, only that which is from his own Spirit, and therefore thou should come
in thine own thoughts as vile as if thou hadest no parts and abilities at all.
Lay aside all such apprehensions of thy self, for the truth is, some poor
broken hearted sinner that can but sigh out a few groans to God, and is not
able to speak two or three sentences together in a right language, but only
breath out his Soul to God, may be a thousand thousand times more acceptable to
God then thou that art able to make great Orations when thou come before him.

3 Thou must come without any righteousness of thy own, thou must never come
into Gods presence, but as a poor worm; and if there be any difference that is
made between thee and others in outward respects, it is nothing to thee: when
thou art in the presence of God, thou art as a base vile worm, though though
be a Prince or Emperor.

4 Thy heart must be taken off from what thou do: If thou have any abilities
of grace yet thy heart must be taken off there, there may be pride not only
from ones parts, but it may be God has given me inlargements in Prayer, the
Devil will come in and seek to puff up thy heart even because of this But thy
heart must be taken off there, and thou must deny thy self in all, when thou
have done the best service of all, yet thou must conclude, thou art an
unprofitable servant, when thou have prayed the best, yet rise with shame, and
take heed of having thy heart puffed up even through the assistance of the graces
of the Spirit of God in holy duties.

5 Lastly, Thou must come with a humble resignation of thy self to God, to be
content to wait upon God as long as he pleases, to wai^ upon God in regard of
the time, and of the measure, and of the manner of the Communication of
himself, in regard of the means by which he will please to communicate
himself, wait upon him; Let me have mercy though at the last hour. This now is
an humble heart in Prayer; and when we come with such a poverty of Spirit as
this is, we may expect that the Lord will accept of us, Give this poor man
some what, will God say: This poor man cried and the Lord heard him.

In the Seventh place, we must bring that which is Gods own in Sanctifying Gods
Name. I spoke to this before in the point of Preparation, Viz. That in Gods
Worship we must give him his own. I will only mention it here in the
Sanctifying of Gods Name in two regards:

1 First, To give God his own, for the matter of it.

2 Secondly, To give God his own, that is, what comes from the work of his
own Spirit, or else we do not Sanctify Gods Name. I will give you one text
further about the matter of it, in Exodus 39. if you read the Chapter, you shall
find that there is ten times said, that they did as God had commanded Moses:
And then in the close of the Chapter, when they had done as God had commanded
in his Worship; the text says, Moses blessed them. That people is a blessed
people that do observe the Worship of God as God has commanded them. But the
main thing is, all that we do it must be acted by the Spirit of God; it is not
enough to have true silver and gold, but it must have the right stamp or else
it cannot go for current coin. And so it is not enough that the things we offer
to God in his worship be Gods own, be what we have warrant for out of Gods
Word, but it must have the stamp of the Spirit of God. In the Worship of God
there be Two Questions that he will ask; First, Who required this at your
hands? But then if you can Answer thus, Thou O Lord, did require it: It is
well, but then God has another Question, Whose Image and Superscription is
this? If thou can not give an Answer to that, it will be rejected too: Thou
must be acted by Divine principles, in all that thou do, there must be the
stamp of the Spirit upon that which is tendered to God else it is nothing. To
open this Point fully will ask some time.

First, Therefore I will show you how we may know when our duties are acted by
our natural parts rather then by the Spirit of God.

Secondly how we may know whether our duties be acted by natural Conscience
rather then by the Spirit of God.

1 First, If thou art acted by natural parts, they will not change thy heart:
Men that do perform duties by the strength of natural parts, they may be as
large as others, and speak to the edification of others, but those duties do
never change their hearts; now if thou be acted by the Spirit of God, thou will be changed into the very Image of his Spirit.

2 Secondly, If men are acted by natural parts, they will not carry them
through difficulties and discouragements, but now the Spirit of God if thou
have acted by him, though thou do meet with never such difficulties and
discouragements, thou will be carried through them all.

3 Thou may know it by this, wherein do thou account the excellency of a
duty to consist, either in thy self or others? Thou performest a duty, now it
may be thy parts do act very lively, and to thy credit, and yet thy conscience
tells thee that thy heart was straightened: Now can thou rise up with joy
because thou have thy ends? At another time perhaps thy heart is more troubled,
and broken: But thou do not express thy self so much, then thou art
discouraged. And when thou see another perform a duty, if thou see but any
failing in their expressions, thou pitchest upon that, and look upon it as a
poor thing: thou art not able to see an excellency in holy duties, except there
be an excellency of natural parts; but those that have the Spirit of God, they
can find the Spirit of God acting in others, though they have not such natural
parts.

4 Those that are acted by their natural parts, in secret they are less
enlarged, then they are before others a great deal. Their parts act much before
others, but what is there between God and their own Souls?

5 They that be so acted will not be very constant, you shall have young ones,
that begin to look toward Religion, their parts are a little fresh, and they
are mightily enlarged in holy duties, and the thing is good for them to make
use of their parts; but how ordinary is it, that after a few years they are
deader and duller then they were before, and have less mind to the duties of
Gods Worship then they had formerly? Were this the Spirit of God, you would
find as much savor and relish in them afterward, as there was at that time.

Secondly for natural Consciences which sometimes puts men upon acting of
duties, and indeed is better then merely natural parts.

1 If it be only natural Conscience, it puts upon duties, but gives no
strength to do them: but when the Spirit of God puts thee upon a duty, it gives
thee some strength to perform it, some strength whereby thou gettest some
communion with God.

2 If it be natural Conscience it puts upon the duty, but makes not the heart
glad of the duty, and to love the duty; but if it be the Spirit of God, it
makes thee to delight in it, and to love it.

3 Thirdly, If it be natural Conscience, thou do not by that increase thy
communion with God, thou do thy duties as in a round, but now when the
Spirit of God puts thee upon holy duties, it is not a task done, but thou
find more and more increase in Communion with God; thy heart more raised to
God, and more closing with the Lord, and so still more and more in the course
of thy life: I had a little converse with God at first when God began to
acquaint my Soul with his ways, but through his mercy now I find more
communion with him, and so thou can bless thy self in God, in that converse
that thou have in communion with him, thou would not lose that Communion
thou have with God in holy duties for all the world; others have their
companions that they have their communion withal, much good may do them, but
the Lord has shown me another manner of communion which my Soul can have with
himself, in which it has sweet satisfaction. And thus you have had Seven
particulars for the Sanctifying of the Name of God in holy duties.

SERMON VI.
LEVITICUS. 10. 3. I will be Sanctified in them that come nigh me.
4 AGAIN, Stepney, Dec. 21 1645.
as Natural Conscience does give no strength to do the duty, so it makes not
the duty to be strong to the Soul; that is thus, there is no strength got by the
duty, they are not by one duty prepared for another, But the way of the Lord is
strength to the upright, that is, when a gracious heart is in the way of Gods
worship, it finds the very duty of the worship of God to be strength to it, and
so it fits it for another duty.

5 Further, A Natural Conscience limits its self, and is bounded; that is, so
much as will serve the turn for its own peace and quiet, so much it will do
and no more: But when one is acted by the Spirit of God, one is enlarged
without any limits at all, not bounded to ones own peace, for the more peace a
gracious heart has in duty, the more it is enlarged in duty: Now a Natural
Conscience, that puts to duty, and will act you when you want peace, when you
are in trouble and fear, but when you are not in trouble and fear, then it puts
not on the heart to performance of duty: but the Spirit of God puts on the
Soul to duty, when there is most peace and comfort.

6 A little will serve the turn to satisfy a natural conscience, so be it
they perform the duty it is enough; but one that is acted by the Spirit of God
in duty, must meet with much of God or else he is not satisfied; he goes
mourning in the day time if he has not met with much of God in the morning in
the performance of duty. Thus you see there is much difference between the
Actings of natural parts and conscience in duty, and the acting of the Spirit
of God.

There be only now Two things more for the Sanctifying of Gods Name in duty,
and then we are to come to show how we should Sanctify Gods Name in duty in
reference to the several Attributes of God. But First for those Two Heads
further.

8 The Eight thing is this, When you come to perform holy duties, if you would
Sanctify Gods Name; you must consecrate your selves to God; there must be a
resignation of soul and body, estate, and liberty, name, and all you are, have,
or can do unto God: This is to Sanctify Gods Name, the consecration of your
selves to God. And the professing of this in the performance of duty, when you
are to pray, were a very good thing, actually to profess your selves to be
Gods, to profess that you do give up all that you are, have, or can do to God:
Lord, I am thy servant, take all Faculties of Soul and Members of body, and
improve all, lay out all, to thine own praise, to the uttermost, to bring glory
to thy great name. If every time you came to God in prayer you did this, this
were to Sanctify your selves to God: I spoke before of a Sanctified heart, but
now this is in a profession of your selves to God; do it secretly at least in
your own thoughts; if you do not every time express it in words, yet in your
own thoughts do it; devote your selves to God every day: Of admirable use it
would be if every day when men and women worship God, either in their closets
or families, they did professedly devote and consecrate themselves to God; and
so likewise, every time they came to hear the Word, or to receive Sacraments,
God would account his name to be Sanctified in such a work as this is.

9 Lastly, That that must make all up, and without which all the other is
nothing; it is, that you must tender up all your worship in the name of Jesus
Christ; let a man or woman worship God never so well, yet when they have done
all, if they do not tender it up in the Name of Jesus Christ, God will not
account his Name to be Sanctified; thou must by Faith look upon Jesus Christ as
the glorious Mediator that is come into the world, by whom thou have access
unto the Father: And act thy Faith upon Christ, and give up thy duties into his
hand, as the hand of a Mediator to be tendered up to the Father by him; though
thou have labored what thou can to perform duty as well as thou art able,
yet thou must not think to tender it up by thine own hand unto God; but thou
must tender it up to the Father by the hand of Jesus Christ the Mediator, and
so thou shall Sanctify the Name of God in holy duties. We read in Levit. 16.
13. that when Aaron was to tender up the Incense, he was to put the Incense on
the fire before the Lord, that the cloud of the Incense may cover the Mercy
Seat that is upon the testimony, that he die not: Mark, it is as much as his
life is worth, whether he does it, or does it not: Now Incense it is in the NEW
TESTAMENT called Prayer, and so in the OLD TESTAMENT too, it was a kind of
emblem of Prayer: The offering up of our Prayers is the offering up of Incense
to God, and the Mercy Seat it was a Type of Jesus Christ. Now the Incense
should cover the Mercy Seat; so our prayers must go up to Jesus Christ, must be
upon him, and so must be accepted by the Father. And as we read in Judge. 13.
20. when Manoah offered a Sacrifice, the text says, that the Angel of the Lord
ascended in the flame: This Angel of God here was Jesus Christ, as we might
easily from this Scripture make it out, and he ascends up in the flame from the
Altar, Now though we do not offer such kind of Sacrifices with Fire and Incense
as they did in the time of the Law, yet when we are offering up of our Incense
there must be a flame of Fervency and Zeal: But that is not enough, together
with the fame of the Altar, the Angel of God Jesus Christ the great Angel of
the New Covenant (for Angel signifies nothing but messenger) the great
Messenger that is come into the world, about that great Errand of his, to
reconcile the world to himself; he must ascend up in the flame, and so God will
account his Name to be Sanctified, the name of God is not Sanctified but
through Jesus Christ. The Acting of our Faith upon Christ as mediator is a
special ingredient to the Sanctifying of Gods Name in holy duties; as you know
the Scripture says, that the Altar does Sanctify the gift offered upon the
Altar, Jesus Christ is the Altar upon whom all our Spiritual Sacrifices are to
be offered, and this Altar does Sanctify the gift that is offered upon it, let
never so great a gift be offered upon any other Altar, it was not accounted
holy nor accepted; so let men by their natural strength, or power that they
have, offer up the most glorious and speciousest Service to God. It is not
accepted unless it be offered up upon the Altar Jesus Christ, we have an Altar
now, (not the Communion Table) but Jesus Christ himself is our Altar upon whom
we are to offer all our Sacrifices, and this Altar must Sanctify the gift; we
can never have our gift sanctified, no nor Gods name sanctified in this gift
except it be offered upon this Altar, and our Faith acted upon Jesus Christ.
People little think of this, but of other things, viz. That when we worship
God, we should worship him with fear, and reverence, and with humility, and
with strength of Intention, such kind of things every one that has any
inlightening of conscience will think of at sometime or other; but people do
least think of this, which is the greatest ingredient of all that is required
in the Sanctifying of Gods Name in holy duties: that is, to come and tender up
all to the Father in the Name of Jesus Christ: How many men and women that have
been professors of Religion 20 or 30 years, and yet not acquainted with this
great mystery of godliness, to tender up all to God in the name of his Son.
This is that that upon diverse occasions I have spoken unto, and am willing upon
every occasion as I meet with it to speak of, because it is a principal part
of the great mystery of the Gospel, without which all our duties are rejected
of God and cast away. Now then put all these Nine things together and see by
them what we ought to do that we may Sanctify the Name of God in holy duties.

But there is something further to be spoken that may help you to Sanctify
Gods Name in holy duties, and that is, several, workings of heart, suitable to
the several Attributes of God, for that is to Sanctify Gods Name, to have the
duty to be such as is some way suitable to such a God as we are now
worshipping. Now then let us consider what the Scripture says of God, and then
let us see what suitable dispositions we should have in us unto those things
that the Scripture says of God:

1 First, You know the Scripture says, that God is a Spirit, in Joh. 4. 24.
Then presently Christ says, That he that worships him, must worship him in
Spirit; that is, there must be a suitableness in our worship to what God is:
Is God a Spirit? then all that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and
Truth: that is thus, When I am to go to worship God, I must consider of him, as
he is an infinite and glorious Spirit; well then, surely bodily worship is not
sufficient for me: Though I do kneel down in prayer, or do come and present my
body to hear the Word, or my body to receive the Sacrament, this is not to
worship God as a Spirit: If indeed that our God were as the Heathens, that were
corporeal, then it were another matter, then bodily worship would serve the
turn, but God being a Spirit, he must have Spiritual worship, therefore my
soul and all that is within me, magnify his name: says David, my Soul
magnify his name, not my lips only, but my Soul: The Apostle in 1 Timothy 4. 8.
says, that bodily exercise profits little; it is no great matter for the body,
God looks but very little at bodily exercise; but it is godliness that is
profitable, it is the work of the Spirit; when we come to pray, we must pray in
the Spirit; that is, we must pray with our Souls, we must pour forth our souls
before God, and when we come to hear, our hearts must not go after our
coveteousnesse, we must set our hearts to what we hear, we must hear with our
hearts as well as with our ears, our Souls must be at work in hearing of the
word, when you hear it is not enough for you to come and sit in a Pew, and have
the sound of a man's voice in your ears, but your Souls must be at work: And so
when you come to receive the Sacrament, your Souls must feed upon Jesus Christ:
Bodily worship without Soul-worship is nothing, but Soul-worship may be
accepted without bodily worship; therefore it is the Soul that God does
principally look at in holy duties: If you be not able to worship God in your
bodies, you may worship him in your Souls, and God regards that Bodily exercise
in holy duties is little worth, some what it may be worth, I confess sometime
bodily exercise may further the soul, as a reverend carriage of the body and
the like, but it is nothing in comparison, the great work is the work of the
Soul, for God is a Spirit and must be worshipped in Spirit. And God is said to
be a Spirit not only in that he is not of so thick a capital substance, but it
notes the simplicity of God, he is without any composition, whatsoever is in
God is God himself, he is absolutely one, there are not diverse things in God;
now then, those that come to worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in
Truth: that is, there must not be a heart and a heart, there must not be a
compounded heart, but you must bring simple hearts before God, without any
composition of drofte in your selves, and of any kind of falsenesse, but in the
simplicity of your hearts you must come to worship God, and thus you shall
worship him with such worship as is some way suitable to him as he is a Spirit.

2 Further consider God as he is an eternal God, what suitable disposition
does this require of me when I am to look upon God as an eternal being; it
requires this only, That therefore thy heart must be taken off from all
temporal good things, and set upon that eternal good, thou may indeed
desire these outward good things but in order to thy eternal good.

Then further, Thou art worshipping an eternal God: hence then whatsoever sin
thou do confess although committed 20. or 40. years ago, thou must look
upon it as if it were now presently committed, and be humbled as much before
the Lord as if it were now committed at this present, you will say, Why so?
Because God is an Eternal God? Yes: For if I understand Gods Eternity, I know
that there is no succession in Gods being: therefore the sins that I committed
in my youth, if I come to confess them, they are before God as if they were
now a doing in regard of time; and therefore I must (as much as I can) look so
upon them, and be humbled for them as if they were sins lately committed. Many
people are troubled for their sins the very day after they commit them, but a
little time wears off their trouble; but if you did consider that you had to
deal with an eternal God, then you would look upon your sins though a long time
since committed as if they were now done.

Likewise there will be this required from the consideration of Gods Eternity,
you must come with such a disposition of heart as not to think much, though
what you desired be defered and not granted in your time when you would have
it. For if there be no time that alters with God, but a thousand years are with
God as one day, then that that we account long before its done, it is nothing
with God; and therefore we must have our hearts so work toward God as toward
an Eternal God, as one with whom there is no alteration of time at all, with
whom there is no succession of time. If we come to a man and seek any thing of
him, if he does not answer us presently, we will think that he will forget it,
and other things will come into his mind: but when we come to worship God, we
must look upon him as an Eternal being, and that time alters nothing with him:
Thus understanding God in a right way will much help us in his worship, and so
to Sanctify his Name. We cannot Sanctify Gods Name, without knowing his Name,
without having serious thoughts about his Name; and getting our hearts to work
accordingly.

3 Thirdly, Look upon God when you come to worship him in his incomprehensible
being; that is, as a God that fills all places, his being is as real in the
room that we are praying in, the place that we are meeting in as it is in
heaven. Now then when we come to worship him, we must consider that that
infinite glorious being stands before us, looks upon us, is at our elbow; and
therefore especially when you worship in Secret consider this, it is good to
consider it when you are with others, but especially I say, consider it when
you are in Secret, and know that when you are most private, you have one that
looks on you, and takes notice of you, who is more then if you had ten hundred
thousand witnesses standing by you, and looking upon you: For it is the Lord
that stands by you, and sees your behavior, sees what you do in your
worshipping of him; take heed therefore that there be nothing done by you that
is unbeseeming the presence of such a God as the Lord is: Suppose that some of
you were praying, and there were some godly able Minister stood near you, it
would be some means to stir up your hearts to mind what you did; but now the
Lord he is not in the next room only, but in the same room, and stands by you:
Let there be nothing done therefore unbeseeming the presence of that infinite
holy God that stands by you: and hold this Truth forth, The Lord is present
with me, I acknowledge it, and I own it, and therefore I carry my self thus,
and all because I would witness to Angels and men, that I do acknowledge that
the Lord is present with me in this duty.

4 Fourthly, Consider God is an unchangable God, immutable. That is another
Attribute of God, he is unchangeable.

First, Therefore our hearts must be taken off from these mutable things, and
set upon God as that unchangable good.

Secondly, We must be humbled for our ^icklenesse, and unconstantnesse; there
is no shadow of change in God, and there is no shadow of con^tancy in us.

Thirdly, When we come into the presence of a God who is unchangable, then we
should look upon God as being the same now that ever he was heretofore he has
as much displeasure against sin now as ever he had, and that God that has done
such great things for his Church in former times, is the same God to do good to
his people as ever he was, and make use of this; When you read the Word, and
there find how God has made himself appear to be glorious for his people; and
now every time I am to Worship God, I should think that I am to deal with God
that is the same that ever he was, as merciful, and gracious, and just, and
powerful as ever he was, and so my heart is to work toward him.

5 Fifthly, When I am to Worship God, I am to look upon him as the living God,
as that God that has life in himself, and gives life unto his creatures.

Then what suitable behavior does become me? I must come before his presence
with fear; It is a fearful thing to fall into his hands that is the living
God; that has my life under his feet, he has the absolute dispose of my
present and eternal condition, he gave me my life, he has preserved my life,
and so may take it away when he pleases, and bring death, eternal death unto
me. These things may marveilously help your meditation when you are to come
before him, you who are barren in your meditations, go over the Attributes of
God thus, and consider what you may be able to draw from thence. God he is the
living God: What behavior then does beseem me toward this living God? Oh let
me be afraid least my Soul depart from the living God. Let me bring a living
Service to him, I must not bring a dead heart; let me take heed how I come
before the living God with a dead heart, and with a dead service, to sacrifice
that that is dead before it comes, its like a carrion that lies dead in the
ditch. Oh let us be humbled for our dead hearts, and dead sacrifices; it is a
living God that I am Worshipping, and therefore I must pray, Lord, turn away
mine eyes from beholding vanity, and quicken my heart in thy Law. Ps. 1. 19.
37. Remember when thou come to worship, that thou come with a quickened heart,
for thou have to deal with the living God: A man or Woman that is of an active
spirit, cannot iudure a dull and heavy servant in the family; but the Lord is
a pure act, and nothing else but act, and therefore he does expect that all his
people should have quick active and lively spirits.

6 When you come to Worship God; you are to look upon him as Almighty. And so
are 1

To Fear his great power when you come before him And 2,

Then you are not to be discouraged by any difficulties. I come to seek for
some great thing, and I come to seek to a great God, that has all power in
heaven and earth, and infinitely more power then there is in all creatures in
heaven and earth; I am praying to a God that can create peace, create help: My
condition cannot be so desperate, but this infinite Almighty God is able to
help me Let me make him the object of my Faith as he is so infinitely Almighty:
What a full object of Faith is this God that has all power in him? Let me
therefore come to him as a strong tower; run to the name of God as a strong
tower, that can help in all streights whatsoever. There would be much drawing
forth of our Faith; if we could present tht Lord before us as an infinite
Almighty God: when we see outward helps and means near at hand, then we can
believe that we may have some succor from him, but when all outward helps and
means fail then we are discouraged; we do not sanctify Gods name, but we
rather take this name of God in vain, when as our hearts are discouraged with
any difficulties; now the Lord expects that all his children that come to
worship him, should worship him as the Almighty God, and so have their hearts
working toward him; there would be mighty workings of Spirit toward God, if
we saw him by the eye of Faith as well as reason.

7 Look upon God as an Omniscient God, as a God infinitely understanding all
things. Now what does this call for?

First if God be a God of infinite understanding, then let not me bring a blind
sacrifice to God, then let not me bring an ignorant heart to God; this is the
excellency of an understanding Creature to know the rule and end of its own
Actions; now thou come to worship an infinite God, of infinite understanding,
then know the rule of what you do, and know the end of what you do, and come
with understanding into his presence

Secondly, If he be so understanding, come with a free open heart, to open
whatsoever is in thine heart to God; take heed of keeping any secret
resolutions in thine own heart, God knows thee, and can tell how to find thee
out; God knows all that is in thine heart before; all the secret baseness that
is in thine heart the Lord does understand it, the Lords eye is a peircing eye,
he sees through and through thy heart. Its a vain thing for thee to come and
conceal any thing before him.

You will say, If God understand a man's heart, what need he come and confess?

Yes, he requires it it as thy duty that thou should come and open all
before him: In spite of thy heart thou can not cover any thing from the
Lords eyes; but the Lord will see whether thou be willing of thy self that
he should understand all: God does not require us to come and confess our
sins, that so he might know that which he knew not before, but for this end,
That there might be a testimony, that thou art willing that he should know all
that is in thy heart; therefore now when thou come to worship him, ransack
every corner of thy heart and confess all before the Lord, and give glory to
his name, as that God that is an All-seeing God, that knows all the windings
and turnings of thy heart: Now meditate of these things that be presented to
thee, and it will be a mighty means to help thee to Sanctify his Name.

8 God is a God of infinite Wisdom, therefore when we come to worship God, let
us be ashamed of our folly: When thou come to have to deal with God, look
upon him as a God of infinite wisdom, and I say be thou ashamed of thy folly
then, and do thou exercise the grace of wisdom too when thou come to God;
that is, by propounding right ends (of which we spoke before) That is one part
of wisdom to have right ends, and right means toward those ends, so that the
meditation of the wisdom of God when we come to worship him will further us to
Sanctify his Name.

And further; This is to Santifie Gods Wisdom, when thou come into Gods
presence, in thy greatest streights, deny thy own wisdom, come with a
resolution to be guided by the wisdom of God, in this manner, Lord, I know not
how to order my steps, there is much folly and vanity in my heart, but thou art
a God of infinite wisdom, I come to thee for direction, and I profess here, I
am willing to give up my whole Soul to be guided by thy wisdom. If every time
we come to worship God we came thus, Oh Lord whatsoever our thoughts have been
heretofore, yet if thou shall but reveal thy mind to us, we will hearken to
thee, Lord, we believe that thy wisdom it is thy self, and therefore we
profess to give up our selves to thy Wisdom. Now this is to Sanctify the
Name of God.

9 Consider the holiness of God: God is a God infinitely pure from all sin, and
therefore when we come to worship God, we must be ashamed of our unholinesse,
as the Prophet in Isa 6. when he heard the Seraphins cry, Holy, holy, holy is
the Lord of hosts, he falls down and says, We is me for I am undone, because I
am a man of unclean lips. And is God a holy God? Then let me take heed when I
come before him, that I bring not with me a love to any sin for the Lord hates
it, and let me take heed that I do not cast dirt in the very face of Gods
holiness, but give up my Soul to be ruled wholly by him:

And labor that there may be a suitableness between the holiness of thy
heart and of the infinite God. Now this is to Sanctify Gods Name, when the
consideration of this Attribute of God has such effect upon my heart, that I
labor upon this to come with a suitable heart before God.

10 When thou come before God, Consider that thou come to a merciful God:
And what should this work?

First, It should make me come joyfully into his presence, as a God that is
willing to do good to his poor Creatures that are in misery.

Secondly, It should make me to come with a heart senseable of the need of this
mercy; O Lord, I have had my heart let out to other vain things heretofore, but
now Lord, thy mercy it is that my Soul comes for, as that wherein my chief and
only good consists.

Thirdly, It should make me come with expectation of great things from God; do
not come unto God as unto an empty Vine, but as unto a full Vine, and the more
thy Faith is raised to expect great things from God, the more acceptable art
thou to God: Certainly the higher any ones faith is raised when they come into
his presence, to expect the greatest things the more acceptable; It is
otherwise with God then men, if you come to men to beg a little thing, you
may be welcome, but if you come to ask a great matter, they will look a skew
upon you: but the truth is, the greater the things are that we come to God for,
the more welcome are we into Gods presence and those that are acquainted with
God they know it, and therefore they come the more fully. When they come to ask
Jesus Christ himself and his Spirit that is more worth then ten thousand worlds
they come with more freedom of Spirit then when they come to ask their healths
and the like.

Fourthly, It will be likewise another means of Sanctifying this Attribute of
God when thou come to him: If thou do come with a merciful heart toward
thy brethren. Take heed whenever you come to worship God, that you come not
with a rugged and cruel heart toward any of your brethren; therefore you find
that Christ lays this upon you in teaching how to pray; you must say, Forgive
us our trespasses as we forgive our brethren that trespass against us; And you
find it repeated again, If you forgive, then your heavenly Father will forgive,
and not otherwise. As if Christ should say, When you come to beg mercy be
sure you bring merciful hearts.

Fifthly, It is a good way to Sanctify the Name of God in this Attribute, for
the Soul to be solicitous with it self: What is that that will hinder me from
the mercy of God, and let me avoid it? It is otherwise, a taking of the name of
God in vain, for me to come to profess what need I have of Gods mercy, and yet
for all that, never regard to avoid those things that may hinder the work of his
grace upon me.

11 Consider the Justice of God, (that is another Attribute) Consider that thou
have to deal with an Infinite, Righteous, and Just God: Do not think that if
thou be a believer, that thou have nothing to do with the Justice of God,
for certainly thou art to Sanctify the Justice of God.

Now you will say, How should a believer Sanctify the Justice of God? Thus;

First, He should be apprehensive senseable how by sin he has put himself
under Justice, and deserved the stroke of Justice to be upon him to eternity;
he should consider what he is in himself: It is true, that Jesus Christ has
come between a believing Soul and the justice of the Father, and has taken the
stroke of justice upon himself: yea but though he has done it, it does not
hinder but that thou should be apprehensive of what thou have deserved thy
self.

Secondly, Here is a special thing in the Sanctifying of the justice of God:
When we come before him, we should consider that we have to deal with an
infinite just God, and therefore not to dare to come but through a mediator:
Here you have the reason why we must tender up all in the name of Christ,
because when we are to come before God, we are to Sanctify the name of his
justice: For thee to think thus, I have sinned, and God is merciful; and I
will go and pray to him that he might be merciful, and there is an end. Is this
all? Oh no, God requires the Sanctifying of his Justice, and there is nothing
that does Sanctify his Justice so much as this, That when a poor creature sees
the infinite distance that sin has made between that infinite God and it, it
sees that through sin, it has made its self liable to justice; and when it
sees that there is an absolute necessity that infinite justice must have
satisfaction, and thinks the sinner, If it comes to me that I must satisfy the
justice of God I am never able to do it, but there is a mediator, and therefore
I Will fly to him, and by Faith tender up to the Father all the merits of his Son
as a full satisfaction to his infinite justice: When thou come thus before
the Lord, thou Sanctifie^ his Name indeed. Many think that when they come to
pray, they should look upon Gods Grace, and Mercy, and not upon his Justice;
but thou must look upon both.

Another Attribute it is Gods Faithfulness: Consider thou have to deal with a
God of Infinite Truth, and Faithfulness, and therefore look upon him as an
object of thy Faith to rest upon. And likewise thou must bring a faithful heart
suitable some way to this faithfulness of God that is, a heart faithful with
him, to keep within the Covenant that thou have entered into and to perform
all the Vows that thou make with God; Remember thou have to deal with a
faithful God, and as the Lord delights to manifest his Righteousness to poor
Creatures that seek his face, so this God does expect that thou should ^ be
faithful in all the Covenants that thou do make with him, and this is to
Sanctify Gods Name.

Now then put all these Attributes of God together and there you have his
Glory, the infiniteness of his Glory. The shine and luster of all the
Attributes together is Gods Glory. I have then to deal with a glorious God, and
let me labor to perform such services as may have a spiritual glory upon
them, that some image of the divine luster that there is in God may be upon my
services; and let me look for glorious things seeing I have to deal with such a
glorious God.

You will say, Here is a great deal of do in serving of God, how much is here
that we must do?

I appeal to any gracious heart, what can thou want of any of these, or what
would thou want? Do thou say, Here Is a great deal? Can there be too much
to make thee happy? These things are not only thy duty, but thy happiness
glory and excellency consists in them: If any one should bring you a great many
Jewels and Pearls, would you say, Here Is a great deal ado? Oh no, the more the
merrier. So say I, this one meditation would take off the thoughts of a great
deal, for in all these my happiness consists, and the more I have of these, the
more shall I enjoy of God, the more happy shall I be both here and for ever.

Now I had thought to have given you some Reasons why the Name of God must be
Sanctified; only I beseech you by all that has been said go away with this
thought, what little cause is there that any of us should rest upon any of our
duties; If this be required of us thus to Sanctify the name of God in duty, I
say we have little cause any of us to rest in any duties that we perform.
There are many poor creatures that have no other Saviors to rest upon but
their Prayers, and coming to Church, and taking the Communion; Now if in all
these the Lord expects that thou should thus Sanctify his Name: Thou have
little cause to rest upon any thing that thou have done, thou have cause rather
to go alone and mourn for taking the Name of God in vain in the duties of his
worship: Rest not in any of your performances; labor to perform duties as
well as you can, but when you have done, know that you are unprofitable
servants after all, and renounce all as in the point of Justification, and rest
upon something else, otherwise you are undone for ever.

SERMON VII.
LEVITICUS. 10. 3. I will be Sanctified in them that come nigh me.
WE are coming now to the conclusion of this great Argument of Sanctifying
Gods Name in holy duties for the general. God expects that we should all in
our drawings near to him in the duties of worship, Sanctify his Name. Now we
are to consider of diverse reasons why God will be Sanctified in all the duties
of his worship.

1 The First Reason is this, It is the very nature of God to Will himself the
last end, and all other things to work suitable to the lifting up of himself as
the last end: I say it is as essential to him as any thing, for him to will
himself as the highest end, and that all things should work so as to be
suitable unto that Glory of his for the furtherance of it: God should cease to
be God, if so be he should not will himself asthe highest end, and so will that
all things that have any being should some way or other work for himself: This
is the very nature of God. It is that which I conceive the very nature of Gods
holinsse consists in, the willing himself as the last end, and so to work all
things as is suitable unto his own infinite excellency. Now as this is Gods
holiness, so it is the holiness that God requires in his Creatures (that are
capeable of holiness) that they should will him as the last end, and all
things suitable to that infinite excellency of his. Now if this be the nature
of God, and this be his holiness, then certainly it must needs be a necessary
duty in all those that would have communion with God and would honor God, to
will as God himself does will, that is that all things should work suitable to
the infinite excellency of God, that God may attain the glory of his infinite
excellency, and this makes it to be a necessary duty that when we come to
worship him we should Sainct^fie his name: So that the first reason is taken
from the very nature of God, it is the very being of God that all things should
work to himself, and in such a suitable way as to lift up his excellency and
glory.

2 Secondly, We must Sanctify God in the duties of his Worship, because it is
the special glory that God has in the world to be actively honored; for his
passive glory, that is, to be glorified in a passive way, that he has in hell,
but the special glory that God would have it is that he might be glorified
actively: Now there is no such way of glorifying the Name of God actively as by
worshipping of him in a holy manner, and therefore God stands much upon this,
That when we come to worship him we sanctify his Name; For says God, If I be
not sanctified in my worship, what active glory have I in the world? It is the
special active glory that God has in the world, the Sanctifying of his Name
in the duties of his worship.

3 Thirdly, That which we have intimated before, That the duties of Gods
worship are the most precious things, the special conveyances of the choice
mercies that he intends to bestow on his Saints, and therefore though he loses
his glory in any thing else, he would not lose it in that wherein he does
especially convey his mercy and goodness to his people. But that we spoke too
in showing how we draw nigh to God in holy duties and it may well come in here
again as an Argument why we should sanctify Gods name.

4 A Fourth Reason is this, Because there is no way for us to be fitted for the
receiving of Mercy from God through those duties of worship, but by our
Sanctifying of Gods name; when thou come at any time to worship God, what
would thou have? there is some communion that thou would enjoy with God,
now there is no way to make thee a fit subject of Mercy, or capable of the
enjoyment of Communion with God, but by such a behavior of Soul as this is
that has been spoken of, to, Sanctify the Name of God: thou would be loath
to lose those duties of worship that thou do perform, therefore it is
required of thee to sanctify his Name lest thou do lose all, for it is this
that makes thee the only capable subject of what good is to be had there.

5 We must Sanctify Gods Name in holy duties, because otherwise we should
certainly never hold out in duties, but vanish and come to nothing; now God
would be worshipped so by his creatures, as to be constantly worshipped, he
would have those that do worship him, to worship him always, to worship him
for ever, and he would have this worship that we perform to him, but to be the
beginning of that eternal worship that he shall have from us in heaven. And so
the Saints do Worship God now, the worship which they perform, it is but as
the beginning of that worship that hereafter in heaven they shall tender up to
God, though there may be some difference in it, as there our prayers will be
turned into praises, and it will not be in such outward Ordinances as now we
worship God in there will be no Preaching, nor Sacraments: yet notwithstanding
the Soul-worship that is now, will be in effect the same as it shall be in
heaven. God would have us so to worship him, as to continue to worship him: Now
I say, unless his Name be Sanctified in our worshipping of him we will
certainly fall off; and the truth is, this is the very ground of all Apostacy
in Hypocrites; Some that have been very forward in the worshipping of God when
they were young ones, and afterward they have fallen off, they were wont
constantly in their families, and in secret in their chambers to be worshipping
of God, and they accounted it the very joy of their lives for the present to be
worshipping of God; but it is not so with them now as it was yea they are
fallen off it may be from their very profession of Religion, and turned lose:
And now to be in vain company, to drink, or play, is better to them then any
service or worship of God, they prize more to be in company with their sports
then to hear a Sermon, or to be in Communion with the people of God in Prayer:
Heretofore they would not have changed one short time of private communion with
God, for the enjoyment of a great deal of pleasures and content in the world;
but now it is otherwise with them. How comes it to pass that these are
Apostatised thus from God? Surely here is the ground of it, That they did not
Sanctify Gods name in holy duties, at the most it was but a work of conscience
that put them upon them, and they had but some flashes, there was no real
sanctification of their hearts whereby they did sanctify the name of God in
holy duties, and upon this it is that they have left off. This I dare say, That
there was never any soul that did know what it was to sanctify Gods Name in
worship, that ever was weary of worshipping God.

It may be some of you may say, We have heard that there is much required in
Sanctifying Gods Name in duties, and that is the only way to weary the Soul,
and to make it fall off; Oh no (as we said the last day there is not any one
thing that has been opened for the Sanctifying of Gods name in duties that any
gracious heart can tell how to miss, and the more we do Sanctify his Name,
the more we shall be in love with worship. For it is from hence that those that
Sanctify Gods name in worship will hold out, because they will find the
sweetness of worship, they will meet with God in holy duties, and so they come
to be encouraged in worship, but as for others who do worship God in a formal
way, their worship will prove to be tedious to them, for they perform the
duties, but do not find God in the duties in that Spiritual way as the Saints
do; If they think they meet with God, it is but an imagination rather then any
real meeting with him; they do not find the influence of God in their souls in
holy duties, so as those do that sanctify Gods name in holy duties; here then
you see the Reasons why we are to Sanctify Gods name in holy duties.

Now then for the Application of all this.

1 If all this which you have heard be required of us for the Sanctifying of
Gods Name: Hence we see how little cause we have to rest upon any duty of
worship that we do perform, certainly the duties of worship that we perform
are no such things as are fit to be rested upon for life and for salvation and
yet for the most part there is scarce any thing that people have to rest upon,
or to tender up to God for acceptance to eternal life but only their prayers,
and their coming to hear, and receiving of the Communion, and such duties that
they perform; this is all they have to tender up for life and for salvation
perhaps they may sometimes speak of Christ, but the truth is that which their
hearts rest upon for acceptance to eternal life is this. And is it but this?
It is a weak prop, a rotten reed that thou have to rest upon; Let the duties of
worship be performed never so well; Suppose we did sanctify Gods Name to the
uttermost that is possible for any creature to do in this world, yet such
duties are not to be rested upon: Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the Apostles,
the most holy men that ever did perform duties in the most holy manner, yet woe
to them if they have nothing to rest upon but their duties; consider therefore
of this, that what thou must rest upon for acceptance to eternal life, it
must be that that must have so much worth in it, as must satisfy for all thy
sins that formerly thou have committed; yea and for all the sins that ever thou
shall commit. Now I appeal unto any ones conscience, is that which thou
performest, is prayer, or receiving the Sacrament, or hearing of the word, such
a work as in thy conscience thou can think, it has so much worth in it, as
to satisfy God for all the sins that ever thou did or shall commit? I am
persuaded if people that have rested upon duties heretofore, would but
seriously have this thought in their minds, That I must rest upon nothing for
my acceptance for life and Salvation, but that that must have such worth in
it, as to satisfy God for all my sins that ever have been committed, or shall
be committed; this would take them off for ever from resting in duties. Yea,
and it must be such as must be the object of the infinite holiness of God to
take content in, Surely the duties that we perform are no such duties to rest
upon: the truth is, If we would seriously consider what they are, as they come
from us, we would even abhor our selves in dust and ashes, and account of them
as the Prophet speaks of his own righteousness as menstruous clothes, they are
such as if God should deal with us, as justly he may do, he might cast them and
us to the dogs, for they are (as the Prophet says) torn and rent
Sacrifices; now if a man in the time of the Law should bring to the Lord a
sacrifice that was all torn and rent before he brought it, would such a
sacrifice have been accepted? All the duties we perform as they come from us
they are snch; we read in Exodus 22. 31. concerning such things as were torn
and rent, that they should cast them to the dogs. Ye shall be holy men unto
we (says he verse ult) neither shall ye eat any flesh that is ^orne of beasts
in the field, ye shall cast it to the dogs, because ye are holy men unto me:
Must the people of Israel manifest their holiness in this, That they must eat
nothing torn by beasts, but cast it unto dogs? Or was the holiness of the
people of Israel such as God required them, that they must eat nothing that
was torn by beasts? What then is the holiness of the infinite God? our
services that we perform are of themselves such as are torn by our beastly
lusts many times: how many are there that bring sacrifices to God that are as a
carrion that swine have been tearing before hand, and yet these are the
Sacrifices that they bring to God, and not only think that God should accept of
them, but they do rest upon them for their acceptance to eternal life. How
infinitely are these people mistaken^ how little do they know of God, or of the
way of acceptance to eternal life! That is the First Use.

2 Secondly, If all this be required for the Sanctifying of Gods Name in
duties, That we cannot perform the duties of Worship without this behavior of
Soul; hence we see that the work of Religion is a hard and difficult work to
flesh and blood. A main work of Religion is the work of worshipping of God, for
indeed those that are not religious and godly, they never worship God to any
purpose: then we come to worship God when we begin to be religious and godly.
Now it must needs be a busy work to be a religious and a godly man, because
there is so much required in the sanctifying of Gods name in holy duties: many
people think it a very easy matter to worship God, and the worship that they
tender up to God is an easy matter, there is little in it. If it were nothing
else to worship God but merely to go and say a few prayers, and come and hear a
Sermon, and take a piece of Bread and Wine, then it were the easiest matter in
the world to come and worship God; but there is more required in the duties of
Gods worship then thou have been acquainted with; there is a power of
godliness in it. That Text of Scripture is a very famous one that shows the
difficulty that there is in the Worship of God, and how men are mistaken in
thinking it such an easy and slight matter to worship God: It is in Josh. 24.
16. 19. where Joshua does call upon the people to worship God, and they came
off presently, and said, They would worship him (so you shall find them
profess, verse 16.) But mark what the Text says in verse 19. And Joshua said
unto the people, Ye cannot serve the Lord, for he is an holy God, he is a
jealous God, and he will not forgive your transgressions and your sins, As if
he should say, You think it is nothing to serve the Lord, and that it is an
easy matter to serve him, you think to put off God with any thing: Alas you
cannot serve the Lord, for he is a holy God, and a jealous God and you must
have other manner of hearts then yet you have, and you must understand his
worship in another manner then yet you do, the Lord will be Sanctified in those
that draw nigh him, and therefore until you understand God, and his ways and
worship, you cannot serve the Lord. Know that the work of Religon is a very
hard and difficult work, for it requires all this, and therefore the Soul had
need be very diligent and laborious that would come to worship God in a right
way.

3 Thirdly, hence is a use of humiliation to us all, even to the best of us; oh
how little, how little has the best of us all Sanctified the name of God! how
far have we all come short of the Sanctifying of Gods name in holy duties! And
when we look abroad in the world and see what poor service God has generally
from the Men and women of the earth, it should make our hearts bleed within us.
Where almost is the man or woman that according to that text in Isa. Stirs up
himself to take hold on God. And I verily believe that in the opening of this
point of Sanctifying the name of God in holy duties, that I have bin in the
bosoms of as many as in the opening of any point whatsoever; and as many may
have cause to lay their hands upon their hearts and say, Certainly I have come
short of what is required here, and have not bin acquainted with this way, this
mystery of godliness in Sanctifying Gods name in holy duties as I ought to be:
O be humbled for this, for all the uncleannesie of your hearts in the
performance of duties In Exodus 27 4, 5. you read, that at the Altar where the
^acrifices we^e to be offered, the Lord required that there should be a grate
made. Thou shall make for it (meaning the Altar) a grate of network of brass,
and upon the net shall thou make four brazen rings in the four corners thereof,
and thou shall put it under the compass of the Altar beneath, that the net may
be even to the midst of the Altar. There was as it were a grate for the ashes
of the Altar to go through, as you have grates in your fires to make them burn
clear, and for the ashes to fall down, so the Lord would have such a grate for
the ashes of the Altar to fall down: We had need of such a grate. Oh the ashes,
and dirt, and filth, that there is in our services when we come to offer and
tender them up to God! So that we have cause I say to be humbled for holy
offerings. There be many godly people that through Gods mercy are able to keep
from gross sins, they do not find it any great matter to keep from company,
swearing, drinking, uncleanness, lying or wronging of others, and such kind of
sins as those are, so that they see not such need of humiliation in this
regard, unless it be for that their natures are as corrupt as any, though they
break not forth into those actual gross sins, but the maine work of the
humiliation of those that are godly, it is to be humbled for their thoughts,
for the mispending of time, and for not sanctifying of Gods name in holy
dnties, those are the maine things that are the subject of the humiliation of
the Saints, beside the body of sin and death that they carry about with them.
And it would be a good sign that thy heart has some tenderness in it when
thou make these to be the matter of thy humiliation: Carnal people little
are troubled for these, if they fall into such sins, as their Consciences do
fly in their faces, then they are troubled and humbled. But for such things as
these are they are seldom humbled: To be humbled for thy holy offerings is a
good sign of a gracious heart. We read of the Cherubims that they had six
wings, and with two of their wings the text says they covered their faces, so
my brethren we had need have wings as it were to cover our best duties they had
wings, and with two they covered their legs, and with two their faces: We had
need, not only of a covering for our lower parts and meanner duties, but a
covering of our holy duties, to cover our faces our best duties of all, the
most heavenly duties we perform had need be purged by the blood of Christ. In
Levit. 16. 14. 16. we read of their holy things, that there was need of purging
of them by blood; and so it should be in our holy duties: Let us be humbled for
our best performance that ever we performed in our lives: The best had need be
so, but then as for others that have made little or no conscience of
Sanctifying of Gods name, how had they need be humbled? Thou have something
more to repent of then thou thoughtest of; for the truth is, those that have
not made conscience of Sanctifying of Gods Name in holy duties, they never in
all their lives did any service for the honor of God, thou have lived perhaps
30. or 40. it may be 60. years or more, and did never yet honor God in any
one thing that ever thou did in all thy life.

You will say, God forbid: Have not I prayed, and heard the word much, and
received the Communion often, and yet have I never honored God?

If thou have not bin aquainted with this mystery of godliness in Sanctifying
his name in these things, This is said from God to thee this morning, That thou
have never done any one action to the honor of God: Thou hadest need begin
presently for thy time is not long, and will thou go out of this world and the
name of God never to be honored by thee?

Yea and further, Thou have lost all thy duties, all the time has bin lost
that thou have been in performance of duties, now it is an ill thing to idle
away time in the things of the World: When a man has an opportunity for to
gain in the world, If so be he loses his time and neglects it, we account it a
very sad thing to him, but now to lose our trading time for heaven (for the
times of the worshipping of God are our trading times for heaven) that is sad
indeed: And yet thou that make not conscience of Sanctifying the Name of God
in holy duties, all the time thou have spent is lost.

And yet further, You that have been false in the performance of duties, and
hypocrites, not only all your pains and labor is quite lost (for if that were
all it might be well with you) but you have aggravated your sins by your holy
duties. Those duties that others have enjoyed communion with God in, and
furthered their eternal life by, thou have aggravated thy sins by them, yet it
was thy duty to do them: but I say, by not sanctifying of Gods Name, thou have
aggravated thy sins so much the more. As those that are godly, they work out
their salvation, even in their natural actions they sanctify Gods Name, in
eating and drinking, and following their business; they perform those actions
in such a holy manner, as they honor God in them, and further their eternal
peace; but as they in their natural and civil actions work out their
salvation; so thou in the very religious actions do work out thy damnation:
Certainly wicked men that are not acquainted with this work of godliness to
sanctify Gods name in holy duties, they work out their damnation even in the
performance of them.

You will say, Then they had better not do them.

Yes, they are bound to do them; but they are bound to do them in a right
manner, as sometimes I have given you this instance, and it is a full and a
clear one, to show that men are bound to perform holy duties and not to leave
them undone, and yet they may further their own damnation while they are doing
of them: As for example, If so be that a Prince should appoint a man to come
into his presence such a day to Petition for his life, which he has forfeited
by the Law, if he do not come he may be a dead man: But now if this man be
drunk on that day, and come drunk into the Kings presence, he may be a dead man
too, for presuming to come drunk before him; so wicked and ungodly men, whether
they worship or worship not, they are in danger to perish: But of this more
when we come to show that God will be Sanctified.

In the Fourth place here is a use of Exhortation, that seeing we have this
truth thus presented to us and opened before us; O that we had hearts to apply
our selves now to it with all our might, to seek to sanctify the name of God
when we draw nigh to him. The Lord has shown thee what it is that he requires
of thee; make conscience of it for time to come, thou do not know what
blessed Communion thou may have with God if thou do make conscience of
this, the truth is, If you have not been acquainted with this, you have not
been acquainted with the way of a Christian in his enjoyment of Communion with
God, thou do not know what the comfort of a Christian life means; do but
make trial of this for time to come, and thou will find more comfort in the
ways of godliness, and more thriving in them in one quarter of a year then
thou have done before in seven years, one Christian that keeps close to God in
holy duties and sanctifies the name of God in them, I say finds more comfort
with God, and grows on in godliness more in one quarter of a year, then the
other does in seven years that goes on in an ordinary, dull, and formal way in
the performance of the duties of Worship: Some there are in our time that cry
out of duties, and what need we trouble our selves so much? those that know not
how to sanctify Gods name they think lightly of them; but now do you apply
your selves fully as you are able to this that I am speaking of, and you will
find yourselves to be as it were in another world, you will be able to say,
Well, I have not yet understood what it was to enjoy communion with God in
Prayer, in Word, and in Sacraments before, this will make your faces shine in
your conversations if you would do it; and now to that end that you may do it,
there are these two or three things that I would propound to you.

1 In the First place, Learn to know God more with whom you have to do, and
present those things that you have heard before you in your meditations, when
as you are to come to God in Prayer, or in any other duty, and when you are
worshipping of God, remember that you have to do with God and none else. You
are every time you come to perform holy duties to be as a man or woman
separated from all things. Valerius Maximus tells a story of a young noble man
that attended upon Alexander while he was sacrificing, this noble man held his
Censer for Incense, and in the holding of it, there fell a coal upon his flesh
and burnt it so as the very scent of it was in the nostrils of all that were
about him, and because he would not disturb Alexander in his service, he
resolutely did not stir to put of the fire from him; but holds still his
Censer: If heathens made such ado in their sacrificing to their Idol gods,
that they would mind it so as no disturbance must be made what ever they
induted: What care should we have then of our selves when we come to worship
the high God? And so Josephus he reports of the Priests that were sacrificing
in the Temple when Pampey brake in to them with armed men, and though they
might have fled and saved their lives, yet they would not leave off their
sacrificing but were slain by the soldiers. They did so mind it as a matter of
great consequence: Oh that we could mind the duties of Gods worship as matters
of great moment, that so we might learn to Sanctify the name of God in the
performance of them more then ever we have done.

2 When thou come to worship, take heed thou do not come in thine own
strength. For there is more required in sanctifying the name of God then thy
strength is able to carry thee on in, and therefore act thy Faith upon Jesus
Christ every time thou come to worship God, not only as I said before, to
tender up thy services in his name, but act thy faith upon Christ to give thee
strength to do what thou have to do. and what strength thou have received from
Christ be sure to stir it up many godly men and women have more strength then
they know of themselves; and if they would but stir up that strength that they
have received, they might Sanctify the Name of God a great deal more then they
do. Therefore remember that text before mentioned, None stirs up himself to take
hold on God: Quicken up thy heart, and rouse up thy Spirit when thou art to
worship God.

3 When ever thou art worshipping of God, do not satisfy thy self merely in
the duty done, but consider, do I sanctify Gods Name in the duty? every time
thou worshipest him, examine thy heart whether thou do it yea or no. And if
thou find that thou have not attained in some comfortable measure to this
that has been presented to thee^ let the shame and the sorrow for that abide
upon thy Spirit until the next time thou come to worship God; at such a time
I have been worshipping of God, and God knows I have been stirring up my heart
in some measure^ but I find my heart dead, wandering sluggish, and dull I say,
when thou find thou can not do it according to what is required in any
comfortable measure: Let the shame and sorrow of heart for it abide upon thee
till the next time thou come to worship God, and that will mightily help
thee: Thou art now praying, and thou can not now get up thy heart to what is
required; The next time thou come to prayer, come in the shame and sorrow of
thy heart for the want of sanctifying Gods name the last time; And so for
hearing of the Word, or receiving the Sacraments. And this will further thee
mightily for the Sanctifying the Name of God in holy duties.

But now that all may be sealed up unto you, and so that we may close the
point, know that God will be sanctified in those that ^^ draw nigh to him^ And
there are these Two things in the Point;

First, If we do not sanctify Gods Name, God will sanctify his Name in a way
of justice.

Secondly, If we do Sanctify his Name, then he will sanctify his Name in a
way of mercy toward us.

For the First, God will manifest that he is displeased with such duties that
thou do perform, he will manifest it one way or other that he is a holy
God, and he does not accept of such unholy things as thou do tender up to
him; for the truth is, if God should accept of such unholy things from men, God
may be said to be like unto themselves. As a man if he does entertain any as
his familiar friend that is naught and wicked, it is his disgrace and
dishonor; a man may sometimes employ in some business those that are naught
and wicked, and it may be no disgrace to him, but if he does entertain one in
his house that is wicked, it is a dishonor to him: So God may employ the most
wicked men in the world in some outward services, but if he should accept of
them in his Worship, it would be a dishonor to God, and therefore God that he
might sanctify his own Name, he will manifest his displeasure at one time or
other against such duties of worship you that perform worship in a formal
manner, and with unclean vile hearts; I say, it stands upon the honor of God
if he will manifest himself a holy God, he must manifest some displeasure
against that way of thy worshipping of him: This one meditation one would
think, should mightily sink into the heart of any man that has an enlightened
conscience, to think thus, It stands upon the holiness of God, And he cannot
appear to be a holy God except he does some way or other appear to be against
me in such duties that I tender up unto him.

Now you will say, How does God appear, that he does not accept of them? He
will appear in these three things:

1 First by blasting those that do worship him thus in a formal way: It shall
at First be secret, but afterward it will appear more apparently, and we see
it by experience, that such as have bin professors of Religion, and worship God
in hypocris^e, and in formality, they have been blasted in their parts and
common gifts.

The judgment of God upon Nadab and Abihu that did not sanctify Gods Name it
was secret at first: It struck them dead, and though by fire, yet if you read
the story you shall find that their clothes were not burnt, and yet they were
burnt in their bodies: So the Lord some times does blast men inwardly in their
Spirits, in their Souls, in their Parts, in their common Gifts ^he blasts them
I say inwardly though it does not appear outwardly, yet at length it will
appear before men that they are blasted: and in these times of the Gospel the
Lord does come with spiritual judgments rather then with outward temporal
judgments. In the time of the Law, those that did not sanctify the Name of
God in holy duties, the Lord did appear by some external and visible way upon
their bodies; but now in the time of the Gospel there God comes with more
spiritual judgments upon men's Souls, and those are the most terrible
judgments: We have a notable Scripture for this in Isa. 29. 13. How God does
blast those that do not sanctify his name in holy duties. Wherefore the Lord
said, For as much as this People draw near me with their mouth, and with their
lips do honor me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear
toward me is taught by the precepts of men: Mark what follows: Therefore
behold I will proceed to do a marvelous work amongst this people, even a
marvelous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish,
and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid. What do they come and
draw near me with their lips and their hearts are far from me, and do they
worship me in a formal way? I Will take away the wisdom from the wise, and the
understanding from the prudent: And that is the reason why so many great
scholars are blasted in their very parts, because they would worship God
according to the precepts of men, in a formal way; and so all hypocrites and
formal worshippers the Lord does blast them in one way or other, the
judgments of God upon the spirits of men were sometimes in the time of the
Law; But in the times of the Gospel there we find generally the judgments of
God to be more spiritual upon the hearts and consciences of men; we find it by
experience God does discover that he does not accept of such as those are; and
therefore when you see any that have made profession of Religion, that had
excellent Parts at first, many common Gifts, and now are as we say, no body;
Remember this Text, That God will be sanctified in those that come nigh me.

Secondly the Lord does manifest that he will be Sanctified in those that draw
nigh him, by awakeing their consciences many times upon their sick beds and
death beds, the Lord does force them to give glory to him, and there to
acknowledge that they did not worship God in uprightness but in Formality. And
now they are in horror of conscience and cry out in the anguish of their
souls upon the apprehension of the dreadful wrath of God that is upon them:
Take heed for the Lords sake of this thing, when you are performing of the
duties of worship, do not rest in the outward duties for they will never
comfort you upon your sick and death beds, you may perhaps put off your
consciences a little for the present, but when you come upon your sick beds
there will be no comfort unto you, and then you will be forced to say, well all
this while I have but taken the name of God in vain, and now God has rejected
me and all my services and you will then speak to those that come about your
beds side, and bid them take warning by you, take heed that when you worship
God you worship him to purpose, I have spent time in prayer, and hearing but
for want of this I find I have no comfort at all, but the Lord appears to be
terrible to my soul, and comes out against me as an enemy I say now Gods name
is Sanctified; what ever becomes of thee, he will force glory from thee one way
or other, and it may be even here in this time of thy life, but however, at the
great day, when the secrets of all hearts must be disclosed before men and
Angels, then the Lord will apeare to be a holy God by rejecting all such
services that thou did tender unto him, and it will then be a great part of
the work of the day of Judgment for God to be Sanctified in those that did
worship him; by declaring before men and Angels, how he did reject such formal
and hypocritical worship that they did tender up unto him, Oh that God would
strik this upon your hearts, that it may abide upon you every time you come to
worship him, to think thus, let me look to it to Sanctify his name now, for I
hear that God will Sanctify it himself if I do not do it.

But then on the other side if so be that thou make Conscience of Sanctifying
Gods name in duties, then he will Sanctify his name in a way of Mercy; that
is, he will manifest how he does accept of the least degree of holiness though
there be much mixture: God has a way to take a way the mixture by the blood of
his Son, and then to accept of any holiness he sees in thee, he will Sanctify
his name by meeting with thee, and revealing his glory to thee when thou art
worshipping of him: There is an excellent scripture for this, Exodus: 29. 43.
There I will meet with the Children of Israel and the Tabernacle shall be
sanctified by my glory. Thou that have a gracious heart and art worshipping of
God in Sincerity, thou art as a Tabernacle of God, and God has his service and
worship from thee, thou art as the Temple of God, and there will I meet with
thee (says God) and I will Sanctify my Tabernacle by my glory. God will
Sanctify thy heart by his glory if thou do Sanctify his name.

Further; thou shall it may be not always have such glorious comforts, the
full beams of the Sun rising upon thee, but at one time or other the Lord will
break in upon thee and manifest his glory to thee, and its like if thou have
not such full comforts now, yet upon thy sick bed, though God does not then
always manifest himself fully, for sometimes the disease may be a hinderance,
yet it is ordinary that those that in their constant way did Sanctify Gods
name in holy duties they do lie comfortably upon their sick beds, and a
glorious entrance is made for them into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

And then again all things are Sanctified unto them: as on the other side,
those that do not Sannctifie Gods name all things are cursed to them, if thou
do not make Conscience of Sanctifying Gods name in duties, God cares not to
Sanctify any thing for thy good: But now, those that make conscience of
Sanctifying Gods name in holy duties, the Lord takes care, that all things
shall be Sanctified for their good, for the furtherance of their eternal good.

And how ever it be here, yet hereafter at the great day of judgment it will be
a part of the glory of God to manifest before men and Angels how he did accept
of those holy services that thou did tender up to him; when hypocrites shall
be cast away and abhorred, and thou who hadest an upright sincere heart shall
be owned before God, and before men and Angels at that great day; and God shall
say, well, it is a part of the glory of my holiness to make it appear, that I
have accepted of these holy things, that these my poor servants have tendered
up to me. And this now is of marveilous use for the comforting of a gracious
heart; those duties that thou do now think thou have lost, and there will
nothing come of them, thou shall certainly hear of them another day, God will
make it appear, there is nothing that he stands more upon then the glory of his
holiness, and it is the glory of his holiness that is thy strength in this
thing and that makes it certain to thee that there must be a manifestation of
thy acceptance; and therefore take these truths into thy heart about
Sanctifying the name of God. You have had only the point in general opened to
you Oh that the Spirit of God would bring things unto your remembrance.

SERMON VIII.
LEVITICUS. 10. 3. I will be Sanctified in them that come nigh me.
WE have as you may remember, Stepney, Janu. 4. 1645.
Preached many SERMONS upon that point of Sanctifying the Name of God in the
duties of his Worship: We have spoken unto the point in the general, the last
day we finished it: I do not intend to look back to any thing that was said,
but we are to proceed to show how the Name of God should be Sanctified in the
particular duties of his Worship Now the Duties of Gods Worship are especially
these three;

1 The Hearing of the Word.

2 Receiving of the Sacrament.

3 And Prayer.

Other things come under Worship, but yet these are the three chei^ duties of
Worship and I intend to speak to all these Three and to show how we should
Sanctify the Name of God in drawing nigh unto him, in the Word, Sacrament, and
Prayer.

We might choose several Texts for all these, but they fall full within the
general and therefore it shall be sufficient, for to ground the Sanctifying of
Gods Name in these duties of worship upon this Text; I OF SANCTIFYING THE NAME
OF GOD IN THE HEARING OF THE WORD.

That which we are to speak to this morning it is the Sanctifying of the Name
of God in the Hearing of his Word^ If you would have the ground of what we are
to say concerning this in a particular Scripture, you may have it in Luke 8.
18. take heed therefore how you hear: It is not enough to come to hear the
word, that is good, and no question but God is pleased with the willingness of
people to come to hear his word, but you must not rest barely in hearing, but
take heed how you hear. Now this is a point of great consequence and I hope it
may do good to help to make many Sermons to be profitable to you, and the point
I hope is seasonable and will be very suitable unto you: For those that come to
hear so soon in a morning, and are willing even in hard weather to come out of
their beds, they give some good testimony that they do desire to honor God in
their hearing, and to get good by their hearing; and it is pity that labor and
pains should be bestowed and no profit but hurt rather got by it, which God
forbid: Therefore now I am to speak to a point that may help you so to hear, as
may recompense all your labor and pains in hearing. In preaching to those that
come to hear, that so they may get good and benefit by it; there is a great
deal more encouragement then to such as come in a formal way because they use
to come; therefore this Point being a great point; I shall open it some what
largely, and shall cast it into this Method:

First, I shall show you that the hearing of Gods word is a part of the Worship
of God, for otherwise I could not ground it upon any text.

Secondly, I shall show you how we are to sanctify Gods Name in the hearing of
his word, either in regard of preparation unto it, or our behavior in the
hearing of the Word.

Thirdly, Why it is that God will be Sanctified in this ordinance of his.

Fourthly, How God will Sanctify himself in such that do not sanctify his
name in the hearing of his Word.

Fifthly, How God will Sanctify his Name in ways of mercy to those that are
careful to Sanctify his Name in the hearing of the Word.

These are the Five Principal things that concern this Argument

For the First, That the hearing of Gods word it is a part of Gods Worship. You
heard in the opening of the worship of God in the general what it was, I told
you it was a tendering up of the creatures homage to God, a testimony of the
respect that the creature did owe to God; now if that be the nature of Worship,
certainly the hearing of Gods word it is a part of the worship of God: for in
the hearing of Gods word we

1 First do profess our dependence upon God for the knowing of his mind and
the way to eternal life: Every time we come to hear the word, if we know what
we do, we do thus much, we do profess that we do depend upon the Lord God for
the knowing of his mind, and the way and rule to eternal life; we do as much
as if we should say, Lord, of our selves we neither know thee, nor the way and
means how we should come to be saved, and therefore that we might testify our
dependence upon thee for this thing, we here present ourselves before thee, now
this is a Testimony of the high respect we owe to God.

2 Secondly, The hearing of Gods Word is a part of his worship, because in it
we come to wait upon God in the way of an Ordinance, to have that good conveyed
to us by way of an Ordinance beyond what the thing is able in it self to do,
and therefore it is worship. I wait upon God when I am hearing the word if I
know what I do) to have some spiritual good conveyed to me beyond what there is
in the means it self, this makes it worship. When I am busied in natural and
civil actions, there I must profess that these things can do me no good
without God, but I do not wait upon God in an ordinance for the conveyance of
natural good beyond what God has put into the creature; it is his blessing with
it, that God in the ordinary course of his providence does convey such natural
or civil good in the use of those creatures. But now, when I come to hear his
word, I here come to wait upon God in the way of an Ordinance for the
conveyance of some spiritual good that this Ordinance has not in its self,
take it materially, but merely as it has an institution in it, and is
appointed by God for the conveyance of such and such things. God does appoint
meat to nourish me, and together with his appointment he has given a natural
power to meat to nourish my body that in an ordinary course of providence is
enough for the nourishment of my body; but now when I come to hear the word, I
must look upon that not only as a thing appointed to work upon my soul, and to
save my soul by not as a thing that has any efficacy put into it in a natural
way as the other has; its not the nature of the thing that carries such a
power in it, but it is the institution of God, and the Ordinance of God in it;
Now then, when I come to wait upon God in an ordinance for the spiritual good
that is beyond the virtue of any creature to convey to me, certainly I worship
God, that is a special part of worship to wait upon God in this way; Therefore
in these two respects the hearing of Gods word it is a part of the Worship of
God, and I beseech you remember these two things every time you come to hear. I
come now to give a testimony that I am not able to understand God and the way
to eternal life of my self, but I do depend upon God for the knowledge of it.
And here I come to wait upon God for the conveyance of that good to my soul
that is not in the power of any creature to convey: Now I worship when I do
these.

But further (you shall find it more plain when we come to open how we should
sanctify Gods Name in the hearing of his word) This is divine service, as much
as any service can be performed. Heretofore our Prelates and those kind of men,
made all the Worship of God to be in their Divine Service (as they call it)
which was of their own inventions, and made light of the preaching or hearing
of the Word, but the Word is a great part of that divine service that God
requires of us in his Worship, and in it you do tender up your homage to God;
You therefore must not only when you come to hear, think, I come to get
something, I come to understand more then I did, and to hear such a man's parts,
and the like, but remember you come to tender up your homage to God, to sit at
Gods feet and there to profess your subjection to him: That is one end of your
coming to hear sermons

Now then you will say, What should be done in the hearing Gods Word, so as
Gods Name may be Sanctified?

For that as we opened in the general, that in the duties of Gods Worship
there must be preparation, and then an answerable behavior of the soul. So
here there must first ^e a preparation of the soul to this work, and then an
answerable behavior of the soul in it.

1 There must be a preparation of the Soul, so as when you come to hear, you
may with all readiness receive the Word; the soul must be made ready, in Act.
17. 11. there it is said, These were more noble then those of Thessalonica, in
that they received the Word with all readiness of mind: The word is, with all
A^aerity, as well as readiness: their minds were in a fit preparation to
receive the word: and the text says, They were more noble: The word that's
translated more noble, it signify Better bred, for I do not take this
scripture, as if it were meant only of men that were Earls or Lords, that did
thus receive the Word with readiness, but they were of a more noble
disposition, They were well bred men, so the Greek word signifies. A man some
times preaching to a company of rude people that never had any good breeding,
they will behave themselves rudely, they slight the word, and like the Swine,
regard Acorns rather then Pearls: And the word is seldom so profitable to a
company of rude people that have no breeding at all; but now there is more
hopes to Preach to men that have breeding: Men that are exercised in Arts and
Sciences, and have some understanding, and so some ingenuity in them, they will
hearken to reason. Now there is a great deal of spiritual reason in the word,
there is a great deal to convince men that are but rational men; let a man be
but a rational man and willing to attend to the word, I say there is a great
deal of reason to convince him in it, and it is a sign of good breeding, of men
of ingenuity to be willing to hear the Word, Who are those in a parish that so
disregard the word as not to hear it, but the ruder sort? There are many I
confess that are men of parts perhaps the word does not prevail with their
hearts to convert them; yet if they have any good breeding at all, if the Word
be preached in a convincing way, so that they see there is pains taken, and
preached as the word of God to them, they will vouch safe their presence at
least: but the rude multitude that know nothing at all, they had rather be in
Alehouses drinking and swilling they never care to hear the word, as in such a
place as this there are very few of your miserable poor people that come to
hear the Word^ What place is there fuller of miserable poor people then this
place is and yet what a poor appearance is thereof such people at the hearing
of the Word? But now those that have any ingenuity in them at all, or any
breeding (for so the word is) they will receive the word with readiness: But
this breeding here spoken of, was a little higher then natural breeding; They
were spiritually noble, and so they had a readiness in their hearts in
receiving the word. Now this readiness of heart in receiving the Word consists
in these particulars:

First, When you come to hear the Word, if you would Sanctify Gods Name, you
must possess your souls with what it is that you are going to hear, That what
you are to hear is the Word of God, That it is not the speaking of a man that
you are going to attend upon: but that you are now going to attend upon God,
and to hear the word of the eternal God. Possess your souls with this; you
will never sanctify Gods Name else in the hearing of his Word; therefore you
find that the Apostle writing to the Thessalonians, he gives them the reason
why the word did them so much good as it did: It was because they did hear it
as the word of God 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13. For this cause also (says he) thank we God
without ceasing, because when ye received the word of God, which ye heard of
us, ye received it not as the word of men, but (as it is in truth) the word of
God, which effectually works also in you that believe, Mark, so it came
effectually to work, because they received it as the word of God; many times
you will say, Come, let us go hear such a man preach; Oh no, let us go hear
Christ preach, for as it does concern the Ministers of God that they preach not
themselves, but that Christ should preach in them: So it concerns you that
hear, not to come to hear this man or that man, but to come to hear Jesus
Christ. We as the Ambassadors of Christ do beseech you, says the Apostle.

2 Possess your hearts likewise with this consideration, that I come to hear
the word as an ordinance appointed by God to convey spiritual good to my soul,
and this is a very useful consideration, and especially it concerns men of
understanding and parts for the helping of them to hear. For men that are of
understanding and parts, when they come to hear this temptation is ready to
come upon them, that except they hear some new thing that they did not
understand before wherefore should they come? I am able to understand as much
in such a point as can be said: And when I have come and heard many times, I
have heard but that I knew before, and upon that they think there is no use of
coming to hear: Now this is a great mistake, when you come to hear the word,
you do not come always to hear what you did not know, it may be sometimes God
may dart in some thing that you did not think of before, or so fully
understand, but suppose it be not so, you are to come to it as an ordinance of
God for the conveyance of spiritual good to your souls.

You will say. Cannot we sit at home and read a Sermon? But has God appointed
that the great ordinance for the converting and the edifying of souls in the
way to eternal life? True, there is some use of it, but the great ordinance is
the preaching of the word, faith comes by hearing, the Scripture says, and
never by reading, So that though when you come to hear, you do not hear that
which you heard not before, yet you come to attend upon this ordinance for the
conveyance of some Spiritual good that it may be has not bin conveyed before,
or in a further degree then it has bin conveyed before, And so you should come
to hear the word with your hearts possessed with that meditation, that it is the
word of God, and the great ordinance that God has appointed for the conveyance
of Spiritual good. So that I come now in obedience to God, and in this do I
testify my respect to God, that I will attend upon this ordinance of his for
the conveyance of Spiritual good to me, and although I may think that this or
the other means may do the deed as well, yet because God has appointed this to
be his ordinance, therefore in obedience to him I will attend upon this means
rather then upon other means, as you know Naaman he thought the other waters
would have bin as good as the waters of Jordan to have healed him, but if God
will appoint him the waters of Jordan that they should heal him rather then
other waters he must wash there; No question but other waters had as much
natural virtue in them as they had, but because the waters of Jordan were the
ordinance that God for that time had appointed to cure his Leprosy withal, he
must come and wash in those waters rather then in any other, So because
preaching of the word is the great ordinance that God has appointed for to
convay himself by, therefore he does require that thou should show thy
respect to him, so far as to attend upon him in this ordinance.

2 The Second thing that is to be done in way of preparation, it is to plow up
the fallow ground of your hearts, and not to sow amongst thorns, as you have
it in Jer. 4. 3. and so in Ho^ 10. The word of God you know is compared to seed
in that parable of Christ in Mar. 13. And an Auditory is compared to the
ground, I suppose you are al aquainted with that parable of the sower, that it
is to set out the ministry of the word, and what fruit it has upon the hearts
of men, a congregation is like the field, and a minister preaching is like the
sower that sows the seed in the field: He knows not which truth whether that or
the other will prosper, the seed being sowed in some part of the ground it is
lost, and in another part it grows; so in one ^ew the seed of the word is lost,
and in another ^ew it grows up: But now if people that are compared to the
ground would so hear the word as Gods name may be sanctified in it, their
hearts must be plowed ^as if one should sow seed upon green soil, sow it in the
fields upon green grass, what would become of it? The ground must first be
plowed for the preparation of the seed

But you will say, what is the meaning of the plowing of our hearts for the
preparation of the word? The meaning is nothing else but this The work of
humiliation, the humbling of the soul before the Lord when it does come to hear
Gods word.

Humble it in these two regards.

First be humbled for your ignorance that you know so little of Gods mind as
you do.

Secondly be humbled for all the sinfulness of your hearts, be senceable of
the sinfulness and wretchedness of your hearts and the miserable condition
that you are in, if you can get your hearts broken with the sense of your sin
and misery, and come so to hear the word, it is very like the word may be of
mighty use, and Gods name may be very much Sanctified in your hearing of the
word.

You will say, Must we plow up our hearts before we come to hear? It must be
the word that must plow us, the word is the plow, and so the Ministers of God
are compared to plowmen in the word, he that puts his hand to the plow and
looks back is not fit for the Kingdom of heaven.

It is true, it cannot be expected that the heart should be thoroughly plowed as
it ought but by the word, therefore at the first coming to hear there is not
hope that men will Sanctify Gods name till the word gets in to plow them, and
so by geting at one time into their hearts they come to be prepared for hearing
at another time. And yet some what may be done before by that natural knowledge
that men have they may come to know themselves to be sinners, and come to
understand themselves to be very weak and ignorant by some knowledge that they
may have by the works of God, and by conferrence with others, and by reading
and the like, and so they may in some measure come to have their hearts to be
humbled. And it is good to make use of these to humble the heart, but now, You
that have heard the word often, and yet have not Sanctified Gods name, there be
truths that you have heard heretofore, that if you had made use of in private
to have, plowed up your hearts, they would have prepared your hearts for the
next time in hearing of the word, If therefore you would hear the word with a
great deal more profit then formerly, your hearts must be plowed by humiliation.

2 Secondly, the heart must be plowed by laboring to get out those thorns that
are in the heart, those lusts that grow deep in the heart as thorns grow in the
ground: labor to pluck them out, that is, when thou come to hear the word
get thy heart into that frame, as to be willing to profess against every known
sin that thou have found in thy heart, labor to find out those lusts that are
in thy heart and then profess against them, that thou art willing to have them
to be rooted out of thy heart, if men and women would but do thus when they
come to hear, that God might see this in them, that they have before they come
professed against every known sin, This would be an excellent thing indeed.

3 Again in the third place which will follow from hence, When thou come to
hear the word, come with a Resolution to yield to what ever God shall reveal to
be his mind, I am now going to hear thy word oh Lord, to wait upon thee, to
know what thou have to say to me: And thou that art the searcher of the secrets
of all hearts, Thou know that I go with such a resolution to yield up my
self to every truth of thine, How would the name of God be Sanctified if you
did thus come to hear the word. If you did come with such a resolution, Job.
32. 34. That which I know not teach thou me, and if I have done iniquity, I
will do no more. In Isa. 2. 3. you have a prophecy of the Centils how they
should come to the word, And many people shall go and say, Comeye, and let us
go up to the mountain of the Lord to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will
teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: Here is a blessed
disposition when you come to hear the word, Some of you come together in
streets and lanes, and over the fields, when you come together, and meet one
with another as you walk over the fields, make use of this text, Oh that this
prophecy might be fulfilled in your coming over the fields every Lords day
morning and at other times, that you would say one to another, or when you call
one upon another to go to hear, Come let us go up to the house of the Lord and
he will teach us of his ways and we will walk in his paths. We are resolved
that whatever the Lord shall teach us to be his ways we will submit unto it.
This is a due preparation of the heart for the Sanctifying of Gods name in the
hearing of his word.

4 When you come to hear the word come with longing desires after the word,
come with an appetite to it. As in 1 Pet. 2. 2. As new born babes desire the
sincear milk of the word that you may grow thereby. Do it as new born babes,
Now you know little babes they do not desire milk to play withal but only to
nourish them: Children of three or four years old, they may desire milk to play
with but new born babes never care for it but when they are hungry to nourish
them, And so it is true, many come to hear the word to play with it, But now
you should come to hear the word as new born babes, with a hungring desire
after the word that your Souls may be nourished thereby. That were excellent if
every Lords day, and at other days you did come as hungry to the word as ever
you went to your dinner or supper, The word of God should be to you more then
your appointed food, And then you are like to grow by it and to Sanctify Gods
name in it.

5 Pray before hand, that God would open thine eyes, and open thine heart, and
accompany his word, thus did David, Open mine eyes O Lord, that I may
understand the wonders of thy Law. And you know what is said of Lydia, The Lord
opened her heart to attend to the word that was spoken: Now seeing it is an
Ordinance thou do expect more good from, then what it self of its own nature
is able to convey; thou hadest need to Pray, Lord I go to such an Ordinance of
thine, and I know there is no effi^acy in its self, it is not able to reach to
such effects as I expect that is, to have my heart spoken too, and quickened,
and to have mine eyes opened, but O Lord open mine eyes and open mine heart
Lord my heart naturally is locked up against thy Word, there are such wards in
my heart, that except thou a^t pleased to put in a key that may fit my heart,
it will never open; Man he is not able to know my heart, and therefore he
cannot fit a key to answer every ward, to resolve every doubt, to silence every
objection but Lord thou can do it: Do thou Lord therefore fit thy word this
day that may meet with my heart Lord, I have gone often to thy Word, and the
key has stuck in it and it has not opened; but Lord, if thou would but fit
it and turn it with thine own hand, my heart would open. Oh come with such a
praying heart to the Word, and thereby shall thou sanctify the Name of God in
hearing his Word, this is to come to the Word, as to the Word of God, you must
not come to the hearing of the Word as to hear a speech or an oration, but come
in such a preparation as this is, and so I say God will be glorified, and you
will be profited

The next thing is, what should be the behavior of the Soul in the Sanctifying
Gods Name in the Word when it is come, Now to that there are these particulars:

1 First there must be a careful attention unto the Word, you must set your
hearts unto it, as Moses in Deuteronomy. 32. 46 he said unto the people. Set your
hearts unto all the words which I testify among you this day, which you shall
command your Children to observe to do, for it is not a vain thing for you,
because it is your life. Set your hearts to it, for it is not a vain thing, it
is your life; when you come to hear the word give diligent attention to what
you hear. In Act. 3. 6. it is said, The people with one accord gave heed unto
those things which Philip spoke. They gate heed, The word is used often in
Scripture, sometimes it is used for to beware of a thing, Beware of the leven
of the Pharisees, Beware of them; as a man when he sees an enemy and is aware
of him, he is very diligent to observe how to avoid him; So there should be as
much diligence to get good by the Word, as one would be diligent to avoid any
danger whatsoever, And the word signifies sometimes to give such heed as a
Disciple gives unto his Master, so they gave heed to the Word. So in Prove. 2.
1, 2. My Son, if thou will receive my words and hide my commandments with thee,
so that thou incline thine ear unto wisdom: We must diligently attend, and
not to suffer our eyes and our thoughts to be wandering, but diligently attend
to what is said: My Brethren, there is all things that may challenge attention
in the Word. What would make you to attend to any thing?

First if he that speaks were much above you If it were a great Prince, or Lord
that spoke to you, then you would attend Now, though it is true, it is but a
man, that it may be, is inferior to most of you, that speaks, yet know in him
it is the Lord of heaven and earth that speaks to you: And so you know what
Christ says, He that hears you hears me: So though you would not attend in
respect of the Messenger so much, yet as it is the Son of God that is speaking
to you, it may challenge your attention. This day if you should hear a voice
out of the clouds from heaven speaking to you, would you not then listen? the
truth is, we should listen as much to the voice of God in the Ministry of his
Word, as if so be that the Lord should spoke out of the clouds to us. And I
will give you a Scripture for that, that the voice of God in his Word should be
as much regarded of you, as if God should speak from heaven to you by an
audible voice out of the clouds. In 2 Pet. 1. 18, 19. This voice which came
from heaven we heard, when we were with him in the holy ^ount. But mark, in
verse. 19. We have also a mere sure Word of Prophecy whereunto ye do well that
ye take heed. Mark; We heard a voice from heaven, says Peter, yea but we have
a more sure word of Prophecy whereunto ye do well that ye take heed. There was
a voice from heaven spoke, you will say, If we had heard that voice, we would
have given heed to that, says the Apostle, You have a more sure word of
Prophecy: Now prophecy in Scripture is taken for preaching, Despise not
Prophecy: As if the Holy Ghost should say, You must have regard to the word of
Prophecy as you would have regard to any voice from heaven: Suppose an Angel
should come and speak to you, would not you attend to him? then whatsoever
thoughts you had, they would be taken off, for there is an Angel that is come
down from heaven to speak: Now mark what is said in Heb. 1. 1. God who at
sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in times past to the Fathers by the
Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he has
appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds. And then in
verse. 3. he describes his Son, And being made so much better then the Angels,
as he has by inheritance obtained a more excellent name then they: If a
Prophet should come and speak, that is not so much as if the Son of God comes;
no nor as if an Angel should come, for Jesus Christ has obtained a more
excellent name then the Angels, and it is Christ that is in the Ministry of his
Word, He that hears you hears me.

2 Secondly, That which would cause attention, is the greatness of the matter
propounded: It is true, if a man should speak of some flight and vain things,
there need not so much attention. My Brethren, the matters in the Word are the
great things of God, it is the voice of God, the great Mysteries of godliness,
those deep things that the Angels themselves desire to pry into; Yea the Angels
themselves by the Churches they come to have the knowledge of the Mysteries of
God. I make no question but in the Ministry of the Word among the Churches the
Angels they attend and come to some knowledge in the Mysteries of godliness;
for so the Scripture says, That they have it by the Churches, there the
greatest things of Gods will, the greatest Counsels of God that were kept hid
from all eternity, are opened to you in the Ministry of the Word: We do not
come to tell you tales, and the conceits of men, but to open the great counsels
of God, wherein the depth of the wisdom of God comes to be revealed to the
children of men, and therefore this calls for attention.

3 Thirdly, Suppose they be great things, yet if they do not so much concern
us, there is no such great reason of attention, therefore in the Third place,
That which we speak, it is your life; it is that concerns your Souls and
eternal estates: Your Souls and everlasting estates do lie upon the Ministry
of the Word, if that be made effectual to you, you are saved: if that be not
made effectual to you, you are damned and undone for ever. If we should come
to tell you of something whereby you might get some good bargain, or of a way
how to get great riches, I make no question but you would rise though it were a
cold or rainy morning: But know when you are called to hear the Word you are
called to hear that which may do you good for ever, that for which you may
bless God for to all eternity with the Angels and Saints in the highest
heavens. If they be such things of so great concernment, then there had need be
a great attention: You know what Christ said to Martha when she was troubled
about his entertainment L^^k 10. 41. Martha Martha, thou art careful and
troubled al^o t^m^ry things, but one thing is needful, and Mary has (...)
that good part which shall not be taken away from her. What did Mary choose? It
was this, That she did diligently attend upon Jesus Christ to hear the word
from his own mouth, when Martha was busied in the house to provide for his
entertainment but it is a better thing to attend upon the word then to
entertain Christ in your houses: You that are of loving dispositions, that if a
good Minister shall come to your houses, or a good Christian, that you see but
the Image of Christ in your hearts spring within you, and you will do any thing
to entertain them: Well, but what if Jesus Christ should come, if you knew that
such a man that came within your doors were the Son of God, how would you
bestir your selves to entertain him? But know, it is a more acceptable service
to Jesus Christ to attend upon his word then to provide for him in your houses
And there is great reason to, that we should be diligent in drawing nigh to the
word, and give ear unto it; because you find that the Lord does express
himself in the Scripture, how he gives ear to us when we speak to him. God is
said to incline his ear, sometimes to open his ear, sometimes to bow his
ear, sometimes to cause his ear to hear, and diverse such expressions there
are to that purpose. Now if God when we that are poor wretches speak to him,
shall bow his ear bend his ear open his ear, cause his ear to hear, much
more should we when we come to attend upon him.

2 Secondly as there must be attending to the word of God, so there must be an
opening of the heart to receive what God speaks to you, it is true, it is the
work of God to open the heart, but God works upon men as upon rational
creaturs and he makes you to be active in opening your hearts, so that when you
have any truth come to be revealed, you should open your understandings, your
conscience, and will, and affections, Oh Lord thy truth which thou art
presenting here to my Soul at this time let it come in, let me receive it, as
the expression is in Prove. 2 1. My Son, if thou will receive my words and then
in v. 10. When wisdom enters into thy heart: The words of wisdom the words of
God, they must enter into the heart, get in; it may be they get into thy ear,
but that is not enough, they must get into thy heart, in Joh 8. 37. There Christ
complains that his word had no place in them, that is a sad thing when the word
of God shall have no place in the heart. If a temptation to sin comes, that
has a place in the heart, but when the Word comes that has no place in the
heart; I say, it is a very sad thing that we can find no room for the Word; we
should get room for the Word, Open ye gates, Stand open ye everlasting doors,
that the King of Glory may come in: Know that when you come to hear the Word,
the Lord is knocking at the doors of your hearts; have not you felt it
sometimes? Open, O open the doors, let all be opened to receive the Word into
your hearts. That is the Second thing for the behavior of the Soul in hearing.

3 The third thing is the careful applying of the word, so in Pro. 2. 2. There
must be an applying of the heart to the word, and an applying of the word unto
the heart. All action is by an application of the thing that does act unto the
subject, there must be an application of the word to thy soul, as now, suppose
thou come to hear the word, and thou hear of some sin, that it may be thou
know thou art guilty of, take the word and lay it to thy heart and say, The
Lord has met with my soul this day, the Lord has spoken to me, to the end
that I might be humbled for this sin, and the other sin that my Conscience tells
me I am guilty of, So, does the Lord put thee upon a duty that concerns thee?
acknowledge this, the Lord has spoken to me this day and put me upon the
reformation of my family, and the reformation of my own heart. Is there a word
presented? apply that, and let not the trouble of thy heart cause thee to cast
off that word that God has spoken to thee; The application of the word to the
heart it is of marvelons use, and it concerns not only Ministers in general to
lay before people the doctrine of the Gospel but to aply it, And know that it
concerns you as well as Ministrs to apply it; And not only when they come to
that that is called use, but all the way in the opening of the word, it
concerns you all to apply it to your own souls, and to consider how does it
concern me in particular? My brethren there is no such way to honor God, or
get good to your own souls, as the application of the word unto your selves.
As a man that is asleep if there be annoise made it will not awake him so soon,
but come and call him by his name (and say John, or Thomas,) and that will
awake him sooner then a greater noise will; So, when the word makes a noise
when it is delivered only in the general, men take little notice of it, but
when the word comes particularly to the souls of men, and does as it were call
them by name, this awakens them; now God many times does speak to your hearts
but you should apply it, you know the word is compared to meat, and it must be
applied to the body, Then do we worship God in a right way when as we take
notice of Gods word as concerning us in particular, as that notable Scripture
that you have in 1 Cor. 14. 25. Where there comes a poor man into the Church of
God, and hears Prophesying, hears the word opened, and the text says He is
convinced of all, he is judged of all, and then in verse. 25, Thus are the
secrets of his heart manifest and so falling down on his face he worships God
and reports that God is in you of a truth, that is, when the word comes and
meets with his Soul in particular, that he finds himself to be aimed at by the
word, then he worships God, and says that God certainly is in them, here is the
reason now that when you come to hear the word you do not worship God because
you apply it not to your selves, you are ready to say, This was well spoken to
such a one, and it concerns such a one, but how does it concern thy soul in
particular? Sometimes the Lord does even force men and women to apply it
whether they will or no, for that they think the Minister speaks to them in
particular, and that no body was spoken too in the Congregation but themselves;
This is a Mercy when the Lord does it unto you; but it is a greater Mercy when
the Lord gives you a heart to apply it to your selves, and although it may
trouble you a little for the present, yet be willing to apply it, and account
it a great Mercy from the Lord, That the Lord will be pleased to speak in
particular to your Souls.

4 Fourthly, We must mix Faith with the Word, or otherwise it will do us but
little good; Apply it and then believe it. In Heb. 4. 2. it is said, that The
word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with Faith in them that
heard it. Wherefore there must be a mixture of Faith, to believe the word that
the Lord brings unto you. Now concerning that I Will but propound these few
particulars;

You will say, Must we believe every thing that is spoken? sometimes there are
some things spoken that we cannot tell how to believe?

I do not mean so, to believe every thing merely being spoken, for you must
take heed what you hear, as well as how you hear; but do thus much at least.

1 In the First place, whatsoever comes in the name of God to you, (except you
know certainly it is not according to the written Word) you owe so much respect
to it, as to examine it, at least to try it whether it be so or no, as it is
said of those Welbred men that I spoke of, that they did examine whether things
were so or no. Do not cast off any thing presently that comes in the Name of
God: Now any thing that has the broad Seal upon it, you must not disobey: You
will say, It may be counterfeit: but do not disobey it till you be sure it be
counterfeit. Oh that men would give but this respect to all things that they
hear, never to cast them off till they have examined and tried whether they be
so or no.

2 Secondly, Do but grant this respect to the Word that is spoken to you, as to
think thus, What if all that I hear spoken against my fin, which lays open the
dangerous condition that my soul is in, prove to be true, what a case were I in
then? This has been the beginning of the conversion of many Souls, the having
but such a thought as this, It may be things are not so terrible as I hear, but
what if they do prove so? then I am undone for ever. Dare I venture my Soul and
my eternal estate upon hopes that these things are not so bad as I hear? I
believe if you would put your selves to it, you would think it a bold
adventure, and the comfort that any of you have grounded upon this, merely
hoping that things are not so bad as you hear; it is a cursed comfort that has
no sure bottom: Grant that respect therefore to the word.

3 Thirdly consider this, It may be I do not see clearly that these things are
so which are delivered, I do not see enough to believe them now, but what if I
were now dying? What if I were now going to receive the sentence of my eternal
doom; would I not then believe these things? Would I not then think what I
hear out of the word to be true? It is an easy matter for men to reject the
word while they have their healths, and prosperity. But if you were to die, and
upon your sick and death bed if you saw the infinite ocean of eternity before
you, what would you say then? were the word true yea or no? would you give
belief unto the suggestions of the Devil then? We find it by experience, That
men that could easily cast off the word in their healths, yet when they have
come to ly upon their sick bed, and death bed, they found the word true:
Believe it now as well as then.

4 Consider, If thou do not believe, what a case art thou in? Am I worse
then the Devils themselves? The Scripture tells me, That the Devils believe and
tremble; Why Lord do I come to hear Sermons, and am I more hard to believe then
the very devils themselves? They do believe that word that I cast off, and they
tremble at it, but my Soul is not at all stirred, as if there were no reallity
in such things that have been spoken to me. There be other things which may
further help us toward believing of the word of God, but these shall suffice:
And certainly my brethren till we come to this to believe the word though we
should sit under it many years, it will do us little good, and we shall never
Sanctify the Name of God in the hearing of it.

SERMON IX.
LEVITICUS. 10. 3. I will be Sanctified in them that come nigh me.
THE next thing for the right behavior of the Soul for Sanctifying Gods Name
is this, Stepney, Janu. 11 1645.
We must receive the Word with meekness of Spirit, that you have in Jam. 1.
21. Wherefore lay apart all filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness, and
receive with meekness the ingrafted word which is able to save your souls.
Receive with meekness; The former part of this Scripture I confess concerns
some what that was before, about the preparation of the Soul, and we shall
perhaps afterward in the Application come to open the former part of this
verse. Lay apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness: But only now we
quote the place for this, Receive with meekness the ingrafted word which is
able to save your souls. Let there be a quietness in your Spirits in attending
upon the word, no hurring; There is a twofold distemper of passion in many
people that is a great hinderance to the profit of the Word, and Sanctifying
Gods Name in hearing it.

1 The First is a distemper of Passion in those that have some trouble of
conscience in them, they are troubled for their fin, and their Spirits are in a
discontented froward humor because they have not that comfort that they do
desire, and therefore the Word of God when it comes to be preached to them, if
it does not every way suit with their hearts, and if they do not find present
comfort by it, their Spirits are in a distemper and frowardness, and cast it
off; and if at any time there be never such comfortable things spoken in the
word, yet there is an anger in their spirits because they are not able to apply
the Word to themselves, and they think, This does not concern me: now there
should be meekness of Spirit in those that are in trouble of conscience above
all; they should quietly attend upon the Word, and wait for the time that God
will speak peace to their consciences: And if I cannot find the Word suitable
to me at this time, yet I may at another time: let me atend with meeknes, let
me receive everything with meekness the Word is above me, and if ever I have
good, it must be by the word at last. It does much concern those that are in
trouble of Conscience to have meek Spirits.

2 There is another distemper in others and that is worse; that is, Such as
when they find the word come near unto them, relating those sins that their
consciences tells them they are guilty of, their hearts rise against God, and
his Word, and Ministers too: Because it would pluck away some beloved
corruption, because it rebukes them for some haunt of evil, some distemper of
heart that they have been or are guilty of, it puts a shame upon them, and
therefore their hearts do rise against it. It is a dreadful thing to have the
heart rise against the Word. As we read of that froward Prince Jehoiakim in the
Prophecy of Jeremiah, that when the Roll was read in his hearing, sitting in
the winter time by a great fire, he took a penknife and cut it a pieces and
threw it into the fire in anger; and I have read that the Jews kept a Fast
every year to mourn for that great sin, and yet this Jehoiakim was the Son of
Josiah whose heart did melt at the hearing of the Word, he had an humble and a
meek heart when the Law was read, and yet see what a different Spirit Jehoiakim
had either from his Father or Grandfather. It is a great dishonor to the name
of God for men to give liberty to their Passions to rise against the Word; take
heed of Passion either while you are hearing the Word, or after the Word, as
many of you when you are discontented with what is said. When you come in
company, what a fury are many men in upon the hearing of some things in the
word that comes close to their hearts; Remember when you are a hearing of the
Word that it is that which is above you, and it is not fit for one that is an
inferior to show himself Passionate in the presence of a Superior: It is
true, the Ministers they may be in as low a condition as you, and in a lower;
but the word they speak, it is above all the Princes and Monarchs upon the face
of the earth; and it is fit therefore we having to deal with God that we should
behave our selves in a meek disposition.

6 The next thing for the Sanctifying Gods name in the hearing of the word is
this, we must hear it with a trembling heart, with fear as well as meekness,
and for that you have that famous Scripture in Isa. 66. beginning. Thus says
the Lord, the Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth is my footstool where is the
house that ye build unto me, and where is the place of my rest? For all those
things has my hand made, and all those things have been says the Lord, but to
this man will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit and
trembles at my word. this is a most admirable Scripture. Mark how God lifts
up himself in his glory, so great a God as the Heaven is my Throne, and the
Earth is my footstool where is that house that ye will build unto me? but then
may a poor Soul say, how shall I be able to stand before this God that is so
glorious? Says God, be not discouraged Poor Soul who do tremble at my word,
for I look to you; And then this is a further thing observable that God has a
regard to that soul that trembles at his word, rather then to any that should
build the most sumptuous buildings in the world for him, for says God here,
the Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth is my footstool, where is the house that
ye build unto me and where is the place of my rest? they have built a glorious
Temple to God, but what do I regard that says God? I regard one that trembls
at my word more then that great house that you have built unto me, it is a
notable Scripture to show what a high respect God has to one that trembles at
his word, he regards them more then this glorious Temple, that was built unto
him, If you were able to build such a place as this was for the service of God,
you would think it a great matter, it is not so much regarded as if you could
bring a trembling heart to Gods word, that is a special thing wherein the
Sanctifying of the name of God consists, when we come to see the dreadful
authority that there is in the word of God, when we are able to see more glory
of God in his word then in all the works of God besides, for there is more of
his glory in the word then there is in the whole Creation of Heaven and Earth,
take the Sun, and Moon and Stars, you that are Mariners you have seen much of
the glory of God abroad that one would think might strik terror into all your
hearts, but know that there is more of the dreadfulnesse of Gods name in his
word then in all his works; In Psalm. 138. 2. Thou have magnified thy word above
all thy name, the word it is magnified above all the name of God whatsoever,
and it is a very good sign of a Spiritual enlightened Soul that can see the
name of God more magnified in his word then in all his works besides; I appeal
unto your consciences in this thing, have you ever seen the name of God to be
more magnified in his word then in all his works? I may with very good
confidence affirm this that there is no godly Soul upon the face of the earth,
that has the weakest degree of grace but has seen more of the glory of God
revealed in his word, then he has seen in all the works of God besides, and
his heart has been more taken with it, It requires therefore a trembling frame
of heart when we hear it.

And then further when this is considered that the word is that that binds
the Soul over either to life or death, men's eternal estates are to be cast by
the world, certainly then it requires a trembling heart to hear that by which
the eternal estate of man is to be cast, we do not Sanctify Gods name when we
come to hear the word, except we come with trembling hearts, and they are the
most likely of all men and women to understand the mind of God, as for such as
come with conceited spirits that they understand as much before they come, and
think their reach of wit or capacity is beyond the capacity of any that shall
open the word unto them (yet that were not so much if it did but only rest upon
the man and not reflect upon the word it self) Now these that are rich in their
own thoughts and understandings are sent empty away, but those that come with
trembling hearts to the word, they are the men that are like to understand Gods
Counsels revealed in his word. In Ezra 10. 2, 3. Shechaniah the Son of Iehiel
one of the Sons of Elam answered and said unto Ezra, we have transgressed
against our God and have taken strange wives etc. Yet now there is hope in
Israel concerning this thing, now therefore let us make a covenant with our God
according to the counsel of my lord and of those that tremble at the
Commandment of our God; so that those that tremble at Gods word are such as are
fitest to counsel, they understand most of Gods mind; and that is another
particular of the behavior of the Soul in Sanctifiying Gods name in hearing
his word.

7 The next is an humble subjection to the word that we hear, our hearts must
bow to it, must lie under the word that we hear, it is a very remarkable
Scripture that we have in 2 Chronicles. 36. 12. There it is said concerning a great
King Zedekiah, He did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, his God,
and humbled not himself before Jeremiah the prophet, speaking from the mouth of
the Lord It it a very strange expression as any we have in the book of God,
that Zedekiah a great King should be charged with this as a great sin that he
did not humble himself, humble himself before whom you will say? we are bound
to humble our selves before God, but here it is that he did not humble himself
before Jeremiah the prophet; Why before the prophet? Because he spoke from the
mouth of the Lord. If it be any messenger that speaks from the mouth of the
Lord, God expects that we should humble our selves, so that if any truth comes
to be delivered unto you, the Lord expects that you should fall down and yield
obedience to it, whatsoever your thoughts, your judgments, your opinions have
heretofore been, if there come any thing in the word agianst it you must submit
your judgments, submit your very consciences, you must submit your wills,
whatsoever your hearts have been set upon, though it has been never so
contentfull to your spirits before, yet now submit, and yield though it go
never so cross unto your minds, your wills, your ends, yet all must be
submitted, and laid down flat before the word, so as to be willing to deny your
selves of any thing in the world. When a man or woman can say thus, Lord it is
true, I confess before I heard thy word opened in the evidence and
demonstration of the spirit unto me, I was of such a mind, and my heart went
after such and such contentments, and I though it was impossible that ever my
heart should be taken from them, but Oh Lord thou have been pleased plainly to
show to me by the opening of thy word in the evidence of thy spirit, what thy
mind is; Now whatsoever becomes of my name, of my comforts, of my contentments
in this world, Lord here I cast down all before thee, I submit unto thy word;
this is a gracious frame. Now is the name of God extolled, and lifted up in
hearing of the word, the name of God is Sanctified in such a work of spirit as
this is. I have read of a Germain Divine writing to Oecolampadius another
famous German Divine, he has this expression, Oh let the word of God come, and
though we had 600. necks we would al submit them unto the word of God says he.
So it should be the temper of such as hear the word and desire to Sanctify
Gods name in it, let the word of God come this morning, let God speak and we
will submit had we 600. necks, we will submit all we are, or have, to this word
of the Lord, it is the word of God, that we are willing should triumph over us:
To have a congregation to lie down under the word of God that is preached to
them is a most excellent thing, and Gods name is much Sanctified, we do not
brethren desire you should lie under us, we are not only willing, but we are
very desirous that you would examine what we speak to you, whether it be
according to the word of God or no. But look to it, that if we do speak to you
that which is the word from the mouth of the Lord, know then that God expects
that you should submit your estates, your souls, your bodies, all that you are
and have to this word, and that is another particular in the Sanctifying of the
name of God in hearing the word; there must be an humble submission of the soul
unto it.

8 Another particular wherein the behavior of the Soul for the Sanctifying of
Gods name consists is this, The word it must be received with love, and with
joy, it is not enough for you to be convinct of the authority of it, and to
think thus, well I must yield to it, this is the word of God and if I do not
yield to it I must expect the plagues and judgments of God to follow it that
is not enough, but you must yield to it with love, and with joy, except you
receive the word with love and with joy it is not Sanctified; you do not
Sanctify Gods Name, nor is it sanctified unto you. You must receive the word
not only as the true word of the Lord, but as the good word of the Lord. In
Thessalon. 2. 10. we find it to be the cause of men's being given over to a
spirit of delution, Because they received not the word of God in Love: It is
spoken of Antichrist, that at his coming he shall come with all
deceivablenesse, and he shall prevail with them that perish, who are they? They
that receive not the love of the truth that they might be saved. It is not
enough my Brethren to receive the truth that we might be saved; but we mnst
receive the love of the truth if ever we would be saved; Good is the word of
the Lord to my soul. And we must receive it with joy too as well as with love;
Prove. 2. 10. When wisdom enters into thy heart, and knowledge is pleasant
unto thy Soul: Then discretion shall preserve thee, understanding shall keep
thee, etc. That is a great matter, when the word reveals some truth to thy
understanding, and thou can so receive it as it should be pleasant to thy
soul, that thy soul rejoices in it; it is a good word, it is that that does me
good at the heart, when a people can hear the word, and the word coming near
unto them, they can say, This word does me good at the heart, it is pleasant to
my soul, that is excellent. In Act. 2. 41. the godly are described, those that
did receive the word so as to sanctify Gods Name in it; by this, that they
gladly received the word and were baptized, and the same day there were added
unto them about three thousand souls. There were three thousand in one day that
did gladly receive the word; What an auditory had Peter at this time? Then the
word it did them good, when they gladly received it.

Quest. But it may be said, We read in Matt. 13. of the stony ground, the
hearers that were not good and did not profit by the word so as to be saved,
yet they received the word with joy. And Herod it is said of him, That he heard
John Baptist gladly: It seems then that it is not enough to receive it with
gladness?

Answ. To that I Answer First, There must be that that Hypocrites may have, if
there be want of that, we cannot Sanctify Gods Name. But you will say, We must
go further or else Gods Name is not sanctified: That I confess; Therefore when
I speak of gladness and joy, know that I mean another kind of joy then the
stony ground had; and so certainly the pleasantness that is spoken of in Prove.
which I mentioned before; And the gladness that the three thousand did receive
the Word withal is different from the gladness of the stony ground. If you
ask me wherein it differs? I would Answer it differs thus, The gladness of an
Hypocrite in receiving Gods Word, it arises either from the novelty of it,
because it is a new thing, and he gets new notions that he had not before, or
else he is joyful from some other carnal excellencies that he finds going
together with the word, some esteem or honor that he shall get by it, some
selvishnesse there is that makes his heart to be glad, for there is a great
deal of natural and carnal excellency that goes along many times with the word.
But now this gladness that is spoken of in the Acts and in the Proverbs, it is
the gladness that arises from the apprehension of the spiritual excellencies
that there are in the word, as that it is that word that reveals God and Christ
to my soul; that word that comes nearest to my soul to the mortifying of my
Lusts, and the sanctifying of my heart: This is that which makes me rejoice in
the word, the holiness and the spiritual excellency that I see to be in the
word: Thy word is pure (says David) and therefore does thy servant love it and
rejoice in it. This no Hypocrite can say; I see the Image of God in his Word, I
see the very glass of Gods holiness in his word, I feel that in the word that
may bring my Soul to God, wherein my soul injoyes communion with God and Jesus
Christ, and it is this that glads my soul. If we receive the word with joy
thus, we shall come to Sanctify the Name of God in the hearing of it; And that
is the Eight particular.

9 The Ninth Particular is this, If we would Sanctify the Name of God in his
word, we must receive the Word into honest hearts. This you have in Luke 8. 15.
in the Parable of the Sower; you shall find there that there are diverse grounds
that do receive the seed; and by those diverse grounds are meant diverse sorts of
hearers: There is First the highway ground, that is, such as hear the word and
never regard what they hear, and as soon as ever they go out of the
Congregation the seed of the Word is quite gone and is as if they had not heard
at all. And then there is the stony ground, and the thorny ground, that is,
those that hear with joy (as was spoken of before) but the cares of the world
choke the seed of the word; as soon as ever they are gone, they are upon their
worldly business, and their thoughts and hearts runs that way. But then there
is the good ground, that is, Those that receive the seed of the Word into a
good and honest heart, a good and an honest heart they are both joined
together. By a good heart is meant a heart that has not malice in it, a heart
that does desire to empty it self of every thing that is against the Word, and
which is not suitable to the spiritualnesse of the Word: A heart I say that
entertaines nothing in it that any way makes against the word: A good heart is
a heart which (as the Apostle says in Jam. 1. 21. and that place may very well
come in here to be opened) is cleansed from all filthiness and superfluity of
naughtiness. The word that is there translated filthiness it signifies
Excrements; that which is unclean, that which comes from the body, such is the
sinfulness of your hearts; you come to hear the word, if it be with evil
hearts you mingle that very filthiness which is as vile before God as
excrements are: And superfluity of naughtiness; by that I take is meant, as if
the holy Ghost should say, Do not think it enough for to purge away
filthiness, that is notorious stinking evils, abominable sins, that you do not
come with such filthy vile hearts, but whatsoever there is in your heart that
is any way against the work of Grace, it is a superfluity of naughtiness, all
kind of evil thoughts, and evil affections that are more then needs. Look
into your hearts and affections, and see whatsoever you find there that is more
then ought to be, running out unto any thing that they should not, labor to
purge out that says he, do not satisfy yourselves in any kind of evil
whatsoever: It may be you are cleansed from the notorious evils of the World;
but if there remains any naughtiness, any kind of drossinesse in your hearts
that is not grace, it is to be purged out, for it is a superfluity: So then
that is a good heart that entertaines no kind of evil in it. It may be there
is some evil, but it does desire to purge out not only that that is filthy,
nastie, and abominable; but if there be any thing that should not be there, a
good heart is against it. And that is a good heart that is willing to receive
any thing that God reveals; As we use to say, Such a man is a good man, that
is, you can propound nothing to him that is fit to be done but he is willing to
hearken to you. A good man he has no kind of evil ends in him, no evil
designs at all, but he is willing to hearken to every thing that is good: So a
good heart whatsoever is good he is ready to entertain, if it be a good thing
his heart is suitable to it, and runs presently unto it; having a good heart, it
does presently close with the good word of the Lord.

But what is meant by an honest heart?

By honesty of heart, certainly there is more meant then such a one that we
call an honest man, that is, a man that is honest in his dealings between man
and man; there is many a man that is accounted a very honest man in the world
but has not an honest heart: I beseech you observe it, That man that has an
honest heart to God, is one that receives the seed of the word, so as he goes
beyond the highway ground, the stony ground, or the thorny ground, he goes
beyond those three sort of professors; he is one that has an eminency in
profession of Religion beyond those three: now the world accounts many honest
men that do not go beyond any of those three; yea the world does ordinarily
account any of those three to be honest men, as the highway ground: Are there
not many honest men in the world, that regard not the word of God at all, but
only come to hear a Sermon, and as soon as they have done, as it came in at one
ear, so it goes out at the other? I fear there are some men and women that are
accounted honest men and women in the world that can hardly give an account of
any one Sermon they have heard in all their lives: hardly I say, but the word
which they heard is presently taken away from them, and yet these are accounted
honest men in the world: But this is not the honest heart the Scripture speaks
of. And many there are that go further then these, that come to hear the word
with joy, and yet they have not this honest heart: Yea they may hear the word
so as to bring forth a Blade, and yet not have this honest heart. By this
honest heart I take therefore to be meant this, A heart that deals squarely and
truly with God, behaving it self in a beseeming manner suitable to that
authority and excellency that there is in the Word of God. As now for example:

1 First, Amongst men he is accounted an honest man that deals squarely and
truly with men in all actions; such a man you will say is an honest man, as
honest a man as ever broke bread; that is, one that will deal squarely with
men, not only in one thing, but turn him to any thing, and you shall find a
proportion between one action and another: So this is an honest heart, not one
that only will be forward for God in some one action wherein he may enjoy
himself as well as God; but one that deals squarely with God, let God put him
upon duty, upon any service, God shall find him still to be the same man: Put
him upon an easy service (as many will embrace that) or put him upon a
difficult service, it is all one if it be the mind of God; you shall find him
square in every thing, though he be put upon that which he is like to suffer
very much in, yet he goes on according to his principles. An honest heart is
one that has received gracious principles, and accordingly he acts, all the
world cannot take him off from his principles of godliness that the Lord has
put into his heart.

2 Secondly, An honest man is one that provides things honest before men, that
does all things in a seemly way in all those relations that he has unto
others, that we account honesty: So when a man's behavior toward the word is
such as does beseem the word of that God with whom he has to deal, That look
what excellency, what glory, there is in the word of God, such a suitable
behavior there is in the heart of a man to it, this is an honest heart. So
that there are those two things, when a man is square with God in one thing as
well as another, and when there is a sutablenesse in the behavior of the Soul
to what excellency there is in the word, when the heart of man will not abuse
the word at all, but behaves its self honestly, according unto the gravity,
holiness, and weight that there is in the word. And thus now with such a good
and honest heart we are to receive the word if we will Sanctify Gods Name in
it.

10 A tenth particular is this, If we will Sanctify Gods name in the word we
must hide the word in our hearts, we must not only heart the word but keep it,
preserve it, and then do we declare that we account the word of God to be worth
something indeed; For what is it to Sanctify God (as we have opened before in
the general) but such a behavior toward him as may testify the excellency of
the name of God, so the behavior of the Soul in hearing the word must be such
as may give a testimony to the excellency of the word and manifest the high
esteem I have of it. Now if I received a thing that is of great value, if I
slight it, and let any body take it from me I do not give a testimony to the
excellency of that thing, but if I take it and lock it up, and so keep it under
lock and key I do thereby give a testimony of the esteem that I have of the
excellency of that thing, so now, When I come to hear the word, and meet with
truths that have gotten into my Soul I close with them, and am resolved within
my heart as I am hearing of them, well this truth I will keep through Gods
grace, this concerns me, and I will make much of it, and although I forget
other things, yet I hope I shall remember this to Sanctify Gods name in
hearing of the word, In Isa. 42. 23. Hear (says the holy Ghost there) for the
time to come? When we come to the word we must not only hearken for the
present, as many of us while we are hearing, our hearts are stirred for the
present, Oh that we could but have that affection of heart always as we have
when we are hearing of the word, how many of you have said when you have been
hearing such a sermon, Oh then me thought I could have gone through fire and
water for God? I but mark it, you must hear for afterward. And in Psa. 119.
11. There the prophet David professed that he did hide the word in his heart, the
word was sweet unto him, Thy word says he have I hid in my heart that I might
not sin against thee. You that come and hear those truths upon the Lords day if
you would hide them thus in your hearts and keep them all the week, they would
help you against the many temptations that you meet withal, you go abroad on
the week days into company, and there you meet with a temptation and it
overcomes you, and you complain, Alas I am weak, I have met with a temptation
and it has foyld me? But had you hid the word that you heard on the Lords day
in your heart, it would have kept you from the strength of your temptation that
it should not have overcome you, those that are truly godly they have a care to
hide the word in their hearts, when they hear it, they think, this word shall
help me against such and such sins which I am prone to by nature, and when a
temptation comes to that sin I hope I shall have use of the word that I have
heard this day; As now suppose you hear a word against passion, then you should
hide that word in your hearts against that time that temptation comes to
passion, And you hear a word against sensuallity and abuse of the creatures you
should hide that word, against that temptation comes, And you hear a word
against unrighteousness and unjust dealings, when a temptation comes to that
sin you should hide that word against that time, So you hear a word that speaks
of obedience to parents, and servants duties to governors, now you should hide
that word in your hearts against that time, I have hid thy word in my heart
that I might not sin against thee. You say that you would fain withstand and
not be overcome with temptations? why here is the way, hide the word within
thee that thou may not sin against him; And so in Pro. 2. 1. you have a
Scripture to the same purpose, about hiding the commandments within us. And
then in 1 John 2. 14. I write unto you young men because you are strong, and
the word of God abides in you and ye have overcome the wicked one. I have
written to you young men, you are youug, you have strong natures, and so
strength of nature for God, But how comes this to pass? You are strong and the
word of God abides in you; here is an excellent Scripture for all young men,
you have your memories fresh, and if you will exercise your memories about any
thing it should be in the word of God, it is a comely and an excellent thing to
see young ones to have the word of God abiding in them, that if you come to
them, not only a week but a month after they have heard the word they are able
to give you an account of it: I am verily persuaded that there are many young
ones in this place, that are able to give you old ones, If you ask them, an
account of what it is to Sanctify Gods name in the duties of worship and why?
because the word of God abides in them, It is the honor of young men to have
the word of God to abide in them, and hereby they overcome the wicked one. And
on the other side many young people that do come to hear the word, it may be
they are drawn to it by others, or it may be they love to have a walk in the
morning, but the word of God abides not in them, and therefore when the wicked
one comes with temptations the week after they are overcome by him, but those
that have the word of God abiding in them they overcome the wicked one. And so
in Job. 8. 31. you have a very remarkable Scripture for this purpose of keeping
the word after we have heard it. Then said Jesus to those which believed on
him, if you continue in my word then are you my Disciples indeed. I beseech you
observe it, It is said that the Jews did believe in Christ, and yet says
Christ If ye continue in my word then are you my Disciples, why, were they not
the Disciples of Christ that did believe in him? By this believing therefore we
must understand some kind of general notion that they had of Christ, they began
to think that Christ might be the true Messiah, some kind of imperfect
believing they had, but they were not thoroughly brought off, now says Christ,
If you continue in my word, you are my Disciples. As if he should say, Do not
you think it enough that you come to hear me, and that you are taken by what I
say; you must continue in my word, and then you are my Disciples: Christ will
not own that man or woman to be his Disciple that does not continue in his
word. O that you would consider of this, you that satisfy your selves in
having some flashes of your affections when you are hearing the word, but do
not think that you are the Disciples of Christ because of them, In Tit. 1. 9.
Holding fast the faithful word as you have been taught, that is the thing you
should labor for, to hold fast the faithful word, hold it fast, that it may
not be taken from you, and so you shall come to Sanctify the name of God in
the hearing of his word.

11 The last that I shall speak to is this, If thou would Sanctify the Name
of God in hearing his word, turn it into practice, or otherwise the Name of God
is blasphemed, or at least is taken in vain by thee if thou do not turn what
thou hear into practice: So you have it in Jam. 1. 22. He that is not a
forgetful hearer but a doer of the word, this man (says he) shall be blessed
in his deed. And verse. 22. Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only
deceiving your own selves. The word here that is translated Deceiving your own
selves, its a word taken from Logicians, and signifies to make a false
Sylogisme. A man that hears the Word and does not do it, he does as it were
reason thus, Those that do come to Church (as we use to say) those surely are
Religious people, but I come to Sermons and therefore I am Religious: Now this
is a false reasoning, and thou do but cozen thy self. Be not a hearer only,
but a doer of the word, that thou may not deceive thine own soul. So in Romans
2. 3. Think thou this O man that judge them that do such things, and do
the same, that thou shall escape the judgment of God? As if he should say, You
have the word, and you are able to judge thereby what you hear, but yet still
you are wicked in your lives; this is dispising of the riches of the goodness
of God toward you. And in Phillipians 2. 16. you have a remarkable text where
the holy Ghost says of the Philipians, That he would have them hold forth the
word of Life. It were a most excellent thing if it might be said of this
Congregation, that as they come diligently to hear, and are willing to take
pains to get out of their beds so early in the mornings, so all the week after
they hold forth the word of God. You that are servants it may be your masters
are naught, and the families naught from whence you come: now when you go home,
though it may be they will not let you repeat the Sermon, yet you are to hold
forth the Sermon in your practice and conversation: How is the Name of God
glorified when we hold forth his word! this is to let, not only your light
shine, but the light of the word shine before men that they may behold it and
glorify your Father which is in heaven.

So that now put all these Eleaven Particulars together, and then you have made
good that expression we find in Act. 13. 48. That the word of God was
glorified. And to the same purpose we have another expression in 2 Thessalonians. 3. 1.
Finally, brethren, Pray for us, that the word of the Lord may have free course,
and be glorified even as it is with you. This is the commendation of a people,
that they do glorify the word of God: I beseech you brethren, in the Name of
Jesus Christ this morning that you that are hearers of the Word would glorify
the Word, and glorify the Name of God in the word; Oh that not one of you
would be a disgrace or shame to the word of God; this is the charge that God
this morning lays upon you, as ever you expect to receive any good from the
word, or to look upon the face of God with comfort whose word this is: do not
be a shame to his Word, and to the Ministers of his word. Put all these things
together, I say, and learn to make conscience of Sanctifying Gods Name in
hearing the Word, that so there may be none of you that may give any just
occasion to others to say, Is this to hear Sermons? Do you get nothing else but
this by hearing Sermons? If you should open the mouths of men to say so of you,
the Word of God as much as lies in you would be disgraced by you; you should
rather think thus, It were better for me that I should die, and that I were
under the ground and rotting there, then that the Word of God should ever be
disgraced by me: Let me hold forth the glory of the Word, the Word is that that
has done good to my soul; the Word is that that I would not for ten thousand
worlds but have heard it, and shall I disgrace this Word? shall I give any
occasion that this word of the Lord should be spoken ill of by reason of me? O
God forbid. Therefore if you regard not your selves and your own honor, yet
regard the honor of the Word; If ever you have got any good by the Word you
should go away with this resolution, Well, I will labor all the days of my
life to honor this Word of God that I have got so much good by: If this were
but the resolution of every one of your hearts this morning, it would be a
blessed mornings work.

SERMON X.
LEVITICUS. 10. 3. I will be Sanctified in them that come nigh me.
NOW follow the Reasons why God stands so much Stepney, Janu. 25. 1645.
upon it that he will have his Name Sanctified in this Ordinance of Hearing his
Word.

1 First, It is because there is so much of God in his Word, and therefore we
should Sanctify Gods Name. If it were possible there could be sin in heaven,
that sin would be greater then sin committed here; therefore the sin of the
Angels when they were in Gods presence in a more especial manner was the
greater: The name of God being in any thing, the greater will be the evil if
we do not sanctify Gods Name in it; now there is very much of God in his word,
more of God there, then in all his works of Creation and Providence. In Ps.
138. 2. Thou have magnified thy word above all thy name: There being therefore
so much of God in his word, we must Sanctify the Name of God in it.

2 Secondly, God has appointed his Word to be the great Ordinance to convey
the special mercies that he intends for the good of his people. That we spoke
to before in the general, in showing how the duties of Gods Worship are as a
channel for the conveyance of special good to the Saints: But none more then
the Word, that is the Ordinance to convey the First Grace to those that belong
to Gods election. The Sacrament is for frengthning, and therefore there is
rather more in the Word then in the Sacrament, and yet every one thinks in
conscience that he is bound to come carefully to the Sacrament, and to look to
Sanctify Gods Name there. It is an easier matter to convince men and women,
that they are bound to Sanctify the name of God when they come to receive the
holy Communion, then for the hearing of the Word: they think not so much of
that, but certainly the Word is appointed to be an Ordinance. of conveying more
blessing then the Sacrament, because it is appointed to convey the first Grace,
and to convey strength of Grace as well as the Sacrament: Now being appointed
to convey such great things to the souls of the elect, both the first grace and
strengthening of grace, and comfort, and assistance thereof, the Lord expects to
have his Name Sanctified in it.

3 Thirdly, The Name of God must be sanctified in the Word, because the word is
very quick and lively, it works men or women to life or death, to salvation or
damnation. In Heb. 4. 12. The word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper
then any two edged sword, peircing even to the dividing asunder of soul and
spirit, etc. It is very quick of opperation the text says; that is, when God
has to deal with men by his word, he will not stand dallying and trifling with
them, but he is very quick with them, either to bring their souls to life, or
to cast them away. The time of men's ignorance God winks at, but now he calls all
men to repent. Let them look to it now, God did forbear in the time of
ignorance, but he will not forbear so when the word comes, Now is the Ax laid
to the root of the tree: And when was that? When John Baptist came to preach
repentance because the kingdom of heaven is at hand. Though the tree were
barren before, and did not bring forth good fruit, yet it might stand still and
not be cut down; but when the powerful ministration of the Word comes, then
the Ax is laid to the root of the Tree; either now come in and be saved, or
resist the word and perish: And therefore that is very observable when Christ
sends out his Disciples to preach, in Mark 16. 15, 16. says he, Go ye into all
the world and preach the Gospel to every creature, and he that believes and is
Baptized shall be saved; but he that believes not shall be damned. As if he
should say, There shall be quick work made with them, go and preach, and those
that belong to my election shall be brought in to believe and be saved, and the
others shall be damned: As if God should say, If they will come in and embrace
the Gospel they shall be saved, If they will not, they shall be damned, and
there is an end of them: So that I say, we have need to look to it that we
sanctify the Name of God in his Word upon these Three Grounds. Because there
is so much of God in his word. Because he has appointed it to convey the
greatest Mercies to his Saints. And because God is very quick in his Word, one
way or other.

We shall now proceed to the Application of this Point: And,

First by way of reprehension to all those that do not Sanctify Gods name in
hearing the word, and herein we shall show their fearful condition, and how God
will Sanctify his name upon them in ways of judgment, and then when we come
to the use of exhortation, to exhort you to Sanctify the name of God, there we
shall show you likewise how God will Sanctify his name in ways of mercy upon
those that do Sanctify him in ways of obedience in hearing of his word.

1 For the first: Certainly if that be to Sanctify the name of God that we
have spoken of; Gods name is but very little Sanctified by people that do come
to hear his word, and we have no cause to wonder that there is so little good
got by the word, because there are so few that make conscience to Sanctify
Gods name in hearing it; Some there are that are so far from Sanctifying Gods
name in it, as they altogether neglect it, and make it a matter of nothing
whither they come to hear it or no: Says Christ in Joh. 8. 47. He that is of
God hears my word, ye therefore hear them not because ye are not of God.
Certainly he that has the knowledge of God and any interest in God, and that
belongs unto him, nothing is more sweet to him then the hearing of his word,
but because ye are not of God (says Christ) therefore you hear not his word.
Those men and women that have no interest in God, but live without God in this
world, they regard not to hear his word. O how many have we that belong to this
place that do so! How many live without God in the world, and do declare to all
the world that they are not of God? they have no part nor portion in God in
that they hear not his word. Some there are that come to hear it, but they come
to hear it as a mere matter of indifferency, in a mere formal and customary
way, or for companies sake, or to give content to others: These are poor and
low ends, thou should come to hear the word as expecting God should speak to
thy Soul for the furtherance of thy eternal good, but your consciences may tell
you what vain and wandering hearts you have, when you come to hear it. The eyes
of the fool (says Solomon) are in all the corners of the earth, up and down
wandering, little minding that you are come to hear God himself speak to you in
the Ministry of man. And if so be that it be minded, yet ordinarily the hearts
of men do put off the word, and if it come any thing near to them they think to
shift it from themselves to others. We have a notable Scripture in Heb. 12. 25.
for such men as shift off Gods word when it comes many times very near to them:
See that ye refuse not him that speaks: for if they escaped not who refused
him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from
him which speaks from heaven: See that ye refuse not him that speaks the
word, see that you do not put him off: And that that is the signification of
it: If you compare it with Luke, 12. 18. you shall find that there is the same
word used, where speaking of those that were invited to the supper, it is said,
They all with one consent began to make excuse, they began to shift it off,
that is the same word: O take heed of this that when you are hearing the word
and Christ comes and speaks to your hearts, and you begin to think that it may
concern you, and your consciences begin to stir, take heed that you do not
shift him off, take heed that you do not put away the word from you by any kind
of pretense whatsoever. It may be you will say, If I were certain it were the
word of God, and that God spoke to me, God forbid but that I should submit unto
it. But though it may be the hearts of men are not so notoriously rebellious as
to resolve to sin against the word, which they will acknowledge to be the word
of God, yet this is the deceit of the heart, when the heart has no mind to
obey, it will shift off the word, and have pretenses, and put offs, O take heed
that you do not shift often him that speaks from heaven by making any kind of
excuse whatsoever, but when thou hear, if the word of God come to thy
conscience, do not listen to vain reasonings that are against it. Others there
are that cannot tell how to shift off the word but it will come upon them when
they are hearing, it may be they are a little stirred, but it is presently
gone, so that they are far from houlding the word, far from keeping it in their
hearts. Oh how many of you have been stirred when you have been hearing the
word, and how happy had it been for you if you had hid those words in your
heart that the Lord has spoken to you in the Ministry of it. If you had but
the Invitations of the Spirit now that sometimes you have had, how happy were
it for you? But it is with many in hearing the word, just as with you Mariners
when you are to go aboard, your friends come with you, take their leaves of
you, and then you see them stand upon the shore a while, but when you sail a
little further your friends are out of sight, and then you see only the shore,
you sail on a little further, and then you see only the houses, you sail a
little further and then you see only the steeples and such high places, and you
sail yet a little further and then you see nothing but the Ocean: So it is in
hearing the word; It may be when you go home there are some things fresh in
your minds, but on the monday morning you have lost some, but then there are
some others that do yet present themselves before you, and then you loose more
and more until you have lost the sight of all: all truths are gone, you see no
more of the word, as if you had never heard it; this is not to Sanctify Gods
name, you should treasure up the word as the most rich treasure that may be.

Another sort to be rebuked are those, who are so far from falling down before
the Lord to receive the word with meekness, as they can bless themselves in
their wicked ways, notwithstanding the word comes and meets with them. I only
name this because of that notable Scripture we have, In Deuteronomy. 29, 18, 19. says
Moses there to them, Take heed, lest there should be among you a root that
bears gall and wormwood, (what is that root that bears gall and wormwood?)
And it come to pass when he hears the words of this curse, that he bless
himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the
imagination of my heart, etc. Take heed there be not among you a root that
bears gall and wormwood; This is a bitter root in men's hearts, when they can
hear the word of God, and have their hearts rise aganst it, and think with
themselves that there is no such matter, these are but mere words, but mere
wind, let the Minister say what he will, and talk as long as he will, I will go
on in my way, I shall do well enough, that which he says it is but his
opinion, I say when men can bless themselves thus in their way, and when there
are such tumultuous and rebellious thoughts rising in their hearts, this is a
root of gall and wormwood, and take heed of it, it will bring forth bitter
fruit one day. But I should quickly be prevented if I should lanch into this
argument, to reprove the several ways of sinning against God in the hearing of
his word. And therefore I leave those and come to show what a fearful thing it
is for men and women not to Sanctify the name of God in the hearing of his
word, that so you may see that God will have his name Sanctified upon them. And
they are these;

1 In the first place, You that do not Sanctify Gods name in hearing his word
in those ways that have been opened to you, first you loose the greatest and
happiest opportunity of good that ever creatures had, for an outward
opportunity: indeed when God moves by his Spirit if that be neglected, that
opportunity is more then merely hearing the word, but otherwise except it be at
such a time when God adds his Spirit together with his word; I say you that are
cast by the providence of God in such a place where the word of the Gospel is
preached to you, applied and urged upon you, if you Sanctify not the name of
God, to hear as you ought and to profit by it, I say you lose the greatest
opportunity for good that is in the world? Oh what have thou lost that have
lived many years under the Ministry of the Gospel, and yet have not been
acquainted with this mystery of godliness in sanctifying Gods name in the word.
There are many thousand souls that are and shall be blessing God to all
eternity for what of God they have met with all in the word, but thou have
fifteen under it stupid as a block, dead and barren, and no good has been
done; Wherefore is there a prize in the hand of a fool, and he has no heart to
get wisdom? this will lie upon thee heavy one day, the loss of such an
opportunity, and that is the first.

2 In the Second place, know that this word that is appointed by God for the
conveyance of so much mercy to his elect, it will prove to be the greatest
aggravation of thy sin that can be: This is the condemnation that light is come
into the world and men love darkness rather then light: This is [ The]
condemnation. If so be that light had not come among you, then the condemnation
had not been so great your sin had not bin so great, and your punishment had
not bin so great. In Mat. 10. 14, 15. where speaking of those that did enjoy
the word, and yet did not sanctify Gods Name in it. Whosoever shall not
receive you (says Christ to his Disciples) nor hear your words, when ye depart
out of that house or City, shake off the dust of your feet; Verily I say unto
you, it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorah in the day of
judgment then for that City. It is a most dreadful Scripture; their very dust
must be shaken off in token of indignation, and it shall be more easy for the
Land of Sodom and Gomorah in the day of judgment, then for that place: You
would be very loath to be in a worse condition then Sodom and Gomorah that was
consumed by fire from heaven, And now suffer the vengeance of eternal fire,
Jude 7. Certainly they shall not be so deep in judgments as those that live
under the Ministry of the word and sanctify not the Name of God in it. Your
sin is of a deeper dye, then the sin of the Heathens, yea and in some respects
then the sin of the Devils, they never had the word of the Gospel sent to be
preached to them and therefore this will aggravate your sin not only beyond
heathens but beyond devils. Look to it then, that Gods Name be Sanctified in
the hearing of his Word.

3. Thirdly, Know that so much as the word is rejected, Jesus Christ is
rejected: Luke 10. 16. He that despises you despises me, and he that
despises me despises him that sent me. It is Christ himself that is rejected
when the word is rejected, thou have not to do with man so much as with Jesus
Christ in the hearing of the word: And the power of Jesus Christ is to be put
forth either to do the good by the word, or to avenge thy neglect of the word:
Therefore in Matt. 28. 18, 19. when Christ sends forth his Disciples to preach,
he makes this preface, All power is given unto me in heaven and earth, go ye
therefore and teach: As if he should say, I having received all power in heaven
and earth, through the power I received I send you to preach, and I Will be with
you to the end of the world: that is, All power in heaven and earth shall go
along with you to assist your Ministry, either for the good of those that shall
embrace it, or for the Misery of those that shall reject it; So that whosoever
stands out against the Ministry of the Word, stands out against all the power
in heaven and earth that is given to Christ: Do not think that thou do
resist a poor weak mortal man, but thou do resist all the power in heaven
and earth. And is not this a dreadful thing then, to be guilty of not
sanctifying of Gods Name?

4 Fourthly, It is an Argument of extreme hardness of heart not to be wrought
upon by the word. Luke 16. 31. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither
will they be persuaded though one rose from the dead, says Abraham. Certainly
that man or woman that shall not be wrought upon by the word so as to Sanctify
Gods Name in it, I say to such, If one should rise from the dead they would not
have their hearts wrought upon, and therefore much less are they like to be
wrought upon by afflictions. It may be some of you think when you are upon your
sick beds then you will repent; no surely, if this that is the great Ordinance
to bring men to God shall not work upon you so as God shall be honored in it;
you cannot expect that sickness and affliction should do it, no if one should
come from the dead to tell you of all the miseries that were there, certainly
if the word work not upon you, that will not do it. But you will say, One would
think that there should be more power to work upon the heart: truly no, because
that is not such an Ordinance appointed by God for working such great works
upon the hearts and consciences of men, as the word is: It is true, the word is
but a weak thing in it self, but here lies the strength, that it is an
Ordinance of God appointed for to work upon the hearts of men therefore if this
work not upon you to give God glory in the hearing it; there is no other means
is like to do it.

5 Fifthly, When the word works not upon men, it is a dreadful sign of
Reprobation If our Gospel be hid (says the Apostle in 2 Cor. 4. 3.) it is hid
to those that are lost. It is a dreadful Argument that here is a lost
creature, one that God intends no good to. One the Lord works upon, perhaps he
lets pass another, one in a family and not in another. Now where it is so that
the word works not, I say, there is no such dreadful brand of Reprobation as
this is. It is true, we cannot give any certain sign of Reprobation; therefore
I cannot say of any man, he has now such a mark upon him as does evidently
prove that he is a Reprobate; we cannot tell that, because we know not what God
may do afterward, but we may say this, That it is as dreadful a sign as any.
There are not any more dreadful signs then these two.

First, For a man to be suffered to prosper in a sinful course; For God to let
men go on and have their hearts desire satisfied in an ungodly way.

And then Secondly, For the Lord to leave them to themselves, so as the
Ministry of the word shall not work upon them, that they shall be by Gods
providence so disposed of, as to live under a faithful and powerful Ministry,
and that it should not work upon them: These are the two blackest signs of
Reprobation: and therefore it is a most dreadful thing to sit under the
Ministry of the word and not to sanctify Gods Name in it.

6 In the next place, Surely there can be nothing Sanctified to thee who do
not sanctify Gods Name in his word. The Scripture says, That every thing is
sanctified by the Word and Prayer. And how can thou expect that the word
should sanctify any thing to thee, seeing that thou do not make conscience
of Sanctifying Gods name in the word? The godly think thus, It Is the word that
must Sanctify all things to my Soul, and I had need then sanctify Gods name
in that from which I expect the sanctified use of all blessings. You therefore
that can fit under it, and make not conscience of sanctifying Gods name in it,
I say you cannot expect no sanctified use of any thing that you have in this
world.

7 Such as do not sanctify Gods name in the word, are very nigh to a curse:
There is a notable Scripture for this in Heb. 6. 7, 8. where the Apostle
compares the word to the rain that falls upon the ground, For the earth that
drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, and brings forth herbs meet for
them by whom it is dressed, receives blessing from God: But (says he) that
which bears thorns and briers, is rejected and is nigh unto cursing, whose
end is to be burned. The meaning is this plainly. The rain here is the word,
and the good hearers they are like the ground that receive the rain and bring
forth fruit, and receive a blessing: But now ill hearers that do not sanctify
Gods name in his word, they are like ground that receive the rain as much as
the other, hear as many Sermons as the other, but they bring forth nothing but
thorns and briers; and mark what a dreadful expression is against them; First,
It is rejected. Secondly, It is nigh to cursing. Thirdly, Whose end is (...)
burned. Thou rejectest the word, do thou? The Lord rejects thy Soul. If
thou have no need of the word, the word has no need of thee it is a dreadful
thing to be rejected of God. And then, thou art nigh unto cursing: It may be
the Lord may for the time withdraw himself from the Soul, and manifest that it
is as it were rejected; but yet the Soul has not the curse of God upon it, to
say, Well, let this Soul perish for ever: but some there are that are under an
actual curse, and says God, Well, my Word shall never do good to this ^oul,
such a one has sat under it thus long, and has rejected it, my word shall
never do good to him: Like as in Luke 14. where those that made excuses when
they were bidden to the Supper, the text says at length, That the Master of
the feast was angry, (which was God himself that invited them by the Gospel to
partake of his Son; and when men would not come in but make excuses, and
refused the offer of the Gospel,) Verily (says he) none of those men that were
bidden shall taste of my Supper. They shall never partake of any good of the
Gospel. This is a dreadful curse. Now the Lord deliver you from having this
curse pronounced against you, but yet I beseech you tremble at this Scripture
in the Hebrews, They are nigh to cursing. Who knows how nigh some soul in this
place may be to this curse, for God to say, This soul has been often invited,
and yet has made excuses and put off all, he shall never taste of my Supper,
of the good things in Jesus Christ, the word that has been so rejected shall
never do them good more; you had better never been born then to have this curse
actually upon you. Oh fear and tremble lest your condition be such as to be
nigh to cursing: Who knows what a day, a week may bring forth? It may be the
Lord may spare and be willing to pass by the neglect of former Sermons; but
who knows what the next actual rebellion against the Lord in his word may do
to bring the curse upon thee? And then if so, the next part of the verse will
prove to be thy portion, Whose end is to be burned. Oh! It is a dreadful thing
to sin against the Word: God stands much upon it.

8 Eighthly, Know that if Gods name be not Sanctified in it, the end that God
has appointed it for, will be turned quite contrary to thee; The proper end
that God has appointed his word for, it is to save souls, but now, where Gods
name is not Sanctified it is turned quite contrary, so the Apostle in 2 Cor. 2.
16. To the one we are the savor of death unto death, and to the other the
savor of life unto life: It is a dreadful thing that the good word of God in
which there is such treasures of Gods mercy, wherein the counsels of God,
concerning man's eternal estates comes to be revealed, that this should prove to
be the favor of death unto death, unto any soul, that is, to have such an
efficacy in it, as to kill them by the very scent of it as it were; As some
things have such a poison in them, as the very scent is enough to poison one.
So says the Apostle, to some our word has that efficacy being turned quite to
the contrary end some souls are saved, and are and shall be blessing God to al
eternity for the word, and thy soul is damned by the word, so as thou will
hereafter curse the time that ever thou came to hear it: That will be a
dreadful thing that the same word that others shall be blessing of God
eternally in heaven for; that thou shall be cursing eternally in hell for, it
will be turned to the quite contrary end, If it works not in the right way it
will work the other, the truth is, it hardens men's hearts if it brings them not
to God; there is nothing that does harden the hearts of men more then the
Ministry of the word: yet by accident, not by its self, there is no men in the
world have such hard hearts as those that are wicked under the Ministry of the
word; It is not only an argument that their hearts are hard, but they are
hardened by it: That in Isa. 6. 9. 10. is remarkable for this, and the rather
because I find it so often quoted by Christ, I think it is quoted three or four
times in the Gospel, And he said go and tell this people, hear ye indeed, but
understand not, and see ye indeed but perceive not; Make the heart of this
people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see with
their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and
convert and be healed. This is a strange Scripture, what must a Prophet go to
them, to make their hearts fat, and to shut their eyes, why, the word is
appointed to open men's eyes, but here the Prophet is sent to shut their eyes
that they might not be converted, this is dreadful, this is for the punishment
of some former neglect of the word of God sent unto this people, above all
Judgments you should be afraid of this; It is not so much that a fire should
be upon your houses, as that God should make his word to be a means to harden
your hearts. In Ezekiel. 14. we have a dreadful expression to this purpose by the
Prophet there, where the Lord says, that the people did come to inquire of
him, with setting up their Idols in their hearts, but says God, I will answer
them according to their Idol. If men come to the Ministry of the word with
their beloved sins, and resolve that they will not part with them, the Lord
many times in his just judgment suffers some things in the word to be
accidentally a means to harden them in that sin of theirs, I will answer them
according to their Idol, those men are in a dreadful estate whose hearts come
to be hardened by the word.

9 Ninthly, If thou do not Sanctify Gods name in the hearing of the word,
what comfort can thou ever have by the word in the day of thy affliction?
certainly when the day of thy affliction comes, then there is nothing can
comfort thee but the word. Unless thy law had been my delight (says David) I
should then have perished in mine affliction, but thou having been exercised in
the word so much and Gods name not Sanctifed, thou must not expect to have thy
soul comforted in the day of thy affliction. No marvail then though the word
has been applied again and again to your hearts, and nothing would stick: I
remember it was an expression of one in a great deal of terror of conscience
many came to apply comfortable Scriptures to him, and he himself for a while
did take those Scriptures and lay them upon his heart to passifie his troubled
conscience, but a little before he dyed, he cries out with a most fearful
terror, there is a fair plaster made but it will (...) on, it will not stick
on, so dyed despairing; so there is in the word such a plaster as may help a
wounded and troubled conscience, but (...) thou expect that have not Sanctified
Gods name in thy life time that it shall stick upon thy soul in the day of thy
affliction? never expect it, for the Lord has said otherwise, Prove. 1. Because
when I cried and called ye would not hear, you shall cry and call and I will
not hear; The Lord in his word cries to thee, Oh thou sinful soul who art going
on in the ways of sin and eternal destruction, Return, return, that is the way
that will bring thee to eternal miseries, but here is the way that will bring
thee to life and eternal salvation: Thus the Lord cries and calls to day to day,
and thou stoppest thy ear, Oh how just is it with God to stop his ear from
thy crying and calling in the day of thy affliction.

10 Further, Know that thou that do not Sanctify the name of God in his
word, that all the word of God will be made good one day upon thee, God has
his time to magnify his Law and to make it honorable Isa. 42. 21. You sight
Gods Law, you slight his word, and despise it, but God will magnify it and
make it honorable, there is not any sentence that thou have heard in the word,
but it shall be made good, whatsoever becomes of thy soul, Thou think that
God is a merciful God and he will not damn thee; but though God be merciful and
has regard to his creatures, yet the Lord has ten thousand times more regard
to his word then to all the souls of men and women in the world, and God will
stand to make that good, he will not have such regard to that wretched vile
sinful soul of thine as not to honor his word, he will honor his word
whatsoever becomes of thee, and all that thou have heard and rejected shall be
made good upon thee one day.

11 Again the word that thou do reject and sin against, it shall be the word
that shall judge thee, Joh. 12. 48. Look to it as well as you will: this book
of God out of which we preach, and those truths that we delivered to you from
this word, they must be called over again at the great day to judge your souls
by, the sentence of every one of your eternal estates must be tried out of
this book: Oh look upon it as the word that must judge your Souls at the last
day, and then you will see it a dreadful thing not to sanctify Gods Name in
it. And then when the word does judge you, you shall obey it whether you will
or no. Now the word convinces you and you will not obey it; but when God comes
to judge you by the word, then you shall obey it: Then when God comes to read
that sentence out of the word, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire: then I say
you shall be forced to obey it.

12 Lastly, There is yet one thing more (which should have been mentioned
before) which is very remarkable; That those men which do not sanctify Gods
Name in his word, they will be blasted, even here while they live their parts
and common gifts that they yet have will be blasted, wither, and come to
nothing. We find it ordinarily, that many that are young, had very good
beginnings, and very good parts, that were very hopeful, and would speak very
favourly where they came, afterward beginning by degrees to neglect the Word,
the Lord has blasted them, their gifts have withered, the common gifts of the
Spirit have been taken from them. I will give you one Text for that in Luke 8.
18. Take heed therefore how ye hear. (It is an Exhortation that follows upon
the parable of the Sower that went out to sow) because it is so that when the
word is sown as seed, there is so little of it does prosper, and most hearers
do not Sanctify Gods name in it, therefore look to your selves: Why? For
whosoever has, to him shall be given; and whosoever has not, from him shall
be taken even that which he seems to have. You had need look to your selves
how you hear, for the truth is, all depends upon it under God, have you got any
common gifts of the Spirit of God, or any abilities to do any service for God?
do not be proud of them, neither be jolly, nor think that you are able to do
better then others, and that those are but ordinary things that the Minister
speaks, and you are gotten into a higher form. Look to your selves, take heed
you come not to the word with a proud Spirit, be not offended at the plainness
of the word, take heed how you hear; for if you do not, that that you seem to
have shall be taken from you says Christ: You seem to have excellent gifts yea
you seem to have grace too, but take heed how you hear for all this, whatsoever
parts you have got, though you be highly esteemed in the company where you
come, and you are able to do things more then others, yet I say, Take heed how
you hear, for otherwise that that you have will be taken away from you: have
have we not seen this in our own experience? and it is apparent that they began
to be withered and to be blasted by neglecting of the Word. And therefore I
beseech you look to this, that you do Sanctify the name of God in his word,
and let your hearts bow unto it as unto the Ordinance of God, and wait upon it
in the Ministry of it, lest you wither and be blasted and come to nothing.

And thus I have shown the great evil of not Sanctifying Gods Name, and how
God will be Sanctified.

I shall be very brief in the Use of Exhortation.

Oh that the Lord by this would cause some thing to stick upon your hearts,
that what has been preached in this point may be made useful for many Sermons
afterward! that it might be said of you in this place as it was said of them
in Act. 13. 48. When the Gentiles heard this they were glad and glorified the
word of the Lord, and as many as were ordained to eternal life believed! Oh
that God would make every one of you to be a means to glorify the word of God!
That should be our care that the word of God may be glorified by us; we come to
hear the word, but take heed that the word of God be not dishonored by us, In
2 Thessalonians. 3. 1. Finally Brethren pray for us that the word of the Lord may have
free course, and be glorified, even as it is with you; Oh that we were able to
say so! and yet through Gods mercy in some degree we hope we can say so and I
could heartily pray that the word of God might be glorified in all places as it
has been with many of you; but yet go on in this, and labor every one of you
that it may be more glorified, that you may manifest the power of the word in
your conversations, that all that do behold you may glorify the word and say,
Oh what has the Lord wrought in such a place, in such families, families that
were wretched, vild, carnal, and lived without God in the world, Profane,
Swearers, foul-mouthed, Unclean; Now since they have attended upon the word,
how has it wrought upon them! what a change is there in such men and women!
That the carnal husband may say, since such time as my wife has attended upon
the word I have seen a Beauty in her conversation, she is more holy, more
gentle, and meek; and so my servant, more submissive and faithful, and so my
children more obedient then before; Oh that the word may be thus glorified!
Take heed I beseech you that the word be not blasphemed by any of you: In Tit.
2. 5. there the Apostle gives diverse exhortations, and among others to wives,
and to servants: To be (...) chast^ keepers at home, good, obedient to their
own husbands, that the (...) God be not blasphemed, you must perform your
duties unto your husbands, and why? that so the word of God be not blasphemed,
that is, that neither your husbands, nor any of your friends may blasphem the
word, and say, what, do you get this by going to sermons? Oh it should pierce
your hearts when as your consciences tell you that you have given cause whereby
the word of God should be blasphemed: and so he exhorts servants and others,
and all in the strength of this argument, that the word of God be not
blasphemed: you get up early in a morning to hear the word, that is good, but
take heed you give no occasion that the word be blasphemed:

Now, I shall show what an excellent thing it is so to Sanctify Gods name in
the hearing of his word, as to honor it, and how God will Sanctify his own
name in mercy to you.

1 First, All the good in the word is thine if thou do Sanctify Gods name.
There is abundance of good in this word that we preach, it is the word of the
Gospel, and to have all the good in that to be thine, that must needs be an
excellent thing; you will say, some times I read and hear such things in the
word that if I were but sure that these things were my portion how happy should
I be? Here Is one sign by which thou may be assured that they are all thy
portion: Is it thy unfeigned care to Sanctify Gods name in the hearing of his
word? Oh peace be to thee, all the good in the word is thine: And here we might
fall into a comendation of the word of the Gospel, and if I should give way to
that a great deal of time would quickly be gone, I will only give you one
Scripture for your encouragement to Sanctify Gods name in the hearing of his
word by way of comendation of it. It is Romans 10. 5. (a place I am afraid you
have not had the sweetness of it for the want of understanding it) It is
quoted out of Deuteronomy. For Moses describes the Righteousness which is of the Law,
that the man which does those things shall live by them. But the Righteousness
which is of faith speaks on this wise; Say not in thine heart who shall
ascend into heaven, that is, to bring Christ down from above, or who shall
descend into the deep, that is, to bring Christ again from the dead? But what
says it? the word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth and in thy heart, that is
the word of faith which we preach. The text has some difficulty and yet
exceeding sweet to us to know it; I confess if the Apostle Paull had not
quoted this place out of Deuteronomy. and thus interpreted it, who could ever have
thought in reading of Deuteronomy. that by the one had been meant the word of the Law,
and by the other the word of the Gospel, therefore the meaning is this, here is
a comparison between the word of the Law, and the word of the Gospel,
Concerning the word of the Law, there is two things wherein that comes short of
the word of the Gospel.

First, It is not so nigh thee.

Secondly, It is not so certain to assure thy Soul what shall become of thee to
all eternity: The word of the Law says who shall ascend into heaven, etc. But
the word of the Gospel is nigh thee even in thy mouth and in thy heart: You
will say, Why is not the word of the Law as nigh one as the word of the Gospel?
I Answer, The word of the Law you hear it in your ears, but it is not written
in the heart as the word of the Gospel is: The Law cannot work savingly upon
the heart of a man to bring salvation: those that are merely Legal they can
hear the duties that are required, but that word has no power to write in
their hearts what they do hear: But now when you come to hear the word of the
Gospel, that is nigh you, even in your very hearts as well as in your ears,
God speaks in it, and it comes into your hearts and there it works
efficaciously, which the Law cannot. The Law is but as a dead Letter in
comparison of the word of the Gospel. If you come merely to hear the Law
preached, and not in an Evangellicall way, you may hear it a hundred times and
it will never be written in your hearts, But when you come to hear the Gospel
in an Evangellicall way, that will come to be written in your hearts: So that
the word of the Gospel is nigh you: But what is the meaning of the other, Say
not, who shall ascend up into heaven, etc? The meaning is this, As if the
Apostle should say, The truth is, while you have no other but the
righteousness of the Law, you are at an infinite uncertainty about your eternal
estates. The Law says, Do and live: but you can never know when you have done
enough so as to be certain that you are well for eternity. That says, Who
shall ascend into heaven to know the mind of God concerning me? whether he will
accept of me, and of that obedience and worship that I tender up to him? Who
shall go down into the deep? Who shall go down to Hell to know there, whether
that place be prepared for him or not? It is a phrase that only expresses an
uncertainty that one cannot be satisfied about his eternal estate, except he
could go to heaven and there see and read Gods book and so discover Gods mind
concerning him; or go down to hell, and so know whether that place be appointed
for him or not except I can do one of these, I can not certainly tell, (merely
by the Law) whether I shall go to heaven or hell. As you that are Merchants and
dealers abroad, you are at a great deal of uncertainty what shall become of
your estates. Indeed if I could send one over to the Indies to tell me how my
Ship prospered, then I could be at a certainty, then I should hear whether I
were a rich man yea or no, but except I could do such a thing I am at an
uncertainty: Such is the expression here. As if a poor soul should say, I would
fain be saved, and loath to perish eternally; But all the while the soul remains
under the Law, it remains in an uncertain condition; but now says he, The Word
of the Gospel is nigh thee even in thine heart; And that is the Word that we
preach, that says, Romans 10. 9. If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord
Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart that God has raised him from the dead,
thou shall be saved. As if he should say, This word of the Gospel that is come
into thine heart does assure thy soul of thy eternal estate, so that though
thou can not go up to heaven, nor go down to hell, yet thou have that in
thine heart, that does as it were assure thee that thou shall be eternally
saved, as if thou were able to go up to the highest heavens and fetch news
from thence. Oh now the good word of the Gospel how should we prize it, and
keep it in our hearts? for that's in our hearts that will assure us of our
salvation to all eternity, and of Gods eternal purpose to do the good in
heaven. You would account it a great happiness if there could be any art to send
abroad to the Straits or to other place, to know how things fare with you: but
now if thou have the word of the Gospel within thee, if that prevails in thy
Soul, thou have always got something in thy heart that will tell thee how
things are with thee in heaven, and what shall become of thee for all eternity.
Oh who would not sanctify the Name of God in hearing of his word, seeing it is
such a blessed word wherein the Gospel is opened with more clearness then it
has been to many of our forefathers.

2 It is a certain evidence of your election, in These. 1. 3, 4, 5. Remembering
without ceasing your work of Faith, and labor of love, and patience of hope in
our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of God and our Father; Knowing Brethren,
beloved, your election of God. Why? For our Gospel came not to you in word
only, but also in power, and in the holy Ghost, and in much assurance. And know
this excellency there is in sanctifying Gods name in hearing the word, I
beseech you mark it, that it is a more blessed thing, then if you did bear
Jesus Christ in your wombes; You that are women, would not you have accounted
it a great happiness if Christ had been borne in your wombes? Now if thou come
to the hearing of the word, and sanctifiest Gods name in it, thou art in a
better condition, and have a greater blessing upon thee, then if thou hadest
borne Jesus Christ in thy womb. In Luke 11. 27. 28. And it came to pass as he
spoke these things, that a certain woman of the company lift up her voice and
said unto him, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps which thou have
sucked. Seeing Christ and what gracious things came from him, she spoke so; But
he said, Yea, rather blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it.
That is, Labor to sanctify my name, (as has been opened in the particulars)
rather is that women blessed that do so, then the woman that bare Christ: Me
thinks this one scripture should be such a scripture for women, to cause them
to sanctify Gods name in hearing of the word, instead of a hundred scriptures;
certainly thou may be so blessed, if thou will believe the word that comes
from Christ's mouth.

3 Do you sanctify the name of God in the Word, that will sanctify you, by
that your souls come to be sanctified, and it will comfort you in the day of
your affliction, and it will save you at last.

4 You that do sanctify Gods name in the hearing of his Word, you will be the
glory of the Ministers of God at the great day of judgment. You will be an
honor to them, before the Lord, and his Saints, and Angels. In Phil. 2. 16.
Holding forth (says the text) the word of life. This is the duty of all the
hearers of the word that they must hold forth the word of life; when you go
home, you must hold forth the power of the word you hear, well what will become
of that? That I may rejoice in the day of Christ, that I have not run in
vain, neither labored in vain; Let that be one motive among the rest, says
the Apostle, this will be such a glory to me, that I in the day of Jesus Christ
shall rejoice that I have not labored in vain, I shall bless God for all my
studies and care, and all the pains that ever I have taken, and ventring my
self for this People, I shall bless God in the day of Jesus Christ. Would it
not be a comfortable thing to you, that all the Ministers of God that come to
preach the word faithfully to you, If at the day of Jesus Christ you should
hear them blessing God that ever he did send them to preach the Gospel in such
a place, and you should hear them saying, Oh Lord, it may be had I been sent to
another place I should have spent all my strength in vain, but through thy
mercy I was sent to a teachable people that were ready to embrace thy word, Oh
this is my crown and glory. Would it not do good to any whose hearts are
faithful to think this, that their holding forth the word of life will not only
be a glory to God, which is the chief, but it will be a glory to the Ministers,
to recompense all their labors, that you shall not only be saved your selves
in the day of Jesus Christ, but you shall add to the glory of his faithful
Ministers likewise when they do appear before Christ?

5 I shall add one particular more, There is a time coming when God shall
magnify his word before men and Angels: In I^^. 22. 21. He will magnify his
Law and make it honorable, What a joy shall it be to thee when the Lord before
men and Angels shall come to magnify his word, and make it honorable, for thee
then to think; This is the word that spoke to my heart at such and such a time,
this is that word that I did reverence, that I did obey, that I did love, that
I made to be the joy of my heart, this word the Lord now does magnify and make
to be honorable? This will be comfortable to thy Soul.

The Eleventh SERMON.
The Eleventh SERMON.
LEVITICUS. 10. 3. I will be Sanctified in them that come nigh me.
THE last day we finished the point of Sanctification Stepney Febr. 1. 1645.
of the name of God in the hearing of his Word; and now we will proceed to the
Sanctification of the name of God in receiving the Sacrament; that is the next
duty of worship.

Now first for the word Sacrament, I confess we have not that word in all the
Scripture, as neither have we the word Trinity, and diverse other words that
Ministers make use of, to set forth the Mysteries of Religion by, but yet it is
useful to consider the meaning why Ministers in the Church have given this
name, unto those signs and seals that the Church receives; Sacrament, is to
hallow a thing, or to dedicate, because in the Sacraments there are outward
things, that are made holy, for holy and spiritual ends.

Secondly, we our selves do as it were hallow, or dedicate our selves unto God
in the use of these Ordinances; that is one reason from whence it has the name.

Or otherwise as some will have it Sacramentum, because it is to be received
Sacrament with a holy mind, and therefore called the Sacrament. The Churches
have used it a long time; in Tertullians time (which was above fourteen hundred
years ago) he was the first that we find used this word, and most that would
open the word unto us, say, that especially it was taken from the practice of
Soldiers, who when they came and listed themselves, bound themselves in a
solemn oath to be faithful to their Captain, and to the Cause that they did
undertake; and the oath, they were wont to call Sacramentum, A Sacrament. Now
in regard that Christians when they come to this Ordinance, they come to seal
a Covenant with God, and though they do not formally and explicitly take an
oath, yet they bind themselves in a holy Covenant, which has the strength even
of an oath in it; (For a solemn Promise to the high God has the strength of
an oath in it) and from thence they were called by these names, Sacraments: but
that for the word, that you may understand it.

But the word the Scripture uses to set out this Sacrament, by that now I am
speaking of, is the Communion of the body and blood of Christ; so you have it
in 1 Cor. 10. 6. The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion
of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the Communion of
the body of Christ? I say we are now treating about this point, how we are to
sanctify the name of God in that which the Scripture calls the Communion of the
body and blood of Christ; And now for the opening of that.

First, We must know that this is a part of the Worship of God, and we draw
nigh to God in this, or otherwise it will not come up to our point.

And then we shall show that God is to be sanctified in this duty of worship.

And then thirdly how.

First, We do in this draw nigh to God; We worship God; For when we are
coming to receive these holy Signs and Seals, we come to present our selves
before God; and we have to deal with God himself in a service that he
himself requires of us, in a holy, in a divine service: we come to present
our selves to God for blessing, for Communication of some higher good unto us,
then possibly those Creatures that we have to deal with, are able of
themselves to convey to us, come for a higher good then to taste a piece of
bread, or to drink a draught of wine, we come I say to present our selves to
God; that we might have Communion with him, and that we might have the blessin
of the Covenant of grace conveyed unto us through these things; now certainly
this is a drawing nigh to God; for to present our selves, for the Conveyance of
the blessing of the Covenant of grace through these Creatures, yea, that we
might have Communion with God himself in them, this is drawing nigh to him,
when we come to his Table; therefore we draw nigh to God; had not God
instituted and appointed these Creatures, Bread and Wine and the actions about
them to be the means of Conveyance of blessing unto us, it had been
Willworship for us to have expected any further presence of God in such
Creatures, then there is in the nature of them. It is true, God is present with
every Creature, when we eat and drink at our Tables God is present there; but
we cannot be said to draw nigh to God, and worship God there; for we there
look for no further presence of God with us in them, to convey further good
then the Lord has put into the nature of those things: only when godly people
take them, and receive them as blessings sanctified by the word, they take them
as the blessings of God that come out of love to them. But now when we come to
receive that which is called the Communion, there we expect things that are
beyond the nature of these Creatures to convey that that is by an institution
of God set apart for supernatural uses and ends, not to convey in any natural
way such and such things but in a supernatural way, through the institution of
God, and so it comes to be worship. Had we not I say a command for this, it
were superstition and Idolatry for us to make use of such Creatures for such
ends. If any man in the world should have appointed a piece of Bread, or a
draougth of wine to have signified and, sealed the body and blood of Christ it
has been superstition in any, and Will Worship, and sinful and abominable to
you; but we are to look upon God setting apart these Creatures for such holy
and solemn ends, and, therefore when we come to be exercised in them, we come
to worship God; and we come likewise to tendes up our homage to God when we
come to attend upon him in such Ordinances as these are to tender up that
homage that is (...) poor Creatures unto (...) as infinite and glorious God,
and the (...) we draw nigh to (...) in these.

Secondly, We must sanctify Gods name in drawing nigh to him: whatsoever we
do, whether we eat or drink we must do all to the glory of God; Now if in our
common eating and drinking we must do all to the glory of God, then certainly
in this spiritual eating and drinking there must be some special thing done
for the glory of God in this.

1. Because there is so much of God in it, for here there is a presenting
before us the great yea the greatest mysteries of salvation, and the deep
Counsels of God concerning eternal life, are presented before us in these
outward Elements of the bread and wine, and the action thereof; now when we
come to eat and to drink those things that are appointed to set forth the
greatest mysteries of salvation, and the deepest of the Councels of God
concerning man's eternal good, wherein especially God will glorify himself;
we had need there sanctify the name of God, for the things are very great and
glorious that are presented unto us.

2. This Ordinance of the Lords Supper, or the Communion it is an Ordinance
that Christ has left to his Church, out of the abundance of his love, and
therefore you shall find if you read the institution of it, in the 25. of
Matthew. that the same night wherein Christ was betrayed, he took bread and brake
it; though Christ was to die the next day, and to encounter with the wrath of
God, yea that very night he was to be in an agony, and to sweat drops of water
and blood, and the next day to die and to have these Trials of wrath poured
upon him, so as to put him to cry out my God my God why have thou forsaken me:
Yet he busies his thoughts that very night to institute this Supper; surely it
must be a great Ordinance, and there is a great deal of the love of Christ in
it. Christ saw that his Church had need of it, that he should that night when
he was betrayed have his thoughts busied about such a thing as this is. One
would think at that time, that he had enough to take up his thoughts
concerning himself, being to encounter with the Law, and with the wrath of God
for man's sin; but for all that great work Christ had to encounter with, yet
his thoughts are bulied about this great Ordinance of the institution of the
Supper, and therefore there was great love in it, Christ saw that it was a
matter of great moment; now if it is so, than there is great cause why we
should sanctify Gods name in such an Ordinance as this is, and not to account
it as a common and ordinary thing.

3. We must sanctify Gods name in this; because it is the Sacrament of our
Communion with Christ; wherein we come to have such a near union and communion
with him as to eath's flesh and to drink his blood, and to sit at his table.
We come to have Communion with Christ even in all our Senses; now Christ
coming so fully to us, that calls upon us to sanctify his name when we come
before him.

4. In this the Covenant of grace is sealed, the Covenant of grace comes to be
sealed in both the parts of it; now when we come to have to deal with God in
the way of the Covenant of grace, both to have the Seal on his part, and the
Seal on ours, surely this must needs call for a sanctified use of such a thing
as is so holy as this is. And that's the first reason why we are to sanctify
Gods name in this, because if we be in ordinary eating and drinking we must do
it, then in this, wherein there is so much of God, wherein the Mysteries of
Godliness are set before us, wherein there is so much of the love of Christ,
wherein we are to have close Communion with Jesus Christ, and wherein the
Covenant of grace comes to be sealed on both sides: there had need therefore be
a sanctifying of Gods name in the use of it.

Secondly, Consider this; that there is no duty in all the book of God that I
know of, that is urged with more strength and severity then this is; as that
place in 1 Cor. 11. shows where you have required of every one that comes to
receive the Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper, That they should examine
themselves and so eat, and you have the most dreadful expressions against
those that do not do it, that I know are mentioned against the neglect of any
duty in all the Book of God; there the Holy Ghost says, that whosoever eats
and drinks unworthily, First, he is guilty of the body and blood of Christ, and
then Secondly, he eats and drinks his own damnation; These two expressions
have as much dreadfulnesse in them as can be Imagined, and we do not find an
exhortation to a duty backed with two such severe expressions, in case we should
neglect our duty, as this exhortation. What if we do not sanctify Gods name
in this duty? we come to be guilty of the body and blood of Christ.
Bloud-guiltinesse is a terrible thing; you know David cries out, Lord deliver
me from Bloud-guiltinesse; to have but the blood of an ordinary man to lie upon
one, to shed the blood of the vildest Rogue that lives, in a murderous way, it
would lie upon the Conscience and be very terrible; it is impossible that such
a man can be quiet all his days though he has never such a seared Conscience.
A Heathen could not be at quiet, if he has the guilt of blood lie upon him;
but to be guilty of the blood of Christ, whose blood is ten thousand thousand
times more worth then the blood of all the men that ever lived upon the face of
the earth, must needs be a most dreadful thing; It is a fearful expression;
guilty of the body and blood of Christ, that is, he offers such an indignity to
the body and blood of Christ, as the Lord will charge him of being guilty of
it, guilty of abusing of the body and blood of Jesus Christ.

And then he does eat and drink his own damnation; but we shall speak more
to that, when we come to show how God will sanctify his name in those that
do not sanctify it here in this holy Ordinance. I will not therefore spend
further time in those Scriptures, for I bring them only now to show that there
is a necessity of it, that we do sanctify the name of God in this Ordinance.

Thirdly, there is nothing that strikes more upon a man's conscience; we find
it by experience; even upon wicked men's consciences, and especially upon such
as begin to be enlightened in the holiness of this Ordinance, God has put much
honor upon it; I confess some men may use it superstitiously though it be an
Ordinance of Christ, yet God has put a great deal of honor upon this
Ordinance, that men that are very wicked otherwise, yet their Consciences tell
them that when they come to this Ordinance then they must be good, then they
must not sin, but have good thoughts, and good prayers at that time. And many
times they dare not come, if their consciences tell them that they live in some
sin. I knew one my self once that was to be executed, and he had never
received this Ordinance in all his life, though about forty years of Age, And
being asked the reason why, he confessed he lived in some sin that he was loath to
leave, and therefore would never come to that Ordinance all his life, though
herein the Devil gulled and deceived him; but I mention it to show what a
power there is in the consciences of men about this Ordinance; this ordinarily
is one of the first things that strikes upon the souls of men, when they come
to have their Consciences awakened, Oh how have I profaned the name of God in
the Ordinance of the holy communion and have not sanctified his name in it.

That God should be sanctified in this Ordinance, that is clear enough.

But now the great work is (which is the third thing that I promised to show)
how we should sanctify Gods name in this Ordinance. Certainly the name of God
has bin much taken in vain, there has been a great deal of pollution in the
use of this Ordinance, and in men's Spirits when they have been exercising
themselves in such an holy Ordinance as this is; therefore I will open this to
you, and shall not be very large in it, only to show you the maine and
principal things that may serve for the direction of us, that the name of God
may not be so taken in vain and dishonored as heretofore, and I shall cast
what I intend to speak of into these particulars.

1 That whosoever was to partake of this must be holy himself; none can
sanctify God, but he must have a sanctified heart himself.

Secondly, this Ordinance it must be received in a holy Communion; There must
be a Communion of Saints for this Ordinance; and it cannot be received anywhere
else but in a Communion of Saints.

Thirdly, The holy disposition of soul particularly, or the qualifications of
soul that are required for the sanctifying of Gods name in this Ordinance.

Fourthly, the manner of the explicit goings out of the soul, that there are
to be at that very time of receiving.

Fifthly, The keeping of the institution of Christ in our receiving. These
things are required for the sanctifying of the name of God in this Ordinance.

For the first, Those that come must be holy themselves.

This is an Ordinance not appointed for conversion, to make holy; others that
are not converted may come to the word, because the word it is appointed to
work conversion; it is appointed to work Grace, to work the first grace, Faith
comes by hearing; but we do not find in all the Scripture that this is
appointed for conversion, but it supposes conversion; none are to come to
receive this Sacrament but men and women that before are converted by the word;
the word first therefore is to be preached to men for their conversion; and
then this is an Ordinance appointed for to seal them; therefore in the
Primitive times they let all come to hearing of the word, and then when the
Sermon was done, there was an Officer stepped up and cried holy things for holy
men, and then all others were to go out, and therefore it was called missa
(though the Papists did corrupt it and so called it the mass afterward, by
mixing their own inventions in stead of the Supper of the Lord, but it had that
name at first) I say this holy Communion was called by the name of missa,
because that all others were sent away, and only such as were of the Church,
and accounted godly staid; holy things to holy men.

And this must needs be so, because that the nature of it being the Seal of the
Covenant of grace requires it; it must be supposed that all that come hither
must be in Covenant with God, they must be such as have been brought to submit
to the Condition of the Covenant. Now the Condition of the Covenant of grace
is, Believe and be saved; it is therefore appointed for believers; And as the
nature of it being a Seal supposes a Covenant, so none can have this Covenant
sealed to them, but those that do first submit to it, and are brought into
Covenant; when you make an Indenture, and put to the Seal, certainly the Seal
belongs only to those that have their names in the Indenture: Now it is true
though men's names are not mentioned in the word, yet the condition is to those
that are brought in to believe in Jesus Christ; says God I come now to seal
all my mercies in Christ to their souls. We abuse God if we come to take the
Seal to a blanke, it is to make this Ordinance a ridiculous thing; therefore
there must be some transactions between God and your souls before you come to
the Seal; if a man should say to you come set to your seal to such a thing,
and there were never any kind of transactions between this man and you before,
you would account it ridiculous; after there has been agreements between you,
you use then to seal. So it must be here; I would appeal to many of your
Consciences that have come to the Lords Supper, what transactions have there
been between God and your souls? can thou say the Lord was pleased to
reveal himself to me; to make known to me my wretched condition, and the
way of grace and salvation, and showed me that upon my coming in to receive
his Son, he would be merciful to me and pardon my sins; and I have found the
Spirit of God working my heart to Jesus Christ, the Lord from heaven speaking
to me, and I sending an Answer to heaven again, how willing my soul was to
accept of the Covenant, which the Lord has made with poor Creatures in the
word of his Gospel? can thou say this in the uprightness of thy heart? if
not, know that this Seal belongs not to thee: until the Lord has by his word
subdued thy heart to this agreement first with him.

Secondly, This Ordinance, it is the Ordinance of spiritual nourishment, of
eating the flesh of Christ and drinking his blood in a spiritual way. Now it
must needs suppose that first there must be life before there can be any
nourishment received in. If it be appointed to nourish and increase grace, then
surely there must be grace before; what nourishment can a dead child take? the
very first thing that is to be done is nourishment here, The word has power to
convey life and then to nourish, but we read of no such thing here, but that
which is to be done here is presently to feed, to eat, and to drink, that's the
end of the Sacrament; therefore it must be supposed that thou must have
spiritual life, there must come no dead Soul to this Ordinance, but those who
are quickened by the Spirit of Jesus Christ, they must come for nourishment.

Thirdly, the act here required does note that only those that are holy and
godly can receive this Sacrament; we are required by the Apostle to examine our
selves. To examine our selves of what? it must be of our godliness, examine
what work of God has been upon the soul, how God has brought the soul to
himself, and what Graces of the Spirit of God are there, And how we have been
brought into Covenant with God now if only those can receive worthily, and are
to come that first examine themselves, then certainly such only as are godly
are to come, for they only can perform those acts that are required.

Fourthly, Its a Sacrament of Communion with God, and Communion with the
Saints; now what Communion has Light and Darkness? or what fellowship has
Christ with Belial, If it be a Sacrament of Communion, of coming to the Table
of God will God have his enemies to come to his Table? you will invite no
enemies to your Tables, but your children and friends, so they must be the
children of God and the friends of God, these that are reconciled to God in the
blood of his Son, and those that are his children that must sit at his Table,
therefore they must be holy. Now this may suffice for that first thing, that
this is not an Ordinance for all sorts of people, but such as have submitted to
the condition of the Covenant before. Such as have grace, and ability to
examine themselves of their graces, and such as are children and reconciled to
God, and so are fit to sit at the Table of God, and to enjoy Communion with him
and with his Son, and with the Saints; for we are one body sacramentally when
we come to this holy Ordinance; all others therefore certainly are to be kept
from this Sacrament but such.

2 The second thing will make it out more fully, and that is, it is not enough
that we be holy our selves; (and so all ignorant, profane and scandalous, yea
all that are merely civil, that can not make out any work of Godliness upon
their hearts in bringing them to Christ, are excluded.)

But 1 It is to be done in a holy Communion, and is clear out of that place in
1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the
Communion of the blood of Christ? the bread which we break, is it not the
Communion of the body of Christ? and then says the Apostle in the 17. verse,
for we being many are one bread and one body; therefore all that come to
receive the Sacrament, they must so come as they must be one body, one
spiritual Corporation; this very consideration, that those with whom we receive
the Sacrament are one body with us, it has a great deal in it, for the
helping of us to sanctify Gods Name; this Ordinance I say, it is to be
received only in a holy Communion; one Christian cannot receive the Sacrament
alone; there must be a Communion wheresoever it is to be administered; it is
not enough there is one Godly man there, but there must be a Communion of
Saints, and in that communion it is to be received.

Quest. You will say, must it be received in a communion of Saints? what if
wicked men do come there? will that hinder us from sanctifying Gods name in
partaking of the Sacrament with them? do not we find in Scripture that the
Church had always wicked men among them? there are always tares growing up
with the wheat: If you read even in the Corinthians, you shall find that there
were some in that Church that were wicked, yea and its thought that Judas
himself did receive the Sacrament too; therefore what if wicked men be there,
does that hinder?

Answ. I answer, first it is true, that in the Church of God there have been
wicked men, and is like there will be wicked men to the end of the World; but
yet wheresoever there is a right communion of Saints, there ought to be the
power of Christ exercised to cast out those wicked men, or at least to withdraw
from them. This is the Law of Christ, that if there be any that have communion
with you, if any of them do appear to be wicked, you are bound in conscience
to go and tell them; if they do not reform, you are bound to take two or
three, and if they do not yet reform, then you are bound to tell the Church,
to tell the Assembly of the Saints when they meet together; for so the word
Church does signify, and we find in the 1 Cor. 5. chap. that when there was
an incestuous person to be cast out, it was done in the presence of the
congregation: Thus far you are bound to do, otherwise you cannot say that it
is nothing to you if wicked men be there, for you have not discharged your
conscience, and so you come to be defiled, and you do not sanctify Gods Name
in this Ordinance, because you have not done to the uttermost of your duty for
the casting out of those wicked men.

And mark in 2 Cor. 5. 7. there the Apostle writing to the Church, bids them
that they should purge out the old leven, Know ye not says he, that a little
leven leveneth the whole lump? the Apostle does not speak there of sin, but of
the wicked incestuous person, says he, you must look to it that this man be
purged out from you, or otherwise you are all levened by it, that is, the whole
Church would be levened by it, if there were not care taken to purge out that
one man.

You will say, shall we be the worse for one wicked man's coming? no, if we be
no way faulty of it, then we cannot be said to be worse and it cannot leven us;
but now when it is our duty to purge him out and we do not do it, as in all
communion of Saints there is a duty, and there is not any one but may do
something toward it; thus far every communicant in every communion of Saints
must go; if there be a wicked man there, if you come to know it, and do not
go thus far as I have spoken, you art defiled by him, you are not defiled by
the mere presence of wicked men, (for that's a mere deceit and gall that some
would put upon men that differ from them otherwise;) but thus now you are
defiled by their presence, if you do not do your duty, and the uttermost that
you are able to purge them out; yea, then the whole congregation is defiled, if
they do not do their duty; now this is the duty of every one in the
congregation, to tell their brother, or to take two or three, and after that to
tell the Church, and so come to profess against them, or if the Church will
not do their duty as they ought, yet then to free their own souls, as to
profess, here is one that is so and so guilty, and may be proved thus and
thus, and so for my part I to free my own soul profess that this man or woman
ought nor to have communion here; and thus you come to free your own souls,
and when you have done thus, though wicked men be there you may there eat and
drink and not be defiled by their presence, for you cannot be said properly to
eat with them now, not to have communion with them, no more than if a dog
should come and skip upon the Table, and take a piece of bread; you cannot have
communion with him because he takes it, no more have you with those wicked men
when once you have dealt so far with them, you for your selves profess against
them that you for your own particular cannot have communion with them herein;
this is not to eat with them: The Apostle in 1 Cor. 5. latter end, he does
there require, in the 11. v. that If any man that is called a Brother be a
fornicator, or covetous, or an Idolater, or a Raylor, or a Drunkard, or an
Extortioner, with such a one no not to eat; for what have I to do to judge
them also that are without? that is, the Heathens, and those that were in no
communion with them, I have nothing to do to judge them; but do not ye judge
them that are within? When we have so far freed our selves as professing
against their sin, then we cannot be said to have communion with them, and then
we do withdraw from those that walk disorderly, when we do our duty thus
far. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 14. If any man obey not our word by this Epistle, note that
man, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed; and in the sixth
verse of that Chapter he commands them in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ
that they should withdraw themselves from every Brother that walked disorderly.
So that till we do our duty we come to be defiled; but now, if we do our duty,
then it is not the mixture of a Congregation that is enough to hinder any from
receiving the Sacrament there: and this will tend much to satisfy men about
the receiving in mixed congregations where any are cast into them and are
actual Members there.

But now on the other side, if we be in a place where either this Congregation
will not take upon them any such power to cast out unworthy ones, or are not
convinced of this power, then there is no rule that Christ has set, that we
must be forced all our days to continue to be in such a congregation as denies
one of the Ordinances of Jesus Christ; if so be there be any such that are
wicked, and we do first what we can to have them cast out, and we wait with
patience in such a congregation for to have them cast out, and yet we see that
either the congregation does not understand that they have any such power, or
do deny such a power that they have, and so upon that all people are left in a
mixed way, I say then there is no rule in all the Book of God that should force
men to continue to be members of such a communion where they cannot enjoy one
Ordinance of Jesus Christ, which is the Ordinance of Separating the precious
from the vile, the Ordinance of casting out the wicked and ungodly. It were a
very diseased body and in danger quickly of the loss of life, to take in every
thing into it, and to have no expulsive faculty to purge any thing out again;
so a congregation that is altogether without such an Ordinance as that is of
expelling such as are wicked and ungodly; I say, I find no Scripture that does
force people, and require them as bound in conscience to continue there where
they may not enjoy all the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, and the right
understanding of what I say now, will help us to answer all those Scriptures
that are brought. As if it be that of Judas, first it is hard to make it out
clear whether it were the Lords Supper that he received yea or no: but suppose
it be granted that he did, yet I make no question but such as Judas was, that
shall continue to make such an outward profession as he did, and could not be
discovered in the Church Way, but that we may receive with such as are close
hypocrites.

You will say Jesus Christ knew him to be faulty, and he told John that lay in
his bosom what he was; but though he knew him as he was God, yet he deals with
him in his Ministerial way, and he had appointed before that none were to be
cast out but were to be dealt withal in such a Ministerial way; so that it is
not enough though I knew by Revelation from God that such a man were an
hypocrite; suppose God should reveal from heaven to me that such a man were an
hypocrite, I think I might communicate with him still, when he does not so
far discover himself that I can by witnesses prove his evil; therefore
though men be wicked, yet it does not defile the communion where they are if
there has been that way used that Christ has appointed for to be observed in
his Church. And when that is done then I am to withdraw from him, and to
profess against communion with him, so that its enough to answer the case.

We read likewise that there were diverse wicked men among the Corinthians, and
of Tares that grew in the Wheat.

It Is true, there were wicked men among them, but they were enjoined by the
Apostle to cast out those wicked men, and if they did not do it, it was their
sin, and they were defiled by it.

And for Tares that were among the Wheat, take it that this is meant concerning
the Church, suppose it were (and yet Christ says plainly that the field is the
World, and it is the godly and the wicked living together in the World, and so I
find many interpreters take it; but howsoever take it that it is meant of the
Church Communion; yet thus far is clear that it was through the fault of the
officers that there should be any Tares among the Wheat; for so the text says
plainly that while the servants slept there did Tares spring up; therefore
there should have been none.

Secondly, they were not such Tares as would spoil the Wheat, but as Jerome
says in those countries the Tares did grow much like Wheat all the while it
was in the blade, so that they were hardly to be distinguished, though some
that were of more understanding were able to discern them from the Wheat;
therefore though such as do grow up like unto the Wheat may be suffered, and
yet in this case only, that is, in case that it will prejudice the Wheat, that
is, when they are so close to the Wheat as there will be danger by plucking
them up to pluck up the Wheat too, then they must be let alone; Mark, first it
was through the negligence of the officers; they should have been kept out.
Secondly, if they do get in, yet while they grow so close to the Wheat as there
will be danger that when you pluck out them, to pluck out the wheat too, only
in that case it must be forborne; but this gives no liberty that therefore all
sorts may be let into the Church, and there should be no kind of Ordinance to
cast out those that are venomous weeds that will do hurt and mischief.

But if you understand it (as many do) concerning the World, then the meaning
is thus, the Preaching of the Gospel that comes to a place, and there is only
good seed sown, and is a means of the conversion of many, but together with the
conversion of some, there are others that do hear the Gospel Preached, and the
truth is, they being mingled among the hearers of the Word, in stead of
bringing forth good fruit according to the Gospel, they bring forth the Tares;
now says the servant, Lord, how comes it to pass that we preach such
excellent truths in this place, and yet there are so many wicked men that bring
forth such wicked fruit? Lord, is it thy mind that we should be wholly
separated from them and have nothing to do with them, that there should be a
full separation while we live in this world? no says Christ, not so; for then
the truth is, if all godly men should wholly withdraw from wicked men, and
believe that they may not live among them, they could not live in the world. if
you did believe it were your duty not so much as to live near a wicked man, nor
to have any thing to do in any kind of converse with him, there would be no
Wheat growing in this field of the world here; and therefore you must be
content, when you live where the Preaching of the Gospel is, and the seed
brings forth good fruit in some, and in others it brings forth Tares, you must
not be offended by this, that here in this world God does not by some visible
stroke of judgment come and strike them dead, or that God does not take some
course that there should be a full separation here, but that they might live
together till the day of judgment; here I say you shall not have such a full
separation; so that you see it carries a very fair sense to take the field to
be the world, and the kingdom of Heaven there to be the Preaching of the
Gospel in any place, and so we must be content while we live in this world to
be where wicked and ungodly men are. But it does not follow from this place
that we are to have converse in the closest communion, in Church Communion with
wicked men, to be made one body by eating the same bread, and drinking the same
wine; it holds not forth such close communion as this is; so that there is little
strength can be taken from that place, but still it holds that wheresoever
there is the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, there must be a holy communion of
Saints.

Object. The Scripture only says let us examine our selves.

Answ. I grant for the benefit to mine own soul, I must look to examine my
self more especially; but now for another I am but only so far bound to
look to him as to keep my self clean; it is true I am not bound to go and
pry into his life and all his ways, so as to force him to give an account of
things that are secret, but I am bound to keep a watch, and if any thing be
done that offends me, then I am bound to go to him according to the former
Rule of Christ, and if he appears to be wicked, then I am bound to see him
purged from the Congregation; for take but that other text in 1 Cor. 5. 6. know
you not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump? If I do not do so much
as concerns my duty, then I am defiled by it. So as that you must not think
that it is nothing to you how many wicked men come to the Lords Table, and that
it belongs only to the Ministers and they are to look to it; the truth is that
every one in his place is to look to it, and every one may be defiled if he
does not perform this duty that God requires of him; do not say what have I to
do with my Brother; am I my Brothers keeper? it was the speech of Cain; if
thou be of the same body, you are to have a care of your Brother; do not
ye judge those that are within? there is some kind of judgment that every one
may pass upon such as do join with them in the same Body; surely it concerns
me much; what shall I do in such an action as to join with them to eat bread,
whereby I must profess that I do believe my self to be of the same body,
that this drunkard is of, that this Whoremaster is of, that this swearer is of?
whenever you receive the Communion with any company, you do profess your
selves to be of the same body with that Company; only in this case, If I have
discovered any, and can particularly profess against anyone, then I do not
profess my self to be of the same body with him; but now when I come in an
ordinary way, and I know such to be wicked, vile, and profane, and I profess
nothing against them, nor take any course at all, I do then by partaking with
them, profess my self to be of the same body that they are of. Thou do as
it were openly declare, Lord, here we come and profess that we are all of the
body of Jesus Christ; now when thou know such and such as are notoriously
wicked and profane, and do nothing in the world to help to purge them out,
do not thou think that Gods name is taken in vain? is not Gods name
profaned here? therefore it concerns us very much to look unto it, that it be
a holy communion that we receive the Bread and Wine in; I beseech you therefore
understands things aright that I have spoken of; I have labored to satisfy
men that there is a way that we may partake of the Sacrament though wicked men
be mixed with us: But this is that that is required of you for doing your duty,
to keep your selves clean that you may not be accessory any way to any wicked
man's coming to partake of this holy mystery of the Body and Blood of Christ,
there are diverse things further about this, and the special thing I thought of
was to show you the holy qualifications that there ought to be; but this I
conceived to be necessary, and I should not have had peace in mine own
conscience as being faithful to you in what I am speaking, of sanctifying the
Name of God in this Ordinance, if I should not have mentioned this that I have
spoken unto you, and there is an error on both sides, that I desire to meet
withal; either those that come hand over head, and think it concerns them not
at all with whom they come to the Sacrament, but to look to their own hearts:
and there is an error on the other side, that if they do what they can to keep
them away, and yet if they should be suffered to come, they may not come to
partake of those things, now it is very useful for us to know what we should
do in this case.

SERMON XII.
LEVITICUS. 10. 3. I will be Sanctified in them that come nigh me.
I Shall add something to one particular that I had the last day, concerning
peoples withdrawing from such a Congregation where they could not receive all
the Ordinances of Jesus Christ.

As now, if I were in a Church where I could have but a piece of the Sacrament,
suppose they dealt with me as the Papists do with the people, that is, they
will give them the bread and not the wine, Certainly I were not bound to stay
with them then, but I were bound to go where I might have the whole Sacrament.
So if a Church will give me some one Ordinance and not another, I confess so
long as there is hope that I may enjoy it, and that they are in a way for
enjoyment, I think there should be a great forbearance to a Church as well as
to a particular person; as I must not withdraw from a particular man, where
there is hope still of his reformation, and that there may come good of my
forbearance, so toward a Church much more; but I say, if I cannot enjoy,
neither does there appear any hope of the enjoyment of all Ordinances,
certainly it were but a cruelty to force men to stay there, when as otherwhere
they may enjoy all Ordinances for the good of their souls. And this cannot be
Schism thus to do; as now is this Schism? suppose a man were in a place and
joined in such a Communion, for his outward benefit he may remove his dwelling
from one place to another, if he can have better trading in another place; then
certainly if he may have more Ordinances for the edification of his soul, he
may as well remove from one to another, as he may remove if his trading be
betterin one place then another. Christ would have all his people look to the
edification of their souls; and should I account that Schism? when a man or
woman merely out of tenderness and a desire to enjoy Jesus Christ in all his
Ordinances for the benefit of their souls, they find such want to their souls
of all Ordinances, that though they may have some in one place, yet if they
cannot have all, their souls do not so thrive; now if this be all the end why
they remove that they might have more edification to their souls enjoying the
Ordinances of Christ more fully, God forbid that this should ever be accounted
such a sin, that the Scripture is to brand; no that's Schism when there is a
violent rending out of malice, for the want of love; for as Apostafie is a
rending from the head, So Schism from the Body, that is, when it is out of an
evil Spirit, from envy, or from malice, from want of love, or from any base
sinister ends, and upon no just Ground; but now when it is merely out of love
to Jesus Christ, that I might have more edification to my soul, and still I
retain love to the Saints that are there as they are in a Communion, and so
far as they have any thing good among them, I hold Communion with them in
that; only I desire in humility, and in meekness that I may be in such a
place, where my soul may be most edified, where I may enjoy all those
Ordinances that Christ has appointed for his Church, certainly, that soul
that can give this account to Jesus Christ for going from one place to another,
will be freed by Jesus Christ from such a sin, as this that the world calls
Schism; but the truth is, this word is in men's mouths that understand not
what it means, and the devil always will have some word or other cast upon
them that are good; for he has heretofore gained much by it, so still he
makes account to gain much by words, and Terms, and therefore men should take
heed of words and Terms that they do not understand, and examine seriously
what the meaning of these words, and what is held forth in those words; and
thus much for that point, that it must be in a holy Communion; wherever there
is the receiving of the Lords Supper, it must be received in a holy Communion.

Now we are to proceed to that which is the maine thing, and that is, What are
the holy qualifications or dispositions of the soul, together with the actings
fit in the receiving of the Lords Supper, what is required in the soul, for
the sanctifying of the name of God in this holy Sacrament; there are many
things required.

As first, there is required knowledge; I must know what I do when I come to
receive this holy Sacrament; knowledge applied to the work that I am about;
when some of you have come to receive this Sacrament, if God should have spoken
from heaven and have said thus to you, what are you doing now, what do you go
for, what account had you been able to have given unto him, you must understand
what you do when you come thither.

First you must be able to give this account to God, Lord, I am now going to
have represented to me in a visible and sensible way the greatest mysteries of
godliness, those great and deep Councels of thy will concerning my eternal
estate, those great things that the Angels desire to pry into, that shall be
the matter of eternal praises of Angels and Saints in the highest heavens,
that they may be set before my view; Lord, when I have come to thy word, I have
had in mine ears sounding the great mysteries of godliness, the great things
of the Covenant of grace, and now I go to see them represented before mine
eyes in that Ordinance of thine that thou have appointed.

Yea Lord, I am now going to receive the Seals of the blessed Covenant of
thine, the second Covenant, the new Covenant, the Seals of the Testimony and
will of thine; I am going to have confirmed to my soul thine everlasting Love
in Jesus Christ.

Yea Lord, I am going to that Ordinance wherein I expect to have Communion with
thy self, and the communication of thy chief mercies to my soul in Jesus
Christ.

I am going to feast with thee, to feed upon the body and blood of Jesus Christ.

Yea I am now going to set to the Seal of the Covenant on my part, to renew my
Covenant with thee, I am going to have Communion with thy Saints, to have the
bond of Communion with all thy people to be confirmed to me, that there might
be a stronger bond of union and love between me and thy Saints then ever; these
are the ends that I go for, this is the work that I am now going about, thus
you must come in understanding; you must come with understanding, you must know
what you are going about; this is that which the Apostle speaks of, when he
speaks of the discerning the Lords Body; he rebukes the Corinthians for their
sin, and shows them that they were guilty of the body and blood of Christ,
because they did not discern the Lords body, they looked only upon the outward
elements, but did not discern what there was of Christ there, they did not
understand the institution of Christ; they did not see how Christ was under
those elements, both represented, and exhibited unto them, that's the first
thing, there must be knowledge and understanding.

And now for the knowledge and understanding of the nature of the Sacrament;
there need be knowledge in other points of Religion, for we can never come to
understand the nature of this Sacrament, without knowing God, and knowing our
selves, knowing in what estate we were by nature, knowing our Fall, knowing the
way of Redemption, knowing Jesus Christ what he was, and what he has done for
the making of an Atonement, the necessity of Jesus Christ, and what the way of
the Covenant is that God has appointed to bring men's souls to eternal life
by. The maine points of Religion must be known, but especially that that
concerns the nature of a Sacrament.

Now this knowledge likewise must be actual, not merely habitual knowledge,
but there must be a stirring up of this knowledge, that is, by meditation, I
must be meditating, have actual thoughts and meditations of what I do know;
that ought to be the work of a Christian in coming to receive the Sacrament,
to quicken up his knowledge, to have a renewed work of his knowledge by actual
thoughts and meditations of the maine points of Religion, and especially of the
nature and the end of this holy institution, that is the first thing.

Secondly, As we must come understandingly, without which we cannot sanctify
Gods name, so we must come with hearts suitable to the work that we are about,
that is, because the great thing that is here, is the breaking of Christ's body,
and the pouring forth his blood. A suitable disposition to this is brokennesse
of heart, sense of our sin, of that dreadful breach that sin has made
between God and the soul; our sin should be upon our hearts so as to break
them; But this brokennesse must be evangelicall; it must be through the
applying of the blood of Christ unto my soul; I must come to be sensible of my
sin; but especially be sensible of it by what I see in the holy Sacrament, that
must make me sensible of my sin: There are a great many things to make me
sensible of my sin: The consideration of the great God that thou have sinned
against, and the Curse of the Law that's due to thee, the wrath of God that is
incensed against thee for thy sin, and those eternal flames that are prepared
for sinners, those everlasting burnings.

But now those are not the things that will break the heart in an evangelicall
way, in a gracious way; the maine thing by which the soul must come to break
its heart, must be the beholding of the evil of sin in the red glass of the
blood of Jesus Christ, the beholding him broken; and truly there is nothing in
the world, that has that power to break the heart for sin, as the beholding of
that which is to be beheld in the holy Sacrament; and that heart is a hard
heart that can see what is there to be seen, and not break in the apprehension
of sin; when I here see what my sin cost, what a price was made for my soul,
when I see the hatred of God against sin, and the justice of God in not
sparing his Son, but in breaking his Son for my sin, and in shedding the
blood of his Son for my sins, I see here that the making of my peace which
God did cost more then ten thousand worlds is worth; I see that by my sin such
a breach was made between God and my soul, that all the Angels in heaven, and
men in the world could never make up this breach; only the Son of God, he
that was God and man, that was thus broken by the burden of the wrath of his
Father, for my sins, could do this. The truth is, when we come to this holy
Communion, we are to look upon Christ as if we saw him hanging upon the Cross;
suppose thou had lived at the time when Christ was crucified, and had
understood as much concerning the death of Christ as now thou do, and what
Christ was, if so be that thou should have beheld him in the Garden, and
there sweating drops of water and blood, and lie grovelling upon the ground,
crying if it be possible let this cup pass from me: and should have
followed him to the cross, and their have seen his hands and feet nailed, and
his side pierced, and the blood trickling down, and have heard him crying out
my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, would not such a sight as this is,
have broken thy heart for thy sin; the truth is there is more, I will not say
only so much, but I say there is more in this Sacrament to break the heart for
sin then such a sight as that.

You will say if you should have Christ to be crucified again before your eyes,
if you should see the body of Christ hanging upon the Cross, and there behold
him crucified, and hearing of him cry out, my God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me, you would think if your hearts did not break for sin then, that
they were desperately hard; know every time that thou have come to receive the
Sacrament, thou have come to see such a fight, and it is as great an
aggravation of the hardness of thy heart if it has not broken at this sight,
as it would be if it should not break at that fight; We read in Gal. 3. 1. of
Paul's speaking of the preaching of the Gospel, he says that Christ was
crucified before those that did hear the word; and, foolish Galatians, who has
bewitched you, that you should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus
Christ has been evidently set forth, crucified among you? he does not mean
that Christ was crucified in Galatia, but that where the word was preached he
was evidently set forth, and crucified among them; but now my brethren, the
crucifying of Christ in the word, is not such a real, evident, and sensible
setting forth of Christ crucified, as when he is set forth in this Sacrament,
and it is that which works with more efficacy to break the heart, then that
other sight; and the reason that I give is this.

Because you do never find that God did set that apart as an Ordinance, an
institution appointed to that end that they should come to look upon that for
the breaking of their hearts; there was indeed a naturalnesse in it, that if
they did behold Christ, it might break their hearts, but it was not such an
Ordinance, it was not a Sacrament as this is; now this being in a sacramental
way in the use of an Ordinance appointed by Jesus Christ to set forth his
sufferings, and all the riches of the Covenant of grace to the soul, there may
be expected here a further blessing then in the other, though its true, the
other might work mightily upon the heart; but yet this being a great Ordinance
of Christ in the church, a great institution of Jesus Christ, for the setting
out of his sufferings, it has a more special blessing that goes along with it;
every Ordinance has a promise, and a more special blessing then any other
thing that is not an Ordinance. So when you come here to behold Christ
crucified before you, you cannot see Christ naturally crucified as upon the
Cross: but you have Christ crucified before you in the way of a Sacrament, in
the way of a solemn institution of Jesus Christ, that has a special Blessing
which goes along with it; therefore if the heart be not broken here, there is
an aggravation of the hardness of the heart as great as if we should behold
Jesus Christ upon the Cross and our hearts not broken there; and indeed this
is a special reason why those are said to be guilty of the body and blood of
Christ that receive unworthily; as if a man had been then alive, and had been
before the Cross, and there have seen how the blood of Jesus Christ was shed
for sin, and should not have been affected with it, but should have acounted
it as a common thing; this man in some regard might have been said to be guilty
of his death; that is, to have joined and consented with those that did
crucify him; for if a man sees another commit a sin, if he be not affected
with that sin, and it does not stir his heart, he may come to be partaker
of his Sin; so those that shall come to see Jesus Christ crucified, and have
not their hearts at all stirred with the crucifying of Christ, they are in some
regard truly said to be guilty of the body and blood of Jesus Christ; and that's
the second thing, brokennesse of Spirit is suitable to the light of a broken
Christ.

3. The third thing that is here to be done in the sanctifying of Gods name, is
the purging and cleansing of the heart from sin; an actual cleansing and
purging the heart from sin there ought to be. The Jews in their Passover
were to cast out all leaven, and those that write of the custom of the Jews,
say that they were wont to do three things in the casting out of their Leven.

1. They made diligent search for Leaven; they lighted Candles to look into
every Corner least there should be any bit of Leaven left in the house.

2. When they found it they cast it out.

3. They used an execration, they did curse themselves if they should willingly
keep any Leaven in the house.

So my brethren, when we come to partake of this holy Ordinance, there should
be a diligent inquisition for sin, for Sin in Scripture is compared to Leaven;
thou should make a diligent search what sin there is in thy heart, in any of
the faculties of thy soul, what sin there is in thy thoughts, in thy
Conscience, in thy understanding, in thy will, in any of thy affections, what
sin there has been in thy life, what family sins, what personal sins. Thou
should make a diligent search to see whither there be not some Leaven, some
evil in thy heart; and what ever sin thou shall come to find out in thy heart,
there must be a casting of it out; that is, thy soul must be set against it to
oppose it with all thy might; whatever beloved sin, whatever gainefull sin,
whatsoever become of thee, thy soul must renounce that sin of thine; yea and
in a kind of execration of thy self; that's thus, Lord, as ever I expect to
receive any good by this body and blood of Christ, that I come now to receive,
so Lord, here I profess against every sin that I have found out in my heart; I
desire to find out all, and profess against all, and renounce all, and would
do to the uttermost that I am able for delivering of my soul fully, from
every known or beloved sin; oh that there might not be any remaining in my
heart; this must be the disposition of the soul coming hither, and it must
needs be thus or else we cannot sanctify Gods name, because there is nothing
more suitable then this disposition unto the receiving of the Sacrament; for we
come here to profess that we do acknowledge that sin did cost so much as it
did, that it cost the blood of the Son of God; now this cannot choose but
cause the heart to renounce sin; If indeed I do believe that sin has cost
the blood of Christ, that it cost him so dear as it did, that it did trouble
Heaven and earth, that there must be such a mighty wonderful way of
satisfaction to God for my sin committed against him, certainly sin has a
dreadful evil in it; oh, let me never have to do with such sin that was the
cause of such sufferings to my Savior, that did shed his blood. If so be that
thou saw a knife that had cut the throat of thy dearest child, would not thy
heart rise against that knife? suppose you come to a Table, and there is a
knife laid at your Trencher, and it was told you, this is the knife that cut
the throat of your child, or Father, if you could use that knife as another
knife, would not any one say, there was but little love to your Father or
child? So when there is a temptation comes to any sin, this is the knife that
cut the throat of Christ, that pierct his sides, that was the cause of all his
sufferings, that made Christ to be a curse; now wilt not thou look upon that as
a cursed thing, that made Christ to be a curse; oh with what detestation would
a man or woman fling away such a knife! and with the like detestation it is
required that thou should renounce sin, for that was the cause of the death
of Christ; I remember it is reported of Anthony when Caesar was slain, he
comes to stir up the people against those that had slain Caesar, and he takes
the clothes that were bloody and holds them forth to the people, and says,
here is the blood of your Emperor, and upon that the people were enraged
against those that had slain him, and went and pulld down their houses upon
them; so when thou come to this Sacrament, thou see the blood of Christ
gushing out, and for thy sin, if ever thy sin be pardoned; either thy soul
must be eternally damned for thy sin, or else thy sin cost the gushing out of
the Blood of Christ; now when thou see this; this should cause a holy rage in
thy soul against sin that caused this, surely the putting away sin, the
risings of the heart against sin must needs be a disposition suitable to such an
Ordinance as this is. And that's the third thing required in the sanctifying of
Gods name in this Ordinance, the purging out of sin, and rising of the heart
against it.

4. The fourth thing that is to be done for the sanctifying of Gods name here,
it is the hungering and thirsting of the soul after Jesus Christ; whosoever
coms hither, he comes to a feast, and the Lord expects that all his guests
should come with stomachs unto this feast, come with hungring and longing for
Jesus Christ; this should be the disposition of the soul, oh that my soul
might enjoy Communion with Jesus Christ; now, this is the end that I am come
for; oh, the Lord: that knows the workings of my heart, knows that this is the
great desire of my soul, that I might enjoy Communion with Jesus Christ; oh
that I might have more of Christ, that I might meet with Christ, that I might
have some further manifestation with Jesus Christ, that I might have my soul
further united to the Lord Christ, and so have further influence of Christ to
my soul; I come with thirsting after the Lord Christ knowing my infinite need
of him, and the infinite excellency that there is in Jesus Christ; my soul
does famish and perish for ever without Christ; but in the enjoyment of Christ
there is a fullness for the satisfying of my soul; that I have had of Christ
sometimes in the word, and sometimes in prayer, that has been sweet unto me,
but I expect a further Communion of Christ here, for this is the grand
Ordinance for Communion with Jesus Christ; in deed the word in this respect it
is beyond this Ordinance, that is, it is not only for the increase of grace,
but for the begetting; this is only for the increase of grace and not appointed
for the begetting; now in that respect the Word is above the Sacrament; but now
this Sacrament is a more full Ordinance for Communion with Jesus Christ, this
is the Communion of the body of Jesus Christ, and of his blood, and therefore
there ought to be hungring and thirsting desires of the soul after Jesus
Christ, therefore you must take heed you do not come with your Stomachs full
of trash, as children when they can get Plums and Pears and fill their
stomachs with them, when they come to your Tables, though there be never so
much wholesome diet, they have no mind at all to it; so it is with men of the
world, they fill their hearts with the trash of this world, and with sensual
delights, and hence it is that when they come to such a great Ordinance to
enjoy Communion with Jesus Christ, that then they feel no want at all of
Christ, only they come and take a little piece of bread and a draught of wine,
but for any strong pausing desires to meet with Jesus Christ there in the
Ordinance, to come so as they know not how to live without Christ, even as a
man that is an hungered cannot live without his meat and drink, and so for the
soul to have such a disposition after Christ, this is a rare thing; but know
that Gods name is not sanctified, unless thou do come in such a way unto
this holy Sacrament; that's the fourth thing, hungry and thirsty desires after
Christ, from a deep sense of the need of him, and the apprehension of the
Excellency in him.

5. In the fifth place, there must be an exercise of Faith for the sanctifying
of Gods name here; Faith, that is both the hand and the mouth for the taking of
this spiritual meat, and spiritual drink; when thou come to the Feast of
the Lord, Faith first is the eye, and then the hand and mouth; it is the eye of
the soul to give a real sight of what there is here, you are not able to
discern the body of the Lord but by the eye of Faith; if thou come only with
bodily eyes to look upon what is here, thou see nothing but a little bread
and wine; But now where the eye of Faith is, there is a real appearance of
Jesus Christ to the soul, as if Christ were bodily present, and we need not
have the bread turned into his body; for Faith can see the body of Christ
through the bread, and the body of Christ gushing in the wine. And it is a
mighty thing to have Christ and such spiritual things made real and not to be
a fancy. If one look upon the fire that is painted, one cannot heat ones self
in cold weather with that, but fire that is really burning upon the hearth; so
those that come to receive the Sacrament, and not come with Faith, that have
only the eye of their bodies, they only see as it were a painted Christ, they
do not see Christ really: his body and blood and those great Mysteries of the
Gospel are not presented as real things to their souls; and hence it is that
they go away and get nothing; but now when the soul comes with the eye of
Faith, the soul sees the wonderful things of God, it is the most glorious
sight in the world; all the glory of God in the heavens and earth is not like
this sight of Jesus Christ and the mysteries of the Gospel that do appear to
the eye of faith; therefore you may by this know whether you have come with
faith or no to the Sacrament; whether you have seen the most glorious sight
that ever your eyes did behold, alas, with our natural eyes, we behold a
Minister coming with a piece of bread and a little wine: but when the eye of
faith is opened, then we behold the glorious things of the Gospel; many times
when you come to hear the word, your hearts burn within you, as they that went
to Emaus; but when you are breaking bread, the eye of faith that must look upon
Jesus Christ; and in this sense, those that have pierced Christ must look upon
him; that Scripture is fulfilled in Zach. 12. latter end, they shall look on
him whom they have pierced by their sins, and then mourn and lament; this eye
of faith will cause mourning and lamenting for sin.

And then as faith is the eye to make what is here real, so faith is the hand
to take it; when you come to a feast, you must have something to take the meat
to you; so says Christ he brake bread and gave it to his Disciples; saying,
take eat this, take it; how shall we take it? by reaching out of the hand; if
you sanctify Gods name in this Ordinance, as you reach out your hand to take
the bread and wine, so there must be an actual reaching out of the soul by
faith, putting forth an act of faith to receive Jesus Christ unto the soul, to
apply the Lord Jesus Christ to thy soul with all his merits and good things
that he has purchased; when the Minister does give out that Ordinance, you
should look upon God the Father giving out his Son, as if this were your
condition. I am now in the presence of the eternal Father, who now does
actually give out his Son to my soul, and says soul, here receive anew,
this day my Son with all that he has purchased for thy good; now then the
soul acts upon this, and by stirring up an act of faith, comes and closes with
this gift of the Father, and casts its self upon Jesus Christ, and says as it
were Amen to what the Father gives, oh Lord, here I come and embrace thy Son
as my life, as my Savior as the fountain of all my good, in whom I expect all
the good I am like to have either here or to all eternity; so that there must
be a stirring up of the act of faith in an actual taking of Christ, if thou
be a believer; can thou remember what thou did, when first thou did
take Jesus Christ? when the Lord in the preaching of his word did reveal Jesus
Christ to thy soul, what did thou then oh soul? how did thy soul work in
closing with Christ; as thy soul did then in closing with Christ, so it must
now renew the work, there must be a renewall of the work at that time. So that
when you come to the Sacrament, you must not think that it is then a time to
listen to doubts, fears, and scruples; no, but it is a time that God calls for
the exercise of faith, the casting of the soul upon Christ, and his merits for
life and for salvation, or else the name of God is not sanctified as it ought;
thou do not sanctify Gods name, when thou art busying thy foul in doubts
and scruples in thy receiving of the Sacrament.

And then faith is as the mouth; when thou come to eat and drink, how can
thou if thou have not a mouth? thou have a bodily month to take in bread and
wine; but know that without faith thy soul cannot take in Christ; faith is as
it were the mouth; that is, by the act of faith the soul does open it self
for Jesus Christ, and not only opens it self, but takes in Christ to the
soul, and makes Christ and the soul as one, as our bread and wine is made one
with our body, so faith takes in Christ, and makes him as one with thee, and
turns Christ into the nourishment of thy foul, and thou and Christ by faith
are made as truly one, as the bread and wine that is put into thy body, is made
one with thy body. This is the work of faith, without which we cannot
sanctify the name of God.

Sixthly, there must be spiritual joy; that must be exercised here; for it is
a feast; here we come to sit with Christ at his Table, we come as children to
our Fathers Table, and to sit there with Jesus Christ our elder Brother; now as
a Father does not love to have his child set in a sullen and dogged way at his
Table, or to be crying, but he would have the child set in comfort, and with a
holy cheerfulness with a holy freedom of Spirit; not in a sullen way, but as
a child in the presence of his Father, and not as a Servant with the Master.

Object. You told us before that there should be brokennesse of Spirit and
sense of our sin.

Answ. That may be and joy; we rejoice with trembling; therefore that
brokennesse of Spirit that I meant, must not be slavish horror and fear, but
a kindly melting of the soul from the aprehension of the love of God unto it
in Jesus Christ, that was willing to be at so great cost to purchase the pardon
of sin: such a gracious mourning as may stand with joy, and the truth is that
that sorrow for sin in the Sacrament that is not mixed with joy, is a sorrow
that does not sanctify Gods name; godly sorrow and evangelicall joy may stand
together very well. And therefore know that this is not the time; neither to
give liberty to have your hearts sink; no, there must be no sinking sorrow of
heart, but such a sorrow of heart as in the midst of it, you may be able to
look upon God as a reconciled Father to you, and have a cheerfulness of Spirit
as in the midst of it, you must look upon your selves as Gods guest, to be
merry at his Table; now this is a great mystery of godliness, that there
should be at the same time, the sight of Christ crucified, and yet at the same
time a spiritual cheerfulness in the assurance of the love of God in Jesus
Christ. I say it is a Mystery and only those that are Believers are able to
understand this mystery, how to have their hearts break, and yet how to rejoice
at the same time in that unspeakeable love of God that is here presented unto
them in this Sacrament.

Seventhly, In the next place there must be thankfulness; therefore it is
called the Eucharist, and in one of the Evangelists where it is said, Christ
blessed the bread, in another it is said, Christ gave thanks; Christ when he
instituted this Sacrament, he gave thanks; he gave thanks; for what? he gave
thanks to God the Father, that he was pleased to send him into the world to die
for poor souls; now shall Jesus Christ give thanks unto God the Father for
that that did cost him his life? yea says Christ I see that here is a way to
save souls; and let it cost me my life if it will, yet I bless thee O Father,
if souls may come to be saved though it cost me my life. Christ rejoiced in
his Spirit in thanking his Father for this; then how should our hearts be
enlarged with thankfulness when we come to this that the Ancients were wont
to call the Eucharist, that is a thanksgiving? we are to give God thanks for
every mercy, you will not eat your own bread without giving of thanks; but
when we come to have this bread, this bread of life, here is matter of
thankfulness, here is matter of enlargement of soul; thou that have the
deadest and dullest soul, and straightest Spirit, yet when thou come hither
and understandest what thou do, here thou can not but see matter for the
enlargement of thy heart, and wish that thou had ten thousand thousand times
more strength to express the praises of the Lord; here is a thing that must be
the subject of the Hallelujahs and doxologies, that Angels and Saints must for
ever sound out in the highest heavens; do thou know what the Lord presents to
thee here? it is more then if the Lord should say, I will make ten thousand
worlds for the sake of this creature, and give all these worlds to him, thou
would think that thou were bound to bless him then; only when God in the
Bread and wine, reaches out to thee the body and blood of his Son, here is
more matter of praise, then if ten thousand thousand worlds were given to thee,
and therefore God expects that thou should say to thy soul, my soul praise
thou the Lord, and all that is within me praise his holy name; bless the Lord
O my soul, and forget not all his benefits; who forgiveth all thine
iniquities, who heals all thy diseases; O poor soul, here is the foundation
of all mercies; do thou praise God for justification, for sanctification?
here is a glorious application of the mercy of God to the souls of sinners,
and therefore if ever thou were thankful, be thankful here. The Sabbath my
Brethren, that is appointed to be the set constant day of thankesgiving for the
great mercies of God in Christ, and there are other days for national
mercies; now a special work of the Lords day is the celebration of this holy
Sacrament, and the Christians in former times were wont to do it every Lords
day, because that's the day appointed by God for to be the day of thankesgiving
for that great mercy, the Lord Jesus Christ: and that is the reason why the
Sabbath was changed; the last day of the week was the Jewish Sabbath, and that
was to celebrate the memorial of the Creation of the world; and the first day
now, it is to be the day of thanksgiving for all the work of God in man's
redemption.

Eighthly, A further thing is this, if you would sanctify Gods name, you must
be willing to renew your Covenant, that is the end of it; there must be an
actual renewing of your Covenant with God, that is thus, I come to receive this
bread and this wine, and this is to be as the Seal of the Covenant on Gods
part; now this will be emplyed in the nature of the thing, that if I take the
Seals of Gods Covenant, that I must be willing to set to my Seal too, to
renew the Covenant that God calls me to; now know, all men and women that are
saved, they are saved by the virtue of the Covenant of grace; and there God on
his part promises and makes a Covenant, that he will bestow his Son, life and
salvation through him; and thou must likewise come in on thy part, and believe
on his Son and repent, which is the Tenor of the Gospel; now every time thou
come to receive this Sacrament, thou come to renew this Covenant; As if
thou should say, Lord, thou have been pleased to make a Covenant of grace;
as the first Covenant was broken, and all men were cast by that Covenant, now
thou have made a Covenant of grace, and call thy servants whom thou
intendest to save that they should renew their Covenant with thee in this
Sacrament of thine; Lord here I come; and Lord here I renew it and set to my
seal, to promise and Covenant with thee, that as ever I expect to receive any
good from Christ, so Lord here I will be thine, I will give up my self for
ever to thee; as thou have given me the Body and blood of Christ for my
salvation, so Lord, here I consecrate my body and blood to thee, the last drop
of my heart blood shall be given up to thee, and so my strength and estate, and
name, and whatever I am or have shall be thine. Have you done thus when you
have come to receive the Sacrament? have you actually renewed your Covenant
with God? you that have taken the body of Christ, have you given up your body
to Christ? what is the reason then that you sin so much with your bodies? that
you abuse your body with uncleanness? and drunkenness? and other wickedness
afterward? oh you profane the name of God; and the very body and blood of
Christ in this, except thou give up thy body and soul to God in way of
Covenant.

Ninthly, In the last place for the sanctifying of Gods name, there is required
a renewing of Love; the coming with lovely dispositions and the renewing of
the grace of love, not only toward God, but toward our Brethren; for it is
the feast of the Lord and it is an act of Communion; Communion, not only with
Christ, but with his Churches; with his Saints; and as I have told you that
there is a profession of our selves to be of the same body with Jesus Christ,
then the Lord requires that his children should not fall out that come to his
Table, but that there should be love and peace; there is a mighty bond upon thee
when thou come to the Sacrament; and therefore, first, all heart burnings,
and heart grudges, must be laid aside; and Secondly you must come with a
willingness to be reconciled one to another, willingness to pass by all
infirmities in thy Brethren; here I have the Seal of Gods willingness to
pass by all my sins, and therefore I must be willing to pass by all
infirmities in my Brethren; I must now cast out all ill wishes toward others;
and come with a desire of all good unto them; and with a heart ready to embrace
any opportunity to do any good; thou do lie unto God except thou come
with such a heart as this is; Lord thou know that I am willing to take all
opportunities to do good to those, that I now do communicate with, for it is
the nearest Communion that possibly can be in this world, between one Creature
and another, and this is the reason why there should be that Ordinance of
Christ set up everywhere, to cast out those that are unworthy, because it is
the greatest union and Communion that possibly can be, for it is the Sacrament
and Communion of the same body; they are the same members of Christ now if thou
do not think such a one to be a member of Christ, why do not thou what
thou can to have him cast out? but so long as thou have done nothing in
private to him, or in telling the Church, thou do own him to be a member of
Jesus Christ; if thou do so, take heed how thy heart be estranged from him,
take heed how thou behavest thy self to them; take heed how thou live in a
jarring way, and a contentious way with them, and hold them off at staves
end, or walking at a distance from them, though they be never so poor and mean,
know that thou do profane this holy Ordinance every time thou come to it
when thou come with such a heart as this is; if thou do not find this
renewed love, Lord, there began to be a strangeness between me, and those that
have communicated with me, but Lord thou art pleased to vouchsafe us to come
once more to this Ordinance, and Lord here we do profess that this Ordinance
shall unite our hearts together more then ever they were; I will study to do
what good possibly I can to my brother; that is we join here to the feast of
the Lord with comfort, so we may live together in peace and love as it becomes
the Saints of God, and the members of the Body of Jesus Christ; oh how far
are people from any such work of God as this is; the Lord expects that this
should be in you every time you come to the holy Communion; here has been nine
particulars now mentioned, for the sanctifying of the name of God when we come
to partake of the Sacrament; but oh Lord what cause have we to lay our hands
upon our hearts ^ for if this be to sanctify thy name then it has been a
riddle, a mystery to us; certainly my brethren these things are the truths of
God that I have delivered, and so far as you have been wanting, in any of
these, know so far you have taken Gods name in vain, in this holy Ordinance,
you have not been worthy receivers of this Sacrament, you have cause to look
back to your former ways, and spend much humilation for your sin herein, and
not to be so greedy of it as some are; they must have the Communion, but I put
it to your Consciences, have you repented you for the profaning of Gods name,
and that's that that we should further have spoken of; that God will be
sanctified; that's thus, if we do not sanctify Gods name, it will quite turn
to the contrary; it is the proper end of the Sacrament, to seal up our
salvation; but if we sanctify not Gods name, it will seal up our
condemnation; if it has not been thy endeavor to sanctify the name of God,
so many times as thou have received the Sacrament, so many seals have thou
upon thee for the sealing up of thy condemnation; many men's or women's
condemnations are sealed with three or four hundred seals it may be.

But yet for thy comfort, while thou art alive, it is possible that thse Seals
may be broken open; as we read in the Revelations that John saw the Book that
had seven seals upon it, and none could be found that was able to open it; at
length the Lamb that was slain he was found worthy to open the Book; So I say,
thy condemnation is sealed up with many seals, and there is no Creature that
is able to cancel these seals, only the Lamb, Jesus Christ, yea that Christ
whose blood thou have shed, and been guilty of, only he is worthy; and he is
willing to open these seals; for as it was with those that did crucify
Christ, yet they were saved by the same blood that they had shed, as in Acts 2.
so though thou have been guilty of shedding the blood of Christ again and
again by thy profane coming to the Sacrament, yet know, seeing there is life
in thee, and the day of grace is continued, it is possible that thy soul may be
saved by that blood that thou have crucified; O how many are cut off, that have
thus profaned the name of God in this Sacrament, and never came to understand
this danger! they are cut of and now are undone for ever; why bless God that
thou art alive to hear more about this Sacrament, and how Gods name should be
sanctified; that thou art alive, and have time to repent thee of this great
evil, of profaning the name of God in this holy Sacrament.

SERMON XIII.
LEVITICUS. 10. 3. I will be Sanctified in them that come nigh me.
THere is one thing more about the sanctifying the name of God in the Sacrament
which clearly concerns us: and that is,

To keep to the institution of the Sacrament; for this is such a worship of
God, as depends merely upon institution; that is, upon a positive Law, upon the
will of God; there are some duties of worship which are natural, that we may
know by the light of nature they are due to God: but the Sacrament is a duty of
worship that is only by institution; and if God had not revealed it, we had
not been bound to it; therefore in these duties of institution, God stands very
punctual upon them; we must be very exact, neither to err on the right hand
nor the left; to make any alteration in the points of institution; Now
therefore for the institution of this Sacrament we find it in diverse of the
Evangelist; in Matthew. 26. 26. there you shall find that Christ and his
Disciples they eat the Sacrament together; and this was the way of it; they
were together sitting at the same Table; so it is called the Table of the Lord
sometimes in Scripture; therefore that's the first thing that is according to
the institution, that those that do communicate must come to the Table as near
as they can; as many as can set about it, and all to come as near as they can,
and the reason is, because that otherwise you will not be able to attain the
end why God would have you come to receive; the end is to remember the death of
Christ; now except you be able to see the sight, to see what is done, to have
your eye as well as your ear exercised, you do not fully accomplish the end
that is appointed; for this is a Sacrament, that does present to our eyes the
death of Christ, and the great mysteries of salvation, and therefore it is
according to the institution, that every Communicant must be where he may
behold what is done, he must be where he may see the breaking of the bread, and
the pouring forth of the wine; certainly it has been a disorderly way
therefore for people to set up and down in their pews everywhere in the
Congregation; and for the Minister to go up and down after them; so that they
could see nothing, nor scarce hear any thing; it is much for the attaining to
the end of the institution for all Communicants to look upon the breaking of
the bread, and the pouring forth of the wine in the Sacrament; and therefore
all should come together; and there as many as can sit at his Table, or those
that cannot, near to it; and the rather because this is not only from the
example of Christ, that he did so, though that's somewhat; but because it has a
spiritual significancie in it, and that's the reason that it should be done; we
find in Luke 22. 26. the institution of the Sacrament; now mark upon their
coming and being with Christ, at the Table, says Christ in the 29. and 30.
verses, and I appoint unto you a Kingdom as my father has appointed unto me,
that you may eat and drink at my Table in my Kingdom, and sit on Thrones
judging the twelve tribes of Israel; he spoke it upon that occasion of the
Disciples sitting with him at the Table; when they did eat bread, and when they
took the Cup; upon that occasion Christ spoke to his Disciples, and said I
appoint to you a Kingdom, and so sit on Thrones judging at my Table in my
Kingdom, and so sit on Thrones judging the twelve Tribes of Israel; as if
Christ should say, you can sit with me at my Table here; and know that this
sitting with me at my Table it is but as it were a praeludium, a
foresignification of the Communion that you shall have with me in my Kingdom:
you shall have that familiar Communion with me when I come unto my Kingdom,
there to sit as it were with me, to join with me in my Kingdom judging the
twelve Tribes of Israel: even as you do now in that holy fellowship join with
me in sitting at my Table; this is the meaning of Christ, so that the Gesture
in the Sacrament is not a mere indifferent thing; heretofore it has been
thought unreasonable to contend for what Gesture we should use.

Now that that has been the Institution of Christ, and has a spiritual
significancie in it, is not indifferent; for not only the eating the bread and
drinking the wine is significative, but the gesture whereby we have fellowship
with Jesus Christ here, to signify that fellowship we shall have with him in
the Kingdom of Heaven; so that the people of God were deprived of a great
deal of comfort, and of one special benefit of this holy Sacrament, whereas
they might not receive it fitting; whereas Christ says that your sitting with
me here is a signification of your sitting with me when I come into the
Kingdom of heaven; some say they must kneel because they may receive it with
more reverence; certainly were it a thing as some say indifferent, it were
another matter; but for to say it is not reverence to sit, in that they accuse
Christ himself for want of reverence, as if he would appoint a way, or would
have his Disciples use any such way as were not reverent; says Christ I intend
by your very gesture to have this signified unto you, that though you be poor
wretched worms, yet even such is my love to you, as you shall sit with me when
I come to my Kingdom, and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel; and every time
you come to my Table, and there sit at it, or about it, then you should be put
in mind that there is a time, that though you be poor unworthy creatures,
worthy to be among the dogs, yet the mercy of God is such unto us, as he has
appointed us to have a familiar fellowship with the Lord Jesus Christ when we
come in his Kingdom to sit with him, and even to judge the twelve tribes of
Israel, yea to judge the whole world; for so says the Scripture, shall not the
Saints judge the world? now this hinders spiritual meditation and comfort,
that the Saints have; therefore we are to look to the institution and to follow
it; that's the first thing in setting with Christ at his Table.

The second thing in the institution is, that the Bread being taken by the
Minister is to be blessed, broken, and then to be given; Christ took it, and
blessed it, and brake it, and gave it: and the people they are to look upon all
this: to look upon the Ministers taking, blessing, breaking, and giving; and
then the cup by its self, we find Christ in Matthew. 26. 27. he first blessed
the bread, and then he blessed the cup distinctly by its self saying, this is my
blood of the New Testament which is shed for many, for the remission of sins;
and you shall observe that the text says he drank it, and said, drink ye all
of it; so that this is not according to the institution for a Minister to go
up and down, and to give it into every man's hand; certainly this was not so
from the beginning; this is a way of man's own devising; for the bread and the
cup to be given into every bodies hand by the Minister: Christ did but give it
once, he gave it to them all, and said, drink ye all of this, so it was done.

Quest. But you will say, is it not better for it to be given into every ones
hand?

Answ. No, because that the giving of it once for all, does signify more fully
the fellowship and communion that they have together; as at a Table it were a
strange thing that every bit of meat must be given to every one particularly;
no, but the dishes must be set before them and they must take it themselves:
Indeed, if they be children you cut every piece of meat, and give it into their
hands or mouths; but that's suitable to a fellowship at Table, and communion, to
have the meat set before them, being blessed, and then for all to partake of it.

And besides this, giving it into every ones hand, certainly, it came to us
from a Popish and superstitious conceit of the Papists; for the Papists will
give it into their mouths, because the people must not defile it with their
hands. And it was to bring more reverence to the Sacrament; now there is a great
deal of danger, for to bring in men's devices for to cause more reverence; we
are to look to the Ordinance of Christ, he gave it once, and said, drink ye
of it, in General to them all; and so the Ministers should do.

And besides there is this in it more, and one would wonder that Ministers
should give it in particular and not in general to the Church: for by this
means Ministers might abundantly ease themselves of a great deal of charge
and guilt; for upon this ground it will appear, that a Minister, though as an
eminent officer he is to look to his Congregation that they be fit, yet the
truth is, it concerns the Church as well to look who comes there, and likewise
the Minister I say, to look about him that he does not say, The body of the
Lord Jesus Christ was given to thee, when he knows they are profane and
wicked; it concerns the Minister to look that he does not tell a lie; but now
when the Minister gives it generally to the Church, Take, eat, and Take
drink, he gives it particularly to no body; Now then his charge is divided to
the Church, and if there be any body that is unworthy, let the Church look to
it as well as he: though he as an eminent Officer, its more especially in
particular his duty then any others; heretofore the charge would lie much upon
the Minister, but the Minister according to the institution, should give the
Sacrament to no particular; but in general to the Church, and therefore if
there were but any particular, that the Minister upon a particular knowledge
did know to be naught, he might in great part discharge himself, as professing
against this or that particular man; for it is not in his power alone to keep
any from the Sacrament, but if so be that he shall profess against such and
such men, the Church must join with him to labor to keep them from the
Sacrament, and that is the next thing for the institution, Christ gave it not
into any particular men's hands; but he gave it to all, saying, Drink, and eat
ye all of it.

A third thing that is to be observed for the institution of this; that all the
while the Communicants are taking, eating, and drinking the bread and wine;
they should all of them that while have their thoughts exercised about the
death of Jesus Christ; for that's the institution; do this in remembrance of
me; there should be no action intermingled, in the time of the receiving of
the Sacrament; nothing but minding the work that you are about, that is, to
remember the death of Jesus Christ; and to discern the body of the Lord, not
only when you take your selves the bread and wine; but when you see the bread
and wine, broken or powered forth, and you see others taking the bread and wine,
all that while, you should be thinking of the death of Christ, and discerning
the Lords body; and consider what these outward elements do signify, and that
they do seal the great benefit of the Covenant of grace; therefore it is not
according to the institution, to be singing of Psalms in the mean time while
the Sacrament is receiving and so to have your thoughts about other things:
singing of Psalms in its due time is a good thing; but for you to do it at
that time when as the death of Christ is presented before you, and Christ calls
you to look upon his body, and to think upon what he has done and suffered;
this is no seasonable time of singing; and if you read the institution, you
shall find, that Christ, after all was done (the text says) they sung an
hymn; so that according to the institution, it is after the action is done of
eating and drinking, then for the Church to join together and sing a Psalm in
the praise of God; and then they must mind all the same thing together; for
that's the thing to be done in the Sacrament; that look what one does all must
mind together; for when one part sings, and the other are waiting for the bread
and wine, this is not suitable to the holy Table action, and that Communion that
God requires of us; though the things in themselves are both good that are
doing; yet when we are about this holy Ordinance, being it is an Ordinance for
Communion, all are to be doing the same thing at the same time; and so when all
have done eating and drinking, then for all to join together in singing to the
praise of God.

Now it may be, this at first seems strange to many; yet certainly observe
this; do but keep to the institution in the Sacrament, though you may think
it a more mean way, yet you will find a greater beauty in this Ordinance, then
ever you found in all your lives; for the more we keep to Christ's institution
and mingle nothing of our own, the more glory, and beauty, and excellency does
appear in the Ordinances of Jesus Christ; but when any man shall mix any of
his own inventions, though he may do it to a good end, and think to add to
and put a greater luster upon the Sacrament: the truth is, that which he thinks
to be a greater luster, reverence, or honor put upon it, it does rather take
off the luster and glory of the Sacrament; then are the institutions of Christ
glorious when there is no mixture among them; thus we should sanctify the
name of God, in receiving this holy Sacrament; you have had diverse things
propounded to you whereby you may come to know and easily to see that there
has been a great deal of dishonor done to this Sacrament, and the beauty and
glory of it has been darkened, and the sweet that the Saints might otherwise
have received in plucking has been exceedingly hindered. There is but one thing
more that I shall propound to you, and that is the several meditations that we
should meditate on in receiving of the Sacrament; the most concerning
meditations are suggested in the holy Communion that are in any thing
whatsoever, more concerning, more efficacious, more various meditations we
have suggested here then in any thing, and it is a great figne that men and
women, do not discern the Lords body if so be their meditations be barren at
that time. I will therefore suggest some nine or ten meditations that that
Ordinance of God may hold out very plainly, and familiarly to every
Communicant, for the busying of their thoughts all the time that action is a
doing.

Meditation 1. As first, that the way of man's salvation it was by a Mediator,
it is not only by Gods mercy, Gods saying that he is offended by sin, but he
will be content to pass it by; no, but it is through a Mediator; now this
meditation is suggested thus, when I see the bread and wine, if I disceren what
that signifyes it will hold forth this to me, that the way of man's salvation,
it is not merely from hence that God says, well, I will pardon them, and no
more, but there is required a great work of God to make an aronement, between
sinners and himself; this Sacrament does hold forth thus much unto us;
wherefore else have we bread and wine, but to signify that the way of our
rconciliation it must be through a Mediator?

Med. 2. The second Meditation is this, that this Mediator that stands between
God and us, is verily and truly man; he has taken our nature upon him; the
bread that puts us in mind of the body of Christ, and the wine of his blood,
and therefore we are to meditate of the humane nature of Jesus Christ; and this
is a meditation that has abundance that might spring out of it; what has the
Son of God taken our nature upon him? has he body and blood and humane nature
upon him? oh how has God honored humane nature? then let me not abuse my body
to lust, to wickedness, seeing that Jesus Christ has taken the body of man
upon him, humane nature upon him, let me honor humane nature that is so nearly
united to the divine nature; that's the second Meditation.

Meditation. 3. Here Is presented unto us what this Mediator has done for the
reconciling of us unto God, that his body was broken; he has subjected himself
to the breaking of his body, and to the pouring forth of his blood for the
reconciling of us; it is not merely (as before) that God says, I Will pardon
them; but Christ undertaking to make peace between his Father and us, it cost
him the breaking of his body, and the pouring forth of his blood; this is a
useful Meditation; Oh what should we be willing to suffer for Jesus Christ in
our bodies, even to resist unto blood, seeing Christ has been content to have
his precious body broken, and his blood shed for us!

Meditation 4 Again, a fourth Meditation is this, that here we come to see we
have occasion of meditating of that the Scripture says, that we are by the
blood of God saved, it is the blood of God, they crucified the Lord of glory,
that's the Scripture phrase; we should consider when we see the Wine poured out,
and so put in mind of blood, whose blood and whose body is this; It is no other
but the body and blood of him that was truly God, the second Person in Trinity.
This is the great Mystery of the Gospel, and this is very needful for us to be
thinking of when we see the body broken and the blood poured out: What will the
breaking of the body and shedding of the blood of a mere creature be
sufficient to make peace between God and Man? surely no; therefore you must
meditate whose body this is, and whose blood this is, it is the body and blood
of him that was God; Its true, God has no body nor no blood, but the same
person that was God, had a body and blood; that body and blood was united unto
the divine nature in a hypostaticall union, and from thence it came to have an
efficacy for to satisfy God, for to reconcile God and us together, this is
the great mystery of godliness.

Med. 5. Another Meditation is this, when you see Bread broken and Wine poured
out, oh the infinite dreadfulnesse of the justice of God! how dreadful is the
justice of God, that coming upon his own Son, and requiring satisfaction from
him, that should thus break him and bruise him, that should have his blood,
that should require such sufferings even from his Son! dreadful is Gods
justice, the justice of God, it is to be feared and to be trembled at; here we
see what is required for the sin of man, and nothing would be bated to Jesus
Christ himself.

Med. 6. Another Meditation is this, here I see presented to me what every soul
that shall be saved cost; whoever shall have his soul saved he has it saved by
a ransom, by a price paid that is more worth then ten thousand thousand worlds;
thou slightest thine own soul; but if it prove to be saved, it cost more then
if thousands of worlds had been given for thee; even the shedding of the blood
of Christ, every drop of which was more precious then ten thousand worlds.

Meditation 7. Again, from hence see what is the evil of sin, how great it is
that has made such a breach between God and my soul, that only such a way,
and such a means must take away my sin; I must either have lain under the
burden of my sin eternally, or Jesus Christ that is God and man must suffer so
much for it; oh, what Meditations are these to take up the hearts of men!

Meditation 8. Behold the infinite love of God to mankind, and the love of
Jesus Christ, that rather then God would see the children of men to perish
eternally, he would send his Son to take our nature upon him, and thus to
suffer such dreadful things; herein God shows his love; it is not the love of
God so much in giving you a good voyage, and prospering you outwardly in the
world; But, so God loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son; And it
pleased the Father to break his Son, and to pour out his blood, here is the
love of God and of Jesus Christ; oh, what a powerful, mighty, drawing,
efficacious Meditation should this be unto us!

Med. 9. Those that are believers they shall be nourished to eternal life, so
that there is no fear that ever a believer should quite fall off from God, and
die in his sin; Why? Because the body and blood of Christ is given unto him for
his spiritual nourishment: though a believer be never so weak, yet seeing God
has appointed the body and blood of his Son for him to feed upon and to
drink in a spiritual way, surely then the weakest in the world will be
strengthened to go through all the hazzards, and dangers that there are in the
world; it is this that strengthens believers to encounter with all kind of
dangers, its this that preserves the weakest grace in a believer, namely the
spiritual nourishment that God the Father has appointed to them, even the
feeding upon the body, and drinking the very blood of his Son; this is meat
indeed, and drink indeeed that will nourish to eternal life.

Med. 10. the last Meditation is this, when you come to this, seeing the bread
broken, and the wine powered out, you have an occasion to meditate of the whole
new Covenant, the Covenant of grace that God has made with sinners; for so the
words of institution are, This is the Cup of the new Testament: the new
Testament which is all one with the new Covenant, only different in this
particular; it contains the substance of the new Covenant, but called Testament
in this regard; to show that the Lord does do all in the new Covenant, that is,
he does not only promise such and such mercies upon condition of our believing
and repenting, but he does work believing and repenting, and works grace, and
therefore the same thing that is sometime called a Covenant, is called a
Testament; that is the will of God wherein the Lord does bequeath his rich
legacies to his Children, to those that shall be eternally saved, so that all
the good things in the Covenant of grace they are bequeathed by way of
Testament as well as Covenant, and this is a mighty comfortable meditation to
the Saints; for indeed when they look upon the way of the Gospel as in a way
of Covenant, why then they think this, this requires somewhat of our parts to
be done, and indeed God will keep Covenant on his part, but it may be we shall
not keep Covenant on ours, and so we may fail at last; but now when thou
look upon all the good things in the Gospel dispensed in the way of a
Testament, that is the will of God, the legacies that God does bequeath to his
servants, this is a mighty comfort to the soul, that all the precious things
of the Gospel come to me in the way of a Testament, and that's the meaning of
the new Testament, that is, the mercies of God in Christ coming now in the way
of another administration, then they did before; it is not only new in respect of
the Covenant of works that God made with Adam, but new in respect of the
administration; our forefathers, the Patriarchs, they had the same thing in
substance, but administered in a darker way, and many differences there are; but
now when we hear of the new Testament, there is presented unto us all the
riches of the Covenant of grace in the way of a legacy and in the
administration of it with cleernesse, and with a great deal of mercy and
goodness of God, the terror and harshnesse of the old administration being
taken away. Now these are the meditations, by which we should labor to
sanctify our hearts, when we are receiving of the Sacrament; and in the
working of these meditations upon our hearts; we shall come to sanctify the
name of God, when we are drawing nigh to him in that holy Ordinance of his;
thus for meditation.

The next thing when we are there, must be an actuating of these holy
dispositions that before we spoke of; it is not enough for a Christian to bring
grace to the Sacrament: but there must be a stirring of that grace at that
time; or otherwise the name of God is not sanctified in the receiving of the
Sacrament, and above all graces the actuating of the grace of faith; it is not
enough that thou be a believer, but thy faith must act at that very instant,
as thus.

First, when thou hear the Minister in the name of Christ say thus, this is
the body of Jesus Christ which was given for you, take, eat, thou should
have thy faith so acting upon the mercy of God, in giving Jesus Christ, for the
nourishment of thy foul to eternal life, as if thou did hear a voice from
heaven saying, here is the body of my Son given for thee particularly, take
it and eat, apply it to thee, and so make Christ one with thee by faith, as the
bread is made one with thy body when thou do eat it.

And then when thou come to take hold of the bread, thou art to put forth an
act of faith, faith being as the hand of the soul, and at that instant, when
thou take the bread and put it into thy mouth to eat, thou should
stir up the act of faith afresh, laying more hold upon Jesus Christ; look as
once thou did in thy first conversion, when Christ was presented to thee in
the word or in any other way, there was an act of faith drawn forth whereby
thy soul did cast it self, and roll it self upon Jesus Christ; so should
thou renew it; renew the same work of faith that thou did find in thy very
first conversion; and thereby thou shall come to have renewed comfort in the
renewing of that act; I might name thee other graces and dispositions; how
there should be a stirring and an acting of them; only remember I leave all
this point with this note, that grace is not enough for partaking the Sacrament
of the Lords supper, except there be an actuating, and a stirring up of that
grace; many Christians are careful to prepare, and examine before whether they
have grace or no; but at that time when they come to receive, then there is not
a lively working and stirring of that grace, and so they come to lose the
comfort and benefit of that Ordinance. Thus much shall suffice for this point of
sanctifying Gods name in receiving the holy Communion; I shall now come to the
last point, which is the sanctifying the name of God in prayer.

Sanctifying the name of God in Prayer.
NOw this argument might take us up many Sermons; but upon occasion of the
days of prayer and humiliation, I have preached diverse Sermons about the point
of prayer; therefore I shall be breife, and only now reckon up together, and
set before your view, the several things that are to be done for the
sanctifying of the name of God in prayer. First, for prayer in that we draw
nigh to God, and its a duty of Gods worship, that I suppose all of you cannot
but acknowledge; and that it is a natural duty of worship; the other was
instituted, but this is natural; its natural for the creature to draw nigh to
God in prayer, wherein the creature tenders up his homage to God, and manifests
his profession of his dependence upon God for all good that he has, and
acknowledges God as the Author of all good, therefore this is worship, and its
a great part of worship, prayer it is such a part of worship as sometimes in
Scripture its put for the whole worship of God, He that calls upon the name of
God shall be saved, that is, he that worships God aright, Jerem. 10. 25. and,
Pour out thy wrath upon the Heathen that know thee not, and on the families
that call not on thy name, that do not pray, that is, that do not worship thee;
there one part of worship is put for the whole, as being a principal part of
the worship of God.

Surely we must sanctify Gods name in prayer, for it is that that sanctifies
all things to us; 1 Timothy 4. 5. every thing is sanctified by the word of God and
prayer; And if the argument of Christ was right, as no question but it was,
that the Temple was greater then the gold upon the Temple, because the Temple
did sanctify the gold; and the Altar was greater then the offering that was
offered upon it, because it did sanctify the offering; then prayer must needs
be a mighty great Ordinance; a greater thing then any other; because that it
sanctifies all things. The word sanctifies the creatures; but prayer sanctifies
the very word unto our use; and therefore when we read the word we are to pray
for a sanctified use of the word; Prayer is a great Ordinance; a great duty of
worship that sanctifies all; prayer has a casting voice (as I may say) in all
the great works of God in the world, the great affairs of the Kingdom of God,
the Kingdom of his power, and the Kingdom of Christ, I say prayer has a kind
of a casting voice, and does order under God the great things of the world,
they are according to the prayers of the Saints, they bring down blessings upon
the godly, they pour forth judgments on the wicked; the prayers of the
Saints, they are the vyalls that are poured forth in a special manner upon the
heads of the wicked; therefore Gods name is to be sanctified in Prayer.

It is to be sanctified first in preparation; Psalm 10. 17. Thou will prepare
their heart; thou will cause thine ear to hear; it is the Lord that prepares
the heart; and then he causes his ear to hear; and therefore in 1 Pet. 5. 7.
we are there required to watch unto prayer; men and women should keep a narrow
watch over their hearts and minds, that they may not be hindered in their
prayers, that they may be always in a fit posture to pray; watch unto prayer,
its that that would help us against many temptations to evil; if I give way
to such and such temptations it, will hinder my prayers; I shall not have that
freedom and enlargement in prayer as otherwise, if I give way to such and such
things, therefore let me take heed of this, for it will hinder my prayers. As
if the Apostle should say, this should be the care of Christians; then they are
like to sanctify the name of God in prayer, if this be their great care that
there is nothing in the world that shall hinder their prayers; O let me take
heed I do nothing to hinder my prayers; if I go abroad into company, and am
merry and jocond, and there game and drink, and sport my self in company;
will not this hinder my prayers? will not this hinder the spiritualnesse of my
heart in Communion with God in prayer, when I come home at night? I appeal to
you, have you had that freedom in prayer, afterward? surely no, therefore
watch unto prayer.

Now for the preparation of the heart to prayer, we must understand either,

First, what is to be done in the course of ones life, or

Secondly, What Is to be done just when one comes to prayer.

For the first, the course of ones life: labor to keep all things even and
clear between God and your souls; that so you may not come with shakels,
about your legs; with guiltiness (I mean) upon your consciences; men that have
given way to any base sinful way, when they come to prayer, the guilt of their
hearts does even sink them; but those that can keep their peace with God in
the course of their lives, they have other manner of freedom in prayer, then
you that walk loosely and contract guiltiness upon your Spirits.

And then the second thing is to keep our hearts sensible of our continual
dependence upon God; sensible how we depend upon God, for whatsoever we are,
whatsoever we have, whatsoever we do; for the blessing of all is from God. The
beams of the Sun do not so depend upon the Sun, as we upon God; that if he
does but withdraw himself never so little from us, we all sink down to
nothing and perish for ever; that soul that every day and hour is sensible of
the infinite dependence it has upon God for its present and eternal estate;
will be fit for prayer; and that should be our care for to carry our selves, as
any hour in the day, or minute in the hour, we might be fit to go to prayer;
and that's one meaning of that place in the Thessalonians, pray continually; not
that every moment we should be praying; but that we should keep our hearts in
a praying frame; some of you when you have let out your passions and are in a
distemper, what will you go to prayer now? your conscience will tell you that
you are not fit to go to prayer at that time, certainly if you be not fit to
pray, you are not fit to live; you are in an ill condition at any time if you
be not fit to pray; and there can be no excuse whatever that can be sufficient
to plead for your selves why you should not be fit to pray at any time; there
is that continual dependence upon God for all, and that need you have of the
blessing of God for every thing, that there is reason you should be in a fit
condition for praying at all times; but now when you come to prayer at the set
time, then there should be a special preparation.

First, you should prepare your selves by getting fresh and powerful
apprehensions of the glory of God, before whom you go; prepare by meditation
about the glory of that infinite God that you are now addressing your self
unto; possess yourselves with thoughts and meditations of the glory of the
great God; that's the first.

Secondly, labor to get your hearts sensible of what you go for. I am now
going to God; for what? for pardon of sin, or for assurance of his love; or for
power against sin; or for such and such mercies; let me by meditation work my
heart to be sensible of these things that I am going to God for, to set a due
prior upon those mercies that I am praying for, and to get my heart affected
with them.

Thirdly, labor to get your hearts separated from the world, and from all
things that are here below in the world; and that should have been a third
thing in the course of your lives, you should never let out you hearts to any
creature, either to businesses or pleasures in the world so, but that you may
have command of your hearts to call them when you will; to call them in to God
in prayer; and then when you come to prayer there should be an actual
separation of your hearts from all things in the world; dedicating yourselves
to God for this time, as one that has nothing to do with the world, nothing to
do with any thing but this duty that now you are about; this is the preparation
of your hearts to prayer in the course of your lives.

Now then for the prayer its self.

First we must consider of the matter of prayer.

And Secondly of the manner of it.

First for the matter of it, we must look to it that it be according to Gods
will 1 John. 5. 14. this is the confidence that we have in him, that if we
ask any thing according to his will he hears us; therefore for the matter we
must be sure it must be good that we pray for; it must be for the glory of
God; for the good of our selves and the good of our Brethren.

First, for the glory of God, that should be the chief matter that we are to
pray for; so Christ when he teaches us to pray, he begins the very first
petition, Matthew. 6. 9, 10. hallowed be thy name; thy Kingdom come; thy will be
done; first begin with the the glory of God, mind that in the chief place,
above all other things. God gives you leave to pray for outward things; but
first for the glory of God, minding that before your own benefit; before the
pardon of sin and your daily bread; how few do sanctify Gods name in this?
people have little mind to pray, but when they are in outward afflictions, when
they are upon their sick beds then they will pray; or at sea in storms then
they will pray, then it seems that the maine matter of your prayer is only
for your selves; but how has the matters of the glory of the great God, and
the good of the Churches taken your hearts all this while? how have your hearts
been affected with this, that the name of God has been so little sanctified in
the world, and that the Kingdom of God has not come, and that the will of God
has not been done, have these things taken up your hearts in prayer, the
matters of the glory of God and the good of the Churches, though your selves
have not any particular interest in them? if these things did but take up your
hearts in prayer, then, when you are at sea you would remember the cause of the
Churches, as much as your selves; the Church is as it were in the midst of the
sea, tossed up and down and in a great storm; now why do not you pray as
earnestly for the Kingdom of Christ among his Churches, as for your selves
when you are in a storm at sea? yea and spiritual things should be the chief
matter of your prayer; for they are the nearest to the glory of God; though God
has his glory from other things, yet spiritual things are nearest the glory
of God; now in these days of prayer, many will come to pray, that they might
be freed from danger, that they might have outward peace; this is good; but
spiritual things are the chief things; and therefore the strength of your
spirits should be thus powered forth to God; O that I could get my heart to God,
and the assurance of the love of God! O that I could get the shine of his face!
O that I could get power over such and such corruptions.

And I beseech you observe this, that spiritual things may be prayed for
absolutely; but outward things must be prayed for conditionally. I may pray
(and never put any condition in at all) that the Lord would pardon my sins, and
help me against my corruptions, etc. But when I pray for the health of my body,
I ought to pray, if this be according to thy will, then restore me to the
health of my body, or the health of my husband, or the health of my wife; but
thou may pray, Lord convert the soul of my husband or the soul of my wife,
without any condition at all; when your estates at Sea are in danger, when you
pray for them, you must make conditions, Lord, as thou see best for me so do
thou deal with me; this shows the excellency that there is in spiritual
things above outward things, surely spiritual things are more to be desired,
for they are to be prayed for absolutely, and the other to be prayed for only
conditionally; that's for the first.

In the second place we are to pray for our own good, God does give us leave so
to do; only here comes in a question.

Quest. Whether it be sinful to pray for afflictions, as sometimes some will
be ready to do.

Answ. To that I answer, first, take it absolutely considered, we may not pray
that God would afflict us, because affliction is in its self materially an
evil thing, and a fruit of the curse, therefore we may not (I say) absolutely
pray for it: but thus far we may pray for afflictions, disjunctively,
conditionally, comparatively.

Disjunctively thus, Lord, either grant unto me a sanctified use of such a
mercy, or otherwise let me rather be without it; let me have a sanctified use
of my sickness, or otherwise let my sickness be continued to me; thus now
you may pray for continuing in sickness.

Or thus, conditionally, Lord, if thou see that my heart be so vile and
wretched that I will abuse (through my corruption) such and such mercies, Lord
rather take them from me, and let me be without them; if thou see that
there be no way to break this proud heart of mine, but such a way, Lord let
that be thy way to break it, if thou see it according to thy will as the
fittest way.

Then comparatively thus, Lord rather let me have any affliction then sin,
rather let me suffer loss of my estate then sin against thee, then depart from
thee: any thing Lord rather then sin. Thus you may pray for afflictions, but
not absolutely. You must not pray that God would send you afflictions
absolutely, for you do not know your hearts; it may be if afflictions should
come, your hearts may be as stubborn under your afflictions as they are now;
for affliction has no power in it self to do us any good.

And then for the good of others, for Christ teaches us to pray, Our Father.

There comes in here a rebuke of the wicked practice of diverse in cursing, and
then a question about it.

It is a wicked thing to use curses; but its a most wicked thing to wish evil
to others in a way of prayer; yet how many do so? though it may be they do
not think it, they speak to God, and desire him to bring such and such evils
upon their neighbors; yea, sometimes parents, upon their children; this is a
wicked practice of men; what, is it not wickedness enough for thee to have any
desire that there should any evil befall thy brother, but will thou dare to
presume to call God to be an instrument of the execution of thy base sinful
wrath, that God must be a drudge as it were to thy wrath and to thy passion?
this is abominable wickedness. Any of you that ever have been guilty of this
sin of cursing others, wives, children, servants, or friends the Lord rebuke
you for this sin; how far have thou been from sanctifying Gods Name in prayer?
whereas, in stead of sanctifying the holy Name of God, thou have called God to
be a servant, and a drudge to thy passion, God must be called to help the
venting of thy passion: oh, remember this you that have been at sea, and have
been angry, and things not going according to your mind, have fallen a cursing,
and a wishing such and such evils might come upon those you are angry with;
that's a kind of prayer, but it is a most fearful taking the name of God in
vain in the highest degree, and certainly God will not hold him guiltless
that shall so take his Name in vain; therefore be humbled for this sin.

Object. But you will say, do not we read in the book of the Psalms, where
many times the Prophet David does curse the enemies of God and wishes evil to
come upon them.

Answ. To that I answer, first, that the Prophets, and those that penned the
Psalms they had a prophetical spirit; and those places that you read that are
in way of cursing, they are rather prophetical predictions of evil then
direful imprecations, they are rather foretelling what shall be in a way of
prophecy then wishing what should be.

Secondly, if they be wishing what should be, then I answer, that those that
were endued with such a prophetical spirit, they did know who were the
implacable enemies of God, and who were not, as David prayed against Judas, so
many hundred years before he was borne; by a prophetical spirit, he knew that
he was the child of perdition; indeed if we could certainly know a man that
were to be a castaway eternally from God, it were another matter; as the
Church in the time of Julian, because of his Apostasy being so abominable, it
was determined almost generally by them that he had committed the sin against
the holy Ghost, and upon that they cursed him. Now I say, those that had an
extraordinary spirit that did know who these were, they might do it; but this
is no example for us in an ordinary way to wish evil and curses upon others.
But thus far we may do with the enemies of the Church.

First, we may curse them disjunctively, Lord, either take them out of the way,
or keep them that they may not do such mischief in the Church: or thus,
conditionally, if thou see Lord that they be implacable, thou know them,
if so, let thy wrath and curse pursue them; Lord thou see what evil they are
set upon, and therefore rather then they should attain their mischievous
designs, let thy wrath and curse pursue them; so we may do it, but not
absolutely to curse any, though they should do us never so much wrong, we are
called to blessing; but now in zeal to God, take heed that we be not carried
on in our own passion. But being sure it is in a zeal to God, we may wish the
curses of God to pursue those that God knows to be implacable; this is but an
appealing to God, and not at all fastening it upon any particular persons that
we know, but leaving it unto God for the execution of it, and so in a zeal to
the glory of God, we may do it, and we are warranted so to do by the second
Petition, Thy Kingdom come: for that petition that requires us to pray for the
coming of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, does also require that we should pray
against all means that hinder the coming of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, so
that every time that the Church prays thy Kingdom come or any prays thy
Kingdom come, they do as much as say, O Lord, do thou set thy self against
all the enemies of thy Kingdom; if they belong to thy election, Lord convert
them, but otherwise Lord confound them. Now thus we see how we are to sanctify
the Name of God in prayer, in regard of the matter of the prayer; but now for
the manner of prayer. The most things I confess are there.

First, when we come to prayer, we must be sure to pray with understanding, 1
Cor. 14. 15. What is it then? I will pray with the spirit, and will pray with
understanding also, God does not love the sacrifice of fools; we must not come
babbling to God in prayer to speak we know not what, and to multiply words we
know not wherefore, but God does require that those that come to prayer, come
with understanding, that they offer to God a rational, a reasonable, an
understanding sacrifice; God is a Spirit, and he will be worshipped in spirit
and in truth; now as it belongs to all other duties of worship, so especially
in prayer, to know what we do when we pray, not to think to put off God with a
mere empty sound; that's the first thing.

The second thing in the manner of prayer, it is the giving up all the
faculties of our souls in it; I spoke to that in the worship of God in
general, we shall apply it now particularly to prayer, the giving up, not
only out understandings, but wills, thoughts, affections, strength in prayer,
in 2 Chronicles. 20. 3. it is said of Jehosaphat, that he set himself to seek the
Lord, he did give his whole self to seek the Lord; we are to give our whole
self, and not to divide in prayer. Now this were an argument that indeed might
well take up a whole Sermon, in showing the evil of the wandering of our
spirits in prayer; we should take heed of the wandering of our spirits in
hearing of the Word, and receiving the Sacraments, and so in prayer; the people
of God are much troubled with the wandering of their thoughts both in Word and
Sacrament, and it is their great burden, and should be so, but I never hear
any more complainings of the wandering of their spirits then in the time of
prayer, the people of God are much pestered in their spirits with this evil,
it is very grievous unto them, and many of them go under it as a grievous
burden all their days; the chiefest burden that is upon their spirits is
their wandering in prayers; so that if God should speak to them as he spoke unto
Solomon, and bade him ask what he should give him, I verily believe there are
many in this Congregation, that have already good assurance of Gods love in
Christ, if they had not that, that would be the maine thing that they would
ask, but having attained that, if God would speak from heaven and say, what
shall I give you for your selves, if he should ask you in the General, it may
be you would ask something for the Churches; but if it be for your selves, you
would put up this petition, oh Lord that I may be delivered from a wandering
spirit in holy duties, and especially in the duty of prayer, that I may thereby
come to enjoy more holy communion with thy self then ever yet I enjoyed, and
they would account this to be a greater mercy then if God should give them to
be Kings or Queens over the whole World; if God should put these two into the
balance, either the whole world to possess or otherwise to have more free
hearts in coming to God in prayer, and to be delivered from that that has so
much hindered their communion with God in prayer, they would despise and scorn
the world in comparison of such a mercy as this is: howsoever carnal hearts
they think little of it, but those that are the servants of God they find it
to be very grievous to them; but being the time is past, I shall reserve that
to speak yet a little more largely for the help of those that are under the
burden of it.

I Will only speak one thing further now, and that shall be to those that are
wicked and vile, that not only have vain wandering thoughts in prayer, but even
in the very duty of prayer many times have wicked and ungodly thoughts; how
horrible are they? unclean thoughts, murderous thoughts it may be, and most
abominable. I confess even those that are godly may sometimes have some
blasphemous thoughts cast into them, for the devil is never more busy then at
the time of prayer; but they rather come from the devil then from the stream
and corruption of their own hearts, which may be we may make out more clearly
afterward; but now I speak to such as have most wicked abominable thoughts,
rising from the stream and corruption of their hearts, such thoughts as their
hearts do close withal in prayer, and they can roll those thoughts about in
their minds as a child will roll a piece of sugar in its mouth; and this is
the wickedness of many men and women's hearts.

Take but this one note with you, that all those dreadful, vile, unclean,
covetous thoughts of thine in prayer, they have been to God as if you had
spoken them in words; thoughts to God, are all one with him as words are to
men; for God is a spirit, and the spirit does converse with God in thoughts, as
well as men do converse with men in words; and what a woeful guiltines would
have been upon you, had you spoken such vile and wicked things to men as some
times has been in your minds, even when you have been praying to God, how
would the company have even spit in your faces, and kicked you from them? none
that have any face of godliness would have endured you in their company; and
yet here is the evil of it, your hearts are not troubled, but you rise off your
knees and away you go; thou have a cauterised conscience, a seared conscience,
that can entertain such vile thoughts at any time without having thy spirit
afflicted, and going away with shame and confusion, as if the greatest evil
had befalne thee; therefore take heed of this.

SERMON XIIII.
LEVITICUS. 10. 3. I will be Sanctified in them that come nigh me.
WE are first to sanctify Gods Name in regard of the matter of our prayers.
And Secondly, in regard of the manner. For the first, we made an end of it the
last day, and came unto the manner, and there were two things mentioned.

First, that we must pray with understanding. Secondly, we must give up our
selves to prayer. Now in the close of the exercise we had occasion to fall
upon that Argument about the wandering of our thoughts in prayer, and by that we
come to take Gods name in vain, in stead of Sanctifying of his Name; God
expects that we should have our thoughts, and wills, and affections, our whole
souls acting upon him in the duty of prayer, or ese we do not pray to God as
unto a God; vain thoughts in prayer do pick up the sacrifice like the birds
that Abraham drove away from the Sacrifice, that they should not peck it.
Wicked lusts in men's hearts are like swine to take the meat and all to hale it
in the dirt, so their prayers are filthy and dirty with their lusts; but those
that are otherwise godly, yet by their vain thoughts the beauty and
excellency of their prayers is taken away; as wine and beer that have the
spirits of them gone, so the life and spirit of our duties are gone by our
vain thoughts, and therefore vain thoughts do dead the heart very much. So
says David in the 119. Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity, and quicken
me in thy Law: while our eyes look upon vanity, there will be no quickness in
our hearts in any service that we tender up to God; now many of Gods people
have experience of the evil of this, and they groan under the burden of this,
and as I said the last time, if so be that the Lord should speak from heaven to
them and ask them what they would have, they having already the assurance of
his love in Christ, they would ask the deliverance from a vain spirit in the
performance of holy duties, Bring no vain Oblations says God in Isa. 1. 13.
Oh what vain oblations do we bring by the vanity of our thoughts in prayer!
it is true, the best of all will have vain thoughts sometimes; but yet, as one
compares the vain thoughts of men in prayer, like unto a spaniel that goes out
with a man, he walks perhaps but half a mile, but the spannel will be running
up and down, this way and that way, and if all the space of ground which the
spaniel has gone over should be measured, it may be while you are walking
half a mile, the spaniel fetching compasses here and there would be half a
dozen miles, so our fancies are like a spaniel which will have fetches about
this way and that way, in a thousand vain thoughts; but thus now it is with a
godly man; as a spaniel though running from his master, yet if he give him a
call, he is able to call him to him presently; and it were well if it were so
with us, though our fancies be wild yet if we were able to call in our fancies
and to have them at command it were well with us: And I find it very much that
those that are new comers they complain much of the vanity of their thoughts,
they were wont to pray before, and they never had such vain thoughts as now
they have; the reason why there is so much vanity of thoughts, or at least so
much taken notice of,

It is first because there is but a little grace in the midst of a great deal
of corruption in young converts, like a spark of fire in the midst of a great
deal of ashes; now if there lies a heap of ashes and nothing else, ^ou do not
stir them; but if there be ashes and some fire, then you will stir them and
be blowing those sparks to kindle another fire by. Now when you come to make
any motion, then the ashes will fly about, whereas before they lay still; so it
is here; before God wrought upon thy heart, there was nothing else but ashes
upon thy soul, and then they lay still, but now God has kindled some sparks
of grace in thy heart, and God is blowing them up to a greater heat, and is
bringing of them to a flame; upon this motion that is in thy heart, and the
stirring to kindle those sparks further in thy heart, it is that the ashes of
thy corruptions do as it were fly about thine ears, and that there is such
stirrings of corruption more then there was before, it is not because there is
more corruption then there was formerly, but before there being nothing else
but corruption it lay still, and now because there is something else, therefore
it is that corruption does so stir; and besides you know a man that was wont
to keep lewd company, if God turn him that he will keep that company no more,
at first he shall be more troubled with them then he was before; and they will
keep oftener knocking at his door, and laboring to get him to them again; so
it is here, when the soul, vanity and lusts were as friends together there was
no disturbance, and taking notice of any thing then, but now when the soul is
casting out those sinful distempers, and will have no more of them, they for
the present will be more importunate, active and stiring then they were before.
And besides, the Lord does this to humble thy heart the more, that thereby thou
may come to see the great corruption that was in thy soul before; the
working of thy corruptions will discover much evil in thy heart, that thou
did not think was there before; when the corruptions of men and women lie
still, they think there is no such thing in their souls, as your civil men,
what is the reason that they bless themselves and think they are in a good
condition, its because their corruptions lie still in them and do not stir,
they cannot believe what abundance of wickedness there is in their hearts, if
God should open the wickedness that there is in the hearts of men naturally,
and so all unregenerate men they would think you speak strange riddles,
whereas they bless themselves; they bless God; they know no such thing in
their hearts; not yes there are such things, only they are not stird, but they
lie quiet as mudde in the bottom of a pond, there it is, yet you cannot see it
till it be stird; at first conversion I say the Lord suffers thy corruption
thus to stir, that he may discover to thee what an evil heart thou have, what
abundance of sin there is in thy heart, and therefore your young converts, they
look upon themselves more loathsome and vile then ever they thought they had
been.

And besides the Devil sees it a vain thing to tempt a young convert to any
gross act of sin; when conscience has life and power in it, he^ shall never
prevail that way; but now he thinks he may prevail to disturb them with
vain thoughts, and therefore he lays his strength most that way; therefore
let not such be discouraged, that find their Spirits anoyed and pestered with
them, if they make them to be the burden of their Souls; notwithstanding much
vanity of thoughts, the Lord will accept of any desire that they have to
sanctify his name in holy duties, and I shall give you these three or four
rules to help you against these wandering and vain thoughts in holy duties,
and especially in prayer.

First, when thou go to prayer, account it to be a great work; set a high
price upon thy prayer; not as having any excellency in it as it comes from
thee; but set a high price upon it as a great Ordinance of God, wherein there
is Communion with God to be enjoyed, and the influence of the grace of God to
be conveyed through it; so set a high price upon prayer, at every time thou art
going to prayer; Lord, I am now setting upon a work that is of very great
consequence, and much lies upon it, and I would account it to be a sore and a
great evil to me, if I should lose but this prayer: this would be a special
means to compose thy Spirit; and to keep thee from wandering, as Nehemiah, in
Nehem. 6. 3. a place that I have sometimes quoted upon such an occasion, when
the enemies of Nehemiah that would hinder the building of the Temple, sent to
him that they might talk together, no says he; I am doing a great work so
that I cannot come down; so when the Devil and the vanity of thine own
heart, would send to thee to parley, and talk as it were with thee, give an
Answer, I cannot stand parlying with these things; the work that I am about is
a great work; there are very few people that do account the work of prayer a
great work; if thou did, it would help thee much against the vanity of thy
thoughts.

Secondly, Every time thou go to prayer, thou that art most troubled with
such vain thoughts, renew thy resolutions against them; I have been troubled
with vain thoughts heretofore, and am afraid, if I look not to it, that I
shall lose this prayer also; and therefore O Lord, here I renew my resolutions
to set against them in this prayer with all my might; it is very much that may
be done by strong resolutions, and especially if thy strong resolutions be
renewed resolutions; for an old resolution begins to grow weak; a man that has
resolved upon a thing a great while ago, it has little power ever him; but
now when a man has resolved upon a thing but this morning, and just at the
time when he is going about it, now he does resolve upon it, and set himself
upon it, and does resolve through the grace of God, that whatsoever difficulty
he meets with all, whatsoever it cost him, that he will go through this work,
I say that resolutions renewed have a great deal of power; and you cannot
imagine what a great deal of power the renewing of resolution against vain
thoughts will have, if they were renewed every time thou go to prayer,
until thou gettest power over thy thoughts, do but make trial of this; thou
have lost (...) prayer by vain thoughts; and thou have been troubled for
(...), and yet they come again; do but try for this week; as I remember I
said in the point of passion and anger, that we should resolve with our selves,
well, whatsoever falls out this morning, I am resolved I will bear it; so
bethink thy self how many prayers thou have lost by vain thoughts; and now
(...) thy resolutions, and Covenant with God, that for this prayer, I will
(...) my self against them, whatsoever pains I take, I will be sure yet
withal to look up to Gods grace to assist one, I will be sure this prayer to
keep my heart close to what I am about; and perhaps that will help you a
little; but yet some vain thoughts will come for all that; then the next night
renew them again; and the next morning renew them again; and that till thou
come to a habit of keeping thy heart close to the duty, though now thou
feel thy heart so wild, that thou think it is impossible to bring it into
order, but certainly by such a means, thy heart will be brought into order.

Thirdly, Be sure to set the presence of God before you in prayer, have a real
light of the infinite greatness, Majesty, and glory of that you present your
selves unto, when you are are calling upon him; if so be that thou can have a
real fight of God in his glory, it will keep thy heart close to the duty, as if
a man be wandering with his eyes, and looking after every feather, if the King
or some great person come into the Room, all his thoughts would be about the
King, or the great person that were coming in: so if you would present the
Lord in his glory and greatness, excellency, majesty, and power, before you,
and what a dreadful God he is in himself, and yet what a merciful God he is
to us in his Son: this would mightily compose our hearts, certainly men and
women that are so wandering in their prayers; it is because their eyes are not
open to look upon God in his glory, they are as it were dreaming and do not
apprehend that God stands and looks upon them, and observes them, and that God
takes notice of every wandering thought that comes from them; they do not
consider that God does converse with the thoughts of men, as well as men do
with the words of men; that's a third rule.

Fourthly, Take heed thou be not deceived; because that those thoughts thou
have in prayer, do not appear to be very evil in themselves. This is a great
deceit and hinder many in the sanctifying of Gods name in prayer; there is
sometimes damed in some vain thoughts; now because the thought has no great
evil in it self, therefore they think they may play with it; and their
hearts close with it, and so (...) along with it as the fish does with the
bait; if the Devil casts in a thought of blasphemy, that makes thee quake and
shake; but if thy thoughts have no (...) evil in them, but they are slight
things; matters of no moment one way or other, upon that thy heart begins to be
dandling, and playing with them; therefore remember this rule, that in the time
of prayer, whatsoever thoughts be in thy mind that do not concern the present
duty, they are sinful before God, though the thoughts for the matter of them
be never so good, yet thou art to abandon them as sinful at that time.
Therefore never be deceived with this, that the thoughts are not very sinful,
that's another rule.

In the last place observe this rule, if ever God has helped thee at any time
in prayer, that thy heart has been kept close to a duty, and thou have had
Communion with him, bless God for that, bless God for that help; it is a rule
of very great use for us to get further assistance from God in any thing, if so
be our hearts be enlarged to bless God for any assistance we have had
heretofore; and the reason why we gain and prosper so little in our Christian
course, it is because we do not take notice of what God has done for us, to
give God glory for mercyes formerly received, and therefore God takes little or
no delight in coming in with further mercyes to us; as if you had a young
nursery of trees, and they began to thrive very well, but there comes a company
of Caterpillars and spoils almost all the young Trees that are set, only two
or three are kept from the Caterpillars; a man goes into his orchard, and looks
upon his Trees, and this is spoild, and that is spoiled; but he sees two or
three and these flourish fairly, and these are full of buds, and are like to
come to something, and he rejoices mightily in those, because they are saved
when so many others are spoiled; and so do thou view thy prayers, and consider
how many has been spoiled as it were by these Caterpillars; for I compare
wandering vain thoughts in prayer unto Caterpillars that are upon the trees;
and we see that if stormy rainy weather comes the Caterpillars will fall; and
one would think that these blustering storms and the hand of God that has
been out against us, should have cleansed our thoughts and souls from these
Caterpillars that have been upon our duties, but many duties have been spoiled;
yet thou may say, that through Gods mercy such a Morning in my closet, the
Lord has preserved a prayer to himself, and I have gotten power over this
vain heart of mine, bless God for this, and so the Spirit of God will be more
ready to come in and help thee another time; but thus much shall suffice to
speak to this, that's the second thing, we must give up our selves wholly to
this duty.

The third thing for the sanctifying of Gods name in prayer is this, there must
be the breathings of the Spirit of God, otherwise Gods name is not sanctified;
that in Romans 8. 26. is clear for this, likewise the Spirit also helps our
infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the
Spirit it self makes intercession for us with groanings which cannot be
uttered; if any of you should say how can we sanctify Gods name, we are poor
and weak, we can do little? mark, it is said here, that the Spirit helps
our infirmities to pray, and the word is exceeding emphaticall in the
original; in your books it is but merely helping our infirmities, but the
meaning of the word is, in these two things, the Spirit helps; that is, look
how a man that is taking up a heavy piece of Timber at one end, he alone cannot
get it up, but there comes another and takes it up at the other end and so
helps him; The word signifies such a kind of helping, as when a man takes a
thing at the other end, or on the other side, one standing the one way, and the
other standing the other way, or one taking up one end, and the other the other
end, that is the meaning of it; he helps our infirmities, the poor foul is
pulling and tugging with its own heart, and finds his heart heavy and dull,
like a logge in a ditch, and have not many of you found your hearts so? but now
then when you are tugging with your hearts, and would feign lift up your hearts
to God in prayer, there comes the Spirit of God at the other end, and takes the
heaviest end of the burden and helps you to lift it up; if a child were at one
end of the logge, and that were but light, and the other end very heavy, if one
come and take up the heaviest end, a little strength will serve for the lighter
end; so the Spirit comes and takes up the heavier end in duty, and so helps our
infirmities; helps together, and then the other word is The Spirit; that is
together with the acting of the graces of the Spirit in our hearts, you must
not say so; alas, what can I do? it must be the Spirit of God that must do
all; it is true, he does all.

First, he gives converting and habitual grace, and assisting and actuating
grace; but now when the Spirit has wrought grace so as to convert the heart,
and has given habitual grace in thy heart, why then when the Spirit comes to
assist it, does expect that thou should stir up all the gifts and graces
of the Spirit, and the very strength of thy body; the Spirit of God expects
that thou should act to the uttermost thou art able, what power has been
given thee by God, and when thou art in acting, then the Spirit comes and
helps together with us; noting that we are to put forth what strength we have,
and thus Gods name will be sanctified, when as we putting forth the graces of
the Spirit in us, then the Spirit comes and helps; and what comes from us now,
comes from the breathings of the holy-Spirit in us, and then God who knows the
meaning of the Spirit, will know now the meaning of our sighs and groans;
therefore when thou art going to prayer, thou art to eye the Spirit of God;
thou art by the eye of faith to look upon the Spirit of God, and to cast thy
soul upon the assistance of the Spirit of God, thou art to look upon the
Holy Ghost, as appointed by the Father and the Son to that office, to be a
helper to his poor servants in the duties of worship, and especially in that
great duty of prayer; now upon the reading of this text, and having it thus
opened, this is one good help for thee in prayer; read this text, and then
exercise thy faith upon it; Lord have thou not said that thy Spirit helps our
infirmities, when we know not what to pray for, nor how to pray for any thing
as we ought? but the Spirit will come, now Lord make good this word of thine to
my soul at this time, and let me have the breathings of the Spirit of God in
me; alas the breaths of men, if it come from gifts and parts, I know thou will never regard it, except there be the breathings of the Holy Ghost in me
in prayer; now, if you would know whether the Spirit of God does come in or no,
you may know it by this; the Spirit of God carries unto God, and it makes the
prayer sweet and delightful, so much of the Spirit of God as is there, it
comes to the soul in the duty, and it leaves a savor behind it; a gracious
savor is always left behind, when the Spirit of God comes to breath; O the
breath of the Spirit of God is a sweet breath, and it makes prayers sweet; it
never comes into the Soul but after it has done any work it came for, it
leaves a sweet sent, after that, the soul finds a sweetness in that prayer;
now many of you have been in the morning at prayer, but I appeal to you; what
sweet savor of the Spirit of God is left behind? certainly if the Spirit has
been there it is like civil that is put into a little box, though you should
take out the civit, yet there will be a sweet savor left behind; so though the
Spirit of God, in respect of the present assistance, withdraws it self, yet it
leaves a sweet savor behind.

The fourth thing is, purity of heart; pure heart and hands, in Heb. 10. 22.
Rev. 5. 8. having every one of them harpes, and golden vials full of odours
which are the prayers of Saints; mark, the prayers of the Saints are odours in
golden vials, the golden vials I may compare to the heart; the hearts of the
Saints must be as golden vials, and then their prayers will be as odours; in 1 Timothy 2. 8. the Holy Ghost giving directions how we should pray, it is with
this qualification, I will therefore that men pray every where lifting up holy
hands without wrath and doubting; the outward conversation must be pure, and
the heart pure; in Job 22. 26. mark what is said concerning that holy man;
there is a promise made to him for the lifting up of his face to God, putting
away iniquity from his Tabernacle, that by putting away evil from our
Tabernacles, and so from our hearts, we may be able to lift up our hearts with
joy to go; and that's the fifth thing, purity of heart and hands.

The sixth thing is, in truth, when we come to call upon God, we must call upon
him in truth, Psalm. 145. 18. the Lord is nigh unto all, to all that call upon
him in truth; you will say what is the meaning of that? to that I answer;

First, there must be inward dispositions answerable to the expressions; as for
instance, when I come to express the greatness of the majesty of God, then I
must have an inward disposition suitable to this expression, I must have a fear
and reverence of the infinite majesty of God.

Secondly, When I come to confess my sin, to judge my self for my sin, there
must be an inward disposition suitable to such a confession; O how many men and
women will come and speak great things against themselves for their sins, and
judge themselves for their sins, and yet there is no such disposition in their
hearts suitable to their words; you shall have some in praying with others, they
will be a means to break the hearts of others, they will so follow their sin;
and take such shame and confusion upon themselves for their sin, and yet God
knows their hearts not stird all this while; and then they will call upon God
for pardon of sin, and for power against their sin, and yet God knows that
their hearts do close with their sin, and are loath to part with their sin in
the mean time, this is falsenesse of heart; when the inward disposition is not
answerable to outward expressions; I beseech you my brethren consider of the
prayers you have made, and especially you that pray much with others, look what
expressions you have made, and see whether there be answerable dispositions to
the expressions you have made, and how that the Lord does remember every
expression that you have made.

Thirdly, we must call upon God in truth; that is, conscionably to perform
the engagements of prayer, prayer puts an engagement upon the heart; now those
that call upon him in truth are conscionable to perform the engagements; as
now, do I pray for any good thing, I am engaged to endeavor in the use of all
means for the attaining of the good thing? when you confess a sin, why, you
are engaged by that means to endeavor all your might against that sin; and
when you pray for my grace, you are engaged to make use of all means you can
for the attaining of that grace; and then besides, in prayer there is much
profession unto God of our sincerity and uprightness, and of our willingness
to be at his dispose, perform these engagements that thou make to God in
prayer; if God should present to us all our professions that we have made to
him in prayer, and tell us how we have come short of them, it would make us be
in shame and confusion in our own thoughts.

Another thing in prayer must be faith; pray without doubting as in the former
Scripture, the prayer of faith prevails much; James 1. 6, 7. a man that
wavereth and doubts must not think to obtain any thing of God. But I should
have opened what that faith is that we should have in prayer, we must have
faith to believe that the thing that we do pleases God, and faith in Gods
promises, and faith in Gods providence, this should be exercised in the time of
our prayers; And therefore after we have done, to go away believing, as Hannah
in 1 Samuel 1. 18. we read of her, that after she had been praying she went
away, and looked no more sad; the text faith, noting that after we have been
pouring forth our souls to God, we should believe and exercise faith and not
go in as drooping a way as ever we did.

Object. You will say, yea, if we knew certainly that God will hear us.

Answ. The way to be assured that God will hear you, is by casting your selves
upon God, how can you know that he will hear, but by resting upon him? I have
been with God, and I have been doing the duty of a poor creature, and for the
success I leave it to God, and therefore it must be with faith.

But I have so many sins mixed with my prayers, how can I believe?

You have an excellent Scripture for that to help a soul, to exercise faith
in prayer, notwithstanding there has been many infirmities; in Psalm. 65. 2, 3.
O thou that hear prayers, unto thee all flesh shall come; Thou hear
prayers, but I have a great many sins that hinders; no, mark, what though
iniquity prevails against me, as for our transgressions, thou shall purge them
away? O make use of this Scripture, though you remember not other things; yet
you that have dejected hearts and are afraid that God will not hear your
prayers, see what the text says, Thou hear prayer Lord, but will not my
sins hinder? no says David, iniquity prevails against me, as for our
transgressions thou shall purge them away; exercise faith in this; and know
that God does not hear prayer because thou art not sinful, because of thy
worthiness, but merely for his free grace.

Another holy disposition in prayer should be this; the soul should come with a
holy freedom, with the Spirit of adoption to God, crying Abba Father; if thou
come to God merely as to a Judge, though its true, those that do not know
that God loves them, yet are bound as Creatures to pray, but thou can never
sanctify the name of God, till thou have a child-like Spirit, the Spirit of
adoption; the Lord loves to have his Children come with freedom of Spirit to
himself in prayer, to come as children, and not to come with dejected
countenances, and discouraged hearts; but come freely to open thy heart to God,
as any child would open his heart to a gracious and loving Father.

Another disposition is fervencie in prayer; the effectual fervent prayer of a
righteous man avails much, and that will be a means to help against vain
thoughts too, as when the honey is scalding hot then the flies will not come to
it; if thy heart were as it were scalding hot in prayer thou would not have
such vain thoughts.

Next there must be constancy in prayer; in 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. by that I mean
this never to give over until we have that we pray for, or something else in
lieu of it; it may be thou have prayed and nothing is come of it; be not
discouraged, thou have to deal with a great God, and therefore pray again and
again, and again, and pray with this resolution, well, let God do with me
what he will, I will as long as I live call upon him, and if God shall cast me
away yet he shall cast me away calling upon him, as the poor woman of Canaan
when Christ called her dog, and discouraged her, yet still she would pray; I
but dogs may have crumbs, that heart is in an ill condition that is
discouraged in prayer, because it does not get what it would, and therefore to
think with themselves I had as good not pray at all, take heed of any such
thoughts.

Again, if you would pray to God indeed, so as to sanctify his name in
prayer, there should be humility in your hearts so as to be sensible of your
own unworthiness; I spoke somewhat about being sensible of the distance between
God and us, when I spoke about sanctifying of Gods name in general. The last
that I shall speak of is this, when you have done all, this all, these
qualifications will not sanctify Gods name, except all be tendered up in the
name of Jesus Christ, and in the power of his merits; let a man or woman pray
with as much fervencie, zeal, constancy, purity, in truth and sincerity; yet
except he puts up all in the name of Christ, I say he cannot be accepted; our
spiritual offerings must be tendered up in his name; but I have Preached much
about that, but now put all that has been said together, and this it is to
pray.

That is, when as I pray understandingly: when I give my self to prayer: when
there are the breathings of the holy Ghost in my prayer: when there is purity
of heart like a golden vial: together with sincerity, when it is in truth of
heart, when it is in faith, when it comes from a spiritual Adoption, when its
in fervencie, when in constancy, reverence, humility, and all put up in the
name of Jesus Christ; now a man prays, as it is said of Saul, behold he
prays; so I may say of those that are instructed in this Art, behold they
pray; you see now that prayer is more then to read in a book, more then to say
a few words; ye see it is a very hard thing to pray, a work of great
difficulty, and no marvel though we have lost so many of our prayers as we
have done; we must not charge prayer and God with it, but look to our selves (I
mean not charge the Ordinance of prayer) but the vileness of our carriage in
our prayers; and let us for time to come know what a Christian life means, it
is said of Christ in Luke 9. 29. that as he was praying the fashion of his
countenance was changed. Oh that's an excellent thing, that when we have been
in our closets at prayer, to come away with our faces shining; my Brethren
could we but pray in such a manner as this is, the very fashion of our
countenances would be changed, as Moses when he came from the presence of God
upon the Mount, or as Christ that had the fashion of his countenance changed.
Prayer, it is the sweet ease of ones spirit, its the help at a dead lift, its
the great Ordinance of our Communion with God in this world; and therefore let
us learn this Art of sanctifying Gods name in Prayer.

I shall conclude all in this, you have heard the mystery of the sanctifying
the name of God in worshipping God; now I beseech you, you that have been a
long time in the school of Christ, as it were Apprentices to Christ to learn
Christianity; be ashamed that you have understood so little of this art in
Sanctifying the name of God in prayer; It is an art and a mystery that you must
be instructed in, and you are not Christians till you are instructed in this,
as in an art and mystery: And that man and woman that shall be instructed truly
in this art and mystery in Sanctifying Gods name now in the worshipping of him,
such a man and woman shall be to all eternity Sanctifying the name of God in
praising of him. There is a time coming when all the Saints must be in the
presence of God, and be always praising of him, and they shall then Sanctify
Gods name for ever; let us now learn this art of Sanctifying Gods name in
praying, that we may eternally Sanctify his name in praising of him.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 94. line 9. for capital, read corporeal. Page 182. l. 25. for world, r.
word. Page 226. l. 36. f. come, r. we come. Page 247. l. 3. f. which, r. with.
Page 251. l. 21. f. with, r of. Page 252. l. 34. f. body, r. blood. Page 259.
l. 20. f. is, r. as, Page 263. l. 9. f. whereas, r. when. Page 267. l. 3. f.
plucking, r. partaking.

FINIS.
AN EXACT ALPHABETICAL TABLE OF ALL THE PRINCIPAL TRUTHS IN THE FOREGOING
SERMONS.
A
Absolutely.
Spiritual things to be prayed for absolutely 277 Accept, Acceptance
Acceptance of our persons the means of it 69 God accepts not the duties of
wicked men 116 The services of the Saints accepted 120
Act, Actual, Action, see Grace.
Actual sanctification 68 The Lord accepts the person before the action 69 God
is a pure act and requires actual service 97
Adoption.
Sign of adoption to desire to be often in Gods presence 36 We must pray in the
spirit of adoption 294
Affections.
Affections the strength of them required in Gods worship 82
Aggravation.
Aggravation of sin to neglect due hearing the word 200 Afflictions, see
Honor. They that sanctify not God in hearing the word, can have no comfort
from it in afflictions 206 Whether it be lawful to pray for afflictions 277
Afflictions in themselves materially evil 278
All
All that we have must be given to God 63 All things sanctified to the godly
119
Altar.
Christ is the Altar upon which (...) offer all our sacrifices 92
Angel.
Angel what it signifies 91 Angels the aggravation of their sin 195
Anger.
Anger not to be brought into Gods service 19
Apply.
We must apply the word in hearing it. 175 Apostacy, see Schism. Apostacy
the ground of it, 206
Assurance.
The Gospel gives assurance of salvation 212
Attention.
Attention must be given in hearing of the word 171
B
Beginners.
Beginners in Religion to be careful of preparation 56
Believing.
Believing the condition of the Covenant of Grace 232
Birds.
Wandering thoughts in prayer as the birds to Abraham's sacrifice 283
Blast
God blasts those men that sanctify him not in worship 117 God will blast
those that neglect his word 208
Bless.
Many bless themselves in evil ways 198 To bless God for helping us against
wandering thoughts in prayer 289
Blind
Blind sacrifice not to be offered to God 98
Blood
A fearful thing to be guilty of Christ's blood 230 Breathing, see Spirit
Broken, see Heart What kind of broken heart is required in receiving the Lords
Supper 255 Christ's Body broken for us 268
C
Children
Gods Saints may meet with afflictions in their Children 20 Ground of
contentment in afflictions upon our Children 21
Church
Church what it signifies 235 Church defiled by wicked men uncastout 236
Civil, see Worship
Christ
All worship must be tendered in the Name of Christ 91 All must be tendered in
Christ because of Gods justice 101 They that reject the word, reject Christ 201
All our prayers must be tendered in the Name of Christ 296
Command
Nothing must be tendered to God in worship but what he has Commanded 8 No
express Command for many things in the New Testament 15
Comfort, see Word Communion
Communion with God not increased by the duties done with natural conscience
88 The Sacrament the Ordinance of our Communion with Christ 229 The Sacrament
must be received in a holy Communion 234 How far the presence of wicked men
hinder this Communion 235 No close Church Communion with wicked men 240 More
Communion with Christ in the Sacrament then in the word 251
Confession
Ground of confession to God 98
Conscience
Sinners against conscience need great preparation to duties 57 Duties acted by
natural Conscience 88 Natural Conscience limits it self in duties 89 Trouble
of Conscience should make men meekly hear the word 180 Consciences of wicked
men troubled about the Sacrament 230
Constant
Men acted by natural parts are not constant in duties 88 There must be
constancy in our
prayers 295
Contrary
The word will be made good on the contrary, to those that abuse it 205
Conversion
Conversion not wrought by the Sacrament 232
Covenant
In the Sacrament we make a solemn Covenant 226 Covenant of Grace sealed in the
Sacrament 229 Those that receive the Sacrament must be in the Covenant of Grace
232 Condition of that Covenant, ibid Renewing of Covenant in the Sacrament. 257
Crucified
Christ crucified in the Sacrament 248
Curse
They that neglect the word, are nigh to a curse 203 Cursing of others, sinful
278 How far we may curse the enemies of the Church 280
D
Danger, see Dignity. Dark, see Mind Dead, Death.
Fear of death taken away, how 38 We must not bring dead services and hearts
to the living God 97 Consciences of carnal men opened upon their death bed 118
Death of Christ to be meditated on in the Sacrament 165
Dear, see Glory. Delight.
God delights in our drawing nigh to him 37
Depart
To neglect GODS Worship, is to depart from him, 33
Dependence.
We should continually be sensible of our dependence on God, 274
Desire.
We must hear the word with a desire after it 170
Devil
Devil gratified by omission of duties 59 Unseasonable motions though
materially good come from the Devil 82 Wandering thoughts in prayer suggested
by the Devil, 286
Difficulty.
Natural parts in performance of duties will not carry through difficulties 87
Not to be discouraged in difficultes considering Gods power 97 The work of
Religion difficult, 109
Dignity, see Prerogative.
The more dignity the more danger 12
Dishonor.
It were a dishonor to God to accept the services of wicked men 116
Disposition
Inward disposition in prayer 292
Divine, see Service. Doubt.
The time of receiving the Sacrament no time for doubting 254 We must pray
without doubting 293
Duty.
The holiness of a duty will not bear men out in their miscarriage in it 17
Omission of duty will not fit for duty 58. 113 The doing of one duty prepares
for another 60 Duties not to be rested on 103. 107. 115 To be humbled for our
best duties 111 All duties of carnal worshippers lost 112 Sin of Hypocrites
aggravated by holy duties ibid
E
Easy.
Preparation makes duties easy 52
Election.
Evidence of election 213
End, see Extremity.
Our ends must be high in the worship of God 72 Base ends of men in Gods
worship ibid To have right ends apart of wisdom 99 It is the nature of God to
will himself the last end 104
Engagement.
Engagements of prayer to be performed 293
Envy, see Mean. Eternity.
Eternity of God how to be considered in our worship 94
Excellency.
Thoughts of our own excellency to be cast off in our worship 85
Exemplary.
Exemplary judgments should make us look into the word how God makes it good
23
Extremity.
Men that regard duties only in extremity make themselves their end. 77
Examination
Examination required in partaking of the Sacrament, 233
Eye
Faith as an eye to see Christ in the Sacrament 252
F
Faith, Faithfulness.
Faithfulness of God, what it should teach us 102 Faith must be mixed in
hearing the word 177 Faith exercised in receiving the Sacrament 252 Faith how
to act it in the Sacrament 271 We must pray in Faith 293
Faculties
All the faculties of the Soul to be given up in Prayer, 281
Familiarity, see Potent
Drawing nigh to God breeds familiarity 37 Benefit of familiarity with God 38
Falling away
Falling away the ground of it 34
Fear, see Public
What fear we must have in Gods worship 78 In fear natural Conscience puts in
to duty 89
Fervency
Fervency required in prayer, 295
Fire
Fire from Heaven Two fold, 2 Fire that slew Aarons Sons what 3 Strange fire
what 19
Folly
To be ashamed of our folly when we come to GOD, 99
Follow
The Soul is to follow after God as a God 65
Free, see Grace Friend, see Word
Friends, who are the best 25
G
Gesture
Gesture in the Sacrament not merely indifferent 262
Guilty, see Blood
Guilty consciences flee the worship of God, why 31 Guilt to be removed when we
come to pray 274
God
Duties must be performed to God as a God 62 When duties are offered to God as
a God 63 The word to be heard as the word of God 166 We are reconciled by the
blood of that person that is God 268
Good
Good heart what 187 The word will be made good on the abusers of it 207 We are
to pray for our own good 277
Gospel
Gospel the tenor of it 257
Glory
Glory of God dear to him 7 Glory of God dearer to him then the lives of men 22
Glory of God is the luster of all his attributes together 102 The active Glory
of God is the especial honor he has 105 Glory of God in his word the
greatest 182 Why God will be glorified in them that hear the word 209 Those
that will obey the word will be the Glory of the Ministers 214 We should have
apprehensions of Gods Glory in prayer 275 The Glory of God is the chief thing
we should pray for 276 Spiritual things nearest the Glory of God 277
Grace
Grace to be acted especially in Gods worship 29 Grace the freeness of it
should make us more diligent in the worship of God 34 Graces increased by
drawing nigh to God 35 Graces to be acted and stirred up in the Sacrament 271
We must act our own Graces in prayer together with the spirit 291 See Covenant.
Great
A people are great that have God nigh them 40 We should prepare to Gods
worship because he is great 43 The duties of Gods worship are great 44 How to
sanctify Gods name in respect of his greatness 67 Great things to be expected
from God 100 We must hear the word with attention because of the greatness of
him that sends it 172 We must be attentive because the matters delivered are
great 173
H
Habitual
Habitual sanctification 68
Harden
Nothing does harden the heart more then the word by accident 205
Hand
Faith is a Hand to take Christ in the Sacrament 253 The Cup in the Sacrament
not to be delivered into every particular hand 264
Heart
Our hearts naturally unprepared for duty 46 The heart in preparation to be
taken from every sinful way 49 As the heart is so are the duties 70 The heart
is not changed by the acting of natural parts 87 Good heart what 187 The word
of the Law not in the heart 211 A broken heart required in receiving the
Sacrament 246
Hearing
Of sanctifying Gods Name in hearing the word 161 Hearing the word a part of
Gods worship 162 How to know that God hears our prayers 294
Heathen.
Heathens attend to worship their Idols 46
Heaven
Being often in Gods presence minds us of heaven 36 The worship of God here the
beginning of that in heaven 106
Hide
We must hide the word in our hearts 189
Highest
What we lift highest in our worship that is our God 74 See Thoughts, Ends.
Hindrance
Hindrances to Gods worship many 46
Holy, Holiness.
Holiness the greatest honor of Gods Name 23 Holiness of God to be held
forth by his servants 24 Drawing nigh to God makes us holy 36 Time, and Place
said to be holy, how 50 God infinitely holy 99 Those that receive the Lords
Supper must be holy 232
Honest.
We must receive the word into honest hearts 186 Honest heart what 188 Honest
amongst men who 189
Honor.
To quiet the heart in affliction is to know that God will have honor by it 25
Humble, Humbled, Humility.
Humility of Spirit requisite in the worship of God 84 To be humbled for not
sanctifying the Name of GOD aright Humiliation in preparing to hear the word
168 Wandering thoughts in prayer suffered by God to humble us 285 Humility
required in our prayers 295 See Worship.
Hungring
There must be hungring after Christ in the Sacrament 251
I
Incense
Incense what it signifies 91
Incomprehensible
Incomprehensiblenesse of God what it should teach us in our worship 95
Infinite
There is an impression of Gods infiniteness upon the duties of his servants 64
Infirmities
Infirmities of others to be passed by of those that receive the Sacrament 258
Infirmities how helped by the spirit 290
Institution
Institution of the Sacrament to be kept close to 261
Intention
Strength of intention required in the worship of God 81
Joy
The mercy of God should make us come to him with joy 100 The word to be
received with joy 184 Difference in the joy of hypocrites and true Christians
186 Spiritual joy required in receiving the Sacraments 255 A broken spirit may
consist with spiritual joy ibid
Judge, Judgment.
Sinners may meet with judgments (...) in the word 10 God is quick with same
in the way way of his judgments 17 Judgments many times suitable to the sins
18 Gods judgments many times invisible 21 The word of God shall judge those
that abuse it 207
Justice
Justice of God seen in the death of Christ 268
K
Knowledge
Knowledge required in receiving the Lords Supper 244 Knowledge in other points
necessary to them that receive the Sacrament 245 Knowledge actual required in
receivers 246
L
Leaven
Leaven how cast out by the Jews 249
Life, Living.
Gods goodness in sparing our lives to worship him 84 That God is a living God,
what it should teach us 96 The things delivered in the word concern our lives
174 Believers nourished to eternal life 269
Limited.
The duties of Gods Children not limited 65
Little.
In matters of worship God stands upon little things 11
Lose.
The ground why we lose so many prayers 296
Love.
Natural conscience makes not the heart love a duty 88 The word must be
received with love 184 The Sacrament ordained by Christ out of love 228 Love to
be renewed in the receiving the Sacrament 258 The infinite love of God seen in
the death of Christ 269
Lust.
The worship of God not to be subjected to our lusts 72 Who they be that
subject it to their lusts 73
M
Man.
The Mediator between God and man is man 276
Mean.
Mean men not to envy great ones why 13
Mediator
The way of man's salvation is by a Mediator 267
Meditation
Meditation in preparing the heart to holy duties 49 Meditations in the
receiving the Sacrament 267
Meekness
The word must be received with meekness 179
Mercy, Merciful.
God is merciful 100 Mercy of God should teach us to be merciful to others
101 The duties of worship the way to convey Gods choice Mercies 105 The word a
means to convey special Mercies 195
Mercie-Seat.
Mercie-Seat a Type of Christ 91
Mind.
We should pick out Gods mind from dark expressions 14 We come to know the mind
of God when we come to hear the word 163
Mystery.
The greatest Mysteries of Salvation presented in the Sacrament 228. 255.
Mixture.
Mixture of man's inventions with Gods Ordinances unlawful, 266
Mortification.
Mortification requisite to the sanctifying Gods name 67
Mouth
Faith, the mouth of the soul to receive Christ 254
N
Name.
No way to enjoy mercies but by sanctifying Gods Name 105 See Sanctify.
Nature, Natural.
Some duties of worship are natural 261 Christ bath honored humane nature by
taking it 267
Near, Nigh.
God will be sanctified in those that come near him 6 Those that are nearest God
should be most careful 22 In worshipping God we draw nigh to him 26 In what
respects we draw nigh to God in worship 27 The word of the Gospel nigh 211 See
Grace, Delight, Adoption Neglect. Several sorts that neglect to sanctify Gods
Name in heating the word 197
Nourishment.
The Lords Supper an Ordinance for Spiritual nourishment, 233 Believers are
nourished to eternal life 269
O
Omniscient.
What we should learn that God is Omniscient 98
Opening
Ground of opening the heart to God 98 The heart must be opened to hear the
word 175
Opportunity
The happiest opportunity to sanctify Gods Name is in hearing his word 200
Ordinance
An Ordinance of God what 163 The word an Ordinance of God to convey good to us
166 Men are not to be forced to Congregations where any of Christ's Ordinances
are wanting, 237 The Lords Supper the great Ordinance appointed to set forth
Christ sufferings 348
Own
We must bring to God in his service that which is his own, 86
P
Parts
How to know when men are acted by natural parts in Gods worship 87
Passion
Passion hinders the right hearing of the word 179 Wicked men in passion rise
against God 180
Peace Offering
Difference between Peace Offerings and Burnt-Offerings 75
Person
God accepts the person before he accepts the offering 69
Place
The Lord is very terrible out of his holy places 18 God in his essential
presence in every place 26 See Holy.
Plowing
Plowing of the fallow ground of the heart, what 168 Men may do somewhat toward
the plowing of their hearts 169 See Word.
Potent
Familiarity with God makes us potent with him 38
Prayer
Prayer a great duty that needs preparation 45 Prayer required in preparation
to duties 50 Unregenerate men cannot sanctify GODS Name in prayer, 68 We
should pray before we hear the word 171 Of sanctifying the Name of God in
prayer 272 Prayer put for the whole worship of God 273 See Preparation,
Wandering.
Praise
Gods worship must not be subjected to the praise of men, 73
Preparation
Preparation of the soul in the duties of Gods worship 42 Preparation and
sanctification all one 43 Preparation to Gods worship why ibid Preparation, 5
things wherein it consists 48 Preparation, the excellency of it, in several
things 52 Those that walk closely with God are in continual preparation 56
Preparation, a special duty of young beginners ibid Good men greived for want
of preparation 58 Where there is sincerity, duties should be done though there
want preparation 59 Preparation required in hearing the word 165 Preparation to
be made to prayer 273 See Prayer, Great, etc. Prerogative Gods Prerogative
appears most in his worship 11 No Prerogative can secure from Gods stroke 12
Presence
Presence of God even in the godly, terrible to wicked men 32 Presence of godly
men comfortable 35 To set Gods presence before us in prayer 288 See Guilty.
Present
When we worship God we tender a present to him 63 Sin committed long since to
be looked on as present 94
Principle
God looks more at the principle of the duty then at the duty, 69 Good men
look at the principle of the things they enjoy from God 70
Prize
To prize those mercies we beg in prayer 275 Prayer to be highly prized, 286
Promise
Every Ordinance of Christ has a special promise 248
Public
Those that are in public place have especially need of the fear of God 13
Pure
We must lift up pure hands in prayer 292
Q
Questions
Two questions God will ask his worshippers 87
Quick
God is quick in way of judgment with some 17 The word of God is quick in
working 196
Quiet
The best way to quiet the heart in affliction 25
R
Ready
What will make the heart ready for duty 54 Readiness to hear the word,
wherein it consists 166
Reading
Reading not to be preferred before hearing 167
Reprobation
Not to sanctify Gods Name in hearing the word a sign of Reprobation 202 Two
fearful signs of Reprobation 203
Resign
In Gods worship we must resign all to God 90
Resolution
We must hear the word with resolution to yield to it 170 resolution against
wandering thoughts in prayer 287
S
Sabbath Sabbath, see Strength Sacrament.
Sacrament, the meaning of the word 225 Sacrament a part of Gods worship 226 We
must sanctify Gods name in receiving the Sacrament, 228 Unworthy receiving the
Sacrament severely threatened 229 How we sanctify Gods Name in receiving the
Sacrament, 291 Whether Judas received the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, 238
Safety
Safety wherein it consists 38
Salt
Salt of the Sacrifice what it signifies 67
Sanctify
Sanctify, what it signifies 5 Gods name Sanctified two ways ibid Gods name
to be Sanctified when we draw nigh to him 42 How Gods Name is Sanctified in
drawing nigh to him ibid How duties must be performed that Gods name may be
Sanctified 62 The heart must be Sanctified in regard of Gods greatness 67
Sanctification the parts of it, ibid Sanctification of the heart double 68
Sanctifying of Gods Name the only way to fit us for mercies, 105 Exhortation to
Sanctify Gods Name 113 Nothing Sanctified to them that do not Sanctify God in
his word 203 See Sacrament.
Satisfied
Natural Consciences is satisfied with a little duty 90 See Sin
Schism
No Schism to depart from a Church that has not al Christ's Ordinances 243
Schism, what ibid Difference between Schism and Apostacy ibid
Secret.
Men acted by natural parts are not enlarged in secret 88
See
The Sacrament so to be delivered as all may see what is done, 262
Self
Self not to be our end in our duties 74 Where self is the highest end God
regards not the duties 75
Service
Hearing the word is Divine Service 164
Shadow
Shadow of Gods wing what 39
Shift
Of those that shift off the word closely applied 199
Silence
Silence, what 7
Sin
The committing of one sin prepares for another 60 No salvation without
satisfying for sin 108 The heart must be purged from sin to receive the
Sacrament 249 Motives in the Sacrament to abhor sin 250 Sin, the great evil of
it 269
Singing
Singing Psalms in the time of the Sacrament unfit 265 Singing after the
Sacrament requisite 266
Sitting
Sitting at the Sacrament the fittest gesture 263
Soul
The price of the salvation of a Soul 269
Spirit, Spiritual.
We must be acted by the Spirit in our worship 87 God must be worshipped in
Spirit 93 Spiritual things may be absolutely prayed for 277 How to know when
the Spirit helps our prayers 291 See Glory, Sweet.
Strange, see Fire. Strength
Strength required in Gods worship 80 Strength required to spend the Sabbath 83
Natural conscience gives not Strength to duty 88 We must not come to duties in
our own Strength 115
Struggling
Struggling alone against corruption often times en snares us 61
Subjection
Subjection required in hearing the word 182
Sufferings
The Sufferings of Christ chiefly represented in the Sacrament 246 Ground of
suffering for Christ, 268
Superstition
Superstition what 9
Suitable, see Judgment Sweet
Breathings of the Spirit sweet, 292
T
Table
Those that come to the Sacrament should come near the table, 261
Tares
Tares what meant by them 238
Temptation
Time of temptation the time of worship 81 We must hide the word in our hearts
against temtation, 191
Terrible, see Place. Thankfulness
Thankfulness required in receiving the Sacrament 255 Motives, to
thankfulness 256
Time
Preparation makes us do much in a little time 52 See Holy.
Thorns
Thorns must be plucked out of the heart when we hear the word 169
Thoughts
In the worshipping of God we must have high thoughts of God 71 Wicked men have
many times wicked thoughts in prayer, 282 Thoughts are to God as words are to
men ibid See Wandering.
Tremble
We should tremble at hearing the word 181
Truth
We must pray in truth 292 Truth what meant by it ibid
V
Vain
Where wicked men are willingly admitted to the sacrament Gods name is taken in
vain 241
Unchangeable
God is unchangeable 96
Understanding
We must pray with understanding 280
Uncertainty
The righteousness of the law leaves at uncertainty 212
W
Wait
We must wait Gods leisure in regard of time 86 Ground of waiting from Gods
eternity 95
Wandering
Wa^dring thoughts in prayer 281 Directions against wandering thoughts in prayer
286 All wandering thoughts in prayer sinful 288 See Birds, Humble, Devil, etc.
Warrant, see Command.
Watching
Watching required in preparation to duty 50
Weakness
God passes by weakness where the heart is prepared to duty 53
Weary
A man that makes himself his end will be weary of duty 76
Wicked
Wicked men are to be cast out or with drawn from in the sacrament 235 Every
man in the congregation to look to the ca^ing out of wicked men 241 Ground of
excluding wicked men 258
Will Willing
We must he willing not will worshippers 10 Things in Gods worship depend only
upon his will 11 God requires that we will as he wills 104 Our prayers must
be according to Gods will 276
Wisdom
Wisdom of God, what to learn from it 99 Wisdom of God to be our guide ib.
Womb
Those that sanctify Gods name in hearing the word, it is a greater blessing
then to bear him in their womb 213
Word
To comfort afflicted friends from Gods word 24 The heart must be plowed by the
word 196 The word must be glorified 194 Word what should make us esteem it 186
Word has much of God in it 195 The word a means to convey special merices
ibid. The word wherein the strength of it lies 202 All the good in the word for
whom 210 The devil gets advantag by fastening il words upon the good 244 The
word in what respect above the Sacrament 251 The word sanctified by prayr 273
Worship
Difference between civil things and Gods Worship 9 Natural helps in Gods
worship ibid We should be humbled for false worship 11 Worship of God what 27
Worship of God the means to convey his choice mercies 28 To heed what we do in
worship 32 Exhortation to be much in the worship of God 34 Hearing the word a
Part of Gods worship 162 What makes hearing the word a worship 163 Prayer put
for the whole worship of God 273 See Command, Little, etc.
World
In preparation the heart must be taken from the world 49 In Prayer the heart
must be taken from the world 275
Wrath
Preachers that reveal Gods wrath should conceal their own 19 FINIS.

THE CONTENTS OF THE SEVERAL ENSUING SERMONS.
SERMON I
THE occasion of the Words page 1 The words opened 5
Observation 1
There must be nothing in Gods worship but what he has commanded. 8
Observation 2
God stands upon little things in matters of his worship 11
Observe. 3
No privilege can secure from Gods stroke 12
Observe. 4
The more dignity, the more danger Ibid
Observe. 5
The beginnings of great matters meet with difficulties 13
Observe. 6
Those that enter into public places have need of the fear of God ibid
Observe. 7
We should pick out Gods meaning from dark expressions in his word 14
Observe. 8
Sinners may meet with judgments never threatened in the word 16
Observe. 9
God is very quick with some in the way of judgment 17
Observe. 10
The holiness of a duty will not bear a man out in his miscariage in it ibid
Observe. 11
The Lord is terrible out of his holy places 18
Observe. 12
Gods judgments are often suitable to men's sins ibid
Observe. 13
We should take heed of bringing strange fire to Gods service 19
SERMON II
Observe. 14
Gods saints many times meet with afflictions in their children 20
Observe 15
Gods judgments many ^nes come in an invisible way 21
Observa 16.
Gods glory more precious to him then men's lives 22
Observe. 17
The nearer any are to God the more careful they should be to glorify him
ibid
Observe. 18
When judgments are exemplarie we should look to the word how God makes it
good 23
Observe. 19
The great honor of Gods Name in the making it holy ibid
Observe. 20
True friendship to comfort friends in distress from the word 24
Observe. 21
The way to quiet the heart in affliction is to think God will have honor by
it 25
Doct. 1
In worshipping God we draw nigh to him 26 In what respect we are said to draw
nigh God in worship 27
Use 1
To take heed what we do when we worship God 30
Use 2
Why guilty consciences fly from the worship of God 31
Use 3
Why Hypocrites meet with such severe judgments 32
Use 4
To neglect Gods worship is to depart from him 33
Use 5
Exhortation to be much in Gods worship 34
SERMON III
Use 6
The honor of Gods servants to draw nigh him 39
Doct. 2
We must sanctify Gods Name in drawing nigh to him 42 First in preparation to
his Worship ibid 1 Because he is a great God 43 2 The duties of Gods worship
are great 44 3 Our hearts are naturally unprepared 46 4 The hindrances of Gods
worship are many ibid 5 The Heathen prepared to worship their Idols ibid 6
Preparation shows sincerity of heart 47 5 Things wherein preparation consists
48 1 A right apprehension of God 49 2 Taking the heart from finfull ways ibid
3 Taking off the heart from the world ibid 4 In watching and prayer 50 5 In
acting the Faculties and Graces 51 4 Things of the excellency of Preparation 52
1 It will make duties easy ibid 2 We shall do much in a little time ibid 3
The Lord will pass by weakness in duties 53 4 It will make the heart always
ready for duty 45
SERMON IV
Cases of Conscience.
1 Whether we be always bound to set some time apart for preparation to duties
55 2 Whether being not prepared the duty may be omitted 57 Answered in 4
particulars. 1 The omission of duty will not fit the Soul for duty 58 2 It is
but a temptation to keep from duty 59 3 If the duty be done in sincerity,
though there be not due preparation it is better then to omit it ibid 4 While
people struggle with their corruptions, and seek not God, they fall into snares
61 In what manner duties are to be performed that Gods Name may be sanctified
ibid 1 We must perform them so that we may glorify God as a God 62 Which is
done, 1 When we offer all we have 63 2 When we greive that we can do no more 64
3 There is an impression of Gods infiniteness on the duties of his Saints ibid
2 When the Soul follows after God as a God 66 3 When the Soul comes expecting
the choicest mercies of God ibid How the heart must behave it self to sanctify
Gods Name in respect of his greatness and glory ibid 1 It must be a sanctified
heart 67 1 Because the Lord accepts the person before he accepts the action 69
2 God looks more at the principle of the duty then at the duty ibid 3 According
as the heart is, so will the duty be 70
SERMON V
2 In sanctifying Gods Name in worship we must have high thoughts of God 71 3
We must have high ends in worshipping God 72 Several base low ends in
worshipping of God 1. In subjecting his worship to our lusts ibid 2 Subjecting
his worship to the praise of men 73 3 Making Self our end in his worship 74
which we do 1 When we are weary of duties if we find not that we desire 76 2
When men are straightened in Worship, and envy others that are enlarged 77 3
When men regard holy duties only in times of extremity ibid 4 There must be
reverence and fear in Gods worship 78 5 There must be strength in the duties of
Gods worship 80 Strength of Intention 81 Affection 82 Faculties 83 6 There must
be a humble frame of Spirit 84. Which consists 1 In admiring Gods goodness
that we are alive to come before him ibid 2 To have no thought of any
excellency in our selves, 85 3 To come without our own righteousness ibid 4 To
take off our hearts from all abilities of grace ibid 5 To wait Gods leisure in
regard of the time 86 7 In Sanctifying Gods Name we must bring that which is
his own ibid 1 The matter must be that which he has commanded ibid 2 We must
be acted by the spirit 87 When duties are acted by natural parts, and not the
spirit of God 1 If they change not the heart ibid 2 If they carry not through
difficulties ibid 3 When men rejoice in acting their parts ibid 4 When there is
little enlargment in secret 88 5 When there is not constancy in duty ibid
Duties acted by natural Conscience 1 It gives no strength to do them ibid 2
The heart loves not the duty ibid 3 It does not increase communion with God
ibid
SERMON VI
4 It makes not a duty strong to the soul 89 5 It limits it self in duty ibid
6 It is satisfied with little 90 8 In the sanctifying Gods Name in Worship,
there must be a resignation of all to God ibid 9 All Worship must be tendered
in the Name of Jesus Christ 91 How to Sanctify Gods Name in reference to his
Attributes 1 God is a Spirit, and to be worshipped in Spirit 93 2 God is
Eternal, and how to worship him in that consideration 94 3 God is
incomprehensible, and therefore sees us in every place 95 4 God is
unchangeable, what that should teach us in our worship 96 5 God is a living
God, and what we should learn thence ibid 6 God is Almighty, what that should
teach us in our worship 97 7 God is Omniscient, and what that should teach us
98 8 God is a God of Wisdom, and what that should teach us 99 9 God is Holy,
and what that should teach us in our worship ibid 10 God is Merciful, and what
that should teach us 100 11 God is just, and what that should teach us 101 12
God is Faithful, and what we should learn thence 102
SERMON VII
Reasons why God will be sanctified in all the duties of his Worship 1 God does
will himself the last End 104 2 The especial glory God has in the world is to
be actively honored 105 3 The duties of worship are the means to convey Gods
choicest mercies ibid 4 We are not fitted to receive mercies, but by
sanctifying Gods Name ibid 5 Else we shall not hold out in duty 106
Application.
1 We have no cause to rest on our duties 107 2 The work of Religion is hard to
flesh and blood 109 3 We should be humbled that we have no more sanctified Gods
Name 110 4 Exhortation to sanctify Gods Name 113 1 To consider we have to deal
with God in worship 114 2 Not to come in our own strength 115 3 Not to be
satisfied with the duty done ibid 5 God is displeased with the duties of wicked
men 116 1 God blasts such men 117 2 God opens their eyes on their death bed to
see what they have done 118 6 Those that sanctify Gods name he will sanctify
it in a way of mercy 119
SERMON VIII
Of sanctifying Gods name in hearing of the word 161 Hearing the word is a part
of Gods worship 162 1 We profess our dependence upon God for the knowing of
his mind 163 2 In hearing we wait on God in the way of an Ordinance ibid In
hearing the word 1 There must be preparation 165 Which is 1 To hear the word as
the word of God 166 2 To hear the word as Gods Ordinance for our good ibid 2 To
plow up the fallow ground of the heart, and what is meant by it 168 3
Resolution to yield to all truths delivered 170 4 A desire after the word ibid
5 Prayer before we hear the word 171 The behavior of the Soul in hearing the
word 1 Careful attention to it ibid Means to help attention ibid 2 An opening
of the heart to receive it 175 3 Careful applying of the word ibid 4 It must
be mixed with Faith 177 How the word is to be mixed with Faith ibid
SERMON IX
5 The word must be received with meekness 179 6 It must be heard with a
trembling heart 181 7 With humble subjection to the word 182 8 It must be
received with love and joy 184 9 It must be received into an honest heart 186
10 We must hide the word in our hearts 189 11 We must turn the word into
practice 192
SERMON X
Why God will be glorified in them that hear the word 195 1 Because there is so
much of God in it ibid 2 God has appointed it to convey special mercies ibid
3 It is quick and lively in working 169
Use 1
Reproof of several sorts of men concerning the word neglected 197 The
fearful estate of those that do not sanctify God in his word 200 1 They lose
the choicest opportunity ibid 2 The word will be a great aggravation of sin
ibid 3 They that reject the word, reject Christ 201 4 It is an argument of
hardness of heart 202 5 It is a sad sign of Reprobation ibid 6 To such there
can be nothing sanctified 203 7 They are nigh to a curse ibid 8 It will turn to
their damnation 205 9 It will not comfort them in afflictions 206 10 God will
make his word good upon them 207 11 The word shall judge them ibid 12 God will
blast them that sanctify not his name in his word 208
Use 2
Exhortatio to glorify the word of God 209 God will sanctify his Name in
mercy upon those that sanctify it in hearing the word 210 1 All the good in
the word is theirs ibid 2 It is a certain evidence of their election 213 3 God
will sanctify them by the word 214 4 They will be the glory of the Ministers
at the day of Christ ibid 5 It will rejoice them hereafter when God shall
magnify his word 215
SERMON XI.
Of Sanctifying the Name of God in receiving the Sacrament 225 1 Receiving the
Sacrament is a part of Gods worship 226 2 Gods Name must be sanctified in our
receiving the sacrament 228 1 Because there are presented the greatest
Mysteries of salvation ibid 2 It is an Ordinance that Christ has left out of
his love ibid 3 It is the Sacrament of our Communion with Christ 229 4 The
Covenant of Grace is sealed in it ibid 2 No duty is urged with more strength
and severity ibid 3 Nothing striks more upon men's Consciences 230 How many are
to Sanctify Gods Name in the Sacrament 231 1 Those that receive it must be
holy 232 1 Because it is the seal of the Covenant ibid 2 It is an Ordinance of
spiritual nourishment 233 3 Because we are required to examine our selves ibid
4 It is a Sacrament of Communion with God and the Saints 234 2 It must be
received in a holy Communion ibid Wicked men not to be admitted to this
Communion 235
SERMON XII
Addition to the former conerning holy Communion 242 The qualifications in the
Soul to fit it for receiving the Lords Supper 244 1 Knowledge ibid 2 A broken
heart 246 3 Actual purging the heart from sin 249 4 Hungring, and thirsting
after Jesus Christ 251 5 Exercise of Faith 252 6 Exercise of Spiritual joy 255
7 Thankfulness ibid 8 Renewing of Covenant 257 9 Renewing of love toward God
and our brethren 258
SERMON XIII
We must keep to the institution in the Sacrament 261 1 For the gesture 262 2
Delivering it to all in general and not into every particular man's hand 264 3
That the Communicants be all the while exercised in their thoughts about the
death of Christ 265 Mediations in receiving the Sacrament 267 1 That the way of
man's salvation it is through a Mediator ibid 2 This Mediator between God and
man is true man ibid 3 That his body was broken and his blood shed for us 268 4
It was the body and blood of that person that is God that reconciles us ibid 5
To consider the dreadfulnesss of Gods justice ibid 6 The price of saving a Soul
269 7 The greatness of the evil of sin ibid 8 The infinite love of God to
mankind ibid 9 That believers shall be nourished to eternal life ibid 10 To
meditate upon the Covenant of grace to believers 270 Holy disposition to be
actuated in receiving the Sacrament 271 Of Sanctifying the name of God in
Prayer. 272 What preparation we are to make to Prayer 274 1 Concerning the
matter of Prayer 276 2 Concerning the manner of prayer 280 Concerning wandering
thoughts in Prayer 281
SERMON XIV
A further enlargement concerning wandering thoughts in Prayer 283 5 Rules to
help against wandering thoughts 286 1 Set a high price upon the duties of Prayer
ibid 2 To renew resolutions against wandering thoughts 287 3 To set the presence
of God before us 288 4 To account all wandering thoughts evil ibid 5 To bless
God if at any time he did help us against them, 289 3 For sanctifying Gods name
in Prayer, there must be the breathings of the spirit 290 4 There must be pure
hearts and hands 292 5 We must call upon God in truth ibid What it is to call
upon God in truth ibid 6 We must pray in faith 293 7 In the spirit of adoption
294 8 We must pray with constancy 295 9 We must pray in humility ibid 10 We
must tender up al our prayers in the name of Christ 296 Conclusion of all 297
FINIS.

