To the Honorable, Major General SKIPPON, William Ball of Barkham, wishes
all good success and happiness.
SIR,
AT Your being in Redding, about what time the Kings forces relinquished that
place in May 1644. I presented unto You a paper, De jure Regnandi, et Regni,
wherein was contained the heads and chief points of that Subject, and therein
I promised to give farther satisfaction, which I hope I have now effected to
the satisfaction of all indifferent men; and I have thought fit to dedicate it
to Your Honor, to whom I first of all tendered the Epitome: remaining

October 27. 1645. Your Honors servant William Ball.

Tractatus De jure Regnandi, and Regni: OR, The Sphere of Government, etc.
MAny there are (too many at this day) who velis remisque, or rather vi and
armis, do contend that the Kings Prerogative power (as it is denominated) is
like to Terra Australis Incognita, which is vast and unknown, and in a manner
unlimited, extending from the Equator (as diverse Cogmosgraphers describe) to
the Pole Antartick in latitude, and of an huge, yet uncertain longitude, some
suppose it answers to all the degrees; and even so they would have the Kings
Prerogative power vast, and unknown, and in a manner unlimited, extending from
the Equator of Law 90 degrees to the Pole or Period of sole Arbitrary
Government in latitude; and in longitude so huge and uncertain, as that it
answers to all the degrees of self end, to do every thing that Power would
admit. Others there are, who suppose that the power of Parliament is like the
Great Sea, which not only environs the Land, and enters into all the creeks and
harbors, wheresoever its flux or currents can make way; but is thought also to
extend from Pole to Pole, and to answer to all degrees of longitude by one
denomination, or another, as it were boundless; for even so they would have
the Parliaments power, not only to environ by limitation the King, and by their
flux and currants of consultation to enter into all creeks and harbors of
private policy, to make them beneficial for King and People; but it must be
thought also to extend from Pole to Pole of Arbitrary jurisdiction, quasi ad
placitum de omnibus, and (as these men would have it) to all degrees of
absolute Authority, and as it were boundless. But these men must give me
leave to tell them, that I cannot think the Kings Terra Australis Incognita of
Prerogative power, or the Parliaments Great Sea of Iuridicall power to be so
unlimited or boundless; or if they were, yet as the Air environs both the
Land and the Great Sea, and gives life to all the creatures in them, and
without which Air both Land and Sea would be desolate, and of no use; even so
the Peoples good in general, environs both King and Parliament, and gives life
to all their actions, and without which Peoples good, both King and Parliament
would be null, and of no use; and to make good this my opinion, or Assertion, I
have inserted (as compendiously as I could) what of right generally belongs to
King, Parliament, and People; submitting my self to more solid reasons or
Arguments if given or produced.

1. It is certain, that all power is of God, Romans 13. and that it is derived
from him either by extraordinary calling, or appointment, as was that of Moses,
Aaron, etc. or by ordinary, which is either natural, as that power which a
Parent has naturally (grounded upon humane reason, as well as the Word of God)
over his child; or National, as that power which Potentates, or States have
over their Subjects or People. And of power National or Political, there are
several species or forms, viz. Monarchy, Oligarchy, Aristocracy, Democracy, or
mixed, or compounded of these forms: Monarchy is either unlimited, or limited;
unlimited, is where tam jus Regni absolute quam Regnandi, as well the Law of
the Realm absolutely, as the Law of Reigning, or ruling over, resides in one
alone, as it did in Nebuchadnezzar, and is said to be in some of the Kings of
the East, and of Africa at this day; limited is where Ius Regnandi, et Regni
conditionate, the Law of Reigning, or ruling over, and of the Realm
conditionally resides in one alone, as it seems to have been in Darius, Dan.
6. who made not the Decree concerning sole petitioning himself, by himself
alone (as did Nebuchadnezzar the adoration of the Image, Dan. 3) but by advice
of his Princes, and Councillors; nor could he alter his Statutes at his
pleasure, as appears, Dan. 6. v. 15. and such like limited Monarchs are the
Great Turk, the King of Persia, and it may be the Emperors of Russia and
Aethiopia; for these Potentates, albeit they can ad arbitrium, command to
strangle, or deprive one man of his life, and he is deprived, and disposses
another of his goods, and he is dispossessed; yet can they not at their
pleasure disanull, or alter their Religion, or fundamental Laws of their
Nation: and this power of Monarchy unlimited, or limited, has been imposed
upon enslaved Nations, either by violent and unnatural conquests, as it was by
the Assyrian, Caldean and Persian Monarchs, etc. or by conquest, and consent
(or agreement as it were) to undergo, and be governed by such power, as in
Turkey, Muscovy; and in a manner in these days, in France, Castile, and
Florence.

Oligarchy, is where Ius Regni, sive Imperii, vel Reipublicae, the Law of the
Realm or Empire, or Commonwealth, is entrusted to, and resident in a few, as
it was in the Roman Triumviri, who were not absolute, for they could not alter
at their pleasure the Roman Laws, but were rather themselves alterable.

Aristocracy, is where Ius Regni, sive Imperii vel Reipublicae, the Law of the
Realm, or Empire, or Commonwealth, is resident in the Princes or chiefest of
the people, and this power may be either inherent, and as it were absolute, as
it is in Venice; or entrusted, or limited, or qualified, as in Holland and
Geneva; for the Aristocraticall Power, or States in those parts, give some
account of their actions to satisfy the people.

Democracy (to speak properly) is where Ius Reipublicae, the Law of the
Commonwealth resides in the people, who have not only a perpetual power of
nominating what Rulers and Governors they please, but also of dictating, or
prescribing by what rules they will be governed by; and of this Democracy, if
there be not an Exact, yet there is a near form in the Cantons of Switzerland.

2. Mixed, or compound forms of Government consist sometimes, and in some
places, of Monarchy and Aristocracy, as in Poland; or of Monarchy, Aristocracy,
and Democracy, as in England: in Poland the Aristocracy has been most
prevalent: in England for the most part the Democracy has prevailed: but I
intend not to insist or instance what has been defacto, or what ought to be de
jure; -- in England jus Regnandi is the Kings, he has it introduced by
conquest, which albeit that barely of it self it created not a just Title, yet
joined with the consent of the Nation it Conquest without special warrant from
God (as had the Israelites against the people of Canaan) or without a just
N^tionall Ti^ is unjust, ^^cause it is ^ compained ^ with two gr^si is, pride
a^ covetousne^ and is direc^ opposite to ^ Law of natu^ in that it depriveth
other men of their liberty and propriety.
did; and to signify the Kings introduction by conquest, the words a
conquestu, are to this day inserted in all Fines: The King has his jus
Regnandi Dei, non populi gratia; and so has the King of Poland (although he be
elective) his jus Regnamdi Dei gratia, but not without, but by consent of his
Nobility; in England it is our Kings by birthright: neither Nobility, or people
can, or ought to deprive him of it, as long as he protecteth them according to
the Laws, and conserveth them (to the utmost of his power) from foreign
slavery or subjection. -- And as Ius Regnandi is the Kings in England, so Ius
Regni Actuals, and Potentiale, is the peoples in general (that is to say, the
people in their several Degrees have right to their Laws in Being, and by
their Feoffees, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, whom they entrust to give
their consents, they have also right to the Laws in Posse, or to be) the King
cannot, nor ought to nullify the Law or Laws at his pleasure: for as in a
Lordship or Manor, the Law of Right of inheriting belongs to the Lord, his
heirs and successors; of which Right of inheriting, the Tenants of a Manor
cannot, nor ought not to deprive the Lord, his lawful heirs and successors;
and also in the same Lordship or Manor, the Law, or right of customs
belongs to the Tenants, their heirs or successors, of which right of
customs the Lord cannot, nor ought to deprive the Tenants, their heirs or
successors; even so is it, or ought to be in this Kingdom of England between
the King and the people in general.

3. And having said that Ius Regnandi is the Kings, I will first briefly insert
what Ius Regnandi comprehends; it comprehends a power ordinary, and
extraordinary; both limited, and qualified, neither absolute; and this last,
some call Prerogative: The ordinary power of a King of England is to convene or
assemble Parliaments, and to ratify or disanull what they shall generally
approve, or disaprove of for the good of the Kingdom, or any essential part
or member thereof; for as a Body politic the King is obliged in foro
conscientia, to do any thing for the good of the Kingdom, provided that it
destroy not his own right: The ordinary power also of a King of England is to
nominate, and constitute Judges, and Civil Magistrates, Commanders and
Officers Military; provided that such as concern the Public, be not
generally disliked by the Public; because although it belongs to the King to
appoint who shall sustain his person, or vices suas gerere, yet for as much as
those persons do meddle with, and are conversant about the affairs of the
Kingdom more then of the King, if Kingdom or Public therefore dislike them,
the King ought in fore conscientiae, to displace them, and appoint such as they
may like of. It is in the Kings ordinary power also, to confer dignities, and
to dispose of those things that merely concern his own Interest; I say
merely, because the Crown is the Kings Interest, but not merely his interest,
he is owner of it but for his natural life, neither can he dispose of it. The
King has relation to the Crown but for his natural life, and then cedit
alii. -- The extraordinary (or Prerogative) power of a King of England, I
define thus, Est virtus sive potentia in persona Regia benefaciendi sibi, and
populo in quibus leges non sufficienter se extensas habent; a power residing,
^xi extensas ^a leges se ^per inten^ ad summu^ ^ctum, cui ^dinantur ha^nt etsi
n^n ^per dicunt ^dum illius ^ensionis.
or being in a King, whereby he may do good to himself, and people, in
things wherein the Laws do not sufficiently extend; and this power may be
said to be intra legem, sed non delege, this power is environed by the Law, and
has the same end that the Law has, viz. the good of King and people; from
this power extraordinary it follows, that if a sudden invasion should be before
a Parliament could be conveened, or assembled, (a thing not very likely) the
King for the raising of forces for defense, might impose taxes upon his
Subjects, such as were usually imposed upon them by consent of former
Parliaments in such like cases; and for the doing or accomplishing thereof he
may issue forth his Proclamations sufficiently strengthened with penal
injunctions: But he ought forthwith to call, or assemble a Parliament, because
the Public is involved as much, or more then himself, and that being
assembled, not to do any thing without their consent: for to speak truly, a
King of England is but in nature of an high Steward of the Kingdom by
inheritance, -- By this extraordinary power also a King may in some cases
pardon (as they call it) or rather suspend or exempt the penalties due to
convicted or condemned felons or traitors, for the Law only provides punishment
due to such offenders; but the King may exempt the punishment, where the
parties virtues, or deserts have formerly countervailed his misdeeds; or
otherwise where there is hope and possibility, that he may by his good
endeavors benefit the King, and Country as much as he has dampnified them;
for these causes ought to be the end of exempting from punishment delinquents
for matters or crimes of an high nature; and in such things as these consists
the Kings extraordinary power or Prerogative.

4. Yet there is one thing greatly insisted upon, and affirmed by some to be a
most essential part of the Kings Prerogative, and that is the Kings negative
voice in Parliament; for my part I must confess that I could never be
otherwise satisfied, but that all Statutes, or Acts of Parliament here in
England, were made by consent of our Kings or Queens; and that the said
Statutes, or Acts do themselves either explicitly, or implicitly demonstrate
as much; for if it be not inserted in any Act or Statute, Be it therefore
enacted by the Kings (or Queens) most excellent Majesty, with assent of the
Lords and Commons, etc. then is it dictated, be it therefore enacted by
Authority of this present Parliament, etc. wherein the King is comprehended as
the head or chief of his Parliament, without whose consent (it seems) such
Acts had not been in their full force and virtue, -- not withstanding I do not
see that because the Kings consent does give force or virtue to an Act or
Statute, that therefore his non-consent, or negative voice is a most essential
part of his Prerogative or power extraordinary, but rather of his ordinary
power: and I conceive moreover power extraordinary or ordinary to consist
rather in reason positive then negative, in being rather then in non being,
and consequently in the Kings power to consent, and Act, rather then in his
power to non consent and non-act, which upon the matter, is but ens negativum,
a denial of acting, enacting, or coenacting with the Parliament; ^d has free
^er to do at be plea^; yet the tribute of Omnipo^ce is not ^ominated ^^ his
not ^lingnesse to ^, but from power of ^ng able to ^, if willing; though the ^g
have free ^er to con^^ or dissent ^is Parlia^nt, even as ^s a body ^tick, yet
the ^ue of his ^thority can^ be deno^ated from non-wil^gnesse to ^sent, but ^^
his pow^ ^facting, etc. ^illing.
wherefore concerning the Kings negative voice in Parliament, I state the case
thus; viz. that his consent is either necessary, or unnecessary to the
consummating of an act in Parliament; if unnecessary, to what end should it be
insisted upon? if necessary, then is his consent either voluntary, and free (as
in reason it may seem to be, as well as the consent of either House of
Parliament) or else the King is tied and obliged, not only in foro
conscientiae, but jure determinato to give his consent; this last cannot be
made appear; for a King of England has power to write, if willing to give his
consent Le Roy It veult, or if unwilling, Le Royle avisera (as for that
allegation which some bring, viz. that the King never writes, Le Roy le neult,
or the King will not, it seems to me of no great consequence for if the King
may as a Politic body advise as he pleases, he may consequently not will,
till he please; wherefore his consent-must be voluntary, that is to say the King
has free power to consent or dissent, even as he is a Body Politic, not
withstanding that the virtue of his Authority consists in his possitive power
of consent, or being able to Act, etc. as aforesaid.

5. Furthermore for my part I conceive, that although the King have free power
to consent or dissent (even as he is a Politic body) and that his consent give
force and virtue to an Act and Statute (as aforesaid) yet his dissent does not
or cannot frustrate, or make void an Ordinance concluded of and avouched by
both Houses of Parliament, and generally accepted of by the whole, or major
part of the Kingdom; and the reason is, because the Parliament is the
representative Body of the Kingdom, entrusted by the Kingdom, and may
therefore conclude of, and constitute what shall seem expedient for the good of
the Kingdom; and such constitution, or Ordinance (generally admitted as
aforesaid) has, or ought to have the nature and vigor of Law, for Ius Regni
tam Actuale, quam Potentiale, is the peoples in general, they are interested
in that, the Kings interest consists in jure Regnandi: but to this some it may
be will object, that almost all immunities and privileges to Cities, and
especially to Towns corporate, have been conferred by our Kings; yea some will
not stick to affirm that all the liberties of the Kingdom have been granted
by our Kings, and that therefore it may seem unjust that any constitution or
ordinance should have the nature or vigor of Law, nolente Rege, to this I
answer, that almost all such immunities or privileges are included Radically
in the general liberties of the shares or shires of the Kingdom, so that they
are not mere Grants of our Kings, but Treasures of the Kingdom in more
special manner applied by our Kings to some places, and persons; and as
touching all liberties of the Kingdom to have been granted by Kings, I
confess I was once inclined to that opinion in respect of the conquest; but
having considered that conquest barely of it self creates no just Title (as
formerly instanced) and that the Laws and liberties which this Kingdom now
enjoys were upon the matter existent before the conquest; and that the
Conqueror, his heirs and successors were obliged, stricte in foro conscientia,
to conserve and maintain them (albeit they violated too many of them) I say
these things considered, I cannot find how the liberties of the Kingdom
should proceed from our Kings, but that they are the peoples in general by
right, even as the Crown, or Ius Regnandi is the Kings by birthright; yet
admitting that some immunities or privileges were granted by our Kings to some
places and persons, or to the Kingdom in general; may not the people, or
(their feoffees in trust) the Parliament make the best use of such Grants, as
well as Kings have made use of Grants from their Subjects? And why should then
the Kings Grants of privileges or liberties (if any such have been) impeach
the Subjects in general, or Parliament from doing what they may do jure Regni
for their general good; any more then the Subjects Grants to Kings should
impeach them from doing what they may do jure Regnandi for their own good?
surely there can no reason be shown; so that for my part I conceive that
Ordinances in nature as aforesaid have, and ought to have the force and vigor
of Law.

1. And I intend now by way of reason, to instance the general benefit and
liberty, which the Subjects of England have by the Law, or rather their Law (I
exclude not the King from any benefit thereof, but only from power of
violation) The Law here in England (to comprehend all special Laws in one
general term) is (as I conceive) A rule admitted by common consent, by which
all men from the highest to the lowest (according to their several degrees)
are to regulate their actions: to this, both King and people have consented; by
this, both King and people are preserved; with this, both King and people are
united, and as it were linked together: This Law is the true Robur Britanicum,
whereof the Common Law is the root and stock; and the Statutes, Acts and
Ordinances of Parliament are the branches, which at several times upon
several occasions, have spread themselves to solace the Subjects of this
Kingdom, under which they might in peace repose: Now the Subjects of this
Kingdom, which live under this Law of common consent, may be considered either
as the Body essential, and so all natural or native persons of what degree
soever in all Counties, Cities and Towns corporate, and wheresoever within the
limits of this Kingdom are comprehended; or else the Subjects of this Kingdom
may be considered as the Body representative, and so the Parliament is only
intended consisting of Lords or Peers (quasipares inter se) and of Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses, for the Counties, Cities and Towns corporate: These
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, are elected by the Democraticall body of
Freeholders, and such like of the people, and do represent, or vices suas
gerere (if the people without confusion or disorder could assemble together,
there were no need of such election) so that these are the true Representative
Body Democraticall of this Kingdom: the Lords are in nature of a Body
Aristocraticall, and the King in form of a Monarch: and these three (viz. King,
Lords, and Commons) are in themselves so indifferently, and exactly composed
without excess or defect ab origin, that as soul and body make but one
entire man, so these three make but one entire power of government, the which
(if defects or exorbitances should not, or do not distemper, as diseases do
sometimes the soundest bodies, is without any flattery or vainglorious praise,
the most excellent known form of government in the world.

2. This power aforesaid may enact any thing in beneficium Regni, for the
benefit of the Kingdom, be it general or special, etc. but this power in
detrimentum libertatis, aut proprietatis generalis subditerum Angliae, cannot
do any thing; not any thing I say to damnifie the general liberty, and
propriety of the Subjects of England, and the reason is, because the English are
subditi potius, quam subjecti, such as have rather put themselves under a law
by common consent, then enforced to undergo a Law. -- Wherefore I conceive the
L. Digby to be greatly mistaken, who affirmed that a King of England ensphered
in his Parliament was as absolute as any Monarch of the East; some Monarchs of
the East can command to strangle one, and he is strangled; and to deprive
another of his goods, or estate, and he is deprived; and this they can do ad
placitum, without showing any cause; but the King and Parliament in England
cannot do so; those Monarchs can, and some of them have, and do make Laws
that all their subjects estates shall be at their own disposalls; viz. that
The Parliament by imposing Subsidies and the like, do not dispose of the
Subjects estates in general ad placitum: but only apply equally so much of
every man's estate as seems convenient (in necessitatem Regni, etc.) the
necessity of the Kingdom, and such like.
they may take from whom they please, what they please, all if they please, ad
placitum; but in England the King and Parliament cannot do so; for the King
(as aforesaid) is but in nature of high Steward of the Kingdom by inheritance,
and the Parliament seoffees in Trust; and both tied by the great Indenture of
Magna Charta to conserve the general liberty and propriety of the people: And
it is to be noted, that (since Magna Charta was confirmed, which upon the
matter, is but an Abridgement or Epitome of the liberties and rights of the
Subjects of England before the conquest, which liberties and rights are
grounded upon the Law of God and natural reason) when any King of England
would have extraordinary supplies from the people, that (the Parliament being
conveened) the King has given or shown some probable or seeming reasons why
he desired, or had need of such supplies, and the Members of Parliament (I
mean those of the House of Commons) at their return to the places which
entrusted them, have likewise shown or manifested some general reasons, or
causes to the people, why such extraordinary supplies were by them granted.
(And surely were there now an account taken, and given of the extraordinary and
vast supplies levied on the estates of the people, it would give a great
satisfaction) so that neither King or Parliament did at any time take ad
placitum, but ad necessitatem, nor did the people otherwise grant any
extraordinary supplies of money.

3. But some it may be will object, and say, suppose the King and Parliament
should make an act that they would and might dispose of all the Subjects
estates in England (themselves excepted, or not excepted) and consequently that
they might take from whom they please, what they please, all if they please, ad
placitum; what remedy might the Subjects have? I answer that for my part, I
suppose it almost impossible that the King and Parliament should do such a
thing; but admitting of a kind of impossible possibility, I answer further,
that in such case, the Counties, Cities, and Towns corporate might and ought
first to petition against so great an injury, and if not remedied then they
might declare and protest against such an act; if violated then they might
defend themselves by Arms; for if the Representative Body of the Kingdom, may
in the behalf of the Kingdom, raise Arms for the defense of themselves and
the Kingdom, may not the essential? is not the cause more noble then the
effect, in that it gives being to the effect? do not the Counties, Cities and
Towns corporate give being, or a well-being to the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses by intrusting their power Judicial to them? And yet by reposing or
granting such Trust, they do not disinvest themselves of their right natural
(no more then one that passes an estate to feoffees in Trust for some causes
and considerations, disinvesteth himself of the use intended or reserved) so
that they may defend their liberties and proprieties even by law of Nature,
which no special or National Laws can nullify, unless men will become, or
be made slaves, and lose the right of Nature. And besides it is an Axiom
Political, ubi nulla protectio, ibi nulla subjectio; if therefore the King or
Parliament, or King and Parliament should make an Act, that they might dispose
of all Subjects estates ad placitum, as aforesaid, deficiunt a protectione;
they fail or fall from the protection of the people; and then the people may
deficere a subjectione, and protect themselves, their liberties and proprieties
even by Law Political.

4. But some will farther object that it may be, that the Counties, Cities and
Towns corporate, do entrust all their power both Judicial and Natural,
fully and wholly as it were, to the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, at their
election, promising and covenanting to stand to all that they shall do in
Parliament, etc. And they will it may be object, and say moreover that the King
and Parliament are the Legislative power in England, and that they may as well
make a Law to dispose of all Subjects estates in England, ad placitum, etc. as
they have made, and can make Laws concerning Religion, and the like. -- I
answer, that albeit the Counties, Cities, and Towns corporate, do entrust
their power Judicial (not natural) to the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses,
and promise to stand to what they shall do, yet they entrust it in beneficium
Regni, nonperniciem (that is the proper and adequate object and end of their
trust) and they promise to stand to what they shall do in matters disputable,
whether Religion is a matter disputable.
they be Actual, or de facto, or Potentiall, wherein the Kingdom may be either
benefited or damnified, and of such things the people make them their Judges,
but not in matters indisputable, wherein without any dispute the Kingdom would
be wholly damnified, and enslaved, and deprived of its natural right (as in
the King and Parliament having a power to dispose of all men's estates ad
placitum, as aforesaid, of such things they make them no Judges: and the word
Represent inferres as much, for to represent, or alterius vices gerere does not
import (as some would have it) to be an absolute Judge or Vmpire in all things,
(for then he does not represent, or vices gerere, but is absolute, and
independent) but in some things moreover the writ whereby the Parliament is
conveened declares that they are not called together de omnibus, sed de
quibusdam arduis Rebus, and negotiis regentibus, etc. some things need not
Parliament Assemblies to determine of them, but only to conserve them from
violation, as the general and fundamental liberty and propriety of the
subject, etc. and as concerning that the King and Parliament are the
Legislative power in England, I grant that they are in things disputable, as
aforesaid, but not in things indisputable, such as is the general and
fundamental liberty and propriety of the Subject grounded upon the Law of
Nature, etc. concerning their lives and estates, as formerly mentioned.

1. And now to satisfy such, who (by mis-interpreting some places or texts of
Scripture) suppose it most unlawful and heinous for a Nation or People to
defend by Arms against a natural, or rather National power (whether
Potentate or Potency it makes no matter) their Laws and liberties if violated;
I have thought good to discuss and resolve some of their chiefest Allegations;
and first, that of the 13. to the Romans, Let every soul be subject to the
higher power for there is no power but of God, etc. Concerning which Text, I
say, that every soul ought to be subject to the higher power, so far forth as
that power does lawfully extend (for God commands no unlawful thing) either
by divine Law, or by Law of Nature, or by Law of Nations: Power by Divine Law
is that which has extraordinary or special appointment by God; (as I have
already instanced in the beginning) that of Nature is grounded upon common
principles of reason; that of Nations upon prudent and political reasons and
considerations: Now to this last Power subjection may be due more or less;
for some Nations have agreed and covenanted as it were to be slaves, as the
Persians, Muscovites, Turks, etc. others have made a better bargain for
themselves in matters of subjection, as the English, Aragonez, etc. Now when
the Apostle says, Let every soul be subject to the higher power, etc. he
intends not that such as were less subject, should make themselves slavish by
undergoing any kind of needless or enforced subjection; but only that they
should be so far forth subject as God had made, or caused them to be subject:
And the Apostle infers as much in the same Chapter, v. 7. Render therefore to
all their dues, tribute to whom tribute; custom to whom custom, fear to whom
fear; honor to whom honor: he does not say, Render more then is due if it be
exacted: Moreover the Apostle in the words, Let every soul be subject, etc.
induces a general cause of obedience, not a special or in some cases: for
suppose the Apostle had said, Spare, or be merciful to all men, for there is
no man but he is of God, or the Image of God; this had not prohibited, but it
might have been lawful to punish malefactors; so when the Apostle says, Let
every soul be subject to the higher power, for there is no power but of God,
etc. This hinders not but that it may be lawful to oppose Tyrants, usurpers,
and such like: And when the Apostle says farther, for whosoever resists the
power resists the ordinance of God, etc. it must surely be understood of
power one way, or other lawful (as the 3. v. in the same Chapter, and the
verses following show) for if otherwise the enslaved or oppressed people may
free themselves (if they find convenient occasion) from their bondage (without
any special warrant from God) as did the petty Kings and people of Sodom and
Gomorah, who were enslaved, or made Tributaries, Genesis 14. yet their leavying
War (or Rebellion) was not reprehended, but rather countenanced by the high
Priest in the time of the Law of Nature, and the usurping Tyrants of the
Nations called enemies of just Abraham their assistant, who surely would not
have aided or rescued his brother, and the rest of his brothers friends without
some special warrant from God, whereof we read of none) if their leavying of
War (or Rebellion) to free themselves from bondage had been unjust, but indeed
the Law of Nature dictated their War to be just.

2. Another Allegation greatly insisted upon (albeit I see no great reason for
it) to prohibit Subjects to take Arms in any case of Tyrany and oppression
against a National Potentate, is the Text, Matthew. 22. v. 21. Render therefore
to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and to God the things which are Gods;
whereby some would conclude, that all temporal estates of Subjects are Caesar's
(or of such like as Caesar) and that therefore if Caesar should and would
demand men to surrender all their estates into his hands they ought to do it;
or otherwise, if he should by violence take it, they ought to permit him, and
no way to resist him; but I answer to such, that there is in those words not
only a distinction of things spiritual and temporal, Gods and Caesar's; but
also a limitation of things temporal; for it is not said, Render all your
money, or substance to Caesar, but the things which are Caesar's, so much as is
due to him, his tribute money, and such like: It may be some Critic will object
and say, that it is also said, And to God, the things that are Gods, and that
therefore according to this interpretation God may seem also to be limited; not
so; for where the Text will admit of limitation (as aforesaid) there it ought
to be admitted, but where it will not without incongruity, there it ought not
to be admitted; when we have done all what we can do in respect of Gods
service, we are but unprofitable servants, we cannot punctually perform our
duties; but we may give, or Render too much to Caesar, or Caesar's, ^e ren^^^
^ore ^ is
Potentates or Potencies; unless they make it appear that what we Render is
for our good, as well as for theirs.

3. Some there are also who allege the 1 of Peter, 2. 13. Submit your selves
to every ordinance of man, for the Lords sake; whether it be to the King as
supreme, etc. and hence they would infer that all Acts, or Ordinances of Kings
ought to be obeyed, or otherwise undergone and suffered, they must not be
resisted: But surely Acts 4. v. 19. and also 5. v. 19. in things touching God,
their Ordinances ought not to be obeyed, if opposite to the Ordinances of God;
and for Ordinances of man, it seems that the Apostle meant that they should
submit themselves only to such as were legal by the Law of Nature and Nations;
as the very next verse imports, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent
by him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do
well: Now the Apostle could not call any thing well done (for good there was
none amongst the Heathenish Kings, and in his days there were no Christian
Kings neither in old Babylon, or new; but if there were it makes no matter) I
say the Apostle could not call any thing ordained by man, or of the Ordinance
of man, well done, but such as should be congruous to the Law of Nature and
Nations; such thing or things which albeit they were not de Evangelio, yet they
were not contra Evangelium; such as the Apostle St. Paul speaks of; that the
Heathens without the Law written, did according to the Law, to the Ordinances
of such natural, and national things does the Apostle Peter command
obedience, when he says, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man, etc.
but not to unjust Ordinances, for that he could not mean if contrary to the
Law of God, or of Nature and Nations.

4. Others greatly insist upon the 2. and 4. verses of the eight Chapter of the
Book of Ecclesiastes, viz. I counsel thee to keep the Kings commandment, and
that in regard of the oath of God, -- where the word of a King is, there is
power, and who may say unto him, what do thou? First, it is to be noted that
Solomon speaks of a King who had (as almost all the Kings of the East his
neighbors had) Potestatem vitae, and necis ad placitum, and were in a manner
absolute; and such a one was Solomon himself upon the matter; for the people
of Israel, when they desired a King, desired such a one as all the Nations had,
1 Samuel 8. 5. and those were such as I have instanced, especially those of their
neighbor Kings; insomuch that God was angry or displeased with the people,
that they would put themselves into so great a bondage, as to desire or become
subject to such a King, or Kings of such a nature; and therefore God bad Samuel
show them the nature of such a King; Now Solomon by way of counsel, or prudent
policy advises men to keep the (legal) commandments of such a King
(illegal he could not advise) in respect they had sworn to him (in the name
of God as it seems) to do so: And if (as I have already instanced) a man become
a slave to the great Turk, or swear slavery to him, he ought to perform it,
for he has sworn it in the name of God; but if not, he is not bound, he
ought rather to make use of his freedom, according to that of the 1 Cor. 7. v.
21. -- and as for the words, who may say to him what do thou? it is true,
such Kings were uncontroleable; but our Kings are not Kings of such a nature,
we only swear to be true and loyal to them de jure Regnandi, (viz. that we
in conscience believe them to be our lawful Kings, and that we will defend
their Crown, Dignities, etc. to the uttermost of our power) which, God forbid,
any one should so much as imagine to deprive our Kings of; but we swear not to
our Kings that they shall be the absolute disposers de jure Regni, we have
otherwise conditioned; and therefore we are not any way comprehended in or by
the before recited Texts to become slavish by keeping, or obeying all
Commandments of our Kings of what nature soever: There are some other Texts of
Scripture of the nature of these last recited, and reducible to the same
exposition.

5. Yet furthermore, I will instance one Text, Matthew. 5. v. 39. But I say unto
ye resist not evil, etc. Hence some will that free Subjects ought to suffer
all indignities, oppressions and tyrannies, rather then to resist or defend
themselves by Arms: But it is to be noted, that the true meaning of that
Textis, that where Gods name may by suffering be magnified, there men ought to
suffer all indignities, rather then to resist; but where Gods name may by
suffering be rather dishonored, then magnified, there men ought not to suffer
actually but intentionally: as thus, A Judge if a base fellow should strike him
on the one ear or cheek, ought to have so much patience, as that he could
turn the other; yet he ought not actually to do it, lest his Authority, and
the Laws of the Land also should suffer contempt: And a King, if an usurper
should endeavor to dispose of his Scepter (or lawful power exercised ought to
have so much humility, as that he could let him have his Crown also, or right
of Reigning) but yet he ought not actually to do it, lest he injure not only
his Regal Authority, but also his Subjects in general, whose welfare he is
bound to protect: And even so likewise, a people, if a National Potent, or
Potencie should tyrannize or oppress them, ought (if it were possible all of
them) to have so much patience and humility, as that they could suffer all
indignities, yet they ought not always to suffer them, lest (in some cases) by
too much suffering, the Law of God, of Nature, and of their Nation (all which
they are bound to conserve) should be violated: in the Chapter before recited,
v. 22. it is forbidden to call a brother fool, yet St. Paul called the
Galathians fools, or foolish, Gal. 3. But how? out of admonition and
compassion, not in hate or contempt, but in ordine ad Deum, to reprove, and
advise them; and every act moral is specified by the object and end; so that
if a People (to whom jus Regni belongs) take Arms to defend their Laws and
liberties, etc. they do it not out of Rebellion, but in ordine ad Deum, to
reduce and reform usurping or exorbitant Potentates or Potencies.

Thus I conclude for the present, praying the Almighty Governor of all things,
that King, Parliament and People, might in a happy union enjoy their just
Power, Privilege and Proprieties. Amen.

WILLIAM BALL.


