TRUTH (the Strongest of all) Witnessed forth in the Spirit of Truth, against
all DECEIT: And Pleading in Righteousness its own cause, to the understanding
of the Simple, against a very great number of lies, slanders, perverting of the
Scriptures, contradictions and false damnable doctrines, held forth by the
INDEPENDANTS.

AND In particular by one JOHN BUNION, (one of Gogs Army) in two several
Books put forth by him, against the despised scattered People called QVAKERS.

AND IS A REPLY Unto his second Book, CALLED A VINDICATION, etc.

Wherein what was wanting in his former of fulfilling wickedness is now
appeared; by his adding sin unto sin, against God and against his own soul.

And this is to clear the Truth from above 100 of John Bunions foul dirty lies
and slanders: By a friend of the Truth as it is in Christ Jesus; and not as it
is in men's carnal apprehensions, EDWARD BOROUGH

LONDON: Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black -spread-Eagle, near the West
end of Paul's 1657.

TO THE READER.
FRIEND,
THOU have here a very great number of about 100 or more as may be proved
inparticular if need require.
lies and slanders, and unjust dealing, and false doctrines, etc. Laid open and
reproved in plainness, and not in hypocrisy, and of contention there is not
suddenly an end being begun; therefore seeing the unbelieving heart of John
Bunion cannot believe me when I speak the truth in justness, nor may I
believe his lies and slanders uttered in hypocrisy; what is laid down is left
to thee, soberly to judge of betwixt us, while we are both silent: And this
know the one is a Deciever and the other is as a Deceiver yet true; and thus
may thou weigh things equally.

First, considering of many lies and slanders truly charged upon him in my
first, of which he is guilty from his first, and he has not at all cleared
himself of them in his second, which an honest man ought to have done, before
he had gone further; for I soberly desired witness of what he said: But be
has added to the number of his wickedness, and not proved justly what he has
said against us: And it is not for his sake, for little hopes I have of his
conversion, but the rather that he will be hardened, nor for my own sake as if
I were unsatisfied concerning him that this is written, but to undeceive the
simple of what his wickedness may falsely suggest into the mind as if all were
truth that he spoke, if his wickedness were not reproved.

Again, Consider that I have cleared the truth of my words which he has
wrested and thereby taken occasion against the truth, by answering his own
conceptions and not my plain words, so my words (which are words of truth)
being defended, all his reply is made void: So I have not so much desired to
answer every particular of his words, as to vindicate my own words, and the
truth from his false slanders and accusations.

London, 12. month, 1656. E. B.

TRUTH (the strongest of all) Witnessed forth in the Spirit of Truth Against
all DECEIT.
O HOW has Satan filled the hearts of men, in this generation (as well as in
former ages) with envy against the truth, and with wrath against the way
thereof, and how has he filled them with craft, and deceitful subtilty, to
offend the way of the Lord, in all manner of persecuting, and evil speaking
against it openly, and also in secret gainsayings, in hypocrisy, and how are
men armed to defend themselves in their naughtiness, laying hid under the
veil of fair speeches, and fine arguments, using the Scripture in the words of
man's wisdom, to oppose the power and life of righteousness, even as the
Scribes and Pharisees of old, how zealous were they in their observances, and
in fulfilling the Commands and traditions of their fathers, having set
themselves in Moses seat, professing Moses and the Prophets words, and yet
persecuted Christ the life, and substance of Moses, and the Prophets, and as it
was then, so is it now, how are Christ's words, and the Apostles professed and
preached by such who are enemies o the life of Christ made manifest in mortal
flesh, and secretly opposing the doctrine of the Apostles, who said, Know ye
not, that Christ is within you, except you be Reprobates. But the mighty day of
the Lord is come, and comeing, wherein all hearts are made manifest, and the
secrets thereof discovered, and the light is springing out of darkness, and
the Sun is breaking through the clouds to give light to all men and Nations, and
the great whore which has decked her self in diverse colors to deceive, shall
be made naked and bare, and the day of great striving is come, and now every
man stands up for his interest, to defend his possession, for the just Judge
stands at the door, to enquire by what Law every man holds his Inheritance,
and he finds many holding their Religion, and Profession, by the traditions
of men only, and not by the Revelation of Christ Jesus in them, and such he
will dispossess, though they strive against him, yet all is in vain, and
though they plead Antiquity, yet that will not prevail, and in that the day of
great striving is come, betwixt the Lamb and his followers, the Draggon and his
followers, every one of that Party appearing with such weapons as the Devil
has armed them withal, and with such Armor as the wicked has they come,
appearing under diverse colors, to fight against Zion, yet under one Head, and
Prince of darkness, and unto one Purpose, even that the seed of Jacob may be
rooted out, and that the way of truth may not prosper, that then the wicked may
go on in their wickedness, without reproof, and ungodlynesse may be hid
under hypocrisy and above all other means, that is used at this day, to keep
up the Kingdom of the Devil, and to offend the Kingdom of Christ; this is
Chief, striving against the light of the world, opposing it, and denying it,
and by crafty arguments, and cunning speeches, seeking suitable Scriptures, (as
they suppose) to ground their false arguments upon, against this very thing,
that the light of Christ is given to every man that comes into the World, or
that the light which convinces and Reprooveth every man of sin within him, is
not the light of Christ, nor worthy to be taken notice off, but natural and
such like, and no way sufficient to life and salvation; if the unjust men
persecute, it is such as walk in the light of Christ Jesus, that cannot
fulfill the wills and customs of men, and so are not of the World, but
contrary to it, in all its ways and works which are evil, and if the wise men
of the World make any argument, it is against the light, with which Christ
lightneth every man that comes into the World, so that all the envy of the
Devil, whether under this or that color and appearance, is against the light
of Christ Jesus and them that walk therein, and if the light be but denied,
and not balieved in, nor regarded, then may the Devil have whole Possession of
the heart of man, and if the light of Christ Jesus within, be owned and loved,
and walked in, then Christ is received, and there the Devil is dispossessed,
and therefore it stands him upon, above all other things to possess people
against the light within, which Christ has given, that then he may not be
discovered in the heart; but may keep all his goods in peace, and have quiet
Possession in his habitation? Well, be it so, though all men of that Kingdom
does gainsay the light of Christ, by this or that way of wickedness, yet it is
precious unto us, and I cannot but earnestly contend for it against all
gainsayers, and yet strives not for mastery to our selves, nor to exalt any
thing of our selves, but only the Lord and his truth, which he has made more
dear to us, then either life, or name, or liberty, and though so it be, that
this way be spoken evil against every where, yet the Lord owneth it, and us who
are faithful therein, in the presence of our enemies, to the confounding of
the wisdom of this world; and whereas John Bunion has formerly set himself
diverse ways to oppose the truth under the account of his great zeal against
error; but especially in a Book sometime since, put forth by him, thinking
thereby to offend the way of righteousness; and now a second time has
appeared, with a defense upon his former, called A Vindication, etc.

Of the former and his defense, is more to the laying open his folly, and to
the uncovering of his blindness and wickedness, then his first offense given
by him, which caused me to write in short four sheets of paper, to clear the
truth from what he had spoken against it.

And now having again a second time appeared in many words without knowledge
yet in great zeal, has brought forth many things reprovable, even lies and
slanders, and evil speeches in abundance, yet with great pretense of holiness,
and soberness, and he has not only helped me, but the truth which is my
chief, and moving cause, (that the truth may be clear) of this my second Reply
unto him, and not for my own sake in any thing, for I more prize to be
accounted a fool, and dispraysed in the world, then to be honored thereby,
and when iniquity shall come to an end, and transgression shall be finished,
his shall be the Kingdom and the Inheritance of Rest eternal, that has kept
himself clean and pure, from a lying and slanderous tongue, and who has done
righteously and fulfilled the will of God, For it is not every one that says
Lord, Lord, that shall enter into the Kingdom, but he that does the will of
the Father which is in heaven, and in that day when the Book of all
consciences shall be opened, and every thing brought to judgment, then shall
the light in every ones conscience answer the Lord in the justness of his
dealings, and even then (if not before) shall this John Bunion know the light
in all men's consciences is of force; when he shall be judged and then shall he
see, he has wronged the Lord, and dealt evil against his own soul, in
speaking evil of what he has not known, and in giving false judgment of what
he has not understood, and till that day I leave him (without praying for fire
to devour him) only may reprove his lies errors, contradictions and false
dealing, and clear the truth from his false Charges, and only to the most
chiefest things whereof he accuses us, in short I may Reply.

And whereas thou say, There is one that has ventured to stand up against
the truth, and has published a book in which there is a great number of
Heresies cunningly ^ented by him and also many things there falsely Reported of
thee, To which I answer, that same Book published called The true says of the
Gospel contended for, etc. Shall clear it self from this reproach that I have
not stood up against any one truth, or uttered any Heresy or lie against thee,
Several lies and slanders was proved against him in that book, which he cannot
clear himself of; mark that.
but in that Book did witness forth the truth against many things falfly laid
down by thee against the Quakers, and that same Book with soberness read,
without partiality and prejudice, does clear it self from these false
aspersions, and prove thee a liar herein, and I leave it to the honest hearted
to judge, who reads that book while I with patience and not seeking any
revenge, do bear thy reproaches, counting them greater riches then thy praise.

And farther thou say, Only by the way thou think good to mind me of my
clothing my self with the words of the Prophets and Apostles, etc.

Answ. true enough by the way, out of the truth, and out of Christ who is the
way, has thou spoken this, and so has uttered in falsehood, and by, or out of
the way, neither have I clothed my self, and yet am I clothed, with the life
of the Prophets and Apostles, and not only with their words, nor do I fight
against them (though thou falsely say it) but bears witness unto them, in
doctrine and conversation, and against thee, all the seed of evil doers, and
take back thy own words to thy self, who art in that generation, which has
the words, but art without the Lying perverting Scripture is an evil l^fe.
life in the evil life.

Farther thou say, I have broken out with a false Testimony of John Burton
and thee, at which thou seem to be much offended, that I should say thou art
joined with the broken Army of Magog, and has showed your selves in the
defense of the Draggon, against the Lamb, etc.

Reply, what need thou be troubled at this, have I not spoken the truth, and
have I not said well herein, for you are joined with all the wicked in the
Nation, and as liars and swearers and drunkards, persecutes with violence, and
as the proud and wanton are filled with scorning and singing wicked rimes in
the streets, even so also are you come in Print, and all of you against them
called Quakers, the drunkards and swearers they beat, them and abuse them, and
cast them as for dead into diches, with stoning in the high ways, and in the
streets beating down with staves, and the wanton they sing there rimes in
scorn in Alehouses, and Taverns against them, and thou and thy fellows and
generation appears in open Print, slandering and reviling them (yet in
pretense of zeal for God) and all this you do against us who have the
witness that we are of God, and that the whole world lies in wickedness, and
now are not you all joined as an Army, and do you not show your selves in the
defense of the Draggon, liars and flanderers is of the Dragons party;
what wrong I have done you, let the upright in heart judge, whether I have
given false testimony against you or no, and though you have noted it for a lie
in the Margent, yet the lie is thy own, who has gainsaid the truth herein,
and called it a lie, and I have dealt justly with thee, in the sight of God and
all that know him, and when the book of thy conscience is opened, thou shall
also confess to this thing, when thou stand condemned with them, with whom
thou art now joined, against us, who have the testimony that we are of God, and
worshippers of the Father in the spirit and truth, and my words were spoken by
the spirit of the Lord, and that in thy conscience shall witness them, in the
day of the Lord* though now thou Opprobriously say, I said that desolate Zion
is compassed about with enemies to make her adestruction, etc.
here are flung into the wind. And whereas thou seemesto be greatly offended,
that I should say part of the first book is a Corrupted grain of Babylons
treasure, etc.

But have not I spoken the truth herein also, when I say, I have numbered up
part of your work and this is the sum thereof, that part which I have numbered
viz. your lies and false reproaches against the Quakers, is a corrupted grain;
yea, and of Babylons These are some of the words which he says flung into the
wind.
treasure too. I am not ashamed of my words, though thou would defend your
work by saying, Your discourse was of the Birth Righteousness, death, blood,
etc. And of the second coming of the son of Mary, etc.

To which I say, these things and the knowledge of them, by the spirit of God,
is not counted by me Corrupted nor of Babylon, though now I answer as in my
last, the words I own, but thy voice I deny, and knows it to be the voice of
the stranger, and for this saying, ha I not, nor never shall have any burden
upon my Conscien^e, (though thou would say it) but it is cleared in the sight of
God, even though I say all that thou speak* I deny, or thy speaking of any
thing of the Kingdom of God; with thy lying spirit.

And whereas thou art offended, that I should say you are described to be the
flock of Ishmaell, and of the seed of Cain, whose line reaches to the
murdering Priests, etc.

And thou say, I am very sensorious, and utterest many words without
knowledge, etc.

Reply, Yea, your words does describe your nature, for by your voice I know
you, to be none of Christ's sheep, and accordingly I judge, in just judgment,
and in true knowledge, and do not falfly sensure, nor utter words void of
knowledge, and my words shall be witnessed by you in the day of the Lord: Envy
is of Cains nature and seed, and in that you are, and liars are of Ishmaels
stock, and you are guilty of that, let the sober Reader try; and you are among
the murdering Priests party, and close joined to them, in doctrine and practice
especially in writing against us.

Now no wrong have I done you, that thou need to be troubled, and seeks to
cover your selves by thy fair words in thy answer as if you were righteous,
but all will not hide you, your works make you manifest to be no less then
what I have said of you.

Then farther thou art hot against me, in that I say, you are found enemies to
Christ, revealed in his Saints, and this thou have noted it in the Margent for
false, but thou do not well to be angry; it is true, what I have spoken, thy
own words do prove it, in saying there was nothing in thee, to be taken notice
of; this was a denying of Christ within, and such as deny him are found enemies
to him within, So the lie is thy own, who have denied truth, let the wise
Reader judge, and thy many words in a pretending answer will not cover you from
the guilt of what I have charged upon you and not falsely, and what I have said
hitherto is true, and not false, though thou fainingly say, thou marvels I
should be so over-seen, as to utter so many false things in so little a space;
nay, my understanding was open, when I wrote forth that book, at which thou art
so tormented, that it has caused thee some months travellin anguish to clear
thy self, and yet cannot be at rest, and thou art over-seen who resists the
reproof of thy wickedness.

Then thou goes about to justify thy brother Burtons words, who wickedly laid
it down, as thou immpudently go to justify it, who joined in his accusation,
and slanders Quakers with Ranters, and this would thou justify we are one,
against my just answer, which denied them in the fourth page of my first where
I said, between Quakers and Ranters there is no more union etc. then betwixt
light and darkness, good and evil, and that answer stands untouched by thee,
and is true, and in justifying John Burtons wicked slander, thou art more
wicked in comparing the Principles, and say it will appear they agree in one
etc.

But what a wicked course have thou taken to clear him, by adding thy own
wickedness, let all consider that reads, for do not I desire in plainness in
my first, in these words, if thou dare lay viz. That the Quakers deny Christ to
be a real man: Secondly, that they fancy him to be God manifest in their
flesh; Thirdly, that they make his humane nature with the fullness of the
Godhead, to be but a tipe of God: these things were charged up on us.
the Charge only upon the Quakers, write in plainness, and bring testimony of
thy accusation, and thou may receive a farther answer but not a word in plain
answer, to this is returned, though soberly desired, neither time nor place,
nor witnesses evidenced to clear your selves, of your first slanders, which had
been more honest, then to have slandered, afresh passing over your first, but
it seems you cannot clear your selves in honesty, and so fulfill your
wickedness by adding to your lies and slanders, as thou impudently does in thy
comparing the principles of the Ranters with the Quakers.

And to save thy brother from shame and guilt, thou art fallen thy self into
the snare, and justly may be judged, to exceed him in wickedness; and thou
say, (with shame to thy self, I repeat it) that the This is a lie;
Quakers will not own Christ without them, but thou brings not testimony of
this asserion, til then, be thou reckoned, and shall be plauged for a liar,
which will be for ever for we own him as he is ascended far above all heavens
who fills all things, yea and without us too, so that instead of proving the
first false accusation, thou adds another slander and the That the Ranters and
Quakers deny all teaching but the teaching within; and yet condemns principle
by practice.
second thing wherein thou compares them, is unsound for though we witness,
(yea thousands) yet we need no man to teach us, but as the anointing with in
us, as the Saints did 1 John, yet we cry not down the ministry of God, but
ownes it, and cries down such by whom people cannot come to the knowledge of
the truth, though they be ever learning, who Preaches for hire and goes for
gifts and rewards, and loves the wages of unrighteousness, and this was the
Apostles doctrine, as it was ours, and is no heresy (though thou may so judge
it) sor we say by the same spirit as the Apostles did, they that are of God
hears us who are in the truth, which is but one, and there is not another;
and the Apostles which witnessed the Saints needed no man to teach them, did
exhort them, and yet did not condemn principles by practice.

Then thou goes on, and says The Ranters are not for baptism, and breaking of
bread, and are not the Quakers the same? But what does this prove, and thou
say, the Ranters are without sin, and how far short of this opinion are the
Quakers, and the Ranters would not own the resurrection, etc.

And how say you, Do you believe the very bodies shall rise, etc.

Reply, Friend this is far short of proving these things upon us, by
querieing them to us, let the Reader consider: But it may be impudency has not
so wholly eaten out honesty in thee, as that thou dare charge us wholly with
these things, but would Intrude into us by thy Questions, as though the thing
were so indeed, but thou may be ashamed of thy work, is this sufficient proof
of evil against us, to ask us whether it be so? what have thou proved in all
this against us (if we were guilty) think thou we will accuse our selves,
this is absurdity, and wickedness in thee, falsely to charge us, and to bring
no better evidence, but thy bare words; and as we deny the Ranters, so do we
thee, and sees you both to be enemies to the life of God: But thy last and
chief proof (as thou think) that we are one is that the Ranters are
sinners, and the Quakers are liars, the first I will not vindicate, but this
last is disputable, and thy proof of it is first thou say, from what thou
have said already, to some pages of my first book, to which I have Replied,
and leaves it to the Reader, only does say, thou have not yet proved one lie
against me in the sight of God not men, thou art the liar if thou say thou have
and honest men shall be judge betwixt us: and thy second proof is more to the
discovering of thy ignorance then yet has been, and to clear thy self from my
In my first Book.
charge against thee (viz.) to be a wrester of the Scripture, which yet I stand
to, thou art fallen into grievious error; my first charge is true upon thee,
that thou perverted or wrested that Scripture; Rev. 13. 18. in saying the Lamb
was slain before the foundation of the World; for that Scripture says since,
or from the foundation of the world, have thou no more sense, art thou and all
thy company so ignorant that you know not betwixt before and since a time, how
are you blinded, and yet persists in your wickedness, and will not be
reproved, therefore this is a double iniquity in thee, to thy shame remember
it, for I have said true, though thou understand it not in my first book I
said,
there is as much difference, betwixt before, and since in that thing, as
betwixt a lie and truth, for to say the blood was shed before the foundation of
the world, as thou do is a very lie but to say it was shed since or from, is
truth, and that Scripture is truth, Rev. 13.

And thou art the liar, and wrester of it and I have not wronged thee in my
first, though thou impudently and ignorantly would clear thy self, and lay
iniquity upon me, but further to clear thy self thou say, thou said, in Gods
account it was shed, before the world was: and this is little less then
blasphemy, what, is God a hypocrite like thy self? to account that for truth,
which is a lie as I have proved, O horrid error and perfect blindness! but
this will not cover thee, nor thy shame, from the eye of men, where is thy
proof for such a doctrine, that God accounts that which is a lie for truth?
largely is manifest thy folly; Repent if thy heart be not void of shame, for
what thou have spoken herein; and let the Reader understand this difference,
thou say the blood of Christ, was shed before the foundation of the world,
according to that Scripture, Rev. 13. I say thou perverts the Scripture, and
lie grossly in the maine thing it self, and says it is Read the Scriptutes
mark the sense. betwixt before. and from.
since, or from the foundation of the world; let the honest judge, and now it
is seen, the lie rests upon thy own head; who wrests the Scripture; and belyes
the Lord, and me, and goes on in thy wickedness after reproof, and take thou
the Ranters, they are thy companinons, in lying and sinning, and not ours.

And further thou art offended that I should say, and would feign reckon it for
a lie, that all thy work is a secret smiting, and an obscure shooting against
the manifestation of Christ within, which words I own to be truth concerning
these, and am not ashamed of them, though thou say, I say falsely, and when the
book of thy conscience is opened, thou shall confess it, only I leave viz
that which you said; there was nothing in any man to be taken notice of; this
is a denying of him within.
this to be consideredseriously and judged by them who are spiritual, and they
shall be my witnesses, and the lie is of thee and thy father, whose wickedness
is sufficiently seen by what is said, if I should say no more; again thou say
it is an untruth of thee, to say thou art one of those that do preach for
hire, through covetuousnesse making merchandise of souls, my words are not so
laid down, thou have rested them for thy purpose, though it availes nothing:
but I said thou art in their steps, that through covetuousnesse with fained
words, makes merchandise of souls and thou art found among them that preaches
for hier, and I have spoken the truth herein, let the light in all consciences
judge, who are not seared in many things, I might instance that thou art in
their steps, and among them that act such things as further may be proved, and
the wisdom of God so fore saw, to keep me clear and my words to be defended,
though I expected no less from thee, as to this thing, then is come to pass,
but the lie is of thy self, who would deny the the truth is he is in their
steps, and among them;
truth; the next thing that thou will charge upon me to be a lie, I pass, here
the Reader may expect it in its place, and though thou say the Ranters and I
and my fellows are of the same mind in many things etc.

To which I Reply, Their practices I deny, and the ground in which they stand
and their false doctrines yet dare we not deny any truth as it is in Christ;
though they, as thou may profess it in words, which is seldom they do, for
we have respect unto the truth, for the truths sake only, but how uncharitable
art thou in thy measure and judgment: Consider, as if he should say, J. Bunion
is of the same mind with the Pope in many things; the Pope holds Christ was
born of Mary, and was crucified and raised again, and ascended, etc. And this
holds John Bunion, and is of the same mind with the Pope in many things; and
therefore must partake of the same plagues with the Pope as thou said of us,
though thou have by unequal measure thus judged us, yet I render not evil for
evil, but in love to thy soul, shows thee thy folly and weakness.

Then thou goes on having passed by the two viz. that the Quaker^ undervalues
the Lord Jesus, and does not lay him for their ^oundation.
slanders cast upan us, by John Burton, in your first book which I charged you
withal in mine to which not one word as to evidence your slanders but has
slipped it over as a foul guilty man, which charge stands upon you both; that
you are slanderers herein, and my first answer I am not ashamed of, though you
snarle much about it, and would taint it or undermine it: but thy subtilty is
to weak, truth confounds thee and thy simplicity, which is that we prise the
Lord Jesus Christ, God man to be precious unto us, and has owned him alone to
be the foundation whom God has lied, and in his light we are saved, etc.

As I said in Page 7. against which words thou can not justly except, nor yet
prove the contrary and yet as a man that loves to hear thy own tongue, thou
lays down many things impertinent as to the cause in hand.

But it had been more honest to have helped thy brother Burton, from under my
true charge and cleared the truth if thou had been able, but thou have left him
in the dirt under the charge of a slanderer; and art unfaithful to him, and
goes about to inquire what it is (as thou say) to lay Christ for a
foundation; thou confesses what I have said is fairly spoken, and yet thy
envious mind and unbelieving heart seems to be offended at my words, and to
them that can believe I speak plainly, and does not bege thy belief, nor any
maes, but commends my self to every man's conscience in the fight of God, and
knows no other Jesus, nor Savior, nor Foundation, then he that John was sent
to prepare the way before, who was, and is, and is to come; who said I am the
light of the World, and now my words are defended to be truth in the fight of
them that are spiritual; and thou and such may hear* but must not understand,
who have hardened your hearts least you should believe, and therefare is given
up to gainsayings, till the wrath of God break out against you; and let John
Burton remember my words, where I said he is fallen into the pit which he
dug for another, and he undervalues the Lord Jesus* whose doctrine is to
speak truth, but he has lied and slandered and so is out of Christ the
foundation, and undervalues him, who keeps not his sayings, but is a worker in
darkness, and not in the light: And as to that where I say, thus much is the
mind of the penmans spirit, (of the first Epistle of the first Book) secretly
smiting at the doctrine of true faith and salvation (to wit) Christ within, I
have said the truth in righteousness, and do own my words though thou say I
have done him a great deal of wrong, etc.

But I leave it to be judged by them that are spiritual, and not unto thee, to
give false meaning of my words, and does not he say in that Epistle of some
that have been depending too much upon some thing they call Christ, and the
rigteousnesse of Christ within them, etc.

Let the wise in heart judge, whether this be not as I have said, even a secret
smiting against Christ within, without which as I have said, there can be no
salvation, for he that has not Christ in him, is a reprobate, and this I
speak, not in opposition, but as a testimony of Christ Jesus, that dyed, and
rose again, and ascended, who is within, and without also, and if any preach
another Jesus, let him be accursed, and repent, who art in the wrong doing thy
self, falsely charging me; noting in the Margent, with speaking falsely, when I
spoke the truth, and the false speaking rests at thy door, and is driven
thither with the power of truth.

Then whereas thou would justify thy former wickedness, in charging the
Quakers to be decievers, against my just answer The children of God were ever
counted deceivers by this generation, but the way which he called delusion do
we worship, the true God, etc.
in page 8. of mine; which stands free from any of thy vain arguments, and
uncontroled though resisted, but it appears my words sticks close unto thee;
and torments thee, and that we are deceivers thou say it will easily appear
with much impudence confidence, thy arguments we shall try.

And (say thou) First, the Quakers deny the man Christ Jesus without them,
and own Christ no other ways but as he is within, etc.

Reply, How impudent art thou in forging lie after lie, and building them up in
thy work one upon another, and a wicked course thou takes to clear thy former
slanders, truly charged upon thee in my first, even by laying another upon it.

Friend, By this thy deceitful flander, while thou have thought to prove us
deceivers, has proved thy self one, even a false accuser, may thou not
blush to say we own Christ no otherwise, then as he is within? we own him
which was, is, and is to come, who is within us, and without us, as I have said
in my first, we own him as the Scripture speaks of him, and it is known to the
Lord, and in his sight we are approved, whether thou be ieve it or not; for I
beg not belief of thee, but leaves thy double slanders to be read, and judged
of, by all honest people, and in the interim, know it is a bad way to prove us
deceivers by thy lies, this the rather is a witness to us that we are of God,
and against thee, to be of the Devil, who was a liar from the beginning, and
thou his Child succeeds him; in lying.

Thy second proof is, That we are deceivers, because (says thou) We do
persuade souls that Christ is crucified in them, dead within them, kept down
with something within them, which was never taught by them that spoke the
Scriptures, etc.

Reply, These words are falsely laid down, but what think thou of such who
might crucify to themselves Or in themselves.
a fresh the Son of God, and put him to open shame, as it is written, this they
could not do, above Stars, they being men upon the earth, and Christ was sent
to preach to the spirits in Prison, he that can read let him understand this
doctrine was preached by them that spoke forth the Scriptures, who had the
spirit of God, but in b^indnesse I find thee, and I think so I must leave
thee: and does not feed the Serpent, yet my words are plain to him that has an
understanding, and an ear open, and deceiver belongs to thee, and at thy door
it lies, and thou cannot remove it.

Farther (thou say) We persuade souls that that man that was borne of the
Virgin Mary, is not above the clouds, and the Stars, when as the Scripture
says a cloud received him out of their sight.

Reply, This is another lie, uttered without fear or knowledge, or honesty, we
do not persuade souls to believe any such thing, but bears witness to the
truth of that Scripture, that a cloud received him out of their sight, and we
say he is out of their sight and must appear again in sight, and this is a
wicked way of thee, to prove us deceivers, by slandering us, adding more to thy
own sin, and the more will be thy burden, in the day of the Lord when plagues
and torment is thy portion, from which thou shall not fly, though now thou be
above shame.

Farther, (say thou) We persuade souls not to believe that, that man that
was crucified, and rose again, etc. Shall so come again to judgment, as he
went away, and shall raise up men and women out of their graves, and cause them
to come into the valley of Jehoshaphat, thou say we strive to beat souls
off from believing this, etc.

Reply, O how swiftly thy lying tongue runs without fear, as though neither
God nor man took notice of thee, or that ever thou should be called to question
for them, many lies together thou have here foulded up in one, thy lies I deny,
and this to be one; have thou set thy self to tell lies O abominable
wickedness may thou not tremble? when thou considers what thou falsely say
of us contrary to my words, who said in the truth of my heart, we own him to be
what the Scripture speaks of him and not otherwise? it seems thou cannot
believe when I speak truth; I number up thy lies and returns them back to
thee to read, and by all this; is it not true, that thou art of the same spirit
with thy fellow, and abounds more in lies, as I said in my first, his was but
about 3, thine manyfold more, but thy lies is no testimony against us, that we
are deceivers, but they shall lay heavy upon thee at one day, when we shall be
clear, for in the affirmive.

I further say that, that Christ Jesus that was crucified, and rose again,
shall come as he went away to judgment, and the dead shall be raised, and
every man shall receive according to their deeds, and he shall set to judge the
Heathen round about, according to Joel 3. and thy portion in that day shall be
howling and gnashing of teeth, for the liars Portion is the lake.

Thou say again the Quakers make no difference between that light, wherewith
Christ as he is God has enlightened all, and the spirit of Christ he gives not
to all.

Reply, I put thee to prove that they are contrary or divided one against the
other, for thus Christ says, I will send you the comforter even the spirit of
truth, which must needs be the spirit of Christ and he shall reprove or
convince the world of sin, and of righteousness; now mark that same spirit of
the Father and of the Son, who is the comforter of the Saints is the same, and
not another that does reprove the world, he that can read let him understand
the world cannot receive the comforter yet have they given to them that which
does reprove them; which is with the light of Christ Jesus, of the same, and
not contrary nor divided; if thou have an ear, thou may hear, the error is in
thy self who art without understanding.

Further thou say, They say that every one has that which is like the spirit
of Christ, even as God, as the spirit of Christ, which thou say is desperate
blasphemy, and cries out with an outcry, O wonderful deceit! etc.

Reply, I would have all to take notice, that thou have wronged my words, in
wresting of them for thy wicked purpose, to have a ground of slander, there is
no such words in the tenth Page of my book, which thou quoatest, but in one
place, I say, till thou prove the light of Christ John 1. 9. (which thou
confesses every man has) to be contrary to the spirit of Christ, (Mark) I
shall say every man has that which is one in union, and like the spirit of
Christ, even as good as the spirit of Christ, according to its measure; these
words I must own.

But let the sober Reader take notice how foully thou have wronged my words Till
he could prove the light, Jo. 1. 9. to be contrary to the Spirit of Christ,
when he prays his I may shut my mouth.
leaving out the strength of them, to take occasion of slander, when thou had
proved the light of Christ (which in John 1. 9. is spoken of) to be contrary to
the spirit of Christ, then had been a better season, for this charge against me:

O thou impudent and shameless man! so unjustly to deal against the upright,
who envies thee not but pitties thee therefore when thou or any man can prove
the light of Christ spoken of John 1. 9. and John 8. 12. to be contrary to the
spirit of Christ, then I may own the judgment and charge upon me, but till
then thou art proved a liar; for the light of Christ spoken of John 1. 9. that
light is one in union, and not contrary, and is of the likeness of the spirit
of Christ, and as The witness is as good as the Judge; in measure.
good in its measure, and these words I stand to, to vindicate against all thy
lies, and wresting of words and outcries, who is an unfit fellow to judge what
blasphemy is, who is so blind that thou know not the difference of words,
betwixt, before, and from, as I have showed:

Repent, If so be thou may find mercy.

Then further thou say to cover my self and deceit, I do apply, that which
should be to the children of God, etc. And yet cannot reprehend my answer,
which is just and saithfull, that the Children of God were always counted
deceivers, and this is true, as thy self confesses but wickedly says in thy
answer, and most lyingly too, and blasphemy is fallen out of thy mouth, The
Devil knows how to take Childrens bread, and cast it to dogs.

Reply, Now let all consider what thou have said, Christ Jesus is the bread of
life that came down from Heaven, the childrens bread, and they have no other,
Now the Devil cannot take Christ Jesus who only is the childrens bread, and
give him to dogs, O horrid! can thou behold this, and not be smitten to the
heart, what wickedness and ignor ance lodges in that heart that can utter
those things; Though thou think, thou have done bravely in thus saying, yet the
wisdom of God turns thy words upon thy own head into confusion and grievious
error, I deny it though thou affirm it, that the Devil can take, or knows how
to take Christ Jesus and give him to dogs.

Further thou say, I am grieved, that thou should say none but a company
of Notionist and Ranters, etc. are carried with the Quakers, etc. and say
thou, this appears in all men's sight, etc.

Reply, Thou art a liar, I am not greived at thy flanders and wicked
reproaches, But rather rejoices therein, that I am one worthy to bear them,
and all men that can see, sees thee a false accuser herein, for such who have
feared the Lord, and served him, and are, and have been honest and upright to
God and man, have owned us, and have been neither Ranters nor such like; and we
rejoice, if any that has been so, be turned from it unto God, to live in
righteousness though thou note it for a false thing in the margent. (But to
make it appear false thou have corrupted my words) which are though some of all
sorts of people be brought to God, yet thou The words seems to be are left out,
by him which carry the strength of my words.
seems to be offended herewith, and these my words are true upon thy head, for
I ask not withstanding some were such, are they such who are in wickedness,
since they owned us? then why do thou wickedly (as though thou were offended
at it) upraides us, that such, or such are carried away with us, as though none
else which is thy lie uttered in thy hastiness.

And whereas thou art offended, (thou say) that I should say thou art like
the Pharisees, whether I spoke so or no, how ever I own that thou art like them
(at least) even one among them.

As further I shall manifest, then thou have over-leapt (with a false excuse of
passing by many railings as thou say) which it seems troubles thee that I
should truly In my first book.
charge thee to bring forth lies without fear, and that the Ranters and light
Notionists, and thee we deny, till you to turn to the Lord by repentance, and
if you turn from your iniquity we dare not deny you.

And further I truly charge thee, that thou art puffed up in thy lies and
slanders, and advances thy self above the Innocent, who exceeds thee in faith
toward God, and in good works toward man, and whose conversation is in
heaven, but thine is among the hirelings, etc. And this thou have skipped over,
as a deceitful child, with a poor excuse, which thou may be ashamed to call
these railings, but that thy heart is void of shame, let the sober Reader judge
else, then thou say I stumble at that, wherein in thy first thou said the
Devil persuades these men to believe,

First, That salvation was not completely wrought out for sinners by the man
Christ Jesus, etc.

Reply, Here thou art a liar again, I stumble not, for I walk in the light and
does not stumble, but I reproved thy lie, and slander, and said this accusation
is clearly false wickedly cast upon us, for there is no salvation in any other,
neither is it wrought by any other, but by Jesus Christ, etc. As page the 9 of
my first may be read, but thou have not at all removed, the true charge against
thee, that I charged upon thee, upon these words (viz.) a believer of lies, a
slanderer, a false accuser, which stands true upon thee still, and will for
ever till thou remove it by repentance, for thou can never clear thy self
any other ways, and thou say I have left some words out, but this is but a
poor catch, for do I not make an Et caettera at the end of thy words, and if
thou were not too ignorant, thou might understand that which follows is
included and conjoined.

Then thou go on, and say I am offended that thou should say the Devil
deceives souls by bidding them follow the light that they brought into the
world with them, telling them that will lead into the Kingdom etc.

Now my answer to this is sober, and just Page 10. of my first.
as will appear, though thou say vainly, I seem to be gravelled, because I
informed thy mistake, who said pervertingly either in subtilty or for want of
wit, the light which they brought into the world with them; when as the
Scripture says, Christ is the light which lights every man that comes into
the world, Joh. 1. 9. which light as I did I do affirm, will lead into the
Kingdom of peace and rest, and deny it if thou can, for the light of Christ,
does reveal Christ, and the light lights every man that comes into the
world, then thou heaps up many words though thou falsely say, I corrupt that
Scripture Ja. 8. yet I lay it down in its own words, and says, that is or was
the true light, that lights every man that comes into the world, and that light
(which has so done) will lead all that believes into the Kingdom, for Christ
says I am the light of the world, and though thou ignorantly would seem to say
this is error, yet I affirm it that h^, the same which says I am the light of
the world, is he, and no other, which lights every man that comes into the
world and this I suppose thou will call a filthy error, but the filthiness is
in thy own heart and error too, through ignorance of the knowledge of the
things of God, who would feign (if thou could) make it appear, that that Christ
which lights every man that comes into the world, John 1. 9. is not the same
that says I am the light of the world, John 8. 12. Thy confused words seems to
carry this meaning, let the Reader judge, whether that be not the same Christ
Jesus, which John speaks of; Jobn 1. 9 as it is written of John 8. 12. and
though thou ignorantly say I would have room to broach my folly, yet thou lets
out of thy vessel insides of leaves, of lies slanders and folly and thou say,
when he said I am the light of the world, he was without he did not mean any
light within, and thou presumptuously bids me deny this if I can, to which I
say, the same Christ, which said I am the light of the world, was he which was
before Abraham, who was a light to the Gentiles, and lights every man in the
world; yea, he was and is given to be a light, where his person (which was
supposed the son of Joseph) never came, and do thou deny this if thou can that
all men may see thy folly, for there is not many Christ's, but one Christ, which
is not only within but without, not only without, but within, but is all and in
all, let him that reads understand.

Then thou say, the light wherewith Christ, as he is God, lighted every one,
is the soul of man, which is the life of the body, and is a creature and has
one faculty of its own Nature called conscience.

Reply, Now lets try this doctrine and consider what thou have said, it amounts
to thus much that conscience is of the nature of the soul of man* and the
soul is the light of Christ, as God.

Therefore thou have said the conscience is the light of God which must needs
be without sin, this is more then I have or dare say, I might here fitly ask
thee, if thou know what the word conscience signifies, in true understanding,
and yet though thou have uttered this that conscience is a faculty of the
soul, which thou say is the light of Christ as God, which light of God must
needs be of the nature of God pure and not impure, yet in the next page thou
say, Conscience is a poor dunghill, creature in comparison of the spirit,
etc. and in another page calls conscience poor, so empty beggarly things, etc.

What now John Bunion; is that which thou have concluded to be the light of
God, but a dunghill creature and lo, and empty and beggarly in comparison etc.
For shame cease such Divinity, least all thy fellows reproove thee; O how does
thy ignorant zeal lead thee into snares and trape thy own feet Conscience
which thou say is the light of God, is Nature it self* then it must needs be
that every man's nature (which is sinful say I) is the light of God, O what
horrible doctrine this proves in its explanation!

Blush, and be ashamed when thou considers; then thou cries out in reproof; O
wonderful says thou, That men should make a God and Christ of their
consciences! I know none that does it, nor that ever spoke so highly of
conscience, as thou have here done, yet we say our consciences bears us
witness in the holy Ghost, and this is our rejoicing, the testimony of our
consciences; and if our consciences condemn us not, then have we confidence
toward God, and yet makes not God and Christ of our conscience, as thou
secretly would charge us withal; then thou goes on and would seem to prove
but cannot, that something besides the light of Christ convinces of sin, but
thy reach is too short, though thou wind abroad, and lets thy thoughts into the
pit of thy own reason, to bring up a thing to confound truth, but cannot; for
this is thy proof, where they were all convinced by their own consciences Jo.
8. Now all these I say were men come into the world, and therefore according to
Jo. 1. 9. were lighted with the light of Christ, and thou have confessed that
conscience is the light of Christ as God; which is no less then I have
affirmed, then wherefore have thou waded so far, when at the end thou art
forced to confess my position, thy words being explained, that it is the light
of Christ that does convince of sin, and can find no other thing besides that,
then thou say, here is something besides the spirit of Christ that does
convince of sin etc.

But yet I say, nothing besides the light of Christ, as thou have confessed,
and that was that only which I affirmed in the 10 page of mine* about which
thou have made all this stir and to no purpose, (as to prove any thing
convinces of sin but the light of Christ) and in that I said he that
convinces of sin against the law leads up into the fulfilling of the law,
which still I own, though the world would contradict it but cannot, and I
clearly see thou have not reached the understanding of my words, But answere^
^hy own conceiving and not my words, for I do not say or think that
righteousness comes by the law, yet that is righteousness, which condemns
that which breaks the law, if thou have an ear thou may hear, and as I said
it is the word of truth, the righteousness of the law must needs be fulfilled
in judgment, upon you all, and by Christ Jesus in you, if ever you receive the
salvation to your souls, and thou have not yet learned what I mean, and though
thou say that for justification, thou looks beyond the law to the son of
Mary; but I say thou must not look beyond it for condemnation; who are in
transgression, and not reconciled to God, through condemnation in the flesh,
for it will reach you to condemnation, and thou say, Thou understands that I
do in all my disoourse disowne Christ without, by pretending to a Christ
within, To which I say thy understanding deceives thee, who, it may be feared,
blinds thy own eyes; that thy conscience may not condemn thee for slandering,
but while I am approved in the sight of God, of those things whereof thou
accuses me falsely, and wickedly, I matter nothing what a liars judgment is of
me, my answer to thy 6 Query shall prove me clear, and thee a liar herein,
that we own Gods Christ as the Scripture deelares of him as I have said, and
the darkness of my words is to blind the eye of subtilty, and not to deceive
the hearts of the simple, (though thou would say it) see if thou now can tell
what I say.

And whereas thou art offended that I say many more things in thy Book I pass
by, as being not pertinent to the thing in hand, my words are true, for the
thing in hand was proving us decievers, and that was the most of that I meddled
withal, or ^urposed to oppose; and to other things that thou speak of in
short, my answer was, and is the words (or some of them) I own, and thy voice I
deny without any blaspheming or error, in the view of all the world (though
thou would say it) for whatsoever a lying spirit speaks, I deny it to be the
voice of Christ, though it may be some of his words and thy spirit is a lying I
pirt; and though thou be offended that I should say fools loves to be meddling;
yet its true enough, is not he a soole who is alyer and a slanderer, ^^at
understands not betwixt before a time, and since a time, judged in thy own
conscience, and thy fair words, as that it must needs be (say thou) That the
Saints of God must be called foolos, etc. I say neved presume the name of
Saint, but clear thy self of thy lies and slanders, and perverting Scriptures,
and learn the First principle of Religion, Even that which Condemns thee.

And as to that which I say is true, that the Pope can speak as much of Christ
without as thou, I own it, and may add; I believe he can speak more then thou
of Christ without, and with as good or better understanding; though both a like
sar from the Kingdom of God; yet in thy answer, thou asks me if I put no
difference betwixt the speaking of; and believing in Christ without; Yea, I do
a great deal for he that believes in in him has the witness in himself of
him, and his heart is purifyed, and he is a new creature, which thou art not,
but thou I suppose would be reckoned a Believer, for I think the Pope has both
more words, and more good works and makes as much conscience of lying and
false accusing as thou, for ought as may be understood, of a tree by the
fruits, which is our way to judge as Christ has given us example; then in
that I said thou have answered thy self a question deceitful, thou art
offended, and boasts thy self against me, Charging me to be an enemy to the
truth, and the like, in that I did not manifest thy deceit; but now I shall,
therefore to stop thy proud boasts in that answer thou calls it a sad doctrine
which says, follow the light which Christ has enligh ned every man withal,
and other such like things following that question which are deceitful, and
wicked, and thou thereby is proved the enemy to truth thy self, and thou and
thy words are both deceitful and therefore boast not thy self: then thou
answers my Question which was, does not the Scripture witness that all who
have not Christ within are Reprobates; the Question is sound, and of worth to
be noted, and in thy answer thou says, yes it is true, to which I soberly
Reply, then what a condition are all in, that has not Christ within, nor no
knowledge of him, but what they have of him as he is without, by the letter
without do thou consider this; and whether it be not of the chiefest prize to
life and salvation, to wait for him, and seek for him within, seeing all that
have not him within are Reprobates.

But farther thou would seem to manifest a great deal of folly in me when all
the folly lies in thy own bosom, and by thy confused words, I understand, thou
grounds thy answer upon a lie, and false understanding, and therefore brings
thy false reproof, as if I should hold forth that every man has received
Christ or the Spirit of Christ in him.

This I have never said, but that every man has the light of Christ given him
which I say is one in union, with the spirit of Christ; and I say Christ is
given to all, but all receives him not and I see thou understands not my former
words that I write in answer to one of thy Queries thou cannot distinguish
betwixt a thing being given of God, and a thing being received by man, so that
the folly is fallen back, on thee take it who understands not my words but
opposes thy own conceivings and false understanding and though I might more
truly apply this word folly in that extent, then thou applied the like word to
thy self in this same page, yet I leave it to the judgment of the serious
Reader, and says thy folly is want of wit in the World, and not for Christ's
sake, then thou would defend thy first wickedness, in that thou said the
Devil deceives souls by persuading them to follow the light within, which all
men have, but my answer to it thou have not reached, in that I said, he that
comes to life eternal must follow the light within which Christ has given,
which stands over thy head for ever to be truth, but yet how blind art thou in
confessing the light within, even conscience is the light of Christ as God, and
it says the Devil deceives souls by bidding follow the light within.

O abominable doctrine! what does the Devil deceive souls by bidding follow the
light of Christ as God? so John Bunnions doctrine is, let it be noted; now see
thou thy folly how it is manifest, and thy pittyfull evasions are weighed,
instead of contradicting my former sufficient answer, which thou could no way
reach to wrest, or otherwise to answer it, asks a question, which I may answer
as soon as thou have sufficiently replied to my former answer and this is in
part an answer to it, it is herisie to say that the light of God (any light of
God or Christ) can or does deceive the soul, and though thou stumble at it, I
said well in saying that thy whole purpose is a secret smiting against the
light within, let the Reader judge*

And now to manifest thy ignorance fuly; thou have confessed the light within
even conscience is the light of God; have not thou cause to repent of these
absurdityes and blindness who holds forth that the Devil deceives souls by
the light of God, seeing thou can find no light within man but that which thou
confesses.

Then thou says, Thy whole design was first to show souls where salvation is
to be had, namely in Christ without, and yet has confessed all that has him
not within are Reprobates, and such have not salvation by him without; Consider
therefore without Christ within no salvation, as I have said, and thou have
confessed it, (Mark it) then to clear thy self from contradiction which I
charged thee with, thou would cast a confusion upon me, in that thou says, I
would make a defiled conscience, the law and spirit of Christ to be all one,
This is falsely spoken, I have never said nor thought that a defiled conscience
is the Law and Spirit of Christ a liar thou art to be noted, and this lie adds
to the number and yet consider thou have said (several times) that conscience
is the light of Christ, as God; and now calls conscience defiled, is the light
of God defiled? J^hn Bunion says so, O horrid! read thou thy confusion and
grievious error which is brought to thy door, and there I leave it; thou may
blush and all thy witness at this; and in that thou calls my answer Scoulding,
against thy Epistle, and presumptuously say, The truth of which thou could be
willing to seal with thy Blood.

Reply, Scoulding I deny, but I have reprooved thy lies in the authority of the
Lord, and be not so proudly puffed up in boasting: what says thou? shall thy
blood go for this that the Quakers are deceivers and that the Devil deceives
souls by bidding them follow the light within which thou say is conscience,
which thou confesses is the light of God, and that the blood of Christ was shed
before the world was, and that the Scripture say so, and that we deny that
Salvation was completely wrought by the man Christ Jesus, with several other
things noted for lies; what says thou John Buniot? art thou so desparate as
that thou will hazard thy blood upon this account? if it be so, sure the Devil
has great power over thee; cease thy boasting least the Lord make thee an
example, and though thou would exhort me, thy spirit I deny, and so thy words I
judge, and cannot receive good from an evil Spirit; then thou comes on falling
on thy own foul ignorance again, and would feign clear thy self, but by thy
stirring thy own wickedness herein, thou makes it cast an odious sight to all
that pass by, (we may follow thee a little, seeing thou art not yet weary) and
feign would thou make it appear that the blood of Christ was shed before the
world was; and say it was in Gods account, but to this I have spoken and
largely showed thy blindness to all men, and adds this upon thy head, thou art
a liar and perverter of Scripture to say that the blood of Christ was shed
before the world was.

And further thou art a liar, to say that God accounts a thing for truth which
is a lie, a sad error and wicked.

And further thou art a liar, to say that I corrupt thy words, for I had not
laid open thy nakedness so fully, if thou had not persisted in thy blindesse,
as now I am forced to do, but enough of this and more then ever thou can
clear thy self of honestly, and yet to cover thy own shame charges me falsely
with folly to speak evil of things I know not, or else with madness, etc.

Reply, Friend be not so confident, I know the difference betwixt, before, and
since, or from, and know that God accounts not a lie for truth (as thou holds
out) thy own folly and madness, behold, who commits iniquity, in lying on the
Scripture, and on God, and on me, and yet persists after a sober reproof, and
resists the reprover with opprobrious words, let confusion of face cover thy
impudent forehead, while I forgive thee and seeks not vengeance against thee,
then through thy mistake of my words, thou have falsely gathered a subject to
oppose, and fights with thy own understanding mightily, and thinks thou
confounds me, and its thy self* for however thou understands my words, either
for want of wit, or otherwise, it never entered into my thoughts, with charging
thee to believe that Christ is a tipe, only I charge thee that thou said so of
others, So that I think this is a mistake in thee for want of knowledge to
understand my rehersall of thy words, being transcribed at the shortest, not to
fill volumes, and through thy own misunderstanding of my laying down the
words, thou heavily yet vainly charges me with corrupting thy words, which God
is my witness I have not done, though thou be guilty herein.

But further, I deal plainly, and slanders not in secret, as thou do, we do
not look on Christ to be but a shadow and tipe, if thou affirm I shall answer
further, and as to that (thou say) I say Jesus is the substance of that
answer to I stand though thou say, Thou doubts I do not speak plainly, etc.

Reply, As I have said I seek not a proof of my faith of thee, nor any man,
nor do I beg thy belief, while I am approved in the sight of God, herein I
matter not what a lying spirit doubts of me, so that what vain arguments, or
Queries thou raises from thy own false doubt I pass by, being by the present
thing branching out in things on the by, if I should examine every particular,
I might fill a vollume.

And whereas thou have answered my question, which is; did Christ put an end to
the law for them, who yet live in the transgression of the law, or does he
justify that which the law condemns, before the work of the law be finished?
In thy answer thou say, Christ did put an end to the law for righteousness,
for all that the father has given him, This is little to the Question:

I say that transgressors of the law are not Christ's but children of
disobedience, and children of wrath, and such God has not given to Christ, who
are his enemies, nor Christ to them is not given, but to condemn them in that
estate and thou say there is many given to Christ, who yet lives in their
sins, the Apostle John says, he that sins is of the Devil, and has not known
God, and such as are of the Devil are not Christ's, and in that I said does
Christ justify that which the law condemns before the work of the law be
finished, and not one tittle of the law shall fail, till all be fulfilled,
thou have not reached the understanding of my words, for while disobedience
stands and the transgressor lives, the work of the law is not finished nor
fulfilled, but to that is condemnation and not justification, if thou have an
ear thou may hear, for he that transgresses the law is an enemy to Christ,
and Christ fulfills not the law for his enemies they must bear their own
burden, and though this thou cannot understand now, yet in the day of
judgment shall thou feel it, and when the burden of thy own iniquity is upon
thee, then shall thou confess to what I have said, and read me in what now
thou can not understand, and in the mean time I deny that Christ has put an
end to the law for thee, who art a liar, and breaks one, and so is guilty of
all.

Many of thy words might be weighed and searched, but I am no picker of
quarrels, but to my last Query, thou say little to the purpose, which is;
what assurance have any, that the law is fulfilled for them, who are yet
transgressors of it, in themselves? but say, Assurance comes through
believing and obedience to the law is a fruit of believing, etc. Saying every
one that has the hope of the Son of God purifies himself as he (Christ) is
pure.

Reply, Then he that has not the fruit, (viz.) obedience to the law, we may
judge by the fruit, or for want of fruit is no believer; and he that is not
purifyed as he is pure (Christ) has not the hope of being the Son of God, but
is without hope, now see where thou art, why it breaks the law, and is without
(thy own noted) fruit of believing neither is purifyed as he is pure, and so
is without hope, this is according to thy own affirmation, if thou cannot bear
it blame thy self for laying down such a position, as has proved thy self
to be an unbeliever and without hope; and so without God in the world; one that
is for condemnation, and to be judged into the state where now thou stands.

And whereas thou say, I would lay assurance on obedience to the law. thou
lie in this also, my words are, the law must be fulfilled in you by Christ,
in judgment and in righteousness, if ever you receive salvation* and these
words are true against all thy opposition, neither do I affirm that by the
deeds of the law any flesh living shall be justified (but the contrary) though
thou would falsely (yet secretly) cast it upon me, and wickedly calls this my
frothy argument, where I said the Law convinces and is a Schoolmaster to
bring to Christ, etc.

But the froth proceeds out of thy mouth, for this argument comprehends thee,
and stands out of thy reach for all thy detestable speeches against me, and the
truth, and the rest of my following words thou have passed by, where I say, who
ownes not that which convinces of sin, how can they own him that takes it away
by his blood? and this is truth, and tell me in justness according to my first
Query in that page, how is sin taken away from thee, more then from the Pope,
seeing neither of you has the fruit of ceasing to commit sin, and art not thou
in the froth, who opposes me as though (I should say yet never did nor thought)
that justification must be sought by the deeds of the Law and so gathers a
false conception, and fights with it, and keeps thy self doing in 9 sheets
against 4 and yet has passed over many special things, almost the chiefest,
and though no flesh shall be justified by the deeds of the law, yet must all
flesh living be condemned for the transgression of the law by Christ, who
freely gives life to all that believes, if thou have an ear thou may hear; in
the next thou seems (or would at least) to defend thy self from my charge
which shall (if it does not) ley heavy upon thee, which is that I call thee
slanderer, and truly too, from thy words where thou falsely accused the Quakers
with boasting, and hipocrisy, and in thy answer thou say, I need not be
offended, for thou do not know our fellow for boasting in that (thou say)
we cry up our selves and condemn all others, etc.

But this is no proof of the former accusation but an addition to thy former
wickedness, let honest men consider I asked thee when thou did hear any of
them boast or see them live in hipocrisy, but not a word to this sober desire,
but adds sin to sin a bad way to clear thy self and thy God; be ashamed,
crying up self, we deny, but yet must say or else say falsely that we are of
God and the whole world lies in wickedness, and he that is of God hears us,
and is one with us and this is as the Saints testified, and is neither boasting
nor hipocrisy, then to my question which was, will that faith which is without
works justify, and thou faist no, and c,

Then I Reply, what is thy condition and theirs, who are not only without works
of faith; but in the very works of darkness, as lying and salfe accusing, etc.
And seeing thou say no, Consider, whether thou have faith and whether thy
works which are like good works proceed not from the unbeleiving ground, and
this I add to my next I asked which thou have passed by, must not every one
receive according to their deeds, in the day of judgment, and then thou runs
out in high words against me, in that I said, if to talk of him (Christ) his
birth, blood, etc. Were faith in him, and living by faith, then few would want
it; and further I add the Pope himself would have it, and my words are just
and honest, without exception or contradiction, but only that something thou
must needs say; though thou say many can talk of Christ, that will fall short
of Heaven, etc. And asks me a question, and say is there not enough in them,
(viz.) birth blood, etc. to justify, etc. I answer the knowledge of all things
whatsoever without, will not justify, except Christ be within, and if he be
within, the power of his life, blood, birth, etc. is known and received and
felt, and in this I preach, not any other Gospel then the Apostles, who said,
say not who shall ascend or descend to fetch him, (Mark) but it says it, the
word of faith (or of the Gospel) which are not divided, Romans 10.
is nigh thee in thy mouth, and in thy heart, and thou falsely again charges
the Quakers with corrupting, (and beguiling many) by those Scriptures.

Reply, Beguiling is thy own, and corrupting of Scriptures too, as is proved,
and while thou accuses us falsely in these things, thy self art proved truly
guilty, in the sight of all that are spiritual, and as to thy charging me That
the man Christ Jesus is not very pleasant to me, And with Scoulding, etc.

Thy slanders I bear with patience, and thy reproaches which is not for evil
but for Christ's sake, who dyed at Jerusalem, and is revealed in me, and for
shame cease to say Thou art ruled by Scripture, a liar, and slanderer, and
perverter of Scriptures, is not led with the spirit that gave forth the
Scripture but is ruled by the Devil, and is out of Scripture rule, then thou
goes on and would justify thy ignorant saying, How are they deceived who own
Cbrist; no otherwise then as he was before the world began, etc.

And my Page the 14 of my first.
answer to it thou have not touched nor truly contradicted which stands over
thee and is sufficient to all honest people, and Christ we own the same
yesterday to day and for ever; and does believe the father granted that
request, and he is glorified with the same glory that he had before the world
was, and though thou tell me of a double meaning yet in plainness I speak
without doubleness the fault is in thy weakness, and sottishness, and
blindness of heart, who knows not that which is infinite and immortal, and
eternal the flesh of Christ's body is so.

Then thou falsely charges me again (in that I said) if every spirit be of God
which does in words confess thus (viz.) that Christ was with the father before
the world was (was borne and suffered in the flesh and was buried and raised,
etc.) then is not the Pope himself antichrist, etc. As (in my 14. page) which
putting on a veil and ventering upon thy words.

But I have spoken the truth herein let that in thy conscience answer in
nakedness without a veil, the veil is on thy heart, and thou cannot
understand me, and so this is thy simple policy to say the veil is on me, and
what of that if I ventred on it, it is but in the fear of God, though I should
say I deny all that thou say, or the speaking of any thing, for I do not own
thy voice, though some of thy words be true, and though thou speak words of
truth, yet therefore I reprove thee, and sometimes may not let it pass for
truth, for Christ is my example herein, who reproved the Devils, though they
confessed him, (Mark that) but the chief part of my words are passed over, and
read over again and see if it is not truth it self, where I said it is not
much better nor more accepted to confess Christ in words to become, and yet in
works to deny him, then it is both in words and works to deny him, the one is
wicked in profaneness, the other in hipocrisy, the one is a liar, and the other
a false witness, and let the honest Judge; then whereas I said Christ is a
mystery and unto him he is light, and shall be salvation where his person,
supposed son of Joseph, never came; which words are true, not gain-saied by
thee, though thou ask, Did he obtain salvation for any without that body which
he took of the Virgin.

Answ. That body which was begotten by the holy Ghost is not so carnal as thou
supposest, and that spiritual Rock which followed them saved them, and the
same son of God the Savior who was borne a Child to them, was the Prince of
peace, yea, the everlasting Father, but thy eye sees not this, and therefore
thou say, Here Is the place where he is not, and the place where he has not
been, (Now thou say) Thou passes by many things which thou might justly
examine, and also many unseemly expressions.

O thou deceitful heart ^ and tongue, is this thy excuse when my words are
beyond thy reach either to understand or contradict; thou wants that Spirit
which can examine of truth, be it known unto thee, and what are those unseemly
expressions? will thou slander always in secret without evidence? and if these
be they in that I said our innocence will speak when thy black veil of lies
is taken away, and this is truth, and is no way but seemly to be spoken to
thee, who art an enemy of God; then thou would justify thy further slander,
who said, we wrest that Scripture, Jo. 1. 9.

And my answer is, we take it without adding or diminishing, which is true and
no lie, nor wresting of it, neither in thy Reply can I find that thou proves
it, though many words uttered little to the purpose with adding to thy former
slanders, in saying, We would hold that that light is the Spirit of Christ this
is not spoken in all my Book, but that it is one in union I say, and not
contrary to the Spirit of Christ, but witnesses of it and to it.

And thou further says, We say many things which thou know to be blasphemy,
This is another lie, prove one blasphemy.

And further thou say, Christ as he is Mediator does not enlighten every one
that comes into the world, etc.

Reply, Well, thy ignorance and wickedness vents it self forth a pace, let
any man read that first of John, and see whether he does not speak of Christ
as Mediator, he says he was in the beginning with the Father, and was made
flesh and dwelt with the Disciples; and his life was the light of men, and the
light shined in darkness, and what was he which lights every man that comes
into the world, and he came to his own but they received him not, but as many
as received him to them he gave power to be the Sons of God, etc.

What say thou, Was not this spoken of Christ as Mediator, consider and be
instructed rather then let thy blood go for it, however I leave thy doctrine,
thy errors herein to be judged by them that are spiritual, and for shame cease
such doctrine, the more I rake among the filth, the more vilely and odious it
appears, and for thy proof of this doctrine, thou brings Mat. 11. 25. and
says here the Father and the Son are speaking one to another, but what does
this prove though it be so, does it any way follow that John did not speak of
Christ as Mediator, John 1. what vain productions thou brings from thy
impertinent proofs, let them be weighed and taken notice of honestly, and thou
bids me understand thus much, That nature which is conscience, is the light of
God.

I understand thy blindness; if this be so as thou say, then man's nature is
pure without sin, as the light of God is; and this is error abominable,
contrary to the Scripture which says, all by nature are the children of wrath,
is all by the light of God (as thou say nature is) children of wrath; so thy
Divinity, and take it as it is truly interpreted, I desire not to wrong thy
words, thou gives me to understand the greatest ignorance from those things
that lately I have heard, no not the like in England; and it is very true, as I
said thy folly appears by thy much meddling.

Then thou asks me, What I will have the light called, wherewith every man in
the world is lightened, and because I do not call it the Spirit of Christ, thou
(as it were) murmurs; because I have cut of thy occasion, and thou cannot bend
thy tongue with any seeming advantage against the truth; but in that I say the
light of Christ convinces of sin, which is true, thou on a sudden produces thy
bad consequences, and asks if I call nature the light of Christ, and such
like, etc.

But they all do not prove the contrary, so that which convinces of sin, is
worth minding and taking notice of, by all that ever is saved, and as to that
where I say, that which may be known of God was manifest in them even in them
that was given up to work unrighteousness, etc.

I said the truth which thou art not able to contradict in equity, though thou
very ignorantly bend thy answer (as if I had said) the knowledge of God was
made manifest in them, when I say plainly in my Book that they were turned
from the knowledge of God, and yet that which might be known of him was
manifest in them, and this thou can not deny, and though my words as laid
down are not in the Scripture words in terms, yet have not I said falsely
herein, and do not be a prover of that which thou cannot thy self deny, then
thou say, How feeble an argument is this to prove, that every one has the
Spirit, etc.

Reply, Thou blind man, did I go about to prove any such thing or make any
argument thereupon; we are about the light which Christ has given or lighted
every man in the world withal, which light convinces of sin, and is not
contrary to the Spirit of Christ, unto this was I speaking and this I stood by,
and thou conceives another thing from my words and fight against thy own
consequences like a man too irrational to understand common English, etc.

Then thou say, Thou passed by other lame arguments which I tumble over like
a blind man in a thicket of bushes.

O be ashamed for ever! thus to evade and shuffle, with such scornful words;
I said that which reproves of sin is the gift of the Spirit of God. John 16.
and that which makes manifest sin, is light, and whatsoever is reproved is made
manifest by the light Ephesians. 5. how dare thou call these lame arguments
tumbling over? what impudence is in thy heart, so to say? when thou art put to
confusion, then such excuses thou brings; Well, some may see thy folly? then to
my Question which was, whether that light which every man is lighted withal,
is sufficient in it self for life and salvation to every one that believes; if
thou say, not wherein is the blame, in God in his light or in the creature,
thou say, No it is not sufficient, I take it for an answer, and leaves it to
be weighed by the sober Reader, and though there be vessels of honor and of
dishonor made of the same lump as thou say, yet I further Query, is not
every man's blood that perishes of his own head, and is not the Lord clear
from the blood of all men, even though they go to destruction, and if the
Reader try thy Book over he may judge whose arguments are lame.

Then whereas thou said, Christ as God has lighted every man that comes into
the world, To which I said, then why do thou say we wrest that Scripture John
1. 9. seeing thou thy self have confessed no less then what thou call
wresting in us, and this is truth let all men consider else; that when thou
confesses Christ as God has lighted every man in the world, it is no less
then what we say, and that Scripture say, which is, that Christ is the true
light, and that is he which lights every man that comes into the world; and
may not thou be ashamed to call this so scornfully a glavering Answer, not
being able to clear thy self from my just charge, in that herein I charged
thee with confusion to oppose us, in that which thy self confesses to be true
consider well of it, and let not thy blood go for the truth of all what thou
say, for I desire it not.

Further thou cries out, Is this all the wit I have, and wonderful ignorance,
Because I said it is not good to neglect following the light, but that every
one mind the light of Christ Jesus in them; in answer to thy words which was
having said the light which convinces of sin is the light of Christ as God,
which the neglect of, will be sure to damn, as thou say, and now let wise
men judge of my answer, but thou falls heavily on it; proving that obedience to
the law will not justify, and the like which I do not at all affirm but to
that I say, the law having its opperation upon the disobedient; the justifier
comes to be seen, which is he that is the end of the Law, and the law must by
him be obeyed or fulfilled in thee, if ever thou be saved from being damned by
it.

Consider of this, when thou have a better understanding, for its yet hidden
from thee, then when thou have thus cried out against my just Answer, tbou
tells me what I should have said, Alas poor man, thou reaches not what the
knowledge of things eternal is, by that wisdom in which thou art, I need no
man to teach me, but the Lord.

Then thou say. Jesus Christ has obeyed the Law and justified thee, etc.

Reply, Nay hold, repent first and be turned from thy iniquities, and believe
in him, and boast not thy self so proudly; thou art in the transgressions of
the Law in disobedience to it, a liar, slanderer, and scorner, one that the
Prince of the power of the Air rules in a child of wrath, and every one shall
dye for his own iniquity, and the soul that sins shall dye, and wrath to
every one that does evil, and the revelation of the judgments of God; Learn
what this means, or ask them that are of a better understanding then thy self.

Then thou seems to mind me of some weakness and cries out, Wonderful
foolishness, etc.

Because I said the light of Christ given to every man, Jo. 1. 9. as thou
confessest, is not contray to the Spirit of Christ, and to the grace of God,
but is one in their nature (Mark) and a man cannot possibly love one of them
and hate another, therefore one they are, in the union leading in the same way,
unto the same end, and where does the Spirit of Christ give light, or that
grace of God work or lead if not in the conscience? etc,

These are my words, Now let honest men consider and John Bunion be silent,
what foolishness or wonderful weakness, is in these words, but is only to
the wisdom which is devilish, which despises truth? or what cause was there
to blush when I wrote them? as he impudently says, who cannot contradict them,
nor reprove them, and yet railes upon them: no marvel that thou would pass
them, as thou say with such a poor shift to evade with a lie that thou have
spoken to it already, when as thou have not meddled of these things.

O let not thy impudency so sottishly carry thee, for thy shame is seen and
laid open, its good (in thy light) to pass that which confounds thee, which is
past answering, so to save thy credit among thy fellows, the cause to blush is
in thy self, and its brought to thy door.

Then thou pleads for the Scripture to be the rule in opposition to my Question
which is not answered, which was, can there be any surer thing for the creature
to look to, to walk to life, or to come to God by, then the light of Christ
which every man has given him, etc.

But thou may for shame cease pleading for Scripture rule, being thy self art
so far contrary to it, for he that walks in the life of the Scripture I have
union with him, and the light of Christ is a more surer testimony either to
witness justification or condemnation, then any man's words without,
whatsoever; then my other Question was whether the Turks Jews, and thee and
others do serve sin and lust, because Christ has not given you light to
discover your sins, or because you hate that light, that is given, and much to
this thou speak not pertinent, nor answered in plainness, I leave it to the
Reader to judge, and to read my answer Page 17. of my first, which clears truth
from all what thou have said against it in this particular.

Now I come to the next thing, where thou foolishly charges me, That my doctrine
is not according to truth, but a lie, Charigng me to affirm that which the
Apostle does deny,

Because I said the spirit is given to every man, though every man receives it
not, and it strives with the wicked though he follow it not, etc.

My words herein are truth, and no lie, neither contrary to the Scripture, and
let the Reader be Judge betwixt us, the Apostle says the manifestation of the
Spirit is given to every man to profit withal, and some of these to whom he
writes thus; was wicked, given to incest and idolatry, and other sins, here I
prove, it was given to the wicked, and thou confesses the righteous had it, and
there is but these two on the face of the earth; Now if thou can find a man
that is neither wicked nor righteous then thou have advantage, then some has
not the manifestation of the Spirit, the Saints had the Comforter the Spirit of
truth, and he (the Spirit of truth) convinced or reproved the world of sin;
they that were not Saints, but wicked had it reproving them, Mark these
things; and let honest men judge while both you, and I am silent, whether thy
doctrine which denies that which the Scripture affirms, or mine which bears
witness to the same thing which Scriptures speaks, be to be disowned, let an
equal line measure; the shame, and false doctrine is fallen upon thee, and thou
art offended (that I should say thou brings other vain arguments) with a vapor
saying Neither I nor my fellows are able to answer, etc.

But I say true, the arguments are vain, one is, The Devils are convinced but
has not the Spirit, or such like, Now what is this to the purpose, that thou
contends in that wherein nobody strives with thee, nor none affirms against
thee, and it is a vain argument to parelell the Devil in such a cause, as
having the Spirit, but thou art so blind, its hardly possible to let thee see
thy ignorance herein. I may not much strive with thee, only I Will tell thee of
those things, and the sober Reader shall judge, to instance a thing impossible
to prove things possible, is vain arguments, so that I have herein done thee
no wrong. Then thou cries out of my weakness, and that I Blaspheme, and of a
great deal of ignorance discovered in me, and bids me be silent, and falsely
charges me with Presumption, and such like, etc. Because I said thus much I
leave with thee, till thou prove the light of Christ, (which thou confesses
every man has) to be contrary to the Spirit of Christ, I shall say every man
has that which is one in union and like the John 1* 9.
Spirit of Christ, even as good as the Spirit of Christ according to its
measure, these are my words, Page 18. and I own them, and thy answer to them is
no contradiction, nor just confutation of them, but lie in saying I call
conscience and nature it self the Spirit of Christ, this is false never spoken
by me, so that thou have uttered a pack of railing words without any knowledge
or fear of God, in stead of a sober Answer, the blasphemy and great deal of
ignorance and presumption appears not in my words, they are truth, and thou
have not proved that the light of Christ is contrary to the Spirit of Christ,
Nay, thy simple policy is too short, when thou had done so, then had been a
time to have cast these opprobrious speeches at me, like venomne from a Viper,
but the weakness (or strength of error) and blasphemy and the great deal of
ignorance and presumption etc, is fallen at thy door and there I leave it,
clear thy self from it as thou art able, who without any confutation of the
words, falls impudently to charge me thus highly and falsely from the words, be
thou silent whise the Reader Judges; then thou goes about to defend thy first
wickedness in that thou said the Devil does deceive poor souls by bidding
them listen within; and turn the mind within, and see if there be not that
which does convince of sin, etc.

And my Answer to this is sound, and stands over thee, and unreproved by thee,
though many words thou speak, yet from the Scripture does not prove or by
honest arguments, that the Devil does deceive any, by bidding them to turn to
the light within, which convinces of sin, if thou would have cleared thy
self, thou should have proved thy assertion, according to my desire I asked
thee, was ever such a thing spoken that the Devil can deceive any by the light
of Christ, but to this not a word in proof, but faith, Every man has not the
Spirit of Christ, etc.

But further then I Query, Does the Devil deceive any by bidding them to turn
in, and listen to that light spoken of John 1. 9. for that light am I
contending for, and not any other contrary to it, then thou say* thou denies
That Paul bid listen within, telling me of making shelter for my error, etc.
This is no error to say that Paul bids listen within, let the Reader judge from
that Scripture, Romans 10. 9. The righteousness of faith speaks on this wise,
verse. 6 (which is the voice of the Gospel) and verse. 9. what says it, the word
is nigh thee in thy mouth and in thy heart, was not that the end of these words
to listen within? the word is in the heart, what says it there? now the error
is thine, that denies the truth, and the lie is returned to the founder, who
denies that Paul bids listen within, when its plain he says the word is in the
heart, what says it there?

O that a man professing knowledge and enterprizing such things, should be so
sottish! and so unable to finish what he has begun then thou cries
out-hidiously and notes it in the margent for wresting of thy words, in that I
said, thou say, they are ignorant of the Gospel who closes in with these
motions of the light within (or conscience) which does command to abstain from
the evil, and to practice good, and thy own words are, now the poor soul
through ignorance of the Gospel closes in with these motions of its own
conscience (viz.) the motions which convinces of sin within, which does
command to abstain from this evil, and practice this good, so let wise men
consider whether I have wronged that intent of thy words, and be not so soon
angry, for thou can not vindicate, that they that closes in with these
motions of the conscience or the light of Christ within, which convinces of
sin within, which does commmand to abstain from this evil, and to practice
this good, is ignorance of the Gospel and do not evade it by words without
knowledge, in picking of quarrels and seeking offenses (by different terms of
words) where no occasion justly is given thee. Then my Question thou seem to
answer, which was, what, and how does the light of the Gospel work, if not in
the conscience, and to command from evil, and to practice good? this Query
stands over thy head not consuted nor fully answered, for the true
understanding of it thou have not comprehended, but to thy own conception, thou
have answered as if I should say that every man has the light of the Gospel
working in them to salvation which I never said nor thought, so thy answer is
not to the purpose.

Then thou have passed by full slightly (as disable to clear thy God and his
Spirit, that guides thee, which is the God of this world) of that great sum of
wickedness justly charged upon thee, Page 19. of my last, which according to
true collection is; by turning the mind within to the light which does convince
of sin, and listening thereunto and claspeing in with the motions of the
conscience, which does command to abstain from evil, and to practice good, and
closing with something within which thou confessed is the light of Christ,
these things preceding, then thou say, hereby or thus, is the poor souls
carried headlong, and at the end of its life does fall into the belly of Hell,
this is indeed a sum of wickedness set forth by thee, which when thou receives
it in again shall receive the interest upon it, of indignation and vengeance,
and though thou have slipped it now, it shall then be reckoned on Jobn Bunions
score. Remember thou owe to prove this before thou be heard any more.

Then again thou cries out, That I have naughtily belyed thee, and the like,
because of misplaceing a word, and saying the light of the world, instead of
the light brought into the world, thou art an unjust Judge who makes offenders
for a word misplaceing, but it is plain, thou means by light brought into the
world, that light John 1. 9. which every man in the world is lightened withal,
and if thou do then thou art a liar in saying in thy first Book and in this,
the Devil counterfeits the new birth, by persuading it is wrought by that
light, and if thou mean not that light, John 1. 9. but that of the Spirit,
John 16. (which I say is not divided) then thou art a liar also, and now while
thou charges me to be guided by Satan, and to be a liar, in the very time have
answered thy self in a lie and cannot get out, Mark it.

Then thou say, Thou passes by many urgeing expressions, which thou might
charge with unrighteousness etc.

Reply, I asked thee by what is the new birth wrought, and how, if not by
following the light of Christ in the conscience is there any other way to God
but Christ Jesus, who has lighted every man that comes into the world, this is
part of that thou have passed by, with thy lyeing excuse of Rageing expressions
of which thou may be ashamed to equivocate thus poorly to save thy own
credit, the charge of unrighteousness justly falls upon thy own head.

Thou further says, And eats up thy own wickedness who said then, and says
it now but most ignorantly, That Satan makes the soul believe is it will but be
lead by what shall be made known to it, from the light (or conscience) within
it shall do well, etc.

My last Answer to this, is sufficient, only I ask thee a proof out of the
Scripture for this doctrine, that the Devil do deceive any by the light of
Christ, in the conscience within, and till then mind my words, in my last
Answer, if ever thou know God, it must be by following, and by being led with
the light within, which God has made known unto thee, else that light is thy
condemnation eternally.

Then again thou chargest me with corrupting thy words for wrighting thee, for
their* Now a scorner I charged thee to be, from thy words, and that I yet say
of thee, taking thy words in thy own sense, as Page 77. of thy first does
manifest thee, unto the single eye, and thou secretly charges us, with
following our own spirit, and speaking by our own spirit, but our own Spirit we
have denied, and have received the Spirit of the Father through the light of
Christ; whereby every man in the world is lighted to life, or to condemnation,
then thou seems to be highly offended that I should say, thou do not profit
people at all, noting it for false in the margent, but thou needs not be so
angry, though thou say The people in the Country where thou dwells will
testify the contrary, etc.

To which I say thou have no cause to boast of the fruit of thy ministry, nor
they of much profit received by thee, witness a meeting in Bedford, where a
company of thy chiefest members, I suppose, uttered much wickedness in lies
and slanders as many can witness, and witness three of thy brethren,
testators of this Book, who say they know that to be truth, which thou have
declared, and thou art proved a liar in many things, let them read themselves
false witnesses and liars like thy self, and these things being considered as I
said with other things at the end of this, thou have no cause to boast of thy
ministry, nor they of their profit, by it in that Contry, who art unconverted
yet, from lying and false accusing, and so art not turned from Satan's power to
the power of God, and as for a carnal ministry of which thou speaks, they are
very bad that exceeds thy self in carnality, in thy understanding of the
things that are spiritual, Then further thou goes on seeming to bring witness
of thy former slanders, having in thy last, falsely accused us with sad
blasphemies and horrible doctrins and thou say, My speech bewrays me, that
I am one of them, because say thou, I say that every man has the Spirit of
Christ.

O thou lying tongue when will thou cease thy wickedness! I never said nor
thought so.

And further thou say, I say there is that in every man which is as good as
the Spirit of Christ, my words are the light of Christ, lights or is given to
every man that comes into the world, which light is not contrary to the Spirit
of Christ, but one in the union and as good in its nature according to its
measure, and till thou prove that that light John 1. 9. is contrary to the
Spirit, which yet thou have not done, stop thy mouth and take shame to thy
self, for being foully guilty thy self of corrupting my words, which thou
falsely charges on me.

Other things thou say, that our society should affirm, but I may have ground
to Judge thou art, so slanderous a tongue on me, that the like thou may do of
others.

And whereas I said thou art, confounded in thy discourse I said true herein,
as instance, thou say, that conscience may be seared and evil, and another
place that conscience is the light of God, can the light of God be seared, or
is it evil? thou holds it forth.

Consider, is not this confusion, other things I might collect, but this one is
sufficient to prove thee in confusion and though thou reckon us some time with
the Ranters, and sometime with the Pharisees, with many words of bitterness
and envy yet we bear thy reproaches, and when they are taken off then shall we
appear, and thou appear and be judged, as we are, by him that is above all.
Then thou falsely charges me with corrupting that Scripture, in John 3. 19.
Whereas, I neither added nor diminshed but spoke it as is to be seen in my
book. Further chargeing me that I do not understand a difference between tbe
light of the law, and the light of the Gospel, etc.

Friend, I rejoice in that I am hidden from thee, and that my words are a
stumbling to thee, for in that state thou stand the entrance into the
Kingdom of God, thou shall not know whose wisdom is foolishness with God,
and though thou say the light of Christ is a saving comforting light, so will
it be to thee a condemning light, and of all liars and slanderers, and this
shall thou know though thou art busied up and down, in thy mind seeking
occasions against me, from my words, not clearing thy self from what I have
truly charged upon thee, but accusing me falsely, and this is come to pass,
that thy shame might openly appear, as to that difference of the law, and
Gospel; thy wisdom with my knowledge of it, I shall not seed, yet I leave the
Reader to consider, Deuteronomy. 30. from verse. 11. to 16. And Romans 10. 7, 8. And what
I said yet remains upon thee undone to prove by the Scripture, something to
convince of sin without, and besides or contrary to the Spirit of God, which
thou art never able to do, for though thou say (as none affirms) the light in
every man's conscience is not the Spirit of God, yet how do thou prove; or
when that it is contrary to the Spirit of God, which in my last I put upon
thee, and now I leave it with thee, and then thou would excuse thy first words,
in that thou called the Quakers found hipocrites, but have not yet proved that
they live in hipocrisy, and so art a liar still, and my words are just upon
thee, a perverter of the right way of God thou art, and in the day of judgment
it shall be proved by thy recompense. Then thou goes about to prove that a
natural man may have power over sin, and abstain from those things forbidden
in the law, and for thy proof thou instances in Paul, who said he was
blameless, Phil. 3. Now this was before the commandment came from God to him,
which let him see the law was spirtuall, and this does not prove that he had
power over sin, for he was in envy, and so a murderer, and had not power over
sin, according as I asked thee, if thou say he had power over sin, etc.

As thou seems to do before he was convicted, while he was a natural man,
then it was no sin to persecute Jesus, and this would be blasphemy, the product
of thy doctrine, but this thou have cuningly slipped, where I asked thee to get
power over sin, and to abstain from those things forbidden in the Law, is it
not further then thou ever came? and because thou will not answer, I do and
say yet, and concludes, that John Bunians state is not so good as Paul's, while
he was a persecuter according to his own doctrine, and thou say the Gentiles
did by nature the things contained in the Law; true, but their state was not
condemned, but justified, before the circumcision, and I ask thee, is any
condemned by the Lord, who are excused in his sight, or is any justified who is
accused, and my words are sound, which thou ignorantly comments upon where I
said I rather chose to be of that profession which abstaynes from those things
forbidden in the Law, and to have power over sin then to live in the
transgression of the Law, and under the power of sin; yet talking of belief in
the Son of Mary, etc. Let the Reader judge whether of these Religions is more
accepted in the sight of God, thy Religion is proved to be talking of belief,
in the Son of Mary and art in the transgression of the Law, a liar a false
witness in envy and backbiting and such like, thy false belief will not save
thee in the day of the Lord.

Then further thou still confesses that as he is God, Christ lights every man
that comes into the world, then, wherefore do thou make all this ado, in
opposing us, in this particular, yet let us try thy Doctrine, whether it be
sound, thou say, this light wherewith Christ as God has lighted every man,
is conscience; and yet sometime says this conscience is seared and hardened and
evil; What is the light of Christ as God, seared, hardened, and evil? J.
Bunian holds it forth; this is thy great Ignorance and Blasphemy, and sometime
thou say this light is Nature, and Nature is corrupted and sinful. And in
it, all are children of wrath, what is the light of Christ as God corrupted and
sinful, and is all by it children of wrath? John Bunians Doctrine holds it
forth; Though blindness possessed thee, when thou write this, yet may thou
blush at the reading hereof.

Then thou goes to give a meaning upon my words; in that I said the Law is
light, and light is the Law, which is truth, but I spoke them not for thee to
Interpret with thy lying spirit, but let spiritual men judge of them then much
ado thou makes in answering my question to thee, but hitts not my words at
all: I asked thee and bid thee show if thou can any sin which is not against
the Law but this thou can not do, though you would prove if thou could, that
unbelief is not a sin against the Law of God; then thou speaks of the
obedience of the Son of Mary imputed to us, etc. But I say the obedience of
him without does not justify any; who are in the Nature of enmity against him,
who is not a new creature nor condemned in the flesh; and whereas thou secretly
charges us, with mingling Law and Gospel together; I tell the we know the
operation of each, and does witness the Ministration of each, and they are not
divided nor opposite one against the other; but that one is the fulfilling of
the other, and though thou said you leap over the Law, for Justification, yet
it is too high for the to leap over for condemnation. Remember this, and all
thy fained faith while in that Nature thou stands uncondemned, is but as the
stubble for the fire; then whereas I charged thee with preaching another
Gospel, then the Apostle preached, and my charge is true upon thy head, and my
proof is sound, against thee, he directed to the word within, in the heart
Romans 10. what says it, the word is in the heart, and he turned to the light
from darkness; but thou says who shall ascend to fetch him, men must follow
him to the Cross without, and to Heaven without, etc. And so art one that
says lo here and lo there; but these things thou have passed by, with thy
lying excuse of quarrelling, a many poor shifts thou art feign to make, and in
that I said thou was a liar, in saying the light (viz.) of Christ as God, does
not show the soul a Savior or deliverer, my charge upon the is true and stands
vnremoved, and I asked thee, if the light of Christ does not show Christ to all
that walk in the light, then what can but this; thou have passed also most
deceitfully which stands upon thee to answer or to stop thy mouth, then thou
would excuse thy contradictions charged upon thee, in that thou said they are
wickedly deluded, who own Christ no otherwise then as he was before the world*
and yet saying God only is the Savior and there is none besides him, and all
thou say cleares not thy self from contradiction herein, let honest men be
judge betwixt us both, for thou judges falsely me to be naught, and I am sure
thou art naught, and thou will not take my judgment, I may not take thine,
(let impartiallity judge betwixt us) then thou would excuse thy slanders
charged justly upon thee, in saying that Quakers make light of the
Resurrection, and to prove thy wickedness, thou asks us whither it be so,
i'ts time enough for us to answer when thou have brought evidence of the first
accusation, what poor proof is this for to cover thy self, though to add to
thy wickedness. Thou say, thou knows we deny it, I ask thee when it was, or
where it was, O thou enemy of Righteousness, yea thou shall arise in the day of
judgment to shame and contempt, and this I affirm except thou repent of this
thy wickedness;

Then whereas thou urges me, that I should have answered, the Querie raised
from Ephesians. 4. 10, better, or confuted thine, etc. Do not boast but hear what I
say, thou say in that answer, that Christ ascended to the right hand of the
Father in your Nature. Mark now, thy Nature and your Nature who are one with
thee, is sinful and wicked and of the Devil for so all liars are, and it is
Blasphemy to say sinful wicked divillish Nature, such as John Bunians is, and
his fellows, is at the right hand of God in Heaven, O horrible! consider of
this, and see what thy begging an answer has brought upon thee, I deny though
thou affirm it, that thy and your Nature which is wicked* or, a man in that
Nature is ascended into Heaven, and therefore boast not thy self another time,
This nakedness of thine might have been covered but for thy own boasting, and
thou say Acts 1. proves it, let the reader search, If he can find that Christ
ascended in sinful wicked Nature, such as theirs is, who are one with John
Bunian, and this is another lie of the Scripture, and though thou with much
impudent confidence affirm the Quakers to be deluders etc. I say from that we
rather love dispraise then praise, and are as our fore Fathers were counted
deceivers and yet are true, and thou art deceived in thy own heart, in that
thou understands my words, that I should say as though there were no false
Prophets now, because I said they were in the Apostles days, which is true,
and yet are they now too; even its witnessed by thee, and thy fellows, who are
in their steps, who through coveteousnes making merchandise of souls, and your
people are ever learning, and not able to come to the knowledge of the truth,
and goes for gifts and rewards, and are false accusers and such like. Nay but
understand me better, for I say thou art a false Prophet, and thou art now,
though thy root sprang forth in the time of the Apostles of which thou art a
branch, and thy fellows; And though I said that Antichrist was in the days of
John, and this was before a Quaker was heard of, my words I own, prove that,
that the Christians was called Quakers at that day if thou can, etc. I allow
not thee to be my Interpreter, except I found thee more honest, but does
condemn thy meaning upon my words, and though thou say instead of proving our
selves not false Prophets, we prove our selves no Christians, because I said
(that word) Quakers was not heard of in those days. Now consider, are they no
Christians now, whose title or name without, was not given or heard of, in the
Apostles days, then Protestants are no Christians, nor Independants are no
Christians, nor Anabaptists are no Christians, because they were not called so
in the Apostles days, and while thou have thought to prove us no Christians,
have cast out thy self also, then thou art no better then we, and what poor
arguments these are, let the wise consider, and vain consequences, I did not
say there were no Quakers then, but not a Quaker beard of (viz) by that name;
for there was thousands of Quakers, who trembled and quaked at the word of the
Lord, Moses, and David, Jeremiah, Isaac, Paul with many more were Quakers, and
tremble^s, though not then so called, but as I said, such as thou have such
thou brings, and thy master will accept thee.

Then thou say, I fling dirt in thy face, because I said if we should
diligent search thee, we should find thee in their steps, through feigned words
through coveteousnesse, making merchandise of souls, loving the ways of
unrighteousness. And further I said among them thou art found, who art
preaching for hire, and loves the error of Balaam who went after gifts and
rewards, etc. Now thou seems to be grieved, and calls this a false accusation,
but lets try; the cause admits dispute, art not thou in their steps, and among
them that do these things? ask John Burton with whom thou art j^yned close; to
vindicate him and calls him Brother, he has so much yearly, 150. l. or more
(except thou have some of it,) which is unrighteous wages, and bire, and gifts,
and rewards. What say thou, art thou not in his steps, and among and with him
and them that do these things? if he be thy Brother, and thou so own him, what
is evil in him whom thou vindicates, I lay upon thee, but tell me, who have
heard thee deny him, and the rest of the Independants, in these things which
thou knows he does act, and in thy answer I cannot find the fully clearing thy
self by denial, but say that spirit that lead me out of this way is a lying
spirit, out of what way I say, out of the way of preaching for hire, do thou
mean; nay its a lying spirit in thee, that go in their steps, and among them
that goes in this way, and though thou bid me have a care of receiving by
hearsay, what I have (said) received in this, is truth, though thou evade it
never so much.

As to that of some bidding thee throw away the Scriptures, etc. Indeed upon
such terms, it might be spoken so as to be owned, a liar and a slanderer is an
unfit fellow to meddle with the Scriptures, or to take the name of the Lord, or
of the man Christ Jesus, in his mouth, and I may say truly what have thou
(unrighteous person) to do, to take his name, and truth in thy mouth, hateing
to be reformed.

And in that I say of thy crying against Christ within, this is true who said
there was nothing in thee, nor any man (without acception) to be taken notice
of, as we may prove by witness though thou deny it; then, was not Christ
within, and what less is this, then to cry against him, when as thou denied
him within, or else concluded he is not worth taking notice of. And though thou
say I falsely speak of thee in saying thou calls the Doctrine of Christ within,
false opinions, and take in hand to discover it, but the falsenesse is in thee,
who has utterd that which is untruth, and contrary to the Gospel, and now
denies it, or would hide thy wickedness; for thou having framed an objection,
and speaks of some that are for a Christ within, etc. and then thou say, thou
will discover the falsity of such opinions, Now thou do here reckon the
Doctrine of Christ within false opinion, (or among them at least) let the
Reader judge, and be thou silent for shame; but all thou say cleares thee
not, from what I said of thee, God shall judge thee thou lying tongue, and
deceitful heart.

Then thou charges me with folly and to eat my first words, and to be unstable
in judgment, and to fight against the truth, etc. From my question asked, does
not the Scripture say, Christ is within, except you be reprobates, and is not
this thus much, all is reprobates but they in whom Christ is within, and yet
because I said the measure or manifestation of the Spirit, is given, to every
man, this thou have catched. at, and would prove it unsound, but truth is over
thee, and both these are true; and further, I say that Christ is given into the
world, yea to all, but all receives him not, and they that do not receive him
are reprobates, though he be given but not received, and the folly and fighting
against truth is in thy self, who says it is contrary to the Scriptures to
say the Spirit is giving to every one, thou here lie of the Scripture as its
proved and I do not befoole my self in saying the words (or some of them) I
own in thy book, though I have written against the book, for though thou speak
Christ words and the Apostles words, yet thy voice is the strangers and thy
voice I deny, what ever words thou speaks, and is not befooling my self, and
here I could justly end my discourse, and what is said is sufficient, to
manifest thee and me, to the honest Reader. And thus far thy weapons of
slanders are broken, and thy refuge of lies are layd-wast, and this also is
cast by, as our spoiled prey of Babylons treasure, and trampled upon, and know
that we are of God, and he that is of God hears us; and to our God, shall all
bow; and before him tremble.

And whereas thou seems to be greatly offended, and stumbling very much, at my
answers to thy Queries, because thy carnal conceptions is not satisfied, nor
thy vain mind gratified, having as thou think great occasion against me
thereby, which causes thy mouth to be opened in vapouring words aloft. against
the simplicity of the Gospel, not understanding my words, for the things of the
Kingdom of God is a parable to thee and sealed from thee, never to be known in
the reason in which thou judge.

But in short thus I Reply, I did not purpose to answer fully to them to feed
any man's wisdom with my knowledge of the things of Gods Kingdom; for the
Queries were not fully directed to the Quakers; so that quench thy anger, and
according to my answer, go seek a further answer, (or else be thou still
unsatisfied) from them who are led with a spirit of delusion, for such a
direction requires no full answer from me, nor any of us who are in the truth
and not in the delusion, neither did I purpose nor do I at any time to answer
fully to such things are directed in a great part to others, I am not a servant
especially to them that are led with a spirit of delusion, to fulfill thy will,
But yet the short answers that I gave, (which was not in the behalf of
delusion) but for the truths sake, I still own though thou cannot understand
them, but products many bad lying wicked consequences from them, and my purpose
was not to feed thy foolish wisdom in answering; nor to satisfy thy reason
to receive praise from thee or any man for so I know it must be in hearing and
seeing, thou must not perceive nor understand, who art of the generation
hardened and in parable is the Kingdom of heaven unto thee, and I rejoice the
rather in being a stumbling to thee, in that state wherein thou stand, then
that I should have gratified thee, for I seek not nor receives honor from man
in what I do; but is covered from the worlds knowledge, and know this, if thou
cannot receive the Kingdom of Heaven as a little leaven; thou shall never know
it; But yet how wicked art thou in this also, though not understanding me, in
what I said yet, so foully wronging me with above 30. false charges and slanders
from my words, which thou reaches not the knowledge of, so it will be enough.

Reply, to sum up thy lies and send them back to thee to seek them out, and
an evidence for them and the Queries and my Answers shall stand as they are to
be judged of by honest men, while we are both silent in our own cause, they are
to be seen at large in my first Book, The true faith of the Gospel contended
for, etc. in the 26, 27, 28. pages.

And whereas further I speak at the end of my Answers of Christ within the
hope of glory and said, it is that mystery which long has been hid from ages,
but now is made manifest and declared, and though the wise of this world cannot
receive it, but speaks evil against it, yet it is dear unto us, and so much
more precious because despised by such as him and such things are a testimony
to us and against you, (viz.) our enemies, etc. As in my 29. Page of my first
may be seen; and most wickedly this, or part of it, he calls bablings, and
says he passes by it.

O horrible impudency! what marvel that he should so belie me, when as he has
called the very Scripture truth, spoken forth in righteousness, bablings? and
these things I leave the Reader to Judge of, and all his lies thrown upon me
impudently and consider, what ground this man has from my answers to be seen
in my first book to broach out and belch out such a number of lies and
slanders, in 5. sides of paper, not any one of them (charged against me falsely)
were spoken by me, or ever in my thought to speak, or ground given by any of
my words for such productions, as it is seen what lodges in the heart of such a
fellow even desperate wickedness who is without any shame or honesty, who dare
utter such things against the upright, who hates not his enemies, but while I
am clear in the sight of God, from all his false slanders, I matter not what
John Bunion say of me, who is as a man given up to wickedness who in less
then a sheet of paper has uttered 30. lies or more, which I may particularly
manifest before he can find evidence; a great wickedness? can this man's
converts be good, while himself is unconverted? is he a minister of Christ? for
shame let it not be told so; well I beg not vengeance against him, but leaves
my answers to be read, who will clear me from his lying consequences, most
wickedly conceived, and as wickedly uttered (By one of Gogs Army) against a
member of Jesus.

Now I come to reckon up his damnable Doctrines, and errors, which are contrary
to the truth; as will manifestly appear, to him that is spiritual; some of
them damnable without comparison.

John Bunian said, That Christ's second coming, is not his coming To this is two
witnesses.
in Spirit, for his coming in Spirit is no coming. He says, this (or part of
it) is a lie made of him by me; when as several witnesses, does testify in
righteousness, that those very words were spoken by him, in Paul's
steeple-house in Bedford town, May 23. 1656. as is witnessed, and yet this man
is so impudent, that he denies what he spoke, (or is ashamed of his words) and
so would cast the lie upon me, who is clear, and the wickedness lies at his
door, and whereas he would prove that the second coming of Christ, is not his
coming in Spirit, I say I will not beg him to believe it, but as he believes,
so be it unto him, and all that he says does not prove, but that Christ
promised, and fullfilled to his Disciples, John 14.
that he would come again to them, (mark) again is a second time, If any man
has an ear let him hear. And then he says he will not trouble himself to lay
this to my charge in that it was said of him; Christ's coming in Spirit is no
coming, it may be he repents of what he has said, being better considered,
since he has already falsely charged me with it, as some in the County of
Bedford knows very well, that he has falsely charged me and denied his own
words, spoken by his own mouth.

Also he said, Take notice that I affirm that there is nothing in me nor in
any man to he taken notice of, These are his own words spoken by him April 12.
1656. at Patnam, witnessed by three men, who heard it from his mouth, and this
charge he does not fully deny, but in a great measure he assents to it, yet
would cover his shame a little with a lie, in saying, Directly in this form of
words he did not lay them down, but this will not serve to hide his reprobate
state, for to his face it maybe testified he spoke the words, as I have laid
them down, and therefore consider against whom I am yoaked, against one that is
a reprobate, and without Christ in him, one that have denied Christ in him, or
else thinks Christ not worth taking notice of. O abominable ignorance, why
should such a fellow take the things of God in his mouth, who has denied
Christ in him, and the Spirit of Christ indeed it appears that he does take
notice of nothing in him, else he would have been wounded with the light in his
own conscience, before he had brought forth thus many lies, it seems he takes
notice of nothing in him, but is past feeling, damnable doctrine indeed,
without comparison, that ever one professing a Minister of Christ, should be so
stark blind and wicked, yea, we have taken notice of what thou have said and it
shall be recorded for ignorance of the greatest sort, but he would evade the
thing and give a sense upon his words, and in such a sense he ownes, and in
such a sense he denies it, but what is this to the purpose, except he confess
it, (as it is) that he is unregenerate, and if so, he confesses the light of
God is in him and then to be taken notice of, if it be but to condemn him.

O blindness to be marked! well, this man's folly has appeared sufficiently,
who confesses this light in every man is the light of Christ as God, and yet
says, he affirms there is nothing in him, nor any man, (regenerate or
unregenerate) without exception) his words here spoken, worth the taking notice
of.

The rest of the particulars charged upon his fellows is passed by with the
excuse of wanting the names expressed, may be he is glad to be ignorant in this
thing, but lets search, John Burion said, That Christ had two bodies, one our
of the sight of the Saints, in Bedford, May 23. 1656. And to this John Bunian
confesses but would excuse it if he could, and would manifest that Christ has
two bodies, clean contrary to the Scripture which affirms Ephesians. 4. 4. Now no
marvel that he gain-sayes me, when as he has gain said the Apostle, who
says expressly, There is one body, but they say two bodies; let them be ashamed
for ever, thus to contradict Scripture,

John Spencly, (one of the Testators of this lying scrole, a May 23. 1656 I^
Bedford.
member of the same supposed Church) said that Christ and the word of life were
two things, and so would divide Christ contrary to the 6th. of John 48. where
Christ says he is the bread of life, and contrary to 1 John 1. 2. The 23. of
the 8. month, 1656.. John Bunion and one Fer. and J. Child laid down.

1. That God dyed, And that very God, and the everlasting Father dyed contrary
to many Scriptures, as Dan. 4. 34. Dan. 12. 7.

2. They affirmed, That the word that was in the beginning was crucified upon
the Cross, contrary to the 1 Peter 1. 23.

3. They affirmed, That justification is without obedience, But yet say I, None
is justified in disobedience but all condemned in it, let them mark that, and
there is but either in obedience, or in disobedience, and he that is a Believer
and justified, is not without obedience.

4. That There is a light which convinces of sin, besides the light of Christ,
and John Bunian in all his Book cannot prove any is convinced of sin, that
has not the light of Christ or that any thing besides the light of Christ does
convince of sin, so that his consusion does appear,

5, That There is no saving knowledge but what comes without from Heaven,
contrary to 2 Cor. 4. 6, 7. where it is said the light shone in their hearts
out of darkness, J. Child denied that the man Christ Jesus had given a light
to every man that comes into the world, contrary to Joh. 1. 9.

Also he denied, That every man was lighted, that they might believe, contrary
to Jo. 12. 36. 35. Jo. Burton said, That a man might be upon the foundation and
yet deny Christ, Now the Scripture says, Matthew. 10. 33. He that denies Christ
shall be denied of the Father, and the Father denies not any that are on the
foundotion as they affirm.

Another of them said, That the word that was hid in David's heart was the
outward Scriptures.

Another of them affirmed, That he was justified from all his sins, past,
present and to come and said there was Scripture in the Acts to prove it.

John Burton said, That a man is not justified by the Spirit, John Bunian said,
the 30. of the 11. month, That the Spirit of Christ does nothing (Mark) within
man as to justification, he affirmed, That the flesh of Christ is not within
any man, then there is no man that has life in him if Christ's words be true,
Jo. 6. 53. and Christ's words is true, and therefore Jo. Bnnions doctrine is, he
said, That by the Kingdom of Heaven, within the Pharisees Luke* 17. Christ
speaks of himself there as a personal This is witnessed by many.
man to be that Kingdom of heaven, Mark here what the substance of this is,
does he mean that the person of Christ was in the Pharisees.

O horrid blindness! not to be parrelelled.

He said, The best thing in a natural man is Impure, and yet in this Book
confesses that the light of God is in all men, so that must be impure, else J.
Bunians doctrine is a lie; but the light of God is pure, and therefore Jo.
Bunians doctrine is a lie,

He said, that the Scripture, In every place does not mean as it speaks, and
instanced that in Peter, not to mean as it speaks, where it is said, yea, as
lively stones are built up a spiritual house, and where it is said, have salt
in your selves, He asked if a man's belly must be filled with salt, Mark this
expositor, and his blindness and ignorance, and the cause why he is silent,
And forbears to aggravate sin is, least hard thoughts should be entertained
against him, Let men judge, whether this be not an unfaithful man to the Lord,
who rather then harsh thoughts should be against him in the wicked, he will be
His own book holds this forth.
silent, and hide and cover sin in sinners. O wickedness indeed!

He says, that Christ Ascended into Heaven in our nature, (viz.) in his
nature, and they that are one with him, and he and they are proved to be in
corrupt nature, as they will confess it. O what wickedness to hold forth that
Christ is at the right hand of God in sinful nature, as his words holds forth
from his own mouth.

Jo. Burton said, That men may depend too much upon something called Christ,
and the righteousness of Christ within.

He says, that the Devil Knows how to take the Childrens bread (viz.) Christ
Jesus who only is the Childrens bread) and give him to dogs. O sad error and
damnable.

He says, That the Devil deceives souls by bidding them follow the light
which they brought into the world with them.

And he confesses that light is the light of Christ (as God) O unutterable
ignorance! can a sober man read this, and not be ashamed, to hold forth that
the Devil deceives souls by bidding them follow the light of Christ (as God)?

He says, they that follow Christ aright, must follow him without, to the
cross without for justification, or mount Calvery without; they must seek for
justification without, and the Spirit of Christ it leads to Christ without.

Reader, see if this be not near unto Poperey, or enquire else what he means,
as if he would have people to go a Pilgrimage, and this is contrary to Romans
10. 6, 7, 8.

He says, That the soul of man is the light wherewith every man is lighted by
Christ as God, and this is the light that every man brought into the world with
him, and the Devil deceives souls by this light (viz.) by the soul, this is
true from his own words, let it be marked by sober men, what damnable
doctrines these are, hardly fit to be raked in.

He says further, That the Devil deceives souls by persuading them to follow
the light within, which he confesses is the light of Christ, and that all men
has it.

He says, Conscience is the light of God, and yet in another place says,
Conscience is defiled, what concurrence is here, let the Reader judge, to hold
forth that the light of God is defiled, his words plainly shows, to say that
the law is the Schoolmaster to bring to Christ.

He says, This is a frothy argument.

And to make up his wickedness he says, He is ruled by Scripture, consider
whether those doctrins and lies be not quite contrary to Scripture, what
impudency is in this man's heart to say he is ruled by Scripture, he says, They
that look upon Compare this doctrine with Heb. 13. 8. and his doctrine is proved
to be damnable.
Christ no otherwise then as he was before the world was, he dare to be bold
to say they are no Christians but Antichristians, he says, That Contrary to
John ^. ^.
Christ as he is Mediater, so he does not lighten every man that comes into the
world though as he is God, he does, Markhere, he would divide Christ, not to be
the same, the Son, as he is the Father; yet he confesses in his Book, What the
Father does, the Son does also, see what contradiction here is? not worth the
raking in, O blindness that may be felt in the grossest darkness he inhabits.
He says, That the Devil has more experience of the knowledge of the eternal
power, and Godhead, then unregenerate men; Mark, the word more signifies
something. He says, The light of Christ as God, is conscience and nature it
self, Mark, nature is sinful, and wicked, and all are children of wrath, in
it so are all by the light of Christ as God; wicked and children of wrath if
Jo. Bunions doctrine be true, let him make it good as he can: O wonderful trash
and muddy stuff, unheard of before. He says, The Devil deceives souls, by
bidding them listen within, and see if there be not that which does convince of
sin, Mark his doctrine well. He denies, That Paul bids listen within, contrary
to that Scripture, Romans 10. 8, 9. He says, conscience may be hardened and
seared, and is naturally evil, and yet says, Conscience is the light of
Christ as God, see what an agreement is here, the light of Christ as God, is
hardened and seared, and evil, else J. Bunion must revoke his doctrine, or else
prove this, Consider what stuff this is, which is held forth by him.

He says, he preaches not for hire, indeed, he had no need to receive money for
such doctrine as these.

He says Christ is some four or five foot long, This is more then he can tell.

He reckons the doctrine of Christ within a false, (or among false) opinions.

He says, It is contrary to Scripture to say the measure (or manifestation) of
the Spirit is given to every man, though Paul says so plainly to the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 12. 7.

Mark here he has spoken quite contrary to Scripture, denied that which Paul
affirmed or else counted Paul's words against Scripture.

He says, They that are borne of God do daily sin, absolute contrary to the 1
John 3. 9. And therefore he would give the Apostle the lie.

Now Reader consider, whether thou will believe John Bunian, or the Apostle
John, for they are at ods, and speaks quite contrary one to the other.

He says, That the light that shows thee there is a God, and that this God is
eternal, would lead to life, then might the Devils be delivered from
damnation, and the Devils knows God as a Creator, etc.

He says, That the light spoken of John the 3^ is the man Christ Jesus, and
yet says, that the man Christ Jesus, is not a condemning light.

Mark that Scripture, says that light was condemnation to them that did evil,
he says not, who must you believe.

He says, That the liar and slanderer is an unbeliever, and his condition is
sad.

Consider here, how out of his own mouth he is condemned, who is at large
proved a liar and slanderer, out of his own mouth will the Lord condemn him.

He says, That a man cannot give a more right description of a false Prophet,
then the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles did give. Reply, In this thou have
truly said. Now lets consider, how thou have* confessed to thy own shame, and
laid open thy own nakedness, the Prophets said such was false Prophets as
preached for hire, and divined for money, and fed themselves, and clothed
themselves with the woole, and that used their tongues, and said the Lord says
it, when God had not spoken to them, and that cried peace to the wicked, and
Christ said such were deceivers, who had the chiefest place in the assembly,
and stood praying in the Synagogues, and loved the uppermost rooms at feasts,
and that were called of men master, and such like, and the Apostle said such
were deceivers, to take gifts and rewards, and lucre, and that loved
unrighteous wages, and that were backbiters, and false accusers, and covetous,
and having a form of Godliness, but denying the power, who ever taught, and
the people were not able to come to the knowledge of the truth, with many other
such like. Now this is my appeal to all men's consciences, in the sight of God,
whether thou art not found under some of these carrectars (at least) or whether
thou art not one in union and fellowship, with such who act these things, yea,
thou art* among them and not crying against them, and so art guilty of their
sin, though not as fully in the act as are some, may be; so that I doubt not,
but they who have not hardened their hearts, and blinded their eyes will see,
how thou have condemned thy self in confessing the truth, and the time is
coming that further it will be made manifest concerning thee, only at present
thou art sufficiently discovered, to be out of the truth in the way of
perdition, and how ever though thou have covered thy self, as much as is
possible* from the stroke of thy own hand, and from the guilt of thy own
confession, yet Jo. Burton, thou have condemned an hundred, I think of
Independent Ministers, (so called) thy brethren, who are known to be found
guilty of those things, all or most of them, which thou confesses are marks of
a false Prophet, and while thou bids us examine our selves, thou art the man
(or among them) that are proved truly guilty.

He says, He is not come to one of the days of the thousand years, of Satan's
being chained, and this is truly confessed, and so he is in the reign and
government of the Devil, and Satan is not bound but at liberty in him, (as it
well appears) and Christ's reign is not known, and so it must needs be true,
that he is of the Army of the Draggon against the Lamb.

Some of the same members with him said, in Bedford, That they scorned that
light which convinces of sin, (which the Quakers speaks of)

Further, most falsely I am charged by him with railing against the Lord Jesus,
which is absolute false; my words are spoken in fear and reverence of the Lord
Jesus. Reader, these things I leave to thee, to be judged of, his false
slanders and his damnable doctrins, and wicked lying accusations; and
contradictions which his 9 sheets of paper is filled with, as if he had set
himself to lie, and slander and speak wickedly against the truth which is over
him, and is a testimony against him, and though opposed by him, yet not
confounded, but him it confounds, and by it he shall be judged and condemned;
and the time comes when further he may be made manifest, if this be not
sufficient *out of the abundance of his heart, has his wicked tongue tered
these things, which are but a little of what lodges in him, but let him prove
these things first, and then utter more.

AND now John Bunian, thou and thy false witnesses* and all thy company and
brethren in iniquity, Remember and repent for the day of your visitation is
upon you, blessed were you, if you could receive it, before it be spent, not to
be recalled; and before the long suffering of God come to an end and you be
shut up in utter darkness, and indeed friends the day hastens wherein every
man shall receive according to his deeds; he that has done evil shall not be
cloaked, and he that has done good shall not be uncovered, in that day when
the secrets of all hearts shall be laid open, and searched with the eternal
eye; the end of my work is to clear the truth, and the way thereof, (God is
witness) from thy slanderous and lying and perverting tongue, and only I
reproove thee, by the Spirit of the Lord, and so leaves thee to receive thy
reward from the just God of righteous judgment; who upon thy head will render
vengeance in flames of fire, in his dreadful day, which upon thee comes
suddenly, even when thou and you cries peace, peace, then shall destruction
come as an armed man from which thou shall not fly to escape, though now you
all be hardened against the Lord and his way and truth, and has even bent thy
tongue for lies, and has reproached the innocent, to the peirceing of thy own
soul, and one day shall thou know it, therefore bow and tremble before the
Lord God, thou and all thy companions, a liar and slanderer thou art, a
perverter and wrester of the right way of God, and of the Scriptures, a
hipocrite and dissembler, a holder forth of damnable doctrines an envious man,
and false accuser, condemning another falsely in what thy self is fully guilty
of; these things I lay to thy charge justly in the presence of the Lord God,
and upon thy account are they reckoned by him, and proved by testimony in the
sight of man (and may be more fully hereafter if any thing be wanting) and one
day shall thou feel the burden of them, though now thou be above shame; and
all thy lies, slanders, deceits, confusions, hypocrisies, contradictions, and
damnable doctrines of Devils, with impudency held forth by thee, shall be
consumed in the Pit of vengeance, and then shall the witness in thy conscience
justify the Lord (in condemning thee) and me, to be true in reproving thee,
and this I say to thee, and you all, the liveing God you know not, nor his Son
Jesus Christ; but are enemies to God and Witness one of their brethren a
Justice of peace (so called who imprisoned falsely the Innocent to all their
shame.
persecuters of the Lord of life, and shall perish among the uncircumcised, ye
false witnesses, and wicked helpers; you may be ashamed of your testimony
subscribed at the beginning of his lying scribble, will you yet say through
Grace, those things are true; the father stop your mouths in the dust, who
has offended the Lord, more then defended him, or your selves; and be ashamed
in the presence of God and man, much more may be said hereafter, to lay you
further open, if you yet harden your hearts in your wickedness, but I do
rather reprove you, then strive with you, and rather desires your return to
God, then your condemnation by him, and with this I shall end, and by what is
said in short is sufficient to manifest you, and John Bunian to all honest
people, what generation you are of, and that you are guided by a lying and
unclean spirit, and that you are doing the Devils work in gainsaying the way
of truth and righteousness, by your multitude of lies and slanders, and
damnable doctrines, and whatever you account or falsely judge of me, yet am I
true (though as a deceiver) and the Lords servants, and a witness for him and
against all your lies and slanders, and wickedness hatched amongst you and
brought forth by a lyeing orator whom you have made your mouth into the view of
the world, even a cursed birth, and the father of it; and the womb that
conceived it, and it shall rot, and perish as the dunge and not accomplish any
part of the end, of your desire, for so loathsome it is, being truly searched
and laid open that it has not obtained neither the praise of God nor man, but
is defamed by men, and condemned of God; alas, alas, for thee John Bunian thy
several months travel in grief and pain, is a fruitless birth, and
perishes as an untimely fig, and its praise is blotted out among men, and its
passed away as smoke; Truth, is a top of thee, and out-reaches thee, and thy
formed weapons cannot prosper, and it shall stand for ever to confound thee,
and all its enemies; and though thou will not subject thy mind to serve it
willingly, yet a slave to it must thou be and what thou do in thy wickedness
against it, the end thereof brings forth the glory of it, and thy own
confounding and shame; and now be wise and learned, and put of thy armor, for
thou may understand the more thou strives, the more thou art entangled, and
the higher thou arises in envy, the deeper is thy fall into confusion and the
more thy arguments are, the more increased is thy folly, let experience teach
thee, and thy own wickedness correct thee, and thus, I leave thee, and if thou will not own the light of Christ in thy own conscience, now to reprove thee
and convince thee, yet in the day of judgment thou shall own it, and it shall
witness the justness of the judgments of the Lord, when for thy iniquities
he pleads with thee, and behold as a theife in the night, when thou art not
awarre, he will come, and then woe unto thee that art poluted,

FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN Page the 2. line 2. for o, r, to, and l. the 20, r. and before the dragon,
in P. 4. l. 5. for helped, r. belyed, take notice of it; in Page 5. line 17. r.
and before all, In Page 6. l. 16. for here r. they, and line 34. for it is, r.
is, Page 7. l. 7. for do r does, for falfly, r. salsly, Page, 9. l. 12, after
Ranters, r. they would profess they, P. 11. l. 11. for rested, read wreasted,
P. 12. l. 2. for upan t. upon, and l. 9. for simplicity, read, simple policy,
and line 11. for lied, r. laid, and l. 25. for maes, r. man's, and l, 26, for
fight r. sight, and l. 30. for fight r. sight, and l: 33. for therefare r:
therefore, P: 13. l: 30. for impuden ce r impudent, P: 19. l: 24. for Ja, r:
Jo, and P: 20. l: last, after feet, r: and to confound thy self thou say, P:
21. l: 36. for the world r: thou, P: 22. l: 10. for are r. art, P: 23. l: 1.
for judged, r: judge, and l: 17. before for, r: nay, P: 24. l: 7. for
therefore, r: therefrom, l: 31. for it: r: yet, P: 25. l. 13. after coufesses,
r: is the light of God, l: 30. for witness, r. witnesses, P: 27. l: 16. for of
read to, and leave out to; P: 28. l: 29. for why it, r: who yet; p: 30. l: 16.
for says, r: faith, l: 28. for it, r: what, P: 32. l: 26. for speak, r.
appear, l: 28. for further, r: former, P: 33. l: 10. for what r. that, l: 31.
for so, r: see P: 24. l: 19. r: I, before have; and for prover r: reprover, l:
28. stood r. stand, and l: 29. for fight r: fights, P: 36. l: 30. for that r:
the, l: 34. after but, omit is, P: 38. l: 8. for you, r: thou, P: 41. l: 6. for
souls, r: soul, l: 9. for set, r: let, l: 27. for answered, r: fnared, l: 29.
for urgeing r: rageing, P: 42. l: 12. for thee, r: the, P: 45. l: 4. for yet r:
yes, P: 46. l: 15. for that r: the, P: 48. l: 17. for not, r: no, l, 37. for
ways r; wages P; 51. l; 15. before are, r; as. P; 55. l; last; r. damnable
after is, P. 58. l; 29. for against r; no, in P. 49. l; 6. for he has r; has
he not, so it is in the manuscript.


