BY THE KING of Kings his Prophets:
A Proclamation concerning the Covenant and League of the People of GOD, to
join together with the Parliament in the great work of the Lord, against the
enemy that has brought all these miseries upon us.
COme a Esaias. 34.1.
near ye Nations to hear and hearken ye people let the earth hear, and all
that is therein, the world, and all things that come forth of it. b Amos 1.11.
Thus, says the Lord, For three transgression of E. and for four, I will not
turn away the punishment thereof: because he did pursue his brother with the
sword, and did cast of all pity, and his anger did tear perpetually, and
kept his wrath for ever c Esaias 1.7.
Your Country is desolate, your Cities are burnt with fire: your Land strangers
devour it in your presence, and it is desolate, as overthrown by strangers. d
Jeremiah 4.18, etc.
Thy ways and thy doings have procured these things unto thee, this is thy
wickedness because it is bitter, because it reaches unto thine heart. My
bowels, my bowels, I am pained at my very heart, my heart makes a noise in me,
I cannot hold my peace, because thou have heard, o my soul, the sound of the
Trumpet, the Alarm of War. Destruction upon destruction is cried, for the whole
Land is spoiled: suddenly are my tents spoiled, and my curtains in a moment.
How long shall I see the Standard, and hear the sound of the Trumpet? For my
people is foolish, they have not known me, they are sottish, and they have no
knowledge ( says the Lord) e Ezra 1.5.
Then rose up the chief of the Fathers with all them whose spirit God had
raised to go up, to build the House of the Lord. f verse 6.
And all they which were about them, strengthened their hands with vessels of
silver, with gole, with goods, and with precious things, besides all that was
willingly offered. g Ezra 4.1.
Now the adversaries h ver. 4.
weakened the handsof the people and troubled them. i verse 8
Wrote a Letter to the King in this sort. k ver. 13. and 14.
Be it known unto the King, that if this City be builded, and the walls set up
again, then will they not pay Toll, Tribute and Custom, and so thou shall
endamage the Revenues of Kings. Now because we have maintenance from the Kings
Palace, and it was not meet for us to see the King dishonored: therefore have
we sent, and certified the King. l Nehemiah, 4.7, and 8.
They were very wrath. And conspired all of them together, m ver. 11.
to slay them, and cause the work to cease. n Nehemi. 9.38.
And because of this, the Princes make a sure Covenant, and write it, and seal
unto it. o Nehemiah 10 28, and 29.
And the rest of the people, and all they that had separated themselves feom
the people of the Lands unto the Law of God, their wives, their sons, and their
daughters, every one having knowledge, and having understanding. They clave to
their brethren, their Nobles, and entered into a Curse, and into and oath, to
walk in Gods Law, which was given by Moses, the servant of God, and to observe
and do all the Commandments of the Lord our God, and his judgments, and his
Statutes. p Esaias 49.5.
And though the Church be not gathered, yet shall they be glorious in the eyes
of the Lord, and God shall be their strength. q verse 8, etc.
Thus says the Lord, in an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of
Salvation have I helped thee: and I will preserve thee, and give thee for a
Covenant of the people, to establish the earth to cause to inherit the desolate
heritage. That thou may say to the Prisoners, go forth to them that are in
darkness, show your selves, they shall feed in the ways, and their Pasture
shall be in all high places. They shall not hunger nor thirst, neither shall
the heat nor sun smite them, for he that has mercy on them shall lead them,
even by the springs of water shall he guide them. r Hosea 13.10.
I will be thy King ( says the Lord) where is any other that may save thee in
all thy Cities? s Hosea 13.9.
Thou have destroyed thy selse, but in me is thy help.

t Jeremiah 51.63, 64
It shall be when thou have made an end of reading this book, that thou shall
bind a stone to it, and cast it into the midst of Euphrates. And thou shall
say. Thus shall Babylon sink, and shall not rise from the evil that I will
bring upon her: And they shall be weary. v Mallachy 4.1, etc.
For behold the day comes, that shall burn as an Oven, and all the proud,
yea, and all that do wickedly shall be as stubble, and the day that comes
shall burn them up, says the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them neither
root nor branch. But unto you that fear my name shall the son of righteou
snesse arise with healing in his wings, and ye shall go forth, and grow up as
calves of the stall. And ye shall tread down the wicked, for they shall be
ashes under the souls of your feet, in the day that I shall do this says
the Lord of Hosts.

Given by the Prophets, as it is written in the holy Word of God out of which
it is collected, London these 25 of March. 1644.
London, Printed, by Andrew Coe, and published accordeng to Order, for the use
of the two united Kingdoms of England and Scotland, Auno Domini, M DC XLIV,


