Temple-defilers defiled, Wherein a true Visible CHURCH OF CHRIST Is described.

The Evils and pernicious Errors, especially appertaining to Schism,
Anabaptisme and Libertinisme, that infest our Church, are discovered.

And Directions to preserve from the sin and punishment of TEMPLE-DEFILING,
DELIVERED In Two Sermons preached at the Lecture in Kingston upon Thames, Feb.
20. and 27. 1644. out of 1 Cor. 3. 17.

BY RICHARD BYFIELD Pastor in Long-Ditton, Surrey.

Mal. 3. 1, 2. The Lord comes suddenly to his Temple. -- But who may abide the
day of his coming? -- For he is like a Refiners fire, and like Fullers soap.
Miror quod non cogitant, posse aliquem aliquando utrumque (novum scilicet,
vetusque Testamentum) legere, and divina open intellectum utrumque laudare:
^raudemque istorum atque malitiam vel dolere tanquam hominum, vel cavere
tanquam Haereticorum, vel irridere tanquam imperitorum and superborum. Aug.
Tom. 6. l. contra Adimantum Manichaei discipulum. cap. 13.

London, Printed by John Field for Ralph Smith, at the sign of the Bible in
Cornhill, near the Royall-Exchange. 1645.

To the Right Worshipful, and the rest Dearly Beloved in CHRIST JESUS, the
Auditory at the Lecture in Kingston upon Thames in Surrey.
IT is the mighty work of God, beset with wonders of fatherly Providence, that
you enjoy again a Thursdaies Lecture, Preached by some of the Ministers, now
standing on their feet by the spirit of life from God entering into them who
upheld it heretofore, until Prelaticall usurpation with furious tyranny
suspended them, and spoiled their Nest, as their proud threats phrased their
malicious Pharisaicall Act a little before they had fully acted it. The fourth
Commandment must be turned up by the roots, the power of godliness, and of
faithful Preaching, with Prayer in the Holy Ghost, as bad, with them, as
Preaching; the undeniable enemies of the Prelaticall Kingdom, Crown, and
Dignity must all be outed, Lectures by godly Ministers that desired to be found
faithful may not b^ endured: and now for this work, that was their day. Their
power through their interest in the Royal favor was superlatively great,
their Hierarchy fastly rooted in the ancient Laws, and grown up with the body
of the Kingdom, Parliaments exploded, the Universities theirs; All preferment
in their hands, thousands of their Enemies gone in Colonies to the Indies the
utmost ends of the earth, many great and choice wits with them, some of them
profound Scholars, some with them preferred by them to the choicest Sees for
ancient fame and present maintenance, as good men, and of as good report, even
among the godly, as ever any Age had, all the rest of them painted Tombs,
goodly Pharisees to see to: And their old friend Rome had got no little ground
among us, by matching one of his Daughters here, and for all the Reformed
Churches beyond sea, they were brought very low. What wisdom of man would not
have thought, but that in such a day they should undoubtedly have ^ad the day.
For my part, I sat down under their unjust illegal Sentence, with this saying
to some of my acquaintance yet alive through Gods mercy: There is no coming in
for me again, but with the breaking of the whole State, An alteration that must
change the Kingdom and the Laws thereof. I sat down willing to see the way of
God in his work; the desires of my soul were toward him in that hour and power
of darkness, I drew a small draught of it for my own direction. Little did I
think the return of our captivity had been so near, and who could conceive the
glory and terror of it? Nevertheless, in the time of that four years and four
weeks suspension and sequestration that I suffered, my thoughts, among other
things, were on that Text in Zach. 2. 13. Be silent, O all flesh, before the
Lord, for he is raised out of his holy habitation. In which, collecting the
signs of the Lords arising, I saw the ruin of these Luciferian Usurpers, yet
not conceiving it to be so near, in such unparalleld ways of high providence,
with such well founded proceedings of legality that has slain all them, and
cast out their carc^ses, and their worm dies not, and their fire is not
quenched, and they are an abhorring unto all flesh, With such streams of blood,
with such executions upon a sensual Nobility, Gentry, seat of Judges, shop of
Lawyers, ^^nke of Civilians, and sinful body of a Malignant Commo^alty; Of
which we may say not without astonishment and high ^raises, What has God
wrought? Must this be the way of Vindication of the Ministerial Liberty, of
such a miserable sinful worm as I am? From the Lords right hand went a flame
of that fiery Law for us: A fiery Law is the Decalogue of the ten Commandments
called; the fourth Commandment is then a flame of the fire, Deuteronomy. ^3. 2.
and it has fiered the State and habitations of these transgressors; that
sentence warmed and refreshed my heart, and touched my tongue in that winter
season, and now should fire us with Gods praises, for the time draws on ^pace
of the Churches Hallelujahs. Rev. 19.


I write this, that you may not forget how we come to preach again unto you at
all.

But now when I came to preach to you at this time; not only neighborhood of
habitation, and former ancient relation to you, and my unfeighned desire to do
you good by imparting some spiritual gift, but your desires, your divisions,
and the care of the Churches, which toward you came upon me, because of your
divisions; did much move me. I had no thought at all of making these Sermons
public; your import^^ity brings them forth; that word, Paul, Apolles, Cophas,
all the Ministers ar^ your^, that word bound me. Being bound, two things more
facilitated my yeildance, when I durst not withstand the suitableness of the
subject to the times, and the diseasednesse of the Congrega^ion of Kingston, to
which I was once, though most unworthy, a Teacher; this year disease is, The
Lord help and heal, the disease of the Church of England; through grievous
poverty grown upon her, under the impositions and oppositions of her
Diotrephesses, the Spring of the year of glorious Gospel-^iberty coming on,
there appears a (...), Ph^hiriasis, she begins Ph^hiriasis.
to swarm with Vermin; this arises from want of concocting the wholesome
food of sound Doctrine, even the truth, which is after Godliness: if we feed
favourly on the solid substantial truths that concern faith and love, which
is in Christ Jesus, and not turn aside after watery trash, that food will
quickly set us sound, and so nourish us, that we should ru^ off, and rid us of
these (...), Pht^ires, these Lice, and Worms. Phthires.


Wash you with the waters from under the Sanctuary, and that is Sovereign to
kill them, and clear the body, and cleanse the skin of the Church. I Will reach
you some that flows out of one vein of Scripture it r^ls the ways and spirit
of s^ducers.

Their ways are such as these:

1. To draw the heart from, and to destroy the fundamental truths; the 2 Tin.
2 18. (...).
first truths, pretending they are low, dry and saplesse in comparison of their
depths, and their high speculations, giving metaphorical, and far fetched
meanings and interpretation^; as (...) and Phil^^us did upon the Article of the
Resurrection; saying, it was past already, or annexing to those foundation
truths, opinions which overthrow them by consequence, laying one foundation in
appearance, and another in deed, as the Apostle implies in 1 Cor. 3. 11. So
the Papists do about the Article of Christ's Ascension into Heaven, when they
teach his corporal real pres^nc^ in the Mass; of th^se kinds of Seducers
the Apostle says, that their word will ^a^ as does a Canker. 2 Timothy 2. 17.


2. To beguile by Paralogismes or d^ceitfull reasonings, and sophistical Col.
2. 4. (...). Iam. 1. 22. Nitor ser p^o, non Argumento, Ambr. de spiritu Sancto.
Col. 2. 4. (...). Romans 16. 18. 2 Timothy 3. 13. (...). Eustachius dicit (...) esse
(...). 2 These. 2. 10. (...). Gal 3. 1. (...).
arguings; when upon misconceived principles of (...), said as premises, wrong
conclusions are drawn; like Satan their Father, who beg^^les men's hearts by a
self de^^it, when they set up a profession of the wo^d, (...), hear^t often,
and thereupon conclude they ^re blessed, though they neglect the practice and
obedience (...)* against this ab^^d of the useful Art of Logicke^it is safe to
rest upon the plain Scriptures and avoid the sub^ilty of Argument, brought to
lead from plain truths.

3. To use persuasive and enticing words, that they might induce to their
errors; and the Moral Philosophy of Heathen Authors about ^^^^ue, natural
abilities, and the chief good, which post us of Christ, and true consolation
through Fai^^^in him, these en^^^ing words are also e^ther the swelling words
of Vanity, ^^d of w^^dy ostentation, or good words and f^ir speeches.

4. To inchant the people through a mournful behavior, the old g^^^e of most
of the, orders of Friars and Monks and the new gusse of many with us, in 2 Timothy 23. ^^. He uses a word for Seducers* that signifies an Incha^^er by
(...) and lamentation.

5. To lead us out of the common b^aten high way; when affectation of a Notion,
and of a curious ^each makes men innovate word^ and phrases formerly received
in the Church, as best expressing the sense of Scripture.

6. To bewitch with fascinations; that is, to delude simple minds with
glesings of some special care of t^^m, about some point of truth pre^^nded, as
witches do do eyes of the body, that they think verily, they see that which
they do not see, and do not see that which is absolutely necessary they should
see and know; these be witchings are most dangerous, when the mist is cast over
the soul with juggling pretexts of showing you Christ and F^ee grace in a more
excellent manner, till you know neither Christ no^ Free Grace.

7. To wrest and w^y things that are straight and plain. Act. 20. ^0. (...).
Act. 8. 9. (...). 2 Cor. 11. 3.


8. To lead people to the admiration of their persons: (another way of
bewitching) bringing them into astonishment, and a trance upon the conceit of
the great power of God in them, and some inspirations of the Holy Ghost.

9. To corrupt men's minds from the simplicity that is in Christ, by adding or
diminishing somewhat of the purity of the Gospel, whereby we ^all from the
obedience of faith, as the Serpent dealt with ^^ve.

10. To alleviate the threats of Gods word with vain words and to promise
Ephesians. 5. 6. 2 Pet 2. 19
liberty; and turn Gods grace into wantonness.

These are the chief path^ of Seducers, and for the spirit that ^^rrieth I om^^
that of Miracles and lying Wonders of S^tan, in 2 These. 2.
them, it is an unruly spirit, a self-willed spirit, a proud spirit, a giddy
inconstant unquiet spirit, a self-seeking spirit, a spirit of timorousness,
and base fear, not of love, power, and a sound mind, a spirit of earthly
mindedness, a spirit captived to men's persons, a spirit that creeps into
houses, and leads silly wom^n captive, laden with diverse lusts, and a doting
spirit.

Of their dotages and deceits, I shall give you two instances, the one is this,
that they conceive they have a great light, and a new light; when their new
great light, is either some old error raised from Hell again and new painted,
or some matter of opinion which is very doubtful, and controversall, or
somewhat of lesser moment, ^rged and pursued with such zeal that the great
things of the Law and Gospel are neglected, the very disposition of the
Pharisees of old: But if any say, should we not seek an increase and growth in
our light; and do not we look for it? yes, in some sense we do, and we ought to
grow in knowledge; but this is not to be understood of any light of new truths,
there are no new truth^ to No new truths.
be revealed; yet the light may increase exceedingly in the more full distinct,
and shining knowledge of received truths, in the clearing and fulfilling We
expect a new and great light, increasing in 8. things.
of some prophesies; in the power of practice when Christians in name shine in
holiness, power of faith and godliness, expressed in their lives, as so many
great lights in the frmament of the Church; in taking away the various
contentions and quarrels, that now darken and offuscate the minds of men;
Satan chained up more from deceiving: in the further manifestation of Gods
judgments upon enemies of all sorts, which thing does exemplify and
illustrate the things we do already know: In the increase of the number of able
and faithful Teachers, and knowing holy professors: and in clearer resolution
of some obscure places of Scripture, together with a more perfect union of the
Church of Christ on earth, which will be full of Grace, Majesty, and Terror;
now not one of these is found in or by the means of our men that boast of their
new light, for why do not they show it to us?

Another Instance of their do^ing deceivable spirit is this, that they cannot
be brought to measure themselves and their tenets by the standard of the
Scripture without shuffling: It were a plain and easy way to see the truth in
any matter in question about Religion, if men did not love to dote: thus,
propose the tenet nakedly; see whether there be any plain Scripture for it; if
there be not, we need go no further: if there be, but yet some other Texts
seem to say against it, or a question may be moved about the sense; hold the
Analogy of Faith and rule of righteousness, see the tenor of the Scriptures,
and accordingly produce Arguments, and answer Objections; as for Example, There
are arisen among us some that utterly deny the Baptizing of Infants of
Professors of the Faith of Jesus Christ; now how easily might this matter be
resolved, among men of quiet and Christian spirits? They say, Infants ought not
to be baptized: What one Text in all the Scripture says so? Not one. What
Arguments can they allege? Not one that reaches the matter in hand; for they
all go no further then this, that persons of age ought first to profess their
Faith, and then receive Baptism: but not this, that they only ought to receive
Baptism; how dare men say, they must be excluded, when God says no such word?
on the other side* does not the Scripture plainly take-in such Infants into the
Covenant, and acknowledge them members of the Church of God: The Infant
Israelites were not born Heathens, without, were circumcised, were meant as
part of Abraham's seed; the Nations to whom the Gospel comes, and who do receive
it, are now of the same body with the Jews, partakers of the same promise, the
grace of God is larger under the New Testament, which it were not, if such a
part, as the millions of infant-Christians that die before they come to years,
were cut off from it? The Children of believers are holy, whole households were
baptized: Christ blessed Infants upon this ground, Because of such was the
Kingdom of God; that is, not only Heaven, but the Church of the new Testament,
which is called the Kingdom of God; there is this ground why those that are of
age that repent should receive Baptism, because the promise is to them, and
the promise is to their children, therefore their children have the like
ground, on which they ought to receive Baptism: these with the like Arguments
are strong and unanswerable, were it not that these persons doted, and in their
Pride will resolve to be contentious? Let not any think that a small error
which shuts out from Christ and his Church millions of his Members, which runs
against the constant tenor of both Testaments, which confines and imprisons
the Grace of God in the New Testament, which makes the grace of Christ the
second Adam not to reach one sort and condition of men, over whom sin and death
passes by and from the first Adam, which evertes and destroys at one blow all
the Churches of Christ in the whole world: All this does this unchristian error
of the Anabaptists do: The like might be said concerning Church Government,
whether the Hierarchy or Independency, or Presbytery be of Christ in the
Scripture? It might soon be determined were it not for a spirit of Dotage,
Pride, and Contention, but I leave that to the Assembly, where it depends and
is in Agitation: I hold you from the perusal of the Sermons, which you heard
with much attention; I have written some particulars in the enumetation of
Temple-Polluters under the second Doctrine, which time cut off from delivering,
as I then told you, the rest you have as near as I could set down, save that
one thing throughout the Sermons the Printer could not ^^nde any Characters or
Letters to express; that is, the spirit with which they were delivered with
lively voice. You have the Instrument and Stick; I cannot help you to the
Rozin: The Spirit of God make supply thereof, while you read them, and in that
superabundant measure. Take me into your prayers, and let me be in your esteem,
what I desire for ever to be whiles remaining in the flesh; Even

From my house in Long-Ditton April 7. 1645. Yours in the service of your faith
RICHARD BYFIELD.

Errata, Page 5. line 14. read converted for committed. p. 6. l. 24. r. worlds
end for world, and. p. 23. In the Title r. Temple Defilers for Heretics. l. 6.
r. Cavillers for Cavaliers. p. 25. l. 6. r. continue for contemn.

Temple Defilers Destroyed.
1 COR. 3. 17. If any man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy.
THE circumstantials of this Text, may profitably serve for our Exordium, or
entrance; they are three; who speaks, how he speaks, and to whom.

1. Who speaks: Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, therefore it is a Gospel
sen^e^ce: Paul the Doctor of the Gentiles, therefore you Gentiles ought to hear
him: Paul the mouth of Christ, the Penman of the Holy Ghost, and therefore he
that despises this word, despises not man, but Christ, but the Spirit, but
God.

2. How he speaks; First by way of denunciation of judgment: The Gospel has
fire in it; the Preachers threaten destruction; yet the Preachers thereof no
legal Preachers, for our God is a consuming Fire; it is true, life and
immortality are brought to light by the Gospel; and it is no less true, then
Hell fire and Damnation is Language peculiar to the Gospel: never any Preached
in so frequent and plain terms the flames of Hell, and that unquenchable fire,
as did our Lord Jesus, who was sent of God, Anointed with the spirit, that oil
of gladness to preach the Gospel to the poor, to heal and bind up the broken
hearted; that meek Lamb of God, whose office it was to speak a word in season
to the weary soul: How often has he Hell and Hell fire in his mouth in one
Sermon? Mat. 5. 22. 29, 30. Three times in one breath, with amazing
illustrations, Mar. 9. 43. 45. 47. At another time, all his discourse almost
beset (as Paradise with a flaming sword) with as sore, as plain and equivalent
expressions; utter darkness, where shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth;
the Prison out of which there is no coming by any means till they have paid the
utmost farthing; the loss of the soul cutting asunder, and appointing them
their portion with hypocrites; in no case any entry into the Kingdom of heaven;
no reward of their Father which is in Heaven: Will any dare to deny that Jesus
Christ was an Evangelicall Preacher? And it stands with all reason that such
Preaching should be for Gospel times; for the greater and more glorious are the
manifestations of Gods grace, the greater and more glorious are the
manifestations of Gods grace, the greater is the sin, and the heavier the wrath
and condemnation due to the refusers, Heb. 12. 25 29. ^he abusers, the turners
of such grace into lasciviousness and w^ntonnesse: No marvel then if that
Ministry of the New Testament, that is, as a mirror to show us the glory of
grace with open face, do with as great plainness of speech set Hell before us
in open view; Heaven is the more Heaven to them that see what Hell is: It is
not unbeseeming an Apostle, a Teacher of Grace and of the Gospel, to denounce
the judgments of God: Paul here speaks by way of threatening. Secondly, he
speaks by way of Argumentation. 1. Against building up the Church with wood,
hay, and stubble, ver. 12. By which is meant, not Doctrine Heretical,
blasphemous and impious, though that be worse that ruins the foundation; but
vain, curious, unnecessary, doubtful, tending to jangling, strife and
divisions; perhaps true, but unprofitable, like the Genealogies, in the which
the Jews were curious or else erroneous and of ill consequence, though not in
it self impious: Such in a word as suites not with the foundation, such as is
not like gold, silver, and precious stones; these only are fit for this
building, suitable to Christ the foundation; the Apostle reasons against their
bringing such stuff to Gods building, and in this verse, brings his Argument
from the greatness of the sin, and the certain^y of the punishment: Their sin
is the defiling of Gods Temple, their punishment shall be destruction. 2.
Again, his Argument against such ill Church works, lies also against Schism,
Divisions and Factions in the Church, as appears to the diligent and
intelligent Reader by that in the chap. 1. ver. 10. 12. and in this chap. 3.
ver. 3, 4, 5. The Apostle is still about the cure of this one disease, and this
verse we are upon, argues against it, as a Temple-pollu^er, and destructive to
those that are guilty of it.

3. To whom he speaks:

1. To the Church of Corinth, called to be Saints, 1 Cor. 1. 2. Consider it.

1. He speaks not to them without, there were within the Church too many
defilers of Gods Temple.

2. He speaks not to a party in that Church, the house of Cloe, a choice party
separating from the faulty party, making up a new Church, l^st they should be
pollu^ed in holding Church Fellowship with them that were such sinners: The
house of Cloe knew how tostand free from partaking with them in their sins, and
yet retain Gospel Union to seek a Medicine, and not make a rupture: The Apostle
guided by the spirit of Union, love, and a sound mind, breathes forth nothing
to make Rents, but what ever might be to make up breaches: He directs not the
Epistle to the house of Cloe, that stood sound, and untoucht, though they gave
him notice of the evils that infested the Church at Corinth:

But 1. To the whole company of Professors of Christianity in that great City,
to the whole society of Christians there.

2. And that also to such a society as were enriched in gifts and graces so,
that he first breaks out in the mention of them with solemn Thanksgiving to
God, they were enriched in every thing by Christ, in all utterance, in all
knowledge, they came behind in no gift, as in chap. 1. ver. 4. 5. 7. Yet many
of ^hese fell into this sin of Schism; these must take heed how they walk on
in that sin, for they may fall under this destroying judgment of God.

2. To the whole and Universal Church of God, ver. 2. of chap. 1. All in every
place that call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both theirs and ours:
One Lord in common of one visible Church in all the world, which is one body
under that one head, par^icular visible Churches are not so many Independent
Churches, those that so teach, m^ke Jesus Christ monstrous. The Papists make
Christ's Church a Monster, in that they hold that Christ is the head of the
Church (which is most true) and yet withal, that the Pope is the head of the
Church: The Church then is a body that has two heads.

And those make Christ yet more monstrous, that setting up so many Independent
Churches, as there be Christian Congregations in the world, which they call
each, s^verally the mystical Body of Christ, do make Christ a head that has
so many bodies; but there is but one Body; all particular Churches make up one
Church and visible universal society; in which Church, he says not Churches,
God has set Apostles, Prophets, Teachers, Miracles, gifts of healings, helps,
Governments, diversities of Tongues. Therefore many of us also must beware of
that and such like sins of Divisions that defiled the Church at Corinth; for
the Ax of this Sentence in this Text is by the Apostle laid also to every of
our roots.

While therefore these words are handled according to the truth, Look not on
me, as if I spoke of my self: look not off your selves, bless not your selves
under the vain thoughts of Gospel Grace, that you will hear, and only that, or
Gospel-graces and gifts wrought in you, or your freedom from other grosse-sins,
as if this of falling into divisions were no sin; but consider who speaks: How,
and to whom: And the Lord Jesus Christ make all saving to you, though for the
present it should not savor you.

The Substance of the Text has three words to be opened,

1. The Temple of God] He means not hereby the material Temple in Jerusalem
first or second, nor the Tabernacle built in the wilderness: but the latter
end of this verse shows clearly he means Christians, which Temple are ye:
every particular Christian, every of you and ye, the Church of Christians both
then at Corinth, and also every where: not only the Christian that has truth
of grace, and is so inwardly as well as outwardly, but the Christian by outward
calling, for to these he wrote also, not only every particular member but
chiefly the Church, the Society: This word ye referred to all in Corinth,
called to be Saints, and to all in all the world, that call on the name of the
Lord Jesus Christ, does fully evince thus much. They are called Gods Temple,
(continuing the Metaphor of a building) considered severally, and in a
Church-society, with Relation to the typical Temple, to show that the truth of
that type is now remaining.

2. Defile, Destroy] The Greek word is but one; in diverse tenses it signifies
both to Defile and Destroy, to corrupt and violate, the Greek is thus (...) The
translation would render the Original more naturally, if we retained one
English word, either thus: If any man defile the Temple of God, him shall God
defile; or thus, If any man destroy the Temple, him will God destroy: It is an
Elegancy, and not barely so, but pregnant in instruction, for it teaches that
the punishment of such offenders shall be in justice proportioned to their
offense, Defiling for defiling, violence for violence, degree for degree; if
they will be dilapidating, and corrupting Gods house, they shall have enough of
it: God will dilapidate and corrupt them.

3. If any man, him] (...), If any do it, that same man shall feel it, whoever
he be, Teacher or hearer, of high esteem for place in the Church, or for gifts
and graces, this man God will certainly meet withal: this his sin shall find
him out.

Now from hence arise three Doctrines worth; our through perusal and attention.

1. Doct. Every Christian professing the true Faith, much more every true
Professor of that true Faith, is the Temple of God: And every particular
visible Church or Society of these Professors, and the whole Church or
universal society of Christians professing the true faith are the Temple of
God: This from the word Temple, in the sense here used.

2. Doct. Many there are, yea many within the visible Church, that are defilers
and Violaters of this Temple of God.

3. Doct. God will certainly punish every and all the defilers and violaters of
this his Temple, with punishments proportionable to their sin in violating and
defiling the same.

For the first of these,

Note the difference I put between a Professor of the true Faith, and a true
professor of that true Faith: One may profess the truth, and not truly
profess it, he may be a hypocrite in his profession: A Professor is visible,
and profession of the Faith may be discerned by men from profession of
falsehood; but a true Professor, and the truth of his profession is to be
desired and prayed for, but is not so easily discerned; God only that searches
the heart can infallibly judge of this.

Again I use the word Society, as the Genus of a Church, not an Assembly; for a
Church is no less a Church when the Assembly is dismissed, then when they are
Assembled in the use of any Ordinance of God: Nor a Congregation, that word is
too narrow, it agrees not to all the kinds, but the word Society, that agrees
to a particular visible Church, and to the whole visible Church, to the Church
in a house, the Church in a Village of one Congregation; the Church in a City,
consisting of many Congregations, as the Church of Jerusalem, of Ephesus, of
Corinth: the Church in a Kingdom or Nation, committed to the profession of the
Faith of Christ: the Church in the whole world, the Church in her Officers
gathered together to hear complaints; the Church in her Members assembled to
worship and serve the Lord according to the Gospel of Christ. It is weak and a
poor quarrel (my opinion is, it is so) to deny a National Church under the New
Testament (for under the old its beyond all question) and to plead there is no
other visible Church then Congregationall. The Church at Jerusalem was not
Congregationall in that sense; that is, it did not consist of one Congregation
that could meet in one place, all the Members of it have one Pastor preach to
them at one time, and use other Ordinances of Worship, as the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper, Baptism, Public Prayer, and fellowship together; twelve
Apostles were not able to discharge to them the duty that belonged to the word
and Prayer, without the help of seven Deacons to take off them the care of
distributing of the Church-Almes, Act. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4. It is hard to make clear
proof that the word Church in all the History of the New Testament is given to
a Congregation: I desire to see it; And why may not a Nation professing the
Faith, be called a Church, as well as all the world of Professors be called a
Church? Why not now as well as under the Old Testament? The word Church is
applicable to every Society of men that profess the faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ. We read of Churches in the New Testament, because we have several
Societies and Nations of men converted, and become the people of God.

And whereas I hear of some that say, did ye ever hear of Nations converted in
the Scripture; those be strange conversions, the conversions of whole Nations?
I answer, did you ever read the Scripture, and yet pass by those famous
prophesies concerning the Church under the New Testament: All Nations whom thou
have made shall come and worship before thee, O Lord; And shall glorify thy
name, Psa. 86. 9. Again, In the last days, the mountain of the Lords house
shall be established in the top of the mountains, etc. Isa. 2. 2, 3, 4. And all
nations shall fl^w unto it, and many people shall go, and say, Come ye and let
us go up, etc. And he shall judge among the Nations. And again, Zac. 8. 20, 21,
22. There shall come people and the inhabitants of many Cities, and the
inhabitants of one City shall go to another, saying, Let us go speedily to pray
before the Lord, and to seek the Lord of Hosts I will go also; Yea, many
people, and strong Nations shall come to seek the Lord, and pray before him: It
is a strange thing you say, The Lord speaks of it indeed as a strange work: Who
has heard such a thing? Who has seen such things? Shall a Nation be born at
once? Esa 66. 81. Yet Zion does so; To what purpose were that command, Go teach
all Nations, and Baptize; if a Nation might not receive the Gospel and
Baptism? or can any doubt of such an effect of Preaching the Gospel when
Christ has promised to his Ministers preaching to Nations, that He will be
with them to the end of the world: Who can deny whole Nations embracing the
Gospel, that have not lost their senses: the Nation of England at this day, and
the Nation of Scotland profess the truth of Christ, and now in their
representative bodies are all for Reformation, for the power of godliness, for
the rooting out of Popery, Heresy, Schism, Prelacy, Profaneness, and in
this work count not their lives and livelyhoods dear unto them: Moreover since
I am upon this point, let me propose this Argument for a National Church.

He that has all power given to him of God in Heaven and earth, and out of the
fullness of that power, says, Teach all Nations, and Baptize them, and
promises his presence to the World, and to make the Nations obedient to the
Faith, and to receive the Gospel and Baptism, does in so doing set up properly
one Church of all the Nations in the world; that receive the Gospel and
Baptism, and make National Churches of the several Nations that receive the
Gospel and Baptism.

But Jesus Christ has all power given him of God, in Heaven and Earth and out
of the fullness of that power, says, Teach all Nations, and Baptize them; and
promises his presence to the worlds end, to make the Nations obedient, and to
receive the Gospel and Baptism.

Therefore JESUS CHRIST does in so doing, set up one Church of all Nations that
receive the Gospel and Baptism, and make National Churches of the several
Nations that receive the Gospel and Baptism.

I have degressed somewhat, but let it pass: Whether there be a National or
Congregationall Church or no; this is sure, every Society of Christians
professing the true Faith is a Church, and the Temple of God; which now we come
to prove, for that is requisite that both branches of the first Doctrine be
made good by clear Scripture.

The first, that every Christian professing the true Faith, especially the true
Professor, is Gods Temple; read the 16. verse of this Chapter, and chap. 6. 6.
19. Where the Apostle says, Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God? What,
know you not this? Every Christian (profession answers our outward call) is
called to this honor to be Gods Temple; this is the dignity to which ye are
called, Christians, this is your high and holy calling; And the true Christian
is so indeed.

For the second Branch of the Doctrine; That the visible Church is Gods house,
besides this Text, the ninth verse of this Chapter is full; We are laborers
together with God (speaking of Gods M^^isters; and then of the Hearers and
Professors) ye are Gods building: The whole Church, and every particular Church
is Gods Temple, as is most apparent by that in Ephesians. 2. 21, 22. in ver. 21.
Speaking of the whole Church, both of Jews and Gentiles he says, In whom
(that is, in Jesus Ch^^st) all the building fuly framed together, grows unto
an holy Temple in the Lord, in ver. 22. Speaking of the visible Church at
Ephesus, he proceeds and says, In whom (that is, in Christ Jesus) you also are
builded together, for an habitation of God through the Spirit.

To unfold this a little:

The Temple Material had a double use, a Moral, and a Ceremonial; the Moral
Use was this, it was the place of Public Assemblies, the place of Public
Prayer and Preaching of the word; so the Synagogues in several Towns among the
Jews, were the houses of God: The Psalmist complains, They have burnt up all
the Synagogues of God in the land: Psa. 74. 8. Our blessed Savior and the
Apostles taught the word in the Temple and Synagogues: The Gospel was there on
mount Zion to take its beginning: And thus there be, and ought to be in every
s^tled Christian State.

Houses for Public worship, and the^ are the houses of God, they may be
called Churches; the Apostle calls the Public place of Christian Assemblies,
the Church, saying, When you come together in the Church; and again, What, have
ye not Houses to eat and to drink in? Or despise ye the Church of God, and
shame them that have not? The Church is opposed to their private houses, the
use of which was to eat and drink in, but the use of the Church was to worship
God in: What sense can there be in these words, if place be not opposed to
place? The word Synogogu^ (...) signifies an Assembly, Iam. 2. 2. yet the
public places where the Assemblies of the Jews, met for the Word and Prayer,
The holy Ghost calls Synagogues; the Christian Assembly is called (...) a
Church, and the public place of such an Assembly, is by the same spirit, and
rightly by true Christians called a Church.

It is base, and from a spirit of foul-tonguednesse, to call it a
steeple-house; it is a familiar trophe, and most significant to call the thing
containing by the name of the thing contained: And on the contrary, do you not
say significantly, the Pot boiles, when you mean the Broth in the Pot: And you
have not bread to find your house: And we call those public places of
Judicature where public Courts use to be kept, by the names of those Courts,
as the Common Pleas, the Chancery, the Court of Wards; it is no abusive or
improper speech.

That Place is Public, whereunto any one may resort, without leave of any,
and without danger of being a trespasser, and liable to an action of Trespass:
Such is this place we are now in, but such is not this or that man's House,
Parlour or Barn: Christ requires, and loves the public: Wisdom cries
without, in the streets, in the chief place of concourse, in the opening of the
ga^es, Prove. 1. 20. 21. Though the private meetings of Christians, used
Christianly have a promise, yet Gods glory and power was never so seen there,
as in the public, Psa. 63. 2. nor have they such a promise, Mat. 28 20, 21
And public Ordinances are for the public, not for the private; thus of the
Moral use of the Temple: The Ceremonial use, was for Sacrifice, for receiving
all the instruments and furniture of the worldly Sanctuary in all it was, for
signification and for shadow; so the thing signified, the truth remains though
there be no Temple.

God has now four Temples, Heaven; the Heaven of the blessed, Heb. 8. and 9.
Heb. 9. 11. Christ, Ioh. 2. 21. the Christian; the Church. The two last are
meant in this Text.

See, beloved, your calling, your dignity; it is no small moment, to preserve
from all manner of sin; if we knew our dignity, we would not debase our selves;
we would avoid all unworthy acts, all carriage that is below us: this is your
dignity, every Christian is Gods Temple, the true Temple the substance of that
shadowish Temple: The Temple had four things considerable.

1. The Fabric. 2. The Furniture. 3. The Glory. 4. The Ministry that served
there.
1. For the Fabric,
1. There were the doors, or Porch, the gates very glorious: These signified
the hearts of the faithful made glorious by faith to receive Jesus Christ,
Psa. 24. 8, 9. Rev. 3. 20.

2. There was the holy place, and the holy of holies answerably.

1. The bodies of Christians are Gods Temples, his holy place, 1 Cor. 6. 19.

2. The Souls of the humble, and poor in spirit, that tremble at Gods word,
are the holy of holies, or the most holy place, Isa. 66. 1, 2.

2. For the Furniture.
1. The mercy-Seat, or propitiatory is Christ and his blood apprehended by
faith, as the Apostle says, Romans 3. 25. God set forth Jesus Christ to be a
Propitiatory (...) Properly notes the instrument of propitiation, and fitly
agrees to Christ by whom God is appeased and pacified.
through faith in his blood, by faith is Christ brought into, and dwells in our
hearts: Faith in Christ's blood; is that which sets up this Mercy-seat in the
Temple of every particular Christians heart: Christ by Faith in his blood is
the Propitiatory, he that believes in Christ to have Redemption, Remission,
and salvation only through his blood sprinkled and applied to his soul and
conscience by Faith, and therefore draws near, lays hold on Christ, and
applies his death and sacrifice unto himself, he has the Mercy-seat set up in
his soul: otherwise though there be a Christ, though there be blood for
expiation; though both Christ and his blood be proposed of God, yet there is no
Temple nor Mercy-seat set up to thee, or me, because thou have not, or I have
not this Faith in Christ's Blood.

This Propitiatory, Ex. 25. 17. 1 Kin. 8. 9. Heb. 9. 4. or Golden Cover was
put above upon the Ark of the Testimony, which Ark was a Coffer in which was
put the two Tables of stone, in which the Law was written, this Ark was the
Symbol of Gods gracious presence among the people of the Jews, it was made of
Shittim-wood, overlaid within and without of pure gold. Two Cherubims covering
the Mercy-seat with their wings were set on the two ends of the Mercy-sea; from
above this Mercy-seat, from between these Cherubims God gave his Oracles and
Answers, and he was known and prayed unto under this name and notion; O thou
that dwell between the Cherubims; Ps. 80. 1. this signified God in Christ
reconciling the world to himself, not imputing the transgressions and
^respass^s against his holy Law, but accepting their persons and imperfect
obedience to his Commandments presented to him through Christ the Mediator, and
in Christ, beholding them with favor and acceptance, and passing by their
sins, as expiated and covered, in whom also their Prayers are heard, answers
are given to them, their hearts find and feel him teaching and ^uling them; and
the holy Angels attend on the^, guard them* and are their ministers; now in the
believer this presence of God in Christ on a throne of grace is set up in his
heart.

2. The Altar of incense placed before the veil that was by the Ark, before
the Mercy-seat, Ex. 30. 1. 6. 2. This signified Christ's interc^ssion, and the
Golden Censer, and Odours of his meritorious sacrifice, with which he appears
before God, as our high Priest, Rev. 8. 3. this Altar, Censer, Odours, and high
Priest; the Believer through the word of Faith even the Gospel receiving and
embracing, presents himself, and all he does to God therewith, that God may
smell a savor of rest toward him; he offers all to God in Christ's name, in
the hands of this consecrated Priest, and on this Altar that can sanctify his
gift, he puts his prayers into this Golden Censer. The virtue also of Christ's
intercession is in him in the spirit of Prayer.

3. The Altar of burnt-offering, signified Christ bearing our sins, and making
reconciliation, in whose sacrifice of himself a whole burnt-offering, is found
full satisfaction, a perfect ransom and price, and plentuous and eternal
Redemption. This Altar, Heb. 13 10. and 10 5. 8, 9, 10. is set up in the
Christian, who by Faith, presents before God this Lamb and his Redemption for
his Justification, and while he apprehends this Redemption in his soul, offers,
through Christ himself, a whole bhrut offering to God and all other his
spiritual sacrifices.

4. The Table of show bread, on which were set new every Sabbath weekly twelve
Cakes with pure incense, representing the twelve Tribes of I^ra^l which stood
on the Table continually before the Mercy-seat in the presence of God, which as
it signifies the gracious favor and the eyes of God in Christ over the
righteous, so also how the Christian lives continu^lly, as in the presence of
God, reconciled, and reconciling him to him through Christ: his heart says
with David, Thy loving kindness is before mine eyes, Psa. 26. 3. and I have
walked in thy truth. And this constant presence as before God reconciled only
through the blood of his Son, raises the incense and sweet odours of holy
motions presented also before God in Christ continually, and look as God
feeds him with Christ the bread of life, and furnishes a Table before ^^m,
so the Believer keeps a furn^shed Table, Cart. 1. 12. and 7. 12 and 8. 2. of
the fruits of the Spirit in which God in Christ is delighted, this Table stood
on the North-side in the Tabernacle.

5. The Candlest^ck of pure Gold, with seven Lamps burning was on the
South Side right against the Table of Show bread. This is the Word of God,
written in the heart of the true Christian, burning and shining in saving
knowledge, with the seven lamps of his spirit, even manifold gifts and graces:
in the light of this Word ingrafted, by which the Holy Ghost dwells in them,
they serve God in Christ with their spirits in the Gospel.

6. The Br^zen Laver to w^sh in, is the very fountain of godly sorrow, and of
renewing grace, Esa, 1. 16. Psalm. 26. 6. Act. 26. 18. the spirit of
sanctification, which is opened in the heart of a believer; it is the
sanctification in them by faith which is in Jesus Christ, whereby their souls
are sprinkl^d from an evil conscience, and their bodies washed with clean
water, that so they may draw near with a true heart in full assurance of
faith, Heb. 10. 20.

This is the furniture of Gods house.

3. For the Glory.
The Glory that fills this house of God, is God in the presence of his Grace,
as the Apostle says, Ye are the Temple of the living God, as God has said, I
will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall
be my people, 2 Cor. 6. 16.

4. For the Ministers.
The Ministers that serve in this house, they are believers, they are both the
Temple and the Priests, as the Apostle Peter says, coming unto Christ, Ye are
built up a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual
sacrifice, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 4, 5.

In these four respects is the believer the Temple of God, and every one that
is called, though but outwardly, is called, that he might be a partaker of this
heavenly honor, of which honor, unbelief and impenitency do deprive him.
Who can sufficiently express the Dignity of the true believer, who can
sufficiently bewail the state of the Christian that is so only in profession,
who while he seems to give himself to God in words, keeps his heart a stye
for Satan, keeps open house for the Devil.

Thus we see how every Christian is Gods Temple.

The Church is also Gods Temple, even the Church visible. It is true, that as
the Temple and Tabernacle had three parts, the outer Court for the people, the
Holy Place where the Priests did their Office, and the Holy of Holies into
which the High Priest only entered; so they did type out the visible Church as
the outer Court, where are good and bad; the Holy Place, the true Saints and
Believers, and Heaven the Holy of Holies. But here the visible Church, in the
whole and in every particular visible Church is called the Temple of God.

1. For the general qualities, or adjuncts.
1. Unity; There was but one Temple, so the Church is one, Cant. 6. 9. There is
but one body, 1 Cor. 12. 12. though there be diversities of gifts, of
operations, and of administrations, though there be diverse members: this
diversity makes for Unity, for if they were all one member where were the body,
1 Cor. 12. 19. unto every one is given some measure of Grace from Christ the
Head, which being improved in our fit and proper place in the body, according
to the effectual working in the measure of every part makes increase of the
body, unto the edifying of it self in love, Ephesians. 4. 4. 7. 16. Diversity of
gifts makes for growth, as well as for unity, if love with lowliness and
meekness do act and carry us.

2. Sanctity, The Temple of God is holy, so the Church are a society or
community separated from the world; they are without, we have nothing to do to
judge them; that is, to proceed with them that are the fornicators of this
world, or the covetous, or the like with Church Censures: These are within,
these that are called Brethren, and are yet fornicators, or covetous, or
Idolater^, or drunkards, or such like: these that are fornicators of the
Church, these we judge. If we do neglect this Discipline, the Apostle does not
say, separate you that are Saints indeed, set up a new Church, but blames us,
saying, Do not ye judge them that are within? 1 Cor. 5. 12. and injoynes
reformation, not a separation for such a fault, saying, Therefore put away from
among your selves that wicked Person. It is a lamentable thing to read in the
Church of Corinth, the Temple of God which is holy, this mixture, brother
Fornicator, brother Drunkard, brother Idolater, etc. yet so it was Aug. Tom. 7.
cont. Ep. Parmen. l. 2. c. 1. Quisquis vel quod potest arguendo corrigit, vel
quod corrigere non potest, salvo pacis vinculo exclu^it, vel quod salvo pacis
vinculo excludere non potest, aequitate improbat, firmitate supportat, hic est
pacificus, and ab isto maledicto immunis quod Scriptura dicit, vae his qui
dicunt, quod nequam, est bonum, and quod bonum, est ncquam.
, so it has been in the Primitive purest times; if it be so now, be not so
offended, as to run out of your little wit, while you are running from
pollution; run not from Gods Temple, while you flee the touching of the unclean
thing; rather let your holiness be accompanied with love, your love with
severity, your severity with tolerance and longanimity, your long-suffering
with zeal, your zeal with compassion, and all with meekness of wisdom.

2. For the Structure.
1. The Temple was built on mount Zion, which was first a strong hold of the
Jebusites, but conquered and taken by David, was called the city of David, and
because a mountain, therefore strong and steady. So Christ has no Church but
what he gets by spiritual conquest, they were before calling a Fort of
Jebusites, but our David subduing the strong holds of Satan, brings them to
God, the Rock of Ages, Is. 26. 4. Jer. 17. 5. 7. the only Jehovah, and on him,
that is, on him, as he has named and revealed himself in his holy word, are
they built.

2. The Temple had goodly foundations, so the Church is built on Christ the
Foundation-stone, elect and precious, tried and sure, on whom, whosoever
believes, shall never be confounded. It is built on the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, (Apostles are the highest Office and Calling that ever
was in the Church, and therefore named first) not upon their Persons, but upon
their Doctrine, called the foundation, because it lays Christ the Foundation,
and lays him out, and sets him in his proper place, to the full, in two sorts
of fundamental truths, the Law and Gospel; or as it is in Revel. 14. 12. The
Commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus: The Church is the Communion of
Saints, that keeps these two: This is the Zion of God, opposed to
Antichristian Babylon: There is not a clearer Text in all the Bible, nor more
lively distinguishing, it concerns our days; well is this Book of Prophesies
called the Revelation, not only because it opens and reveals the Prophesies of
things to come, all Prophesies; but also because it carries such beams and
rays of lightsome doctrinall truth, wherewith it is bespangled, and shines in
several parts of it, to enlighten the times which the Prophesies concern.

3. The walls of the Temple were conjoined by corner-stones: Christ Jesus is
the chief corner stone, that holds both parts of this spiritual building, both
Jews and Gentiles that are called, fast together, so that they do concorporate,
Ephesians. 3. 6.

4. The several stones in this Temple, or curtains, with tapes, and loops, and
tenons, posts and sockets, are the several members variously gifted, and yet
united in the unity of profession, and of the spirit, and of faith, and of
Baptism, and in the bond of Peace.

5. The outer and inner coverings are the double condition of the Church, the
inward, Psalm. 45. 14. comely and glo^ious; the outward, black, and tanned with
afflictions and persecutions, Cant. ^. 5.

6. The Temple had pillars and walls; and the visible Church, in respect of the
Ministry of it, is the pillar and ground of truth, 1 Timothy 3. 17 Gal 2. 9. Col.
2. 19. The Officers and Members in the Church, are the sustainers of the
fabric and the body.

3. But for the Furniture chiefly is the Church of God, his holy Temple. For.
1. There being retained, held, and held forth, the Doctrine of Reconciliation
by Christ alone, that one Mediator, that God is only to be found gracious to
a sinner in Christ, fully satisfied in his blood, which is belonging to no
sinner, but to him that believes; here is the true Mercy-seat, God in Christ:
We need not say, O thou that dwell between the Cherubims! but know, and pray
to God, as the God and Father of our Lord Jesus: Here being taught, that Christ
is true God and true Man in one Person; here is the Ark over laid with gold,
the true flesh of Christ, under which his Godhead was covered, is the Vail
between the Holy-place, and the Holy of Holies.

2. The Doctrine of Christ's sacrifice on the Cross, and of his intercession in
heaven, is both the Altars, the Altar of whole burnt-offering, and the Altar of
incense.

3. The Tables of the Covenant in the Ark, the Manna, and Aarons rod by it,
this is in the Church that sets up Christ, the Bread of Life, the only Prophet
that teaches to profit, and the high Priest over the house of God, whom we
ought to obey.

4. The Candlestick, is the light of the Word, the Law and Gospel, that all in
Gods house may walk in the light of the Lord, and see to do his work.

5. The Laver is the Doctrine of Regeneration and Justification by Christ's
blood and spirit.

6. The Golden Instruments and vessels for Incense-offering, and sprinkling
with the rest, are the gifted Ministers, gifted with pastoral and teaching
aptness and abilities, and sanctified for the applying of Christ and his
benefits by their Ministry, which gifts Christ gives; but the Church upon due
trial acknowledges, owneth, receives, confirms with her testimony, and
honors.

4. For the glory inhabiting there.
4. God in Christ is there, giving the blessing and life: The name of that City
is Iehovah-Shammah, Ezekiel. 48. 35. or, The Lord is there.

5. For the cover on it all.
5. There is over every such assembly, and over the whole Zion of God, Isa. 4.
5, 6. a special Protection, a special Direction, and a special safety to
them that shroud there from the heat, and from the storm: This is the defense
upon all the glory.

Now from this branch of the Doctrine, and from this true and plain explication
of the same, we may describe, or direct to the infallible note of the true
Church on earth, and of a true particular visible Church.

1. Where ever Jesus Christ is held for the foundation and cornerstone, and
the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles touching the faith of Jesus, and the
Commandments of God that concern holiness and righteousness, there is the
true Church, Ephesians. 2. 19, 20. What ever Society of men, associating in a
religious way, do hold Christ and the Prophets and the Apostles Doctrine for
faith and holiness, that Society is a particular visible Church, Ephesians. 2. 22.

2. In what ever particular Society, religious, there is to be found all the
furniture of the Temple (all the glory, the Mercy-seat, the two Altars, the
Table of Shewbread, the Candlestick, the Laver) that is a true particular
visible Church. It is the Temple of God, therefore the Church of God. Who can
deny that that is Zion, where it can be truly said, the Tabernacle of God is
with these men.

Behold, he dwells with you, you of Kingstone, for of you it may truly be
said, Behold the Tabernacle of God is with men.

And to remove all things that may mislead your judgments, let us look upon
that Prophecy in Rev. 11. 1. and forwards to v. 14. It concerns the state of
the Church during the reign of Antichrist, in which Prophecy, so far as
pertains to our present purpose two things are beyond all doubt, and the more
to be heeded. First, that the outer Court, and the Holy City, that is, the
Church visible is given to the Gentiles, even the Antichristian, or Popish
Gentiles, and they shall tread it under foot forty and two months, which is,
one thousand two hundred and sixty days Prophetical, that is, so many years;
this is the time of Antichrists reign. Secondly, that this is the time and
space in which the two witnesses, that is, the small but sufficient number for
testimony to confirm any truth; I say the small number of Christ's faithful
Ministers (for these two witnesses are expressly called two Prophets,) v. 10.
and their work is expressly and precisely named to be Prophesying, v. 3. Now
the Magistrate and his work, by the sword and Edicts is never in all the Bible
called by these names, the Scripture appropriates this manner of witnessing to
the Gospel, and against errors, to the Ministers and their work alone, which
is Preaching of the Gospel, Mark 16. 15. 1 Cor. 1 17. if this be not the work
of their Office, they have no work; Christ sends them to Preach, and in
comparison of this, not to Baptize) this small number is to Prophecy in
sackcloth.

Now this time being not expired, for Antichrist is not yet destroyed, the
seven V^^ls are but in pouring out, the state of the visible Church is this, to
be inf^sted and polluted dive^sly with many Gentiles, as we see by woeful
experienc^; there is no Protestant Church in the christian world but is
miserably trodden upon at this day by Papists, their bloody rage, their
errors, and superstitious inventions, the errors of other Heretics and
Schismatics; all which are appertaining unto, and are of the frye of
Antichrist, as the Apostle John said of the errors of his time; there are many
Antichrists already: to^tered, and torn, and soyled will be the face of the
visible Church until Antichrist be down. Again, the number of faithful
Ministers will not be very great, nor their estate any other then a state of
mourning; they shall yet Prophecy in sackcloth, even so long till the one
thousand two hundred and sixty days or years be accomplished; they that say
otherwise shift as they can, they will feel this to be a truth, for the time
of this burden is not yet expired. Is Antichrists reign expired when Papists
so swarm, so prevail with many Kings that are Protestant, that they waste
Germany, Ireland, Scotland, England, besides other parts, and yet the Pope sits
in Rome?

I shall add here but that of learned and godly Chemnitius in his Common
Places. Chemnit. Loc. Theol. De Eccles. loco. cap. 3. Sect. 3. Miser caetus, in
qu^ multae sunt infirmitates, quoque non tantum persecutionibus and cruce
premitu, sed etiam offendiculis and scandalis deformatur.
That the Church may be a miserable Society, or company, in which there are
many infirmities, and which is not only pressed with Persecutions and the
Cross, but also is deformed with stumbling blocks and scandals; of which we
ought not to judge by the outward show, but by and according to the Word. The
Church Visible is the company of those that embrace Christ's Gospel, and
rightly use his Sacraments, in which company God by the Ministry of the Word
works powerfully, and regenerates many to life eternal, in which society
notwithstanding, there are many, Et Sect. 5. 2 Timothy 2. 20. In Ecclesiae caetu
multi sunt non sancti.
Non-sancti, not holy, but yet consenting with the godly in the point of true
Doctrine. Thus of the first Doctrine.

The ^econd Doctrine is this, That there are many, yea many within the visible
Church, that are defilers and violaters of this Temple of God. If it had not
been so, in vain had been the Apostles reasoning; if it would not be so, in
vain were this sentence written and left registered in the Canon of the New
Testament. The Apostle did not deal this blow in the air, and fight with
shadows; and that we may not so do, and only beat the air and lose our
labor, let us inquire who are they that stand guilty of this sin; the thing is
filthy and odious, and no man will willingly own it though he will not be
taken off but will willingly do it. To come then to charge the guilt of this
great si^ upon the particular offenders.

1. All scandalous Christians. I begin with you, for though you are not the
first intended by the Apostle in this Text, yet you deservedly go in the
front, you make and cause others to defile and wrong the Church by Schisms.
The offense you give makes them forsake the fellowship of the Church of God, to
which you do belong, you are many ways guilty of this Temple-pollution, for
the present you may be ranked into three sorts.

1. Fornicators, Adulterers, ^ffeminate and unclean persons, these defile
their own bodies, 1 Cor. 6. 15, 18, 19. they take the member of Christ and
make it the member of an Harlot; these defile the Church of God: this is a
Leaven, a little of which leaveneth the whole lump, 1 Cor. 5. 6. it is a
leaven to be purged ou^ by Church Censures.

2. The Covetous, Raylers, Ex^ortioners, Drunkards, Thieves, Swearers, that
fear not an O^^h, the profane, unholy, malicious, and all unrighteous
persons, these make Gods house a d^nne of Thieves; they that live in these and
the like sins against the holy Law of God, and yet come before him as his
people, and cry, The Temple of the Lord, and rest in the name and privileges
of Christ^ans, these live as if they were delivered to do those abominations,
I^r. 7. 4 8. they are abominable polluters of Gods Temple.

3. The Ph^ri^^^c^ll Hypocrites, that pretend the glory of God, and good of the
Church, but under that color drive a trade, Ioh. 2. 14, 15. of the Publiq^e,
and of godliness make a m^rchandize for their own filthy lucre. Such a^e those
pretenders to Reformation now among us, that make up their private estates out
of the Public, being carried with self-seeking; they dread not the ex^mples
of Counselors, Nobles, Judges, Prelates, Gentry, that now before their eyes
lie under Gods avenging hand; their carcases, for they are cast out, and naught
of them remains but their dead contemned bulkes, and on them their Worm
feeds and dies not, and the fire is not quenched; these their miserable
carcases they may go out and see, and look upon the contempt that God has
and does pour upon them, for the abusing of their power to their own lusts,
and for making a prey of the Public, and yet they greedily follow the way of
such Balaamites. All that are entrusted and employed for the public in this
great service of seeking Reformation, set them fear, lest, if found in the
like sin, they should fall into greater condemnation. The Lord is a jealous
God.

2. All that make Schisms and divisions in the Church, (the context shows
this; these are properly and directly intended here by the Holy Ghost. In the
Church of Corinth many stood guilty of this sin, their factious studies rented
them into Sects. 1. By contentious siding, falling into parties according to
their Teachers whom they affected, 1 Cor. 1. 12. 2. By affectation of humane
wisdom, and foolish admiration thereof in the Preaching of the Gospel, Chapter
17. and 2. 1. 4. 3. By building Heterogeneall stuff, of a diverse kind, and
unsuitable, as wood, hay, and stubble, upon the foundation, Chapter 3. 12. 4. By
undervaluing their faithful Teachers, Chapter 4. 1. and neglecting their
spiritual Father that had begotten them in Christ Jesus, through the Gospel,
ver. 15. of Chap. 4. had you, says the Apostle, ten thousand instructers, yet
I am your Father, you have not many fathers; this unnaturalness in matters of
Grace is found in some of this place; that Minister that begot you, you cast
off, he continuing in his integrity; and you heap to you instructers, yet I
think not so many as yet that we should reckon them by the thousands. 5. By
over-valuing themselves, Chapter 4. 8. 10. in their own conceit, they were full,
rich, and reigned as Kings without their faithful Teachers; they were wise,
strong, and honorable: now they were in the right, now their joys and light
abounded, but without us, says the Apostle; I would, says he, ye did reign,
this their happy estate was but in their conceit.

These things made them be puffed up one against another, 1 Corinthians, 4. 6.

Of this sin are they also guilty that fall under that admonition, in Romans 16.
17. that make divisions and offenses contrary to the Doctrine of the Apostles;
the Greek Preposition signifies both contrary and besides, (...) Significat,
praeter and contra; the peace of the Church, and the purity of Doctrine is
sinfully violated by those that divide, and lay stumbling blocks in the ways
of Christians, by contending for any thing that is against or besides
Scripture-truth. The Scripture is the Rule by which we discern of Division and
offence-makers.

Schism is a sin that sticks fast: the Apostle spends in one Letter four
Chapters upon it, for this discourse begun in the first, is continued to the
fifth Chapter. The greatness of this sin the Apostle shows many ways.

1. Schisms divide Christ; so this sin is parricide. Is Christ divided?

2. Schism gives Christ's honor to another, so it is Sacrilege. Was Paul
crucified for you?

3. It breaks our faith in Baptism, so it is perfidiousnesse. Were ye
Baptized in the name of Paul? Chap. 1. v. 13.

4. It is a glorying in men, Chap. 3. 21. and to glory in men, that first
proves men c^^nall, for it fills men with envying, and strife, and divisions,
and tha^ is to walk as men, not as christians, Chapter 3. v. 3, 4. Ob. Some of them
were ready to say, Why spend you your time about this matter, why come you not
to us with meat? we are strong, we are spiritual, teach us some deep
Mysteries, and hig^er Doctrines. Sol. The Apostle prevents this and lays it
upon themselves; their Rudity, their rawnesse required his plainness* they kept
him to be laying of the Principles: his faithfulness and Pastoral discretion
and wisdom kept him fast to this way of dispensing the Truth to them. Were
they spiritual that thus strove and stood divided? They were carnal, they
were babes: the spoone was fitter for them then the knife, they were not fit to
be their own carvers, v. 1, 2, 3. Secondly, this glorying in men makes as if
the Ministers were Lords of our Faith, whereas they are but Ministers, v. 5.
Thirdly, it makes as if our profiting did depend on the Ministers, whereas they
are only planters and waterers: it is Gods giving the increase that does the
deed, v. 6, 7. Fourthly, all Ministers are but one, though some are gifted
above others, some labor more than others, they are all but Servants in one
Work, employed in Tilling Gods Field, in building Gods House, v. 8 9.

5. Schisms are of our own spirit; the Spirit of God is not factious Chapter 3.
v. 16.

6. They wrong Gods Temple, as in the text in hand, dividing it when it is but
one, profaning it when it is holy.

7. Schism is the bad effect of two evil causes: 1. Self-confidence,
Anthadie, and boasting, as the Apostles words show: Let no man deceive
himself, if any man think he is wise, Acts 8, 9. 2. Vain admiration upon
vain wisdom, ver. 18. every one with Simon Magus would feign be (...) some
great one.

8. It is derogatory both to the Christians honor, and to Gods order, v. 21.
All is the Christians, he is Christ's, and Christ is Gods.

Thus Paul here sets out the greatness of the sin of Schism and Divisions, to
which I shall add but that one word of the same Paul, in Gal. 5. 19, 20. that
it is a manifest work of the flesh; the works of the flesh are manifest,
which are divisions. Their ways of deceit in sowing divisions are excellently
deciphered in Romans 16. v. 18. they are not easily discerned, for they paint
with two colors; 1. They glory they are the Servants of our Lord Jesus Christ.
2. They use good words, and fair speeches, their tongues mere sugar;
blessing, Grace, goodness in their lips with such soberness, gentleness,
meekness, lowliness, insinuations of fair speech, as one would not think
but God and goodness were confined to that sort of people; these catch the
simple, but indeed they serve their own bellies; they have the teeth of Lions,
with those Locusts, Rev. 9. 8. though they have the hair of women.

Now this schismatic spirit is in all things most dangerous, because it
agrees every way, and takes wonderfully with corrupt nature, which is full of
self-love, pride, and dotage.

3. All Heretics; these ruin the foundation, those before mentioned make
rents in the walls and fabric of the Church. Heresy is worse than Schism;
that of our Apostle imports so much, where he says, 1 Cor, 11. 18, 19. I hear
that there be divisions among you, and I partly believe it, for there must be
also Heresies among you. Also shows that Heresy is a greater evil than
Schism, when he says, there must be also or even Heresies, he speaks of
somewhat more than that was signified by the word Schisms. Heresy is an
election or choosing to ones self an opinion, not only contrary to the Doctrine
delivered in Scripture, but also contrary to that Doctrine which is of the
substance of faith and holiness. Heresy is a perverse Doctrine, Schism in
the deed of a perverse separation; he that denies or teaches contrary to any
Article of Faith, and yet will hold communion with a Church professing the true
faith, he is guilty of Heresy, but not of Schism: he that believes all the
Articles of Faith, and holds a pure confession, and yet will not communicate
with a true Church in holy duties, he is guilty of Schism though not of
Heresy, in the Epistle to the Galathians, Gal. 5. 20. (...), these are two
distinct works of the flesh, Divisions, and Heresies.

The foundation-truthes on which Zion Rev. 14. 12. is laid, are the
Commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus. Babylon the great, the Mother of
Harlots, who is to be destroyed, opposes the Keepers of these, labors to
demolish these. Papisme or Popery, it is not any one lone Heresy, but a body
of many Heresies, the sink of Heresies, A Mystery of iniquity; Heresies
therefore in a Mystery, a cunning serpentine invasion of Christ, and his Faith,
and Worship, under the name and title of the Church of Christ, his Faith, his
Spirit, his Honor, his Worship; therefore for this man of sin, I shall set
him by himself next after these Temple-violaters, these Heretics, not as not
guilty of Heresy, but as guilty in a higher degree. And here let me mention
only those that we are most in danger of and troubled with at the present:
these Heretics, polluters of the Temple of God are.

1. The Antinomians: they overthrow the Law Moral, they hold that Christ came
to abolish it, that a believer has nothing to do with keeping the
Commandments, that the Gospel takes away all obedience to the Commandments;
they are against all urging of doing of duty of Humiliations, of Repentance for
sins after Justification, of praying for pardon of sin by a bele^ver, they hold
that the Law ought not to be Prea^hed to believers, with a great deal more of
the like pernicious Leaven: all which savoureth of ignorance, pride, and
conceitednesse, and of affectation of licentiousness, and lawless liberty:
the spirit of Libertinisme inspireth these men.

2. The Anti-Sabbatarians: They evert the fourth Commandment; teaching that it
is Ceremonial, and so taking away all conscience of sin against the
Commandment of God, (though no day be kept a Sabbath in the week) and thereby
all preaching, and attendance on duties of Gods Wo^ship, public and priva^e on
^he Lords day, in conscience to Gods Commandment laid aside, they at one blow
lay flat all that would uphold the power of godliness.

3. The Germane Anabaptists, that hold that a Christian ought not to be a
Magistrate, that Christians may not take the sword, nor wage war; these evert
the fifth Commandment; I call them the Germane Anabaptists, for there diverse
Sects of them, are, and have been for this hundred of ye^rs past; through Gods
just judgment, their errors, some of them, begin to spread in England; these
ghosts can pass the Seas, and swim through the billows and waves of mighty
waters; they are in their first spawning to be looked unto; for who knows unto
what destructive Principles and Practices such giddy self-willed spirits may
run? Bellarmine slanderously calls them Proles Lutheranismi, the offspring of
Lutheranisme; ^hey are, inde^d, the off spring of hell, for hell it self is
moved, when God rents the heavens, and comes down to the great work of the
Reformation of his Church. Satan that sent these Furies out to defame the work
of Reformation, which God began by Luthers glorious Ministry, he is Satan
still and sends these ^uries among us for the very same end.

For the present, I will name no more that are against the Commandments of God.
Against the faith of Jesus I shall only mention two:

1. The A^minians, that teach universal grace, and the falling away of the
Saints, and deny that the efficacious working of internal grace from Gods
Spirit is necessary to conversion, and to the begetting of faith in a sinner:
They teach that the grace of conversion is resistible, that we cannot have
assurance, and the like.

2. The Socinians, which, among other damnable errors, run into these two:
First, they deny the Deity of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the great God, our
Savior, God blessed for ever. Secondly, they deny that Christ's death was for
satisfaction, Isa. 53. 5, 6. Gal. 3. 13. 1 Pet. 2. 24. or for merit, 1 Pet. 1.
18. 19. Act. 20. 28. and that it was a price, 1 Cor. 6. 20. 1 Timothy 2 6. of our
redemption, but only has in it the nature of an example how we should suffer,
that Christ is our Redeemer, not by being a ransom, or paying a price, or as
our Surety Heb. 7. 22. making satisfaction, but only by leaving us an example,
that we should follow his steps: The foregoing Texts of Scripture are expressly
against this most hellish heresy.

These, and the like to these, are Dogs, Wolves in Sheeps skins, evil workers,
the Concision, as those that urged Circumcision are called, Phil. 3. 2. they
are to be named with such names of disgrace, as tell truly what they are, that
all may beware of them: they cut themselves, and others that hearken to them,
off from Christ, and from his Church: in Jucunda prosonomasia conjunxit inter
se (...), conciditur e nim qu^d discerpitur, and plane distrahitur:
circu^ciditur, quod, supervacaneis resectis, purgatur, Bullinger. in locum.
this respect all the heretical teachers are the Concision, they are
evill-workers, for they should build up the Church of God, but they pull it
down and destroy it: like dogs they bark at the truth, they grin at Orthodox
Ministers, and fasten on the simple the fangs of their poisoned doctrine:
There Is the Wolf; beware, and thrice beware.

4. Antichrist, and the Spirit of Popery, which has turned Zion into a
Babylon; I mean Rome-Christian, into Rome-Antichristian, and it is now a cage
of unclean and hateful birds, a den of beasts, a stie of foul spirits. This
Spirit of Antichrist discovers it self in four things:

1. In Self-exaltation, and Domination over the Church, that the Pope might sit
in the Temple of God, as God, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. 5.

2. In Apostasy from the faith, that the man of sin might be the head of the
Church: thus he becomes the head of that Apostasy, and of the Popish
Apostaticall Synagogue, far from the Apostolical Church of which Christ is
head.

3. In spiritual fornication and adultery, which is Idolatry, Superstition and
Will Worship: thus the Popish Synagogue is the Whore of Babylon.

4. In lies taught in Hypocrisy, and doctrines of Devils, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3.

5. They defile and destroy Gods Temple, that by pernicious errors destroy,
and ever either of the two great ordinances of God, the Magistracy and the
Ministry; the Authors, the fautors, cherishers, or nurses, ^he receivers,
abettors, or applauders of such errors: these strike the very Pillars of the
Temple.

1. For Magistracy, those that erroneously teach that Magistrates have nothing
to do in the first but only in the second Table of the Law, that they are to
preserve the Peace, and judge about meum and tuum, mine and thine, but for
Religion, and Gods Worship, and Doctrine, they have not to do with their power
in those. But God says, I will give Kings to be thy nursing fathers, Esa 49.
23. as speaking of the Church under the New Testament. David says, Psalm. 122.
9. because of the house of the Lord, I will seek to do thee good. And again,
Psa. 101. 8. I will betimes cut off evil doers from the City of God.
Restoration of the true Worship and Religion, and the demolishing and
extirpation of the false, were the chief praises of godly Princes, Asa,
Iehosaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah, and of Nehemiah the renowned reformer, Neh. 13.





2. Do you ^old the New Testament to be in force? you must then receive the
Old. The New Testament is not to be received but as it agrees with the Old.
Christ bids, Search the Scripture, Ioh. 5. 39. 46. meaning the Old Testament,
which then was only written; he says, Had ye believed Moses, ye would have
believed me. He that refuses the Old Testament, where his lust serves him,
will do as much for the New. The Evangelists writing of Christ that we might
believe on him, runs thus; this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was
written. The Apostles in their Epistles confirm all they say in matters of
faith, and holy life out of the Old Testament: as to instance in two or three
places for all, the great point of faith, in 1 Pet. 2. 4, 5, 6, 7. the great
point of holiness of life, in 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. the great duty of obedience to
Parents, in Ephesians. 6. 1, 2, 3. read the Texts. The Scripture of the Old
Testament will furnish a Minister of the New Testament, the man of God, and
make him absolute, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17. It is for every Christian a more sure
word, 2 Pet. 1. 19. 21. than voices from Heaven; it is a light that shines in
the dark, until Christ the Daystarre dawn in the heart of him that takes heed
to it.

3. But let us come to the New Testament, Romans 13. 4. 3. Magistracy is the
Ordinance of God, set up for the punishment of evill-doers, when Blasphemy, and
Idolatry, false worship, Heresy, Profaneness, and cursed Oaths are not
evill-doing, then let the Magistrate have nothing to do with the first Table:
it is Gods Ordinance for the praise of them that do well; when the seeking of
the Lord Jehovah, the use of Christ's holy Institutions, the profession of his
holy Name and Faith, the sanctification of his Holy Day' and in a word, when
Piety cease to be well-doing, then let the power of Magistracy cease about
matters of the first Table: the Magistrate is the Minister of God for thy good;
O Christian, as thou art a Christian, he is to thee for good.

1 Timothy 2. 2. 5, 6. Out of this Text note to stop the mouths of all Cavaliers.
1. The end of Magistracy is not only that thou may, who art a Christian, lead
a peaceable and quiet life, but the end of that end, that thou may lead it in
all godliness and honesty.

2. For the better attaining to this end, thou art bound to pray all manner of
Prayer for Kings, and all in Authority; this duty he cannot do that holds this
error.

3. The reasons on which this rule and exhortation is grounded, do reach out
all their strength to this, that the Magistrate may (being converted to the
Truth) not only look to that part of his duty to be the father of the Country,
and Commonwealth, but the Nu^sing-father to the Church; not only to see the
Peace be kept, but to see that Piety flourish, all Godliness: the Reasons are
these.

1. God will have all men, i. e. all sorts of men to be saved, and come to the
knowledge of the truth. Pray for them, that coming to the knowledge of the
truth they may the better use the Sword, to maintain the truth, and restrain
and debellate falsehood.

2. This is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, that your
prayers should be the means to bring in Kings, and Parliaments, States, and
all in Authority, to uphold Godliness out of an heart truly enlightened, and
inflamed with the love of Godliness: you please not Christ if you pray not for
them out of such a principle, and to such an end.

3. There is but one God, both of Kings and Magistrates that are yet without,
and abuse their power against all true godliness: and of you; why should ye
doubt but that he will hear your Prayers, and at your Prayers give you
Magistrates, that shall make it their honor to use their power for God, to
attain his main end, that is, your Godly life, as well as your peaceable and
honest life, as they received it from God; who has ordained Magistracy for the
attaining of that main end?

4. There is but one Mediator between God and men, who gave himself a ransom
for all, that testimony in proper seasons. Christ mediates for Magistrates, is
a ransom for Magistrates, is that testimony which is as well testified to
Magistrates as any other; and if any say we have prayed long and prevailed
little, you must know there are proper seasons, full seasons for this testimony
to be dispensed, and to make that dispensation effectual, therefore pray, pray
all manner of Prayers for their thorough conversion, that they may glory more
to see their Dominions all Godly, under that one God, through that one
Mediator, by that one Gospel that witnesses of this Grace, by one Faith, one
common Faith, in that only ransom of Christ, in one way of his true Worship;
then to see their Dominions rich, and peaceable. Why under this one God, and
this one Christ feeding among you, may you not raise up to you seven
Shepherds, and eight Princes of men? say all, yea, by Prayer of faith we shall
do it.

2. For the Ministry, they destroy and profane Gods Temple, by their errors
diversely;

1. Everting the Lords own Canons for the Examination and Ordination of
Ministers, or Bishops by the Presbytery. The Epistles to Timothy and Titus were
written to order Gods house; 1. Tim. 3. 15. there are drawn by the Holy Ghost
the Church -Canons, the Constitutions of the Church of the New Testament,
Christ's Directory, by the hands and Ministry of that elect Vessel, Paul the
Apostle. In these Canons the Presbytery, that is, the society of
Teaching-Elders, or Bishops (Paul knew no other Bishops) the Assembly of the
Elders (so the word is used in Act. 22. 5. where our last Translation reads it,
the estate of the Elders) the Elder-ship, 1 Timothy 4. 24. and 5. 22. and. 3. 2.
9, 10. Tit. 1. 5. 9. 2 Timothy 2. 2. has the charge of Examination of those that
are to be made Ministers, and the power of Ordination by imposition of hands;
they that are to be made Ministers must be apt to teach, 1 Timothy 3. 2. and they
must be ordained by laying on of hands, Tit. 1. 5. 1 Timothy 5. 22. their aptness
to teach must be tried and examined, 1 Timothy 3. 10. having spoken of Bishops
before, and now speaking of Deacons, and that concerning their holding the
Mystery of Faith, he says, and let these also first be proved, also, that is,
as well as those that desire the office of a Bishop: they must first be
Examined touching their aptness and ability to Teach; so must the Deacons also
about their holding of the Mystery of Faith in a pure conscience. Now this
Charge of Examination lies upon the faithful men, the Presbyters that are able
to teach others, 2 Timothy 2. 2. and the power of laying on of hands, or of
ordination is in the Presbytery. We find this order of men, but we find no
other in these Epistles that have any charge over the House of God, the Church
of the living God: Now those overthrow these Canons, and defile the House of
God, that take Ordination away, that take it out of the hands of the
Presbytery, and put it into the hands of the People, or any other, that take
away this Presbytery, that set up Ministers, or run into the Ministry, and
will not submit themselves to the trial of the Assembly, and estate of the
Teaching-Elders the Ministers, that are opposite to the Government by the
Presbytery; these are the everters of the Lords own Canons.

2. Subverting the Lords own Ordinance for the Ministry, that those that
Preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14. they would
have them get their livings by the Plow, or by Trades. The Apostle charge
Timothy, and in him all Timothies, all Ministers of the Gospel to give
themselves wholly to Reading, to Exhortation, to Doctrine, that their profiting
may appear to all; and to contemn in them (who can do so, and drive a trade,
and follow another calling) the Apostles called to be Fishers of m^n; left
their Nets, and applied not themselves to catch F^sh. If the Ministers be doing
this, (they need take care of no more, nay this is that deed to which the
Promise is) He shall both save himself, and them that hear him, 1 Timothy 4. 13,
15, 16. They Object, the Apostles did work with their hands. Sol. 1. They had
immediate and infallible assistance of the Holy Ghost in their Ministry, 1. So
have none now. 2. But that is not all, they wrought not ordinarily, but in a
case, as it appears in the 2 Cor. 11. 9 12. to cut off occasion from them
which desired occasion, 2 Cor. 12. 13, 14. and in that place where he says, I
robbed other Churches to do you service; that is, he took maintenance of
others while he Preached to them: what ^ver he did, it is evident he had power
to have lived wholly of the Gospel, and that is the Lords Ordinance, which the
Church must stand to, and be bound by, 1 Cor. 9. 14, 15. they would have the
Ministers maintenance by Alms, and Contributions, Mat. 10. 10. Luke 10. 7. 1 Timothy 5. 18. but it is hire, not Alms: can you make Wages and Alms to be the
same? It is a due, and as truly earned as whatsoever any laborer gets at his
fingers ends. They cry down Tithes as Popish and Jewish: but that way of
maintenance is neither Popish nor Jewish, which was before the Law.
Melchisedech took Tithes of Abraham, and of Levi in Abraham's loins, and
Melchisedech was not a Priest of Aarons Order; our Lord Jesus is the Priest
after Melchisedechs order. Jacob promised maintenance of Gods Public Worship,
by paying Tithes.

3. Confounding the Lords order, who has instituted a Ministry to Preach the
Gospel, Mark 16. and to teach, Mat. 28. 19, 20, 21. and they give power to
every Member to Preach, abusing that Text in ^ Cor. 14. 31. ye may all
Prophecy one by one; it speaks of the Prophets in that Church, not the
Members, read the Text, v. 29. let the Prophets speak two or three, and let the
other judge, v. 32. and the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the
Prophets: ye may all Prophecy, that is, all the Members that were Prophet^,
not all the members as members; those that had the gift of Prophesying, not
those that had not the gift: Now the truth of the place is, there were then in
the Church extraordinary gifts, as of Healing, of Miracles, of Tongues, of
interpretation of Tongues; and so of Prophesying, that is, either foretelling
things to come, or of unfolding the Prophecy of Scripture that concerned the
present times of the Church, with a special gift of dextrous application, and
accommodation of the Exposition of the Prophecy to the estate of the Church
for comfort, for exhortation, and for edification; those that had these gifts
ought to use them for the good of the Church, but with order, and with
submission to the trial and judgment of the Assembly of the Prophets in the
Church. These gifts are ceased now, yet if any s^y they have them, let them
show their gift, according to the Apostles Rule, yield to the trial of the
same; and if they have any such gift, we will bless God that now also gives
such gifts to the children of men; we will open our Pulpits for you, but
because they can bring forth no such thing, but raise from the Dead, and from
Hell old Heresies, and errors, and trouble the people with trifles, and
endless Disputes, that tend not to edification in the Faith; we reject them,
and yield not to them any Authority to meddle with the work of the Ministry:
but observe, while they pervert this Text, perusing the words, let the other
Prophets judge, the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, ere
ever we are aware, we are fallen upon a Judicatory, a Presbytery, an Assembly of
Prophets.

4. D^stroying the provision for an able Ministry, debasing Learning and
Universities; under the Old Testament there were the Schools of the Prophets,
2 King. 2. 3. 7. which some think took their beginning in the times of Eli, and
Samuel. The Levites had their Schools, instituted by Moses and Aaron,
preserved by the Judges and Kings, continued in the Babylonish Captivity,
propagated to the days of our Savior, and an end put to them by the
destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans. Out of these Schools came their
learned Rabbis, and their Scribes, and others; 1. Paul was brought up at the
feet of Gamaliel. Christ had his School, in which were the Apostles, and
seventy two Disciples. The Apostles opposed the Schools of the Libertines,
Cyrenians, and Alexandrians, Act. 6. 9. they instituted Schools in Antioch,
and Alexandria, and other Provinces. These opinionative persons say, that the
Apostles were unlearned Fishermen. We answer, that part of that power from on
high, which the Apostles were commanded to expect, and to tarry at Jerusalem
till they were endued with it, Luke 24. 49. was the gift of the Holy Ghost
inabling them to speak all Languages, Act. 2. this supplied abundantly from
heaven that defect of learning, and did make them learned above all that can be
attained in Schools and Universities; they had their Commission before to go
and teach all Nations; but were not to set out upon the execution of their
Commission until they were fitted in this manner: he that can show the like
gift of the holy Ghost, we say no Schools are required for the help of such;
but if from Heaven the Holy Ghost be not thus given, let them use the ordinary
helps which God affords; if any refuse, show such gifts and we shall bless
God. The Languages, the Greek and Hebrew are needed to understand the original
t^x^, and derive our Doctrine from the fresh and pure fountains; the Latin is
also needful, that we may not only the better receive the benefit of the gi^ts
given to the Fathers, and Writers of former ages (for all gifts are given of
God to profit the Church withal) but also be acquain^ed with the Liberal Arts
and Sciences: that the Ar^s are needful in a Minister is clear; hereby the
Minister ought to be able to convince and confute errors, and to maintain the
truth by disputation, as well as to teach it, and to comfort, exhort, and
rebuke, he is to stop the mouths of Heretics and Deceivers; this he cannot
do without the help of the Arts, especially of Logic, whereby he discernes
the fallacies of seducers, and can open the truth out of the Scriptures, which
are delivered in a rational discourse. Who have been the famous Instruments of
God, to confute all the Heretics of old? Who have cut the sinews of Harding,
Stapl^ton, Bellarmine, and other Popish Writers? not any other save men famous
for Learning. Did you ever hear of such service done for the Church of God by
any of the illiterate Anabaptists and Sectaries, though they have boasted of
the Spirit? yet I say not that Learning gives Ministerial gifts, much less
Grace; but without Learning the Ministry would be but lame in many respects:
therefore the enemies of a learned Ministry are the friends of Popery, and all
Heresies, of ignorance and blindness, and the enemies of the truth and
Gospel, of the light and comfort of the Church of Jesus Christ.

5. Novices, newly converted ones at the best taking upon them to Preach, and
permitted so to do; this is to defile Gods House by profaning the Ministry.
Holy Paul says, not a novice, 1 Timothy 3. 6. lest, puffed up with pride, he fall
into the condemnation of the Devil; these five ways our Novellists strike the
pillar of the Ministry: thus of a fifth sort of Temple-defilers.

6. I proceed to others, which though they might be cast, many of them, under
the head of Schism, yet because they are now late-sprung, and trouble the
Church of God, I shall let them bear a distinct numeration, as so many
several orders of Defilers, though not distinct sorts and kinds; therefore,
sixthly, those that keep out of the Church any of the Ordinances of Christ,
those that keep Gods Household Stuff in any part of it out of his Temple, as
those that deny Paedo-Baptisme, or the Baptizing of the Infants of those that
profess the faith of Jesus Christ; the Scripture for Baptizing of such Infants
(beside many others urged by many) is that in Acts 2. 39. For the Promise is
unto you, and to your children: from these words with the former arises this
Argument; To whomsoever the Promise belongs, to them Baptism does belong; the
truth of this is in the reasoning of the Apostle, who requires them to receive
Baptism upon their Repentance professed, because the Promise is to them; this
ground is Apostolical and Divine. But to the children of Professors of the
Faith does the Promise belong; this is the very sense of the words of the 39.
verse, therefore to the children of the Professors of the Faith does Baptism
belong: those that deny these infants Baptism call them common, whom God calls
holy, 1 Cor. 7. 14.

7. Those that keep out the members of Christ, not admitting Saints, every way
as gracious as themselves, unto the fellowship of the Church, unless they will
yield to their Church Way; not admitting Professors of the true Religion, that
have knowledge, are not scandalous, are not refractory to any the Holy
Ordinances of Christ's Worship, because they see not in them truth of Grace, or
that which may savor to the sense of Christians, that the work of Grace in
the New Birth is truly begun in them so far as man can conceive. Where is
the Rule given for this visible grace, as they call it, by which rule the
non-admitted may see that he is justly proceeded withal, according to the Word
of God, that so, though he have no Grace, yet all that will use their reason
may see by virtue of such clear Texts of the Word, their power is rightly used
for his non-admission, that the use of it may be to edification, not to
destruction? 2 Cor. 13. 10. for which end all Church Power is given of Christ.

8. They that Dis-church the true Churches of Jesus Christ, because they are
faulty in Discipline, or in Government, and chiefly to dischurch them when they
thirst after, pray for, use all means God affords them for Reformation.

9. Those that would introduce into a Christian Church and State a Toleration
of all sorts of Religions, or all sorts of Opinions in Religion, under the name
of Liberty of Conscience; These Scriptures are fully against it. The Angel of
the Church of Ephesus is commended by our Lord Jesus for his patience, Rev. 2.
2. (...) and that he could not bear them which were evil, and tried those that
said they were Apostles, and were no^, and found them liars. It is condemned in
the Angel of the Church of Thyatira, that he suffered, or tolerated that woman
Iezebell to teach etc. And Christ says to the Angel of the Church in Pergamos,
I have a few things against thee; because thou have there, Rev. 2. 12. 14, 15,
16. them that hold the Doctrine of Balaam, and the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans.
He is not charged with so great a fault as a toleration; but there they were,
and there he should not let them be: his connivence, or invigilancy, or
remissness in not executing his power, must be repented of; or else, Christ
will fight against him: from that place in Jeremiah, chap. 32. 39. this
Argument is full of power. Whatsoever God has promised, and is a branch of the
Covenant of Grace with his people, to be made good chiefly in the time of the
New Testament, all Christians ought to seek and aspire after. To give his
people one heart, and one way, in his fear, for the good of them and their
Children, God has promised, and it is such a branch of his Covenant; therefore
this all christians ought to seek and breath after. To seek after a toleration
of diverse ways in Religion, is not to seek after one heart and one way in
godly fear; and so not to seek after that branch of Promise and Covenant made
to Gods people, and to be made good, chiefly in the times of the New Testament:
therefore to seek after a toleration of diverse ways in Religion, is that which
ought not to be in any Christian. Add to this, that in Phil. 1. To stand fast
in one spirit with one mind striving together for the faith of the Gospel, is
the conversation becoming the Gospel, especially in times of terrible
Adversaries: and to stand thus united, unterrified, is an evident token of the
Adversaries perdition, and of our salvation: And that of God, Phil. 1. 27, 28.
to fall into Divisions, and plead for tolerations of Opinions of diverse
mindedness in one faith, is not to stand fast in one spirit with o^e mind,
striving together for that one faith of the Gospel, and it is not to stand thus
united, unterrified; therefore to fall into Divisions, and plead for
tolerations of opinions of diverse mindedness in faith, is not the conversation
becoming the Gospel, especially in times of terrible Adversaries, and is not an
evident token of the Adversaries perdition, and of our salvation; and that of
God. What is it then? It is an evident token of the Adversaries prevalency, and
of our succumbency under the present judgment as yet: And of the further wrath
of the Almighty, and that from a just God. I have heard of some that say, this
is that which can never be, that all Christians should be of one heart and way;
let such believe in him that is faithful, and has promised, and not dishonor
and weary God by unbelief. God has heretofore made good this Article of his
Covenant. In the first primitive Christian Church, they were all, the multitude
of them that believed, of one heart, and of one soul, Act. 4. 32. they
continued steadfastly in this holy unity, Act. 2. 42. 44. 46. There were two
glorious fruits and concomitants hereof: Fear came upon every soul, Act, 2. 43.
and great grace was upon them all, Act. 4. 33. Now the same God that has thus
powered out his own holy, and one spirit, the spirit of unity by the Preaching
of the Gospel, can do the same again. His Covenant is the same. The great God
delights to do great things; the fruits would be alike excellent, nothing more
full of Grace and amiablenesse, or of terror and dread. Hence also arises a
strong Argument, that no Christian should plead for toleration, for all ought
to seek for Gods Church in the Reformation of it; the utmost conformity to the
first purest Primitive Church of Christ, when she was as a heap of Whea^ set
about with L^llies. True liberty of Conscience lies in sweet communion in the
unity of faith, and in the perfect bond of love; the souls of beli^vers knit
together, and cleaving one to another, as Ionathans did to David, unanimo^sly
subject to Gods Law; all other Liberty is the Liberty of lust.

10. There are also that will not join in Prayer with any other, though they be
Christians, unless they know them to be godly, and that they be of their
judgment and way: they refuse to pray with us, no^ only in our public
Congregations, but in our private or occasional meetings. The Lords P^ayer
directs us to Pray, Our Father: Our, respects the whole community of Professors
of Christ's name, and not any Segregated part: It takes in all that call on the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ. What spirit are they of, that can deny to pray
with those that say, Za. 8. 21. Come, let us go and seek the Lord, and pray
before him? Not of the spirit of one that is a Jew inwardly; Holy Paul among
Sea men and Mariners, who are none of the best; among soldiers, prisoners for
several sorts of wicked deeds, Heathens of several Nations and Religions,
prayed as the mouth of them all, or with them all, beseeching them all to take
meat: he took bread, and solemnly prayed, as the Text says, He gave thanks to
God in the presence of them all, Act. 27. 35. Christ has broken down the
partition Wall, and now none are to be called common, Act. 10. 11, 12, 14, 15.
or unclean: The Gospel is to be preached to every creature, to all Nations,
therefore prayer is to be made with every creature, with all Nations; to whom
we may preach, with them we may pray and ought: yea, prayer to God is not only
an instituted worship, but natural, or of the Law of Nature. These Doctrines
of division rent and tear the Church of Christ, and this now mentioned is a
pricking Bryar, and grieving Thorn.

11. Like to these also are those that make up Churches of those of their own
opinion, and separate from others that do hold the unity of Faith, and the Rule
of righteousness: But who can separate from those that are of the same Faith,
and not break fellowship with the Lord Jesus?

D^fferences in opinions should not dissunder us in affections, much less make
divisions separate us into Church-wayes against C^urch-wayes; the same Faith,
and the same Commandments for holiness should be more powerful to cement us
in one Church, then difference in opinions through petulancy to put every
opinion into practice; note, this should be of force to loose us in the
building, or lay us in a frame, whose cemen^ and mortar, whose mould and
fashion is from a conspiring in an opinion: these conspiracies in opinion
joined with separation from other Churches that hold the faith of Jesus and the
Commandments of God, are no right gathering of Churches; they are Conventions,
sinful, and Schismatic, and unlawful, carnal, and proud separations; they
that hold one Faith ought in lowliness of mind and forbearance of one
another, in love to endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace, Ephesians. 4. 2, 3.

12. In like manner, it is a violating of Gods Temple to separate, because some
wicked livers are not cast out of the Church, the place abused is that in 2
Cor. 6. 14* 15, 17. To separate, to come out from among them, is not to
separate or come out from the Church and Temple of God, but from Idols, from
Belial, from Infidels, from Darkness, from Unrighteousn^s^e; that they from
whom we ought to separate, are Idolaters, Infidels, Belialists, Heathens, of
whom it is said, ye were once Darkness, Unrighteous ones, and they are not the
Church and Temple of God: to separate in the Apostles sense, is, not to touch
the unclean thing; that is, to have no communion with them in their Idolatry,
in their unrighteousness of any kind; but other communion with them is not
condemned, and if he will come to the Ordinances of worship of the true God
with the Church, we may and ought to admit him to Communion with us in all
Ordinances that are for conversion, and this is not to touch the unclean thing;
I dolatry and unrighteousness is the unclean thing, which we may not touch;
but the man is not the unclean thing, the separation commanded and the coming
out from them is not to be un^qually yoked together with them; the Greek is
elegant, lively, significant, (...), it is a Simile taken from the Plough,
where the Teeme that draws the same plough is by yokes and paires of
Draught-cattell, Oxen or horses, or the like, which are yoked in the same yoke,
and so do draw each his part of the same Plough: to be yoked together is to
draw one part in the same Draught; which is in the sense of the Apostle to be
joined in the same communion, and counsel of the wicked, in which they draw
the Plough of their wickedness; be the wickedness, Idolatry,
unrighteousness, drunkenness or any other to have Communion with an Idolater
in his Idolatrous worship, counsel to uphold that worship, or such leagues of
nearest conjunction voluntarily chosen and run into, which may be a temptation
to entice one to Idolatry; this is to be unequally yoked with the Idolater: It
is to have fellowship with them Hoc non est consentire male facientibus, esse
cum eis in ecclesia, sed mala facta little approbare atque laudare. Aug. Tom. 7.
Contra. Epist. Parmen. l. 1. c. 3.
in the unfruitful works of darkness, that the Apostle disswadeth us from,
and not from the fellowship with Christ in his fruitful Ordinances, and with
his people in duties of public worship of the true God, because an incestuous
brother is there present, and through none of thy approbation of his
wickedness, or of his presence, but through neglect of the Church, and those
officers in whom the power, and execution of the power lies for
excommunication of such scandalous brethren, is suffered to be there. Lastly,
he truly in the Apostles sense does separate from the unclean thing, that
cleanses himself from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1. That
is, purifying from all his sins inward and outward, and not he that to avoid
communion with the world, shuts himself up in a Monastery, lives an Hermit in
a wilderness; nor he that to avoid Communion with Swearers, and Drunkards,
forsakes the Assemblies of Orthodox Christians: using Christ's own Ordinances
of the Word and Sacraments, to hold fellowship with Swearers and Drunkards in
their Swearing, and Drunkenness, and drunken meetings, is to go to plough with
them, and to tumble with them in the filth; but to hold the fellowship of the
Gospel, if these come to the same assemblies with us, and sit there as Gods
people, is to hold Communion with Christ, and they have fellowship with us
outwardly in Christ's Plough and yoke; we have none with them, but with Christ
and his Saints, and with them in the Profession and duty of Saints.

13. But now the same Text does condemn, as Temple-Defilers, those that are
unequally yoked together with unbelievers in Idolatrous worship, and Idolatrous
feasts, 2 Cor. 6. 17. that have communion with them in the Idol-service: What
fellowship has the Temple of God with Idols? Those that separate not from
such, that is, from the assemblies of Idolaters, they partake of the table of
Devils, 1 Cor. 10. 21. and cannot partake of the Lords Table. Those that
separate not from the Popish assemblies, and that separate not from their false
Catholic Church, do also touch the unclean thing, and sin against the Apostles
command for separation. We must separate from them that hold not Christ, in all
things, wherein they hold not Christ, and no farther.

14. It is a sore pollution of the house of God, to set up men's Commandments
and inventions for Doctrine, Matthew. 15. 9. Col. 2. 18. 20, 21, 22. These be the
births of men's fleshly minds, which are begotten and quickened by a spirit of
Whoredoms: These are heathens brought into Gods holy Temple.

15. The profanation, pollution, or contempt of Gods Ordinances, Discipline,
or Government, is the defiling and wasting of Gods Temple; hitherto you may
refer the prophanations of the Lords Supper in divided Communions, and in
coming without examination and selfe-judging, 1 Cor. 11.

16. Rank with these such as disgrace the public and solemn Assemblies,
either troubling them by barbarous confusion, 1 Cor. 14. 26. Every one has a
Psalm, an interpretation, a Doctrine, a Revelation. Our new disturbers boast of
a falls gift in these particulars; though they have not, yet they will have an
Interpretation, a Psalm, a Doctrine, a revelation: they cannot have the face
yet to say, a Tongue; and if they may not have liberty to speak in the public
Assemblies, having no such gift, they will deny their presence to the Public,
and fling dishonor upon them all they can: or else despising the Church, 1
Cor. 11. 22. or place of the Public assemblies: like unto these are such also
as puldown Churches, and set up their Chamber-meetings. David complains, they
have burnt up all the Synagogues of God in the Land, Psalm. 74. 8. It was the
Cen^urions Luke 7. 4, 5. high commendations to our Lord Jesus, he is worthy,
for he loves our Nation, and has built us a Synagogue. Such also as deny the
maintenance, Neh. 13. 10, 11. of the public Ministry, solemn worship, and
places for public worship: such as devour things Holy, and Consecrated, or
convert them to private uses. Abhorrest thou Idols, Romans 2. 22. and yet
committest thou sacrilege? Why should any Tobiah live in the chambers of the
Temple, Neh. 13. 5. and eat up the Tithes, all which belonged to Gods
instituted Ministry?

There yet remain four notorious Temple-Defilers, that make Gods house their
prey, it shall suffice to name them.

17. Persecutors, Tyrants, and oppressors of Gods Heritage; of whom we have
that mournful complaint, Psalm. 79. 1, 2, 3. O God! the Heathen are come into
thine inheritance, thy holy Temple have they defiled: they have laid Jerusalem
on heaps: the dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto the
Fowls of the Heaven, the flesh of thy Saints unto the beasts of the earth:
their blood have they shed like water round about Jerusalem, and there was none
to bury them. This is exemplified in the Antichristian rage of Papists, and
other our enemies at this day in these three Kingdoms, especially in Ireland.

18. Hinderers of Reformation, and of the Reformers God raises up; these like
Iannes and Iambres withstand our Mosesses, I mean all the Sticklers for any
error, and the resisters of that blessed work of the National Covenant,
whereby these three Kingdoms may become one according to Christ Jesus. Shall
Hell, that now opens her mouth wide, shall Satan, that can make use of a Peter,
and make him a Satan, Mat. 16. 23. shall heights or depthes, of white or black
Devils, swallow up that Covenant, or dead that Covenant-care, which cannot but
make Rome and its Conclave to shake? why is not our Covenant prosecuted?

19. Sensual Separatists, Jude 19. that walk after their lusts; Mockers, that
juggling with the Scriptures broach bruitish-damnable Tenets, such as that, that
the soul dies with the body, whereas it goes to God that gave it, and is
either as Dives's was, presently sent to Hell, and is there in torments; or
else, as Lazarus's in Abraham's bosom, as Paul's with Christ, as the believing
Thiefes in Paradise, as all believers present with the Lord, clothed upon with
their house from Heaven, possessed of an house not made with hands, eternal in
the Heavens, 2 Corinthians 5. 1, 3, 6, 8, Scoffers, 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4, 12. that by
their impostures would illude the Doctrine of the last Judgment, and say,
where is the Promise of his coming? and take off from the hearts of the unwary
and unstable, the terror of the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 11. and the looking for, and
hastening unto the coming of the day of God. Diseased fancifull minds that have
itching ears, and will not endure sound Doctrine, but heap teachers to
themselves, 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4.

20. The Machiavilian Politicians in a Christian State, many degrees outgoing
old famous Achitophel, 2 Samuel 16. 21, 23. the Seditious, that love to make
divisions, and sow discords, and plant an inveterate odium in the hearts of
King, and Prince, and people, against all the godly and faithful in the Land,
with all evil Counselors against the Lord, Nah. 1. 11. Psa. 3. 2. and
flattering bloody Edomitish Doegs, Ps. 52.

Beloved, what a grief is it to think that by the ennumeration of particulars,
not this Doctrine alone should be so clearly and fully demonstrated by twenty
several sorts of off^ndors, that there are many Temple-defilers within the
Temple of God, but also that in our English Church and Temple, ^uch
Temple-vermine should swarm at this day? wherefore to descend to some short
application.

1. Prayer becomes us with complaints to God, that dwells in his Temple;
Prayer, that he would look down from Heaven and behold, that he would not
make us to err from his ways, and harden our hearts from his fear, but
return for his servants sake: that he would rent the Heavens and come down
with demonstrations of zeal, strength, and sounding of bowels, with terrible
unexpected works of wonder, with Gospell-blessing, that he would not be wroth
very sore, nor hold his peace at these things, nor afflict us very sore. Pray,
O remember not against us former iniquities, let thy mercies speedily prevent
us, for we are brought very low. Prayer, with fasting, and deep humiliations
become all that love Gods house in these our days, until God raise up some
Nehemiahs that they may cleanse, Neh. 13. 8. Gods Temple.

2. We should not be scandalized hereby, but remember that in the great house
of Gods Church there are Vessels of several sorts, and rather be purging our
selves from these, then forsaking and deserting the true Church of God: if a
man purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto honor, 2 Timothy 2. 17.
20, 21. sanctified and meet for the Masters use, and Prepared unto every good
work.

3. And then the zeal of Gods house should eat us up; though there be many
things in these troublous times that befall us, or may fear us, and distress
us from without, yet the care of all the Churches should somewhat come 2 Cor.
11. 28, 29. upon us, especially upon Christ's faithful and painful Ministers;
whatever befalls the Churches we should lay it to heart as if it befell our
selves: the fire of consuming zeal for Christ's honor, the Gospells purity,
the Churches safety should melt and fashion us to that of blessed Paul, who is
weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not?

4. Lastly, attending to our own growth in Faith, Prayer, love and hope, we
should have compassion of some, making a difference, Jude 21. 22, 23. and
others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire: hating even the Garments
spotted by the flesh: not hating the men, but hating the filthy affections and
lusts, which pollute the man, and come from the flesh, man's nature corrupted,
hating them first in our selves, all envy, and vye in Religion, vainglory,
self-seeking, self-love, pride spiritual, strife, emulation, variance,
self-pleasing in our gifts and parts, and disunion of heart, etc. for who can
number all? but wisdom, love, and sincerity will by these direct enough. Thus
of the second Doctrine.

The third Doctrine is this; that God will certainly punish all defilers, and
violaters of his Temple with punishments proportionable to their sin: they are
not all of a sort, nor all alike guilty: and God that will do no man wrong,
that he should have the least ground of entering an action against him, the
righteous God will deal out his punishments accordingly.

What punishments, you will say, or how does he punish these sinners?

Cor. 3. 13. 15. yet so as by fire, the fire of the Word and Spirit in the day
of the Gospel, in the powerful opening and application of the bright and
burning truths thereof: such a day as this, when now you are before the Lord,
hearing this Text Preached upon: this fire shall these defilers pass through,
and their errors, and their ill work they have made in Gods building, their
wood, hay, and stubble burn to ashes, and their persons humbled and purified
be saved; the Lord grant it, you need no other Purgatory, you will think this
hot enough; and this or none will do the deed. The Pontificians would feign
find their Purgatory-dreame in this Scripture, and they shall find their
Purgatory to purify or consume them, not the Purgatory they seek, but the
Purgatory God has prepared for such Temple-wasters, and Temple-defilers, such
foul beasts; this is the breath of Christ's lips, this is the brightness of
his coming, which shall consume and destroy that man of sin: they are in
Purgatory, and the fire now burns hot upon them, and so it will upon all the
rest of the Temple-polluters aforementioned. Do you not see the Angels of God,
many of the Seraphims, Esa 6. 6, 7. with live-coales in their hands, taken with
the Tongs from off the Altar, and laying them upon the mouths of many
faithful able Ministers, many an Esaias?

Tim. 3. 9. that is, all the Elect; but evil men, and seducers will wax worse
and worse, deceiving, and being deceived; they shall not yet deceive the Elect.
You Will say, many of the choicest Christians cleave to them, and many of them
are the precious servants of Christ Jesus, we cannot be otherwise persuaded:
for them, I said but even now, they may be saved, but their works shall
perish, themselves shall be saved, yet so as by fire: and for the rest, mark
it, that was their aim to get the choice Christians, those whose hearts are
for Christ and Heaven, their design is mostly upon any in whom any work of
Grace appears. So have all deceivers ever, that they might glory in their
flesh, as our Apostle according to the wisdom given unto him has written,
Gal. 6. 13. but they shall not compass their end, they will return, perceiving
the strangers voice; these gracious souls thought it had been Christ's voice
which they heard in these men, in these their errors: but finding at length
their mistake, and under the sheeps-skin of gifts and graces perhaps, show of
Scripture, manifestation of the Spirit, finding the bloody wolf of error and
falsehood, that soul-murtherer, they will embrace the truth, and follow Christ:
perhaps hearing this you will for a while be froward (for who can be willing to
think he is in an error, or is deceived?) but Christ, and his Father hold you
in their hand, and you cannot wrest your selves thence. Another end they have,
they would be great, and of same in the Church of God: but their folly shall be
manifest to all, not only to the Elect, but to all that will not deny the light
of their reason, and do hold the Scripture in the Word of God, and so shall
fall in their esteem in men's hearts within the Visible Church: our Savior has
said it, they shall be least in the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5. 19. of no
esteem in the Church of Christ, although for a while they bear the bell. See
the truth of it in all the Heretics, Schismatics, Novellists, Persecuters,
and the like of all former ages; they have no name of memorial left, but a rot
is upon their memory. Another end they have, and that is to spread and
propagate their Opinions and ways, that they might with the Pharisees and
Herodians of old, leaven all the lump of Gods people; but their folly shall be
manifest, and that manifestation of their folly* shall set them their bounds,
they shall proceed no further, Thus have all the ancient Heresies, and Schisms
of the Pelagians, Donatists, and the like been bounded, and the infection
stayed: so God defiles Church-defilers, they fail of their ends.

Achans: God will scatter them in Jacob, and disperse them in Israel. They
break, and teach the breaches and violations of Gods Commandments the least of
his Commandments, that of his day, they shall be esteemed nothing in the
Church, be least in the Kingdom of Heaven. Scandalous Brethren shall have
their Millstone, workers of iniquity strange punishments; Heresies and divisions
swarm, God has his East wind whereby he can sweep away those Locusts, and cast
them into the Red Sea. Persecutors have their doom notably in this life,
besides hereafter. Remember Antiochus, of whom you read in the second of
Maccab. 9. chap. Remember Herod eaten up with worms, Act. 12. 23. Remember the
Heretic Arrius, that voided his bowels with his ex^rements in a common Iakes;
and all other Heretics and Schismatiques, and the Plagues upon Papists,
mentioned in Rev. 16. and 18. chapters.



The certainty of this just proceeding of the Lord, appears in four things,
which are as so many reasons or grounds of this Doctrine.

1. It is the vengeance of his Temple, Jer. 51. 11. and 50. 28, which is a sore
vengeance; in the execution whereof, the Lord Pleads the cause of Zion
thoroughly, to give rest to his Church, and disquiet his enemies, whose spirit
can sustain it self in the day of Visitation, when the Lord shall say, Behold,
I am against thee?

2. Secondly, the Argument is strong here from the less to the greater; God
has said, and will not repent of his word, concerning Death and the Grave: O
Death, I will be thy Plague, O Grave I will be thy destruction, Hos. 13. 14.
Because they offered to touch the bodies of his Saints, which are his Temple,
and destroyed his holy place. Shall God say thus of Death and the Grave, and
resolve that Repentance shall be hid from his eyes? In this thing he will never
alter his purpose that he determined. And shall he not much more be the plagues
and destruction of soul-polluters, of d^stroyers of his Church, of rophaners of
the Communion of his Saints and people.

Thirdly, the Temple of God is holy and inviolable, therefore the sin of
Profaning and wasting of it, is provoking and execrable,

Fourthly, God is a jealous God, and the vindicator and avenger of his glory: "
(...), Zelo^es et vindex gloriae suae.
no gifts will pacify jealousy: no power can shelter and save from the
jealousy of the Lord of Hosts. It is he, the mighty one of Jacob, the holy one
of Israel, that says, Zach. 8. 2. I am jealous for Zion with great jealousy:
and I am jealous for her with great fury.

I have done with the explication and confirmation of the third Doctrine: the
application respecting the present Doctrine, and the whole Text, I shall draw
up under two sorts of uses:

1. Of Information. 2. Of Exhortation.
1. We may from hence inform our Judgments in four truths.

First, what is the Christian use of the Ceremonial Law: the practice of it is
out of date, and deadly; but it is not cut out of the Bible: Non observamus,
non quia damnata sed quia mutata sunt, non ut res ipsae quae significabantur
perirent, sed ut ^^ru^ sign^ suis* quaque temporibus convenirent. Tom. 6. Aug.
oratione cont. Iud. c. 3.
God has left it as part of Canonical Scripture, that we may read it, preach
and hear it, that comparing the things themselves with those shadows, we may
with pleasing delight embrace the body of those shadows: here are also Emblems,
Similitudes, and expressions of Gods own devising, out of Gods own mint, which
with safety and profit, we may and ought to use. This fancifull age may here
please their fancy, and yet retain and grow more in the soundness of faith and
love which is in Christ Jesus.

Secondly, that there is the same God in both Testaments, the same Christ,
Evacuatur in Christo, non vetus Testamentum, sed volamen ejus, ut per Christum
intelligatur, and quia sidenud^tur, quod sine Christo obscurum, and quia
adopertum est, non igitur per Domini gratiam tanquam inutilia ibi legerentur,
ablata sunt, sed tegmen potius quo utilia ^^gebantur. Aug. Tom 6. ad Honor:
Contra. Manichaeos de util. Credendi. 63.
the same Covenant, though there be different ways of Ministry, and degrees
of manifestation and clarity; that place in Heb. 8. 8. 10. taken out of Jer.
31. 31, 32, 33. which speaks of a new and old Covenant, is thus to be
understood; not of two Covenants differing in substance; not of the two
Covenants, the Covenant of works, and the Covenant of Grace; but of one and
the same Covenant of Grace distinguished in their different manner of
Administration; the one in Ceremonies, Types, shadows, to signify and lead to
Christ that was to come; the other in the substance of spiritual things
themselves, the body, the truth, exhibiting Christ now already come: this place
is much abused through inadvertency. Here also we see that a proof out of the
old Testament is as much Gospel if rightly applied, as any in the New Testament.

Thirdly, that the Ministers of the Gospel ought to preach Gods wrath to evil
Christians.

Fourthly, that they ought to preach wrath not only to those Christians of evil
life and manners, but also to those of evil Doctrine, of errors in Religion, of
Pride, dissensions, and faults in that kind; where they are not yet fallen to
notorious Heretical Doctrine, these are threatened in this Text by the Apostle.

2. We should be exhorted and persuaded to our duty, even those duties which
are to be pressed unto, that we may escape this sin and punishment, they
respect our selves and others.

1. For our selves, let us see how far in any kind we are guilty, and be
humbled for the same in confessions and godly sorrow; and then do as Paul, who
preached the Faith which once he destroyed, Gal. 1.. 23, 24. Build up the
Temple, which once we destroyed, that all the gracious that see or hear of it
may glorify God in us.

2. For others, these duties lie charged upon us to escape pollution and
destruction.

1. We must try the spirits, the Doctrine of those Teachers, that say they
teach by the spirit; they bring the doctrine of Gods spirit, not of their own
spirit, we must not receive what they say, upon trust, but try it, 1 John 4. 1.

2. We must mark those that cause divisions and offenses contra^y to the
doctrine received, and avoid them, Romans 16. 17. Ob. They seek to set up the
Lord Jesus Christ. Sol. v. 18. They serve their own bellies, observe them well,
and you will find it; again, they seek to draw away disciples after them, and
not to bring men to be disciples to Jesus Christ, Act. 20. 30. Quest. But may
we not hear them in their separated meetings? Ans. That is not to avoid them,
you are by the command of the Apostle to avoid and decline them, but by this
you encourage them, and feed their proud humor, who glory in having their
meetings frequented.

3. We must place all in their due place, Ministers in their place, fathers let
them be fathers; and evil workers and dogs in their due place; that is,
without, Rev. 22. 15. Let no man corrupt your minds from the Gospel, and its
Simplicity.

4. We must hold the unity of Faith and love, that we may with one mind and
mouth glorify God, The Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 15. 5. 6. 7. If
we have bitter strifes and envyings (the never failing fruits of erroneous
opinions and divisions) let us not glory that we are true Christians, and lie
against the truth, as we do in saying so; to persist in such evils proves that
we are no true Christians, Iam. 3. 14, 15, 16, 17.

Paraeus in Loc. Quid gravius hodie ecclesiam affligit, cursum evangelij magis
remoratur, quam Schismaticae doctorum contentioues? Viderint isti quid se
mancat: nos dise^mus templum D^i reveren ter and in pace exornare Doctrina,
fide, vita pura. Vt enim sui templi vastatores, tyrannos, Haereticos,
Schismaticos deus destruat; Ita fideles, Architectos, cultores, and defensores
gratia, and benedictione cumulabit, juxta promissionem: Ego me diligentes
diligo: Honorantes me honorabo.
What is there in the world that does more heavily afflict the Church at this
day, that does more retard the course of the Gospel than the Schismatic
contentions of Teachers? Let these men see what abides them: as for us, let us
learn with fear and trembling and in all peaceablenesse to adorn the Temple
of God with sound doctrine, the power of Faith and the purity of an holy life:
For as the Lord will destroy the destroyers of his Temple, Tyrants, Heretics,
Schismatiques and the rest of the Litter of all the Foxes, the little Foxes, So
he will Crown with his Grace and blessing all Masters, builders, Repairers,
Beautifiers, faithful Laborers and Defenders thereof according to his
Promise: Those that love me I ever love, and those that honor me I will honor.

FINIS.
(...).

