A Letter with a Narrative, written to the right Hon:ble THOMAS ALLEN Lord
Major of London, etc. concerning a strange Sight that appeared over this City
of London, in the year 1642. when the King was driven from his Parliament,
Dated as follows.
My LORD:
I Do with all due respects (upon sight of your late Proclamation) make bold
to acquaint your Honor, with a strange sight which appeared over this City in
1642. not improper for the work of next Friday. I am sorry I had not
acquainted your Lordship with it, before you published your Proclamation, for it
will conduce much to the work of the day, to let the People know what warning
God offered to this City in 1642. and may much increase their Devotion and
humiliation upon the day, or as many days as it shall please God to put into
your Lordships heart, to command the people (under you) to meet again upon the
like Humiliation; For this neglect has been so long, that I fear it will
require many days of humiliation before Gods Judgments will be remitted. There
has been many Fasts, since God sent this City warning in 42. but no proper
return has been made by this City in 17. years, to answer God again; till
it has pleased God to put it into your heart at this time ( NEHEMIAH like) to
command a Fast, which I hope will prove effectual as his did.

I think my self happy, that I can see it begun in Your time, which your
Predecessor did either neglect, or took no cognizance of. I hope it will be a
means to preserve this City; if with reverence, and effectually performed; as I
doubt not, I could have wished that you had made it Nehemiahs fast; that both
Man and Beast might have fasted strictly; But for that, I submit to your
Honors better Judgment, and shall ever pray for your Honors health and
happiniss, and the Cities safety.

Your Honors to command; N. B.
If your Honor doubt the Truth of what I have related, I am ready to make it
good, being well known (a member of the Company of Stationers) and being Aged
78. years, not able to follow my Trade do the more give my mind to a better
world. Cursitors Alley anent the Rose Tavern, November. the 30. 1659.
A Narrative of the strange Apparition which appeared over this City of London
in the year 1642. about the time that the late King Charles was forced away
from his Parliament by the rude multitude.
IN the year 1642. in the Christmas Holidayes, there appeared over this City
of London, a Bow of Smoke in the Firmament (in a clear Starlight night no
cloud seen) which had his motion over the City about three hours before it
dispiersed it self. The rising of it was about Aldgate or White Chapel, and
extended it self as far as St. Giles in the Fields to our appearance, and
began his motion over the North part of the City, moving in a perfect body (for
about three hours) toward the South, till it came over the Thames, and there,
and then scattered and dispierst it self. The breadth of the bow was about an
Ell to our seeming: It was observed by diverse Gentlemen in the Fleet which I
spare not to name, Sir John Digby, Mr. Thorn of Bedford, Mr. Newcomin, 2.
reverend Divines, Mr. James Howell, a knowing man, and they and diverse more of
quality, gave their opinion, that this Apparition was not Natural, but sent by
God to give warning to this City, and that the Bow of smoke intimated Fire
that should consume it, and that God sent it of purpose to give warning. I
doubt not but many hundredth in the City saw it, but slighted it, as being
smoke a common vapor that comes out of every Chimney, and appearing at that
time of Night when few people were abroad, twixt Eight and Eleven at night,
there could be little notice taken of it; but at the Fleet upon notice given,
most of the Gentlemen of the house went up into the Leads, where you might
look over all the houses as far as Aldgate, and had a full view of the
manner and motion of it, which struck a great amazement into many of them,
whereof I was one, and did observe it from almost the beginning, till it came
over the Thames and dispierst it self. So much for the description and manner
of this apparition.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Butter, residing in Cursitors Alley, 1659.


