ADVICE, Sent in a LETTER From an Elder Brother, to a Younger.

Which he missed of by being abscent, since occasionally Printed, it relating
to remedying and reforming several Abuses in the COMMON WEALTH, by several
Practisers pretending Equity and Conscience in the High Court of Chancery, and
that unsettled, irregular unlimmited Court of Probates, who also Act against the
Law of God, and the Law of England, as in the reading thereof may be observed
and bewailed, and it is hoped, may be of Public Concernmen^, and Profit;
wherefore the Author has been at this charge of Printing it.

Who rises up with me against the wicked? Who takes my part against the evil
doers? If the Lord had not helped me, my soul had been put to silence.

Will thou have any thing to do with the stool of wickedness which imagines
mischief in the Law? Mr. Tindalls translation, Psalm. 94. If a Ruler hearken to
Lies, all his servants are wicked. Prove. 29.12.

None calls for Justice, nor any pleads for truth, they trust in vanity,
and speak lies, they conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity. Esaias 59.4.

Of false Judges assigned, King Alfred ordained such Judgment, that the wrong
they do to God, whose Vicegerents they are, and have conusance to judge
Offenders, that first they be judged to make satisfaction to those they have
hurt, that are parties Plaintiffs. The Book called, The Mirror of Justices.
page 207.

LONDON, Printed for the Author 1655.

TO HIS HIGHNESS, O. CROMWELL, Lord Protector of the Common Wealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland; And to His Honorable Counselors and Assistants.
O. CROMWELL,
I Am moved by Gods Spirit this present 24. of May, 1655 to write this to You,
and those that assist You in Council, for your leisurely perusal, with the
other lines that belong thereunto, and also to present them, by the spirit of
God, who is the King of all the Earth, and reigns over the Heathen, and of a
truth will be found no respector of Persons, though many that are in places to
Judge the People, give false Judgment, and respect Persons, both in the High
Court of Chancery, And that Illegal, Arbitrary, Irregular, Unlimmited Court,
now called a Court of Probates, etc. in which is executed more the will of man
then the judgment of the Lord, they respecting the Persons, and Profitts one
of another, as they do yet in Chancery, although in the Ordinance for
Regulating and limmitting the High Court of Chancery, it is Ordained, fol. 523.
That for the future there be no more cause of just Complaints from the People.

SIR, it is hoped good things will be found in You; Jehu told Jehoshaphat 2
Chro, 19.2, 3 For such a thing he had provoked the Lord to be wrath with him;
Nevertheless good things are found in thee, and that You will set Judges over
the People of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, You having
accepted the Style of Lord Protector thereof, and sworn to Govern these Nations
according to the Laws, Statutes and Customs, seeking their Peace, and causing
Justice and Law to be equal Administered; The Lord God of our Fathers enable
Your Highness to put in such men to Judge between the People, that may be men
of Truth, fearing God, and hating Covetousness, as Jethro advised Moses, Exodus
18.21. the People have been long abused and oppressed by lying unsatiable
extorting, unfaithful, unconscionable Lawyers, and men in places of
Judicature, to the dishonor of God, and the destruction of the Nations, and
their great reproach, for sin is a reproach to a people or Nation But Justice
or Righteousness exalts a Nation. Prove. 14.34. and lying lips are an
abomination to the Lord, but they that deal truly are his delight. Prove. 2.22.
then all lying men in place of Judicature, and ^ying Lawyers that deal not
truly, are an Abomination to the Lord; The Apostle, who knew all Gods Council,
Acts 20.27. For he must first know it before he could declare it, Romans 13.1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, says, God ordaines Powers, for the Peoples Weal, or good, and
such are called Gods Ministers, and are to attend continually for that very
end, or thing, for the Peoples good, and well-being, if the People do well; but
they are to take Vengeance, if the People do evil, and to such ministering
Persons ought People to be obedient, or subject unto, not because of their
wrath, but for Conscience sake, Your Highness, assisted with your Council, has
begun to limit and regulate that unconscionable Court of Chancery, and lying
delaying Practisers, and to pull down their extortions by your Ordinance, made
August 22. 1654, though they are loath to obey it; Oh judge for the Lord, and
limmit and regulate that unchristian corrupt Court, styled a Court of Probates,
etc, for the Civillians must confess, their Law is a Sea full of Waves, and as
uncertain as the present Judges minds thereof, but the grounds of our Common
Law have from the beginning been laid with such deep Wisdom, Policy and
Providence, as they do provide for and meet with almost all Cases that can fall
out in our Common Wealth; The Imperial Power, th'immeiate Power under God and
Christ, is settled in Your Person, with Your Council, and all Writts, Processes,
Commissions, Patents, Grants and other things in Your Name, they are to run as
the 2 and 3, and 33 Articles of Government, declared December 16. 1653. and from
You to be distributed in all Courts, they acting and doing in the Name of
Oliver Lord Protector, should act justly and truly; and the Penman hereof
shall exhort all People with the words of Paul. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. to make
supplycations for Your Highness, etc. and all you shall prefer to Judge
between the People, and deal truly therein, that so we may lead quiet and
peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty; for false Judges, and false and
lying Practisers about the Law, under them, must be a more intolerable and
ahhominable thing then War; believes Yours, while GOD is with you, and you
with him.

Cap. Nathanael Burt.

AN EPISTLE DEDICATORY, TO Mr. WILLIAM WHETSTONE, His hoped for Friend in the
Truth.
SIR,
THat a man should Dedicate his case to one he is forced to sue in the Law, one
would think should seem a Juggle, or a Paradox; but it will not be so found in
this, and I shall clear it to you, or any else; for in the Mirror of Justices,
pages. 156, 157, 158. Our Ancestors, if the party would not confess that had
done any falsitie to a man in deed or word, where there was no witness to
testify the truth, they were suffered to enter Battle, if Equals, for
Declaration thereof, or proof thereof, and sometimes they proved by Witnesses,
says the Author; for if a man has done any falsity to me in deed or in word,
whereof he is appealed or impeached in Judgment, if he deny it, it is lawful
for me to prove the Action, either by Jury, or by my Body, or by the body of
one Witness: Now that Battle is laid aside, yet by Jury and Witness a man may
prove his Action, or Appeal; and I having spoken to you, and finding you so
real and just, and honest, in your Discovery of the matter related in these
following lines, and confession thereunto, and since this our Appeal to Equity
and Law is a Combating, and that the Victory is holden for truth, and you a
Witness therein, I have placed you upon the front of the Battle, and have
dedicated it to you, that in this fraudulent matter, whereof doubtless you have
been ignorant, as a faithful and Courageous Champion or Combitant, you may
maintain the truth hereof to this evil lying World, and in your answer in
Chancery, quit your self like a Christian man, and thereby keep a good
Conscience, void of Offense. Thomas Walton has confessed the cancelling of the
old Writings to our Father in his House, though not by his own hand, April the
Eleventh, 1655. But would not confess Francis Riche^ Habitation. Sir, on
Saturday, April the Seventh, toward Evening, I was with Mr. Thomas Ellis, to
have delivered this Letter to my Brother John Burt, where he lodges in
More-fields, and his Landlord told me and Mr. Ellis, that he and his Wife and
Children were gone out of Town, and that he had no servant left there in being
to answer for them, or belonging to them, so that not knowing when he may
return, I having been at the pains of penning of it, and added since something
of Court Abuses, and wishing his repentance, and amendmennt, and theirs also,
that this iniquity be not his perpetual loss and undoing, but that he may be
saved in the day of Christ's appearing; though thereby he has sought my
temporal ruin, and I not being certain of his return, that I might have seen
how he would have received my Council, or rebuke herein, and answered
thereunto next unto Gods glory, and Englands Laws, I claim satisfaction to,
and any Damages or losses I have received by him and his Accomplices therein
beside my trouble and grief thereby (and the expenses and loss which you have
already seen and felt by him, and through him and his procurement) who as it is
believed, never deserved or ought to have had any such usage from him; or any
of his accomplices, abbetors or Confederates, and that now it is discovered, and
come to my knowledge, so much as concerns you, you are by Law answerable to
me; who am the Eldest son of my Father, and sole Admininistrator by Law of my
Fathers Estate, and by the Seal of the Prerogative Court, unto whom John Burt
became bound in a bond of 500. l. to fulfill certain Articles which were sealed
between us twelve days after our Fathers Funeral, and Sixteen days after his
discease wherein he ties or binds me the eldest Son to sue Letters of
Administration out of the Prerogative Court in 500. l. also, and himself with
me to Discover to the utmost of our knowledge the said Estate, viz. All and
singular the Goods, Chattells, Plate, ready Money, Leases, and all other things
whatsoever, which any way did, or does concern the Estate of the said
disceased, which B^nd, Witnesses, and administration I have showed you, and he
having had in his hand and Possession several Writings and Leases of your
Fathers, which have continued with our Father ever since Anno 1639. and the use
made by our Father, Recited in his Book of Accounts written with his own hand,
until the Christmas before he dyed, which rests with me, and he dyed June the
12th, 1654. Now you being the Principal Witness herein, and next unto my
self, the nearest concerned both in the abuse, Charge and loss past, and of
suffering for future. I having used your Name in relating the matter of mine
and your abuse, and since he is abscent, that I cannot have his present Answer.
I am constrained to publish it in Print, that my wrongs, losses and false
judgment given against me, may appear to you, and through you to the World,
you being the grand Witness, and others also, and that can here discover
concerning the fraud and Concealment of the said Writings belonging to you
and your Father disceased; and I hope by this to find much more of my Fathers
concealed Estate. And it being commanded, That the hand of the Witness be
first upon him that is to suffer. Deuteronomy. 17.7. And that the Father and Mother of
the Rebellious or stubborn Son, which would not hear the voice of his Father
or Mother, should lay hands on him, and bring him before the Elders of the
City, That he might suffer for that he would not hear and obey them, it being
an evil Example in Israel, and not to be suffered; This Premised to you, with
my Love and Well-wishings to you.

April the 18. 1655. I rest yours for the truehs sake, NATHANAEL BVRT.

ADVICE, Sent in a LETTER From an Elder Brother, to a Younger. And Isaac
trembled very exceedingly, and said, thy Brother came with subtilty, and has
taken away thy blessing, And Esau said, Is he not rightly named Jaacob, for he
has supplanted me these two times, he took away my birthright, Behold, now he
has taken away my blessing.
JOHN BURT,
I Am not ignorant, that Cain and Abel were natural Brethren, and that Isaac
and Ismael were natural brethren, or taken by Abraham so to be, who was their
natural Father, as well as by others, though they were by two several Women,
and Esau and Jaacob were so both by one Father and Mother, as Cain and Abel
were by one man, and one Woman, which Scripture sets forth; and though Cain
the elder Brother, slew Abell the younger Brother, in those days, as Mr.
Sparks his younger son, in your memory, slew his Elder Brother, and suffered
the Law for it; so you ungratiously and unnaturally left word at my House,
September 8. 1654. with two several Persons in my abscence, That my last
glass was run, and bid them to tell me so from you. And when you had buried me
alive, December, 1654. in Luds-gate, in your rage and Malice, to bring about
your conspired ends, you having no just cause against me in Law to ground an
action upon, or to file a Declaration against me, Wherefore you were fain the 2
Court Day after to withdraw your own Action of 500. l. though your Attorney
Baines, against his Oath, Maliciously moved the Court against a Nonsuit
therein, saying, he could not find the Bond, and he knew he had declared
thereon in the Upper Bench, the Michaelmas Term was 12 Months before, yet in
the mean time, with my ungracious Son in law Peter Tompson, you both of you
offered to swear then in the Court of Probates, you had no Action then upon
me, which was a Lie, as two witnesses can yet testify, viz. Thomas Ellis and
John Brook. And though you are my half Brother, and had buried me there alive,
to bring about your malicious fraudulent ends, and thereby to procure to your
self of those unjust and unrighteous Judges, letters of Administration, against
the Law of God, and of England, as though my glass of Life had been run
indeed, and I departed, out of this life (for Imprisonment, let it be well
observed) is but a Civil Death, the Law makes it so. And sure you and your
Accomplices looked on me so to be indeed, when illegally, unrighteously, and
irregularly, they granted Letters of Administration to you, a second son, by
a second ventor, which by Law is unanswerable, Thus has your dealings been
like a treacherous, false, deceitful, unfaithful, unchristian, unholy,
unnatural Brother, in which our Fathers Name cannot but be dishonored: I have
read in Scripture also, That Abraham and Lot, though their Heardsmen strove
together, yet Abraham said to Lot; Let there be no strife, I pray thee between
me and thee; and between my Heards-men and thy Heards-men, for we are Brethren:
Yet it is written, Abraham and Lot had two several men to be their natural
Fathers, so that they were of one stock, proceeding from the same Ancectors,
and were called Brethren, or Nephews, as Kinsmen are, and not by one Father, as
Isaac and Ishmael was, and by natural generation of the same Parent; a true
distinction of descent, apparent for that false and foolish Court of Probates
instruction: yet behold faithful Abraham, Genesis 25. who had nine Children by
Keturah another Wife, besides Ishmael whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarahs
handmaide, bare unto Abraham; And to avoid strife, discord, contention and
discention, that might have come or risen amongst them as Brethren, because of
the heritage; Abraham gave all that he had unto Isaac, But unto the other
sons, Abraham gave Gifts, and sent them away from Isaac his son, while he yet
lived; Ask Dr. Walker of (many words) if this be not Civil Law, and God said
to Isaac, Genesis 26. That Abraham obeyed his voice, and kept his Charge, and his
Commandments, his Statutes and his Laws, and when men degenerated from God,
and did not walk as faishfull Abraham had done, Then God makes a Law, That the
Eldest son, or the firstborn son, by the first Wife shall be by the father
acknowledged for his firstborn, by the Fathers giving him a double Portion, of
all that he has, for that he is the beginning of his strength, the right of the
first born-ship is his, Deutr. 21.15, 16, 17. This is Gods law, Maugre corrupt
long breathed Lawyers, or pretended Regulators of the Abuses of Practisers in
the Law, or any silly Vilaines, or Civilians belonging to Doctors Commons,
either Dyers, Fishers, or Liars of any Court whatsoever, or of that Arbitrary,
and irregular Court of Probates, who act and practice under the title of Wise
men or Fools, and who act against the Truth, and leave the Law of God, and
right of English Law practiced in other Courts, purposely to destroy, by
combination, or corrupt will, the right of a firstborn son, and a legal
sole Administrator lawfully admitted, sworn and made; such must either have no
knowledge, and then incapable of being either Judges, Officers, or Practisers
therein, or Dissemblers therein; And Solomon says, He that dissembleth hatred
with lying lips, and he that inventeth slander, is a fool, Pr. 10.18. And it
will, I doubt, not but be agreed on, that he was wiser then ever (Dr. Wiseman)
And such wicked Liars, Lawyers, Fishers, Wisemen and Dyers, in any Court
whatsoever; who slander men by misinformations in Court, as you know sensibly
by your means and contrivance was foolishly and maliciously, by you and your
Compl^c^s used for above two years, before you brought about your combinated
ends and Purposes against me, which you may all be ashamed of, or whosoever
has done un^ighteously in judgment, and judges not what is right, as well as
in passing the Seal, as Serle Zanchy, or Cottle, to do any wrong, such ought
by Law to make satisfaction to the Party that is dammaged, as I shall prove
yet in this Epistle, which act as the Lawyers and Scribes and Pharisees of old,
which Christ rebuked, it will reach also the base practice of Lawyers in our
times, either Chancery men or Common Lawyers, as well as Civil Lawyers,
whether they be Ecclesiastics or Laymen, and did any Ecclesiastics fit there
more then Mr. Hugh Peter's in the Court of Probates, it would reach them also; I
dare say, he will not deny it if he were asked, they doing as the Lawyers, and
Scribes and Pharisees did, if you compare, Matt. 23.2 3, 4. with Luke 11.39.42,
43, 44, 45, 46. if they Act and do like them, hypocrittically and
unrighteously; for I hope he will not deny the Scripture, which says thus,
They did lade men, or Peoples shoulders; and it is understood, their Estates
also, with burdens grievous to be borne: they being as rotten graves, that
appear not, into which men sink, and are caught of them, before they are aware
of them, they being full of ravenning and wickedness, and will not touch the
burdens with one of their fingers, they laid then upon the Peoples shoulders;
And I finding it thus recorded, Matt. 23.1. That Christ spoke it, unto the
multitude of People, as well as to his Disciples, when he was upon the Earth
with a multitude of woes, which he pronounced against them for their Hypocrisy
rottenness, oppressions, extortions and injustice, as well as dissimulation,
and fair speakings and promises to the People, which they never intended
(which is the ground of Hypocrisy) In the Bibles of the English and Roman
letter, Printed 1609. and 1610. by the Kings Printer Robert Barker, as you may
read, Psalm. 10.10. The Prophet in his days complaining of the fraud, rapine,
tyranny, and all kind of wrong which worldly men then used, or wicked men, or
Hypocrites, amongst the rest of their pretended Virtues, says the Scripture;
He croucheth, and boweth: therefore heaps of the poor do fall by his might;
and in the Margent it is thus Printed, By the Hypocrisy of those that have
Authority, the Poor are devoured. And Christ warned the People, as well as his
own Deciples, that they should not do after their works, but whatsoever they
did bid him observe, all those things they were to observe, and do; sure then
they were exact teachers, though bad performers, or doers; But Christ said, All
their Works they do for to be seen of men, Matt. 23.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. They
loved the chief seat in the Sinagogues, and the uppermost place at Feasts, and
to be called, by Titles of Dignity, and to be saluted, honored, or greeted,
in public places, as if they were somewhat more then other men, as many do
now in our days, but for loving of these things, and passing over judgment,
and the Love of God, Christ pronounces woe against them, Luke 11.42, 43, 44.
Mark 12.36. (which Luke said or spoke by the Holy Ghost,) and without doubt
these Hypocrites carried themselves, as close, and covertly, and seeming
courteous, with as fair and plausible Pretenses as any do now, and as now, so
then they would compass both Sea and Land for their own ends, to make a
Prosilite, and to bring him to believe with them, and to be of their Synagogue,
though thereby, when he was brought to their belief, he was made twofold more
the child of Hell; by being made one of the Synagogue of Satan; this Christ
spoke, Matt. 23.15. Who was greater then Solomon, Luke 11.31. And as he left it
both to Rebuke, and instruct that generation, I desire this pretended wise
generation, would take notice thereof in this day that belongs to our Peace,
and not to delight to burden their Brethrens shoulders, and to betray their
fellow brethren, and their Estates; for as Paul whom Christ counted Faithful,
became injurious no more, and persecuted none of his Brethren, after he had
obtained mercy himself. 1 Timothy 12, 13. and was called, and made to believe, he
averreth Romans 15.2, 3, 4. that every man should please his Neighbor to
edification; as it is written, The rebuke of them that rebuke thee fell on me;
for says Paul, by the Holy Ghost, Whatever things are written before time, are
written for our learning, that we through patience, and comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope; And says Paul, They are written for our
admonition, upon whom the ends of the Wo^ld are come, 1. Cor. 10.11. Yet he
advises, to rebuke them that sin before all, that others also may fear; if it
can be proved by two or three Witnesses; yea, though he were in place,
partiallity should not be used. 1 Timothy 5.19, 20, 21. And Paul shunned not to
declare all the Council of God, and he thereby stood pure from the blood of
all men. Acts 20.26, 27. Now this being an Epidemicall disease in England, and
perticularly rooted in you (John Burt) as by Witnesses will be proved; so that
it is in you gangrened I fear, or settled; you having been the chief plotter,
and Acter and Contriver all along against me; and Concealer and Decliner, and
Instigator, and Importunator of all Persons, of all sorts, and in all Places;
so that it is feared, you being m^st concerned therein, may be said, To have
spoken Lies in hypocrisy; and have your Conscience seared with a hot-iron; as
the Holy Spirit spoke by Paul expressly; In the latter times some should depart
from the Faith, and should do. 1 Timothy 4.1, 2. Therefore this Epistle is sent
to rebuke you, that you may not be destroyed; and that I may be pure from your
blood, and from the blood of all men; and any that are concerned with you
herein; Wherefore I instruct you with meekness, and entreat you to examine
your self; and to judge your own self, for these enormities by you acted and
committed; that you no longer harden your heart and braze your forehead, and
continue in your sines against the Light of truth and Conscience, or light of
Nature, though you served much time of an Aprentiship to a Scrievener; but as
the Apostle S. Peter, by the Holy Spirit advises. 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. Laying aside
all malice, and all guile, and Hypocrisies, and envyings, and evil speakings;
As newborn Babes desire the sinceer milk of the Word, that you may grow
thereby; for holy David through his temptations and experience, could tell you,
Psalm. 119.9. Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed
thereto, according to thy Word; for the Prophecy came not in old time by the
will of man: But holy men of God spoke, as they were moved by the holy Ghost, 2
Peter. 1.21. Wherefore John Burt be instructed thereby, that you may be
recovered out of the snare of the Devil, who are taken Captive by him at his
will, if God peradventure will give you repentance to the acknowledging of the
truth, as it is written, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. Therefore in all meekness I again
advise you to repent, of your many and particular unfaithfulnesses,
malitiousnesses, envyings, lyings, unnatural combinations, concealements,
threatenings, imprisonings by your self and other your Accomplices, and false
reports to stop and detain my moneys, due to me, not only 66. l. 13. s. 4 d.
in your own hand, besides the use, which is of ^he Mmrgage of the Red Lion Inn
at St. Edmonds Bury, but in other men's also, to put me to charges in
Lawsuits; viz. In Henry Woods hand, my Tenant, which this is the third time,
and in John Wests hand 60. l. which had been paid me but for you and your
Accomplices, Jan 23 1654. besides my many losses other ways, well known to your
self, as also your contrived Demurrings in Chancery, and half perjuries, And
your cancelling, like a Scrievener with one ear, and detaining several
Writings, as well as much moneys, which belong to me, as the Image and
representor of our Fathers Person, and your many Provocations, and incitements,
as well as inticements of others, to lie and swear falsely against me, and to
sue me in several Courts, or to withstand my right, to cause me to sue for it,
to which I was not only bound in 500. l. to you, with Articles to discover our
Fathers Estate, before letters of Administration were delivered me in Sir
Nathanaeel Brents time, but also bound to the Prerogative Court with security
in a far greater sum, and sworn therein also to be a faithful Administrator
to our d^ceased Fathers Estate, you having ever since vexed both my self and
others, and then, and still threatening them if they Pay me; and such whom you
have, and still do procure with you so to do; also your home-swearings
Personally in two Courts. Viz. the one of Chancery, which I hope in time will
be made to submit to the fo^me and Power of that Ordinance, which was Ordered
by His Highness the Lord Protector, and his Council to be Printed and
published, August 22, ^654. both for their limitation and regulation, it
seeming to be the distribution of his own Conscience therein, and a great step
to reform abuses, though by those sons of Zerviah, which sure are but as a spot
in a Pavement, in respect of the whole Nation, it was never yet obeyed, and
submitted unto, and all other Ordinances that have been made besides, are
establish^d and compelled to be obeyed by all People under the Power; And also
your home swearing in that Arbitrary, Irregulated, unlimmited, and
unparralell'd Court of Probates, the very Pest, and Plague, as it is, and has
been lately used to this English Nation; which I hope the present Power will
curb, and bring into Order also in due time, and settle them by Orders, as the
other Courts are settled by the Judges of the Land, viz. the Common Pleas and
the Upper Bench, which shall be by them published in Print, as the Ordinance
for Chancery, for the Peoples instructions and relief, and also Order their
unlimmitted and excessive Fees therein taken, as it formerly was by Statute
Law, and give them Rules also to proceed therein, that for future, as says the
Chancery Ordinance, that there be no more just complaints from the People, so
that they have declared both the Proceeding and Fees of the Chancery to be
unconscionable, I appeal to all that have had to do therein, if they have not
found it so, without they have been in special favor in that Court, and then
by consent much may be done; My Appeal formerly against it, has set forth the
iniquity thereof sufficiently, printed 1653. a Month after the Parliament was
dissolved; I read in a Book called, The Mirror of Justices, made by Henry
Horn. page 293. That the Common people called the Chancery, then a Court of
Conscience, and the Author says, it is to be noted in respect of other Courts,
the Court of Chancery is a Court of a high nature; And the Ordinance made by
His Highness, etc. 1654, calls it The High Court of Chancery, which October. 22.
1654. should have taken place for the regulating and limmiting their excessive
Fees, and exorbitant practices; to the end all Proceedings touching relief in
Equity to be given to that Court, may be with less trouble, expense and delay
then heretofore; thus the Ordinance declares, f^lio 495 523 unto which all
honest Englishmen should gladly shout, Amen, Amen, Amen, and which the penman
hereof hopes to see put in execution by His Highn^ss comm^nd, etc. as sure, as
44 ^ustices, who were hanged in one year, for oppressing the People by false
Judgment, Mirror of Justices, page 239. that famous law-Book says, It is an
abuse of the Common Law, that Justices and their Officers, who kill People by
false Judgment he not destroyed as other murderers, which King Alfred caused
to be done; who caused 44. Justices in one year to be hanged, as murderers for
their false Judgments, which Judges are in the following Pages, perticularly
named, and their false and Arbitrary Judgments, for which they suff^red, death
or imprisonment, or wounding, or loss of limb or member; And accordingly, he
caused mortal rewards to criminal Judges, for wrongful mortal Judgments,
and so he did for wrongful Judgemenss venialls, Imprisonments, for wrongful
imprisonments, and like for like, with the other punishments, page 244. It is
an abuse of the Common Law, to obey the Judge who is appealed of doing wrong,
pages 158. 230. And the Penman hereof Appealeth from the false and wrongful
Judgment of Thomas Manby, George C^ck, Anthony Kous, John Hild^sly, Joachim
Mathewes, or all, or any other Judges of the Court of Probates, and granting
Administrations unto the Common Law of the Land, for relief herein, having by
Letters forewarned them several times, that they could not do it without my
consent, being personally present and it is verily believed, some of these
Judges, would think it judgment contrary to Law, and so wrongful and false
Judg^ment, if they should have stood in my place, and others should have sitten
in their places, and should have so done by them, and judged contrary to Gods
Law, and Englands Law, as they have done by me, who have given yon John Burt my
younger B^other by the second ventor, Letters of Administration, two years after
the law had possessed me thereof, lawfully, and that I had paid, in portions,
and taken receipts from your self, and you had denied it in Court, had not our
sister personally testified the same against you, she seeing you receive a
part thereof, and her self about that time which was about 18 Months since,
given me a release on her part, which being produced in Court, you having
seduced her, and by that means defrauded both of us as yet of our parts of 200.
l. in your hand, and you villanously would have had her to have denied it as
her Act and Deed, and the Judges of Probates, etc. would have persuaded me to
have relinqu^shed it, I am sure you^ Dr. Wiseman can rem^mber this, who
misinformed the Judges for you about it several times, and sputtered hard
therein against me then personally relating the truth unto the Judges against
both his and your lies, and your P^octers also Fisher my Proctor, either being
by you, or some of you so corrupted, or by others conjured to be dumb in my
case, that in my absence you and you^ Accomplices might attain your intended
ends, to null the Administration of the Son and Heir, as the several Orders
in Court will yet testify, which were commonly drawn by Dyer your Proctor to
speak as that Viper would have them, who made the Register enter, or sign what
he pleased; thus would you and your Accomplices have cast out the son long
since, to have shared the inheritance, and yet he had the Power legally, and
was m^de sole Administrator of all that was his Fathers Deceased, and had long
before brought in a true and perfect Inventory, and an Account and Aditionall,
which the Order of the Court says, the Judges allowed of June 6. 1653. for a
true and perfect account, as is therein declared, and your Oath also then
taken, which you may be heartily ttoubled for; and had you one dram of grace,
you would, but at last you procured an unjust Ord^r and upon that, a false and
wrongful Judgment against me, viz. That my Letters of Administration should
be null, and that John Burt should have Letters of Administration, and it was
given you, of which wrongful Proceedings of the Judges of Probates, I have
heard Learned men, and Ancient Practisers both of Common and Civil Laws, say
that it was irregularly and illegally done against both the Civil and the
Common Law, And that if such Arbitrary Judgments, or Sentences be suffered to
be Decreed, what English man can say he has any thing his own, or any
inheritance, by Enlish Law, when Judges without the Peoples or Parties consent,
shall g ve the title, right, interest, dignity or Estate or Inherritance of
the People or any particular Person, or p^oprietie thereunto, away from him or
them wilfully against Law, and contrary to Law; And when Judges do pass their
ju^isdiction, or the bounds of their Delegacies, or of their Commissions, and I
dare jeopard my life to prove Mr. Manby and the rest of the Judges, who gave
you Letters of Administration, have passed their jurisdiction and Delegation,
and Commission; And for such offenses, King Alfred did not meddle with the
judgments; In l^sser Off nces he did not meddle with judgments, but
disinherrited the Justices, and removed them according to the points of those
Statutes in all points, where he could understand that they had passed their
jurisdiction, or the bounds of their Delegacy, or of their Commissions; or had
released or increased any punishment contrary to Law, or done any other wrong,
in dissalowance of a reasonable Exception of the Parties, or to the judgment,
Mirror of Justices, page 245. It is worth the observing, and declaring also,
that the Judges of Probates, etc. could not be ignorant of my Case, and
rightful Cause, it having been d^pending (though to my grief and loss) as
long as Mr. Manby or Mr. Cock had been in and out of Commission, by Act of
Parliament, or Ordinance since, although I had believed that I had ended
Septmeber the 28. before the Acted grew vacatt or null, October the first,
1653. and by the Order of the Court I had charges given me, though since, by
some Officers, and my own Proctor, I have been very much abused, until he
diss^nted, and denied to own my business any longer for that in op^n Court I
had demanded judgem^nt against him for consenting against me, and abusing me,
and laboring to destroy me; so that so much as the Judges has heard, not
only from my self in Court pleaded in Faylor of my Proctor, but also by that
juditious Advocate, and Ancient Practiser, Honored Dr. Swett, and several
Letters and Petitions to enable their memories, and several exceptions in
writeing delivered them, to keep off false and wrongful judgment; for in the
Mirror of Justices, page 198. It is said, The Judge does not offend so much,
that he does not make the Law, but he ^ffendeth in foolish undertaking upon him
to judge foolishly, or falsely; And when you had buried me in Ludgate, in the
height of your Malice and Rage, as one d^ad, or not in being to appear in my
own right, and my Proctor desented, and the Judges denying me any Proctor in
Court to ^ssist me, or appear for me, or to answer for me in my absense, I sent
my Letter from Ludgate, December the 8. 1654, Which Mr. Th^mas Ellis brought
them, which was read in Court, and the par^ie examined by the then Judges, if
it were mine, written by me or no; And I sent it as a Messenger, who came to
them from the dead in Prison, to warn and Protest against them, as often I had
done before, that they should not dare to do unrighteously in judgment, who
seemed then to be much minded to give you Letters of Administration, which
Original Letter, of which that was a Copy, is still to be seen, and as Cain
churlishly denied the Lord, who inquired for Abel whom he had slain, so I,
though shut up by you, cried by my Letter to the Judges of Probates, that as I
was the Eldest son of our Father Deceased, and sole administrator and
representor of his Person, that they would do no wrongful judgment then unto
me, though I, was enclosed and shut up as a dead man, and in that Letter, I did
aver, as I had done before in Court in March, 1654. when I put in my
Exceptions to the Proctors Abbortive and misconceived report which was
underwritten thus; Mr. Manby, I do aver that my life, Liberty or Estate
cannot be taken away, but where the Law does it, and it was but the other day,
the Lord Protector took an Oath, That he would Govern according to the Laws,
Statutes and Customs of this Nation (and the descretion of a Court ought not
to be contrary to Law and Reason.) thus testifies Nathanael Burt, and this was
added to my Letter also from Ludgate to testify they were the lines of a
living man, though the Judges, with you and your Compli^cs looked upon me as
dead, in your judgments, and practices, and this Letter also is preserved to
be given in testimony against their unrighteousn^sse and false wrongful
judgment, and your frawd and maliciousness; John Burt herein may be read, you
have put me to no small trouble, losses and attendances, and charges in
several Courts, besides Imprisonments also by you and your Accomplices
combination, to destroy me in my Name, Liberty, Estate, dependencie of Trade,
to gain bread the staff of life in this Orb, to make me fall under you, who
am the Survior of our deceased Fathers Person in Law, and lively represent or
thereof, and thus you and your Accomplices have Acted to keep me from an Account
of the Estate of my deceased Father, who am in Law the sole Administrator to
his Estate, and all parts and particulars thereof, and to detain and conceal
from me, and to turn it to your own use, profit and Benefit; Witness that
concealing of one Hundred Pounds of money, our Father sent to one William
Whe^stone of St. Giles Holburn, about the year 1638, or 1639. of which, the use
was honestly paid unto our Father, until the Christmas before he dyed, as by
his Book under his own hand will appear, and by witness also, four Pounds half
yearly, which was secured to him, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns by
a Mortgage of two several Houses in Holburne, held by Lease from one William
Wooley Esquire of Lincolnshire, which Writeings of Conveyance, and security, you
possessed your self of secretly and fraudulently, as you did of our Fathers
Keys out of his pocket in his lifetime, to his great grief, and vexation, he
wanting much of his tongues benefit to express, but not then quite dumb,
which you took advantage of, and by this means possessed your self of several
Moneys and other Writeings of Bonds and Mortgages, which you kept concealed,
and some since Cancelled, and others you received the use and profits thereof
your self, sometime uncancelled, and you knowing my Administration was in Power
and in full force, which will be made to appear; And at the same time in the
Chancery, to my first Bill, you and your Accomplices generally demurr and deny,
and not long after to my second Bill for discovery only against your self,
you swear positively an untruth to the major part of our Fathers Estate,
concealed by you; and also of the Mortgage of 200. l. of St. Edmonds Bury;
somewhat therein you confess, upon which confession, it was Ordered to be
divided as 200. l. of clear Estate, of which you know the moyetie or Third part
belongs to me, and as much unto our sisters Children, she being deceased
since, and you having paid neither of us, and though it was put in my
Inventory, yet you know it never came out of your hands, though it came to my
knowledge, and I had been forsworn, and had forfeited a Bond of 500. l. to
you, had I not discovered it as part of our Fathers Estate, he having entered it
into his Book with his own hand writing, which you and others have seen, and
you your self cannot deny, which in the Court of Probates, etc. before the
Judges, you confessed in my presence, you canceled; saying Samuel Thomlins
(once your fervant) could testify it was given you; which you know, you then,
and in your Answer lied in, for he has denied it unto your face, as also in
his Answer in Chancery; But this Mortgage of Mr. Whetstones, which you knew of
many years belore, of 100. l. paying 8. l a year, this is so swallowed, and
Concealed and Forsworn the knowledge of by You in both Courts of Chancery and
Probates, yet you know you received of Mr. William Whetstone the son of William
Whetstone deceased, who was bound with his Father upon the old Mortgage to
perform Covenants, after the rate of 8 per Cent. after our Fathers decease, I
having Letters of Administration, and that you had bound your self to me in
500. l. Bond, with Articles, to discover our deceased Fathers Estate, which
Bond you know (if this be proved) is forfeited by you: And thus you concealed
the same as all the rest, And it is believed, you have concealed a Bond of a
100. l. for the payment of 50. l. wherein Jeames Ryton, and one Tobias Markeham
and old Mrs. Ryton were Bound to our Father, and it is entered into his Book,
the use received by him about Christmas before he deceased, with his own hand,
as Mr. Whetstones is, and demanding of Mrs. Ryton to be satisfied therein, the
same day Mr. Whetstone had satisfied me the truth of his; she sord^dly denied
ever that she knew of any Bond given our Father, or any money had of him, as
though you had been in her belly to prompt her to lie in her Answer; and so
soon as she had done speaking, James Ryton appeared, and he being demanded
concerning 50. l. he should be bound for with one Markham and his Mother, he
before her face confessed it, and has not yet given me full satisfaction of
payment thereof, and to whom; Now since you swear so desperately, and
Whetstones concealment having lain so snugg, I see that neither Lies nor Oaths
will choke you, for it will be proved, that you have received the use to your
self, upon the old Mortgage for time also after our father deceased; and
afterward in Mr. Waltons house, the Scrievener or shop you then sealed new
Writings in your own Name, with Mr. Whetstone, the survivor of his deceased
Father, and then you also with him, and in his Presence altered the old
property thereof into your own Name, and then cancelled the Old Writings, and
Bonds made between both our Fathers deceased as before related, which were at
8. l. per Cent. and yet you like a well-tutered Scrieveners bratt, in all this
you well knew you had acted, and done, swear you knew nothing of this belonging
to your Fathers Estate; And after you had cancelled these old Writings and the
Bond thereto belonging; as is before mentioned, and will be proved to be true
to your face, and to your shame, which by the old men deceased, had been made
and sealed, and again renewed them in your own Name, with his son William
Whetstone, you could not rest content therewith, and satisfied; But you must
have them altered again by Mr. Walton, And then you do entitle and interest
one Francis Rich in the said renewed Mortgage, pretending to Mr. Whetstone you
had received of Francis Rich, for the said Mortgage of his not long before you
had renewed in your own Name, though fraudulently, as he now believes, 100. l
in money, for which cause say you, and Walt n the Scrievener, Whetstone must
now assign to Francis Rich, and become bound to pay the Use to him, as they
had done to our Father for 14. years before, and to you for some time; Then
after sealing, to R^ch by Whetstone, there is a suite commenced, or brought in
the Exchequer of Pleas against William Whetstone, in the Name of Francis Rich;
and in Michaelmas Term, 1654. recovery is made against Whetstone in the said
suite, and Whetstone is thereby forced to compond the same, and pay charges in
Francis Rich his Name, who is now of opinion neither John Burt, or Francis Rich
had or has any right or interest therein, and also William Whetstone at that
time Judgment being in the Name of Francis Rich obtained against him, or to
be, was forced to promise payment thereof to Francis Rich, and for his use, as
then he could agree to stop Execution, and accordingly he paid 25. l. of the
said 100 l. January 4. 1654. and all Interest unto that present day, besides
charges of suite therein, and likewise to promise, Twenty Five Pounds from
thence quarterly, until he had paid in Francis Rich his Name, and for his use,
the full sum of one Hundred Pounds, and Mr. Whetstone says, In all his life as
yet, he never did see or know the said Francis Rich, and this he spoke Thursday
the 29th of March, 1656. but said, Thomas Walton the Scrievener had been there
to see if 25.l. in money were ready to be paid in his Name, and for his use;
and William Whetstone says, He paid the 25.l. above meneioned unto John Burt,
and the Interest, in the Presence of Thomas Walton, and took his Receipt for
Francis Rich his use, and that he had not so much as ever known Nathanael Burt
the elder Brother of John Burt, and sole Administrator of Nathanael Burt their
Father deceased, until March following after, and believes, if he had known
the Administrator, He should not have paid John Burt any money, or suffered
the Old Writings to have been altered in his Name, and afterward into Riches
name, or agreed to the cancelling the old Writings. Oh John Burt, hear Paul's
advice, which was inspired by God, if you will not hear me, who says, Ephe.
5.25. Wherefore, cast off lying, or putting away lying, and speak every man
truth unto his Neighbor; See Esaias. 30.1.8.12.15 For we are members one of
another; and the Lord, the Holy One of Israel has caused it to be noted in a
Book, that it may be for the time to come for ever and ever: which you may read
Prove. 12 19.22. and 15.27, 28, 29, 20.21.21.6.28.24, Lying lips are an
abomination to the Lord, But they that deal truly are his delight, But a lying
tongue is but for a moment; He that is greedy of gain, troubles his own
House: and he that makes haste to be rich, shall not be innocent; An
Inherritance may begotten hastily at the beginning: but the end thereof shall
not be blessed; And I believe, in time, if you receive not this instruction,
many more of your Concealements and frauds, you have so lustily covered with
Lying; and so falsely sworn against, of which you see this apparently is one,
for a righteous man hates Lying, but a wicked man is loathsome, and comes to
shame. Prove. 13.5. and whosoever robs his Father, or his Mother, and says it is
no transgression, the same is the Companion of a destroyer. And you robbed our
Father of his Keys in his life time, which you know too well, which the City
Crier cried before your door about seven Weeks before he dyed, though you
never delivered them no more then the Lease of the Crown you possessed, and the
Fine thereto belonging, and much Moneys and other Bonds and Mortgages, and
money belonging then to him, and since to his Estate; All which has been
denied by you in Chancery, by your delaying, hum -- haw demurrer, and in your
Answer also. Yet John, you may very well remember, you once had me to one Mr.
Oglethorps in Alderman-Bury; I could name you the day also, for I entered it for
Memory, who is Attorney of the Upper Bench, and then said, you would deny your
Demurrer, and give an Answer to my first Bill in Chancery; if I would accept
thereof, which it seems he then hindered you in, or of, like a kindle-coal,
and sower of discord, for this was within Seven Months after our Father
deceased; which had you Answered then, you might have saved many suits in Law,
and much Money you have caused to be spent, and loss and sufferings to me, and
it is like, have had a conscience less void of offense, but after you were come
forth from him, I having left you together, you may remember that before you
and I then parted, you wept to me, and said, You durst not answer the said
Bill, least that you should make your self guilty of Felony thereby, the Keys
of our Father having been Cried, and they and other things of our Fathers by
you denied, and the God of truth knows this is truth, for I believe as it is
written, A false Witness shall not be unpunished, and he that speaks Lies
shall perish, he shall not escape, it is mentioned twice in five Verses. Prove.
19.5, 9. and a lying tongue, An heart that devises wicked imaginations, A
false Witness that speaks Lies, and him that sows Discord among Brethren,
are four of the seven things God hates. Prove. 6.17, 18, 19. and that are to
Him an Abomination; Since it is thus John Burt, you must repent, for your Lies,
spoken and sworn by you in the Court of Probates, etc. with your hand lifted
up toward heaven, June 6. 1653. and in your Chancery Answer not long after;
and observe it well, though I do not say as Peter said when Ananias lied, or
dissembled, or played the Hypocrite, discovering a part, and keeping back a
part of what he sold his possession for, Acts 5.1, 2, 3, 4. Whilst it
remained, was it not thy own? and this was by the Apostle called deceit, as
well as Hypocrisy, dissembling and lying; yet you do not only keep back much
of our Fathers Estate and conceal it, and deny it, but you swear thereunto,
and lie in your swearing; and for your swearing a Lie; I say to you, as Peter
said to Ananias, Why has Satan filled thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost?
Why have thou let Satan fill thine heart to lie in the Presence of God, with
thine hand lifted up toward heaven, as is before set forth; The Lord by Hosea
says, By lying and swearing, with other sins, a Land is brought to mourn,
and all therein to languish, for abusing of the God of truth; and such wicked
speakings, and swearings, in Scripture are called as well Cursings as Lyings,
and Perjurie, if you read the Bible with Annotations, it is said Perjurie, in
the other Cursing. Psalm. 14.7. His mouth is full of Cursing and Deceit, and
fraud; sure he is looked on by David to be so wicked, that he does not care
what he devises or does in his Pride, to bring about his imagined or malicious
ends, or what he says or swears; under his tongue is mischief and vanity,
Psalm. 50.12. And let them be taken in their Pride, even for their prrjury and
Lies they speak, for the sin of their mouth, and the words of their lips;
And we see the Pillory catch them sometimes by the Law of England, for their
false swearings, the sin of their mouth, though in the Chancery lying lips is
cherrished, to beget Delays, and Demurres, and to procure Motion, upon Motion,
and Order upon Order, as thousands by woeful Experience have found, to their
great loss, and detryment, yea to their undoing and impoverishing and ruin;
For if the Lord had not been on my side, long ere this I had been devoured
therein: as now the Court of Probates destroy my Title and Interest against
Law, to destroy and expunge, or draw out my Estate in Charge of Lawsuits to
defend my right by Law, even my birthright, which by Law was given me, to be
sole Administrator of my deceased Fathe s Estate, and of all and singular the
Goods, Chattells and Debts of the said disceased whatsoever; and the Law gave
me power to demand, by my Letters of Administration, and Collect; Levy and in
legal manner, require all, and all manner of debt or debts due and oweing to
the said deceased; These are part of the words of my Administration, and I
would very fain know of the Judges for Probates, and granting Letters of
Administration, if an Administrator can Demand, Coll^^^; Leavy and in a legal
manner require, all and all manner of Debt and Debts due and oweing to the said
disceased, he is made Administrator unto, if any, who concealing the major
part, or part thereof, lesser or more, and swear the contrary before their
faces in Court, as you have done (John Burt) and if I or another man, by virtue
of Letters of Administration, can either demand, Leavy, and in a legal manner
require, any debt or Debts, or Collect, any such due or owing, he wanting
Witness thereunto, so long as they continue concealed, buried, and detained, by
the Policy, deceit, fraud, and evil Conscience or contrivance of the
Concealor, who maliciously swears and falsely, he knows not thereof, or of
any part of the deceaseds Estate, or parcel th^reof, that any has come to his
hand^ or Possession since the decease of the intestate, or does r^main in his
Custody, at his present swearing, neither does he know of any of the Dece^seds
Estate, remaining in the hands or P^ssession of a^y other Person; but only of
the Administrator ^uch an Oat being taken in any Court of Equity or of
Probates, by, any conc^^le^, how the Administrator can either Collect or Leavy
in a legal manner, by any Power of his Administ^ation, any Debt o^ Debts
oweing and due to the said Estate, when men will so pernitiously conceal and
combine together to defraude the Administrator, and so cursedly lie, and swear
therein, until time discover the truth thereof, and that by witness to
testify the same that so the obstinate concealer of the intestates Estate,
which denies it by Oaths, and makes his neck as an Iron sinew, and his brow
Brass, to lie, and swear untruths, which it is believed you have done, for
which I pray the Lord, who deferred his anger to the house of Jaacob, and
refrained to cut them off, to give you repentance, that you may no more swear
falsely, and dishonor the Almighty, by taking his Name in vain; I testify
therefore unto you John Burt, that by the Law of God, and man, you have no part
of our Fathers Estate remains in your hands or custody, or disposed of and by
you concealed, belongs to you, or any you have disposed of it unto, without
my consent thereunto, and thereof, for by Gods law, you ought to restore it to
me as the next of kin, and so the representor of his Person, or Father
disceased, and by law sole Administrator of all that can be called his Estate,
or belonging thereunto in his life, and at his death, and you knew thereof very
well, it being the second Article of our Agreement, That Nathanael Burt, the
eldest son of Nathanael Burt deceased, Citizen and Sadler of London, should
sue forth of the Prerogative Court, under the seal of the said Court. Letters
of Administration; and the third Article thereof; Item, That either of the said
Parties shall, and Will from time to time, to the utmost of their, and either
of their knowledge, make full and clear discovery, and Declaration of the said
Estate; and to this you know Major Hayne the Scrievener that made them, and his
two Servants are witnesses therein, and at the same time you sealed a Bond of
500. l. to me, to keep the Articles and Covenants therein contained; which was
to Discover from time, to time, the Estate, but not to conceal the Estate from
time to time, which if you submit not your self for the breach thereof, time
may compel you thereunto, or discover it to Englands Law, which may compel
you to perform or suffer accordingly; and reward you for breach of your
Articles and Covenants, and Bond, and faith, as a younger son, or younger
Brother, and then truth will discover it to time, and time then will not
conceal it from the knowledge of men, when that shall come to pass: And you
and your Accomplices opposed me all that you could, before my Letters of
Administration were sealed to me and withstood me to the face to hinder me
therein; but then I striking the words of the Statute law, 31 Ed. 3. 11. and
the 21 Hen. 8.5. And proving my self to be the next of kin, and the next most
lawful Friend of our Father, who died intestate, and none being in equality
and degree of kindred with me; which being by me written out of the Book, and
brought in my hand, that I might strengthen my Claim thereby, you and your
Accomplices Pride was abated, your malice for the present assuaged and your
Devices for that time confounded, and by Letters of Administration I was
legally confirmed sole Administrator, etc. and neither you nor your Accomplices
secretly or openly could hinder me thereof except you had bereft me of my life,
and by that means my last glass had been run, as in September last 1644. you
threatened me; so indeed if you had not suffered by law, you might have come to
have been Administrator to our Fathers Estate deceased; But while I live, you
cannot be by Gods Law or Englands Law, or Custom, for if that there were any
truth, or mercy, or knowledge of God in the Chancery to be found, I or another
man might have relief therein, according to the Statute of the Fifth of Eliz.
cap. 5. which says, For the avoiding as well of long and tedious Suites, as
also great Expenses in prosecuting of Civil Causes, by reason of diverse
Appeals permited to be made by Order of the Laws Civil in such cases, etc.
Be it inacted, etc. all and every such Judgment or Sentence definitive, given
or pronounced in any Civil and Marine Cause, upon Appeal lawfully to be made
therein to the Queens Majesty in Her Highness Court of Chancery, by such
Commissioners, etc. as it has been used in such Cases shall be final, and no
further Appeal to be had or made from the said Judgment or Sentence
definitive. I would ask any man, or Commissioner thereof, How the People can
expect Equity therein, or relief thereby, since they will not obey and fulfill
that Equitable and lawdable Ordinance, Ordained by His Highness the Lord
Protector, by and with the consent of His Council, who Ordained therein, That
the Chancellor, Keeper or Commissioners of the Great Seal for the time being,
shall according to the times, and in manner by this Ordinance prescribed, put
in Execution, all the Rules, Laws, Orders and Directions before mentioned;
That for the future there be no more cause of just complaints from the People,
folio. 522. 523 or who can or dare be encouraged to appeal to His Highness^
Court of Chaucery, while the Practisers therein delay the People, and put them
to such trouble and Expense, that it is scarce one of a thousand, but may
feelingly and experimentally say; that when they are complaining therein, and
waiting for Equity, the Remedy there is as bad, if not worse then the Disease;
being thus feelingly sensible of the iniquity of this unconscionable Court,
which the Commissioners should take care with all diligence and Circumspection,
that all the Officers, Ministers, Clerks and servants, belonging to the said
Court do honestly, and faithfully etc. in the Chancery, but how many faithful
English men heartily desire the regulation, yea rather the Reformation thereof,
in Conscience, in honesty and truth and of all Courts of Judicature, according
to Gods Word, and Law and not that they should imagine and practice mischief in
the Law; I conclude against the iniquity, Falsehood, and false judgments I have
seen in the Court of Chancery, which when they have submitted to the Ordinance,
I will call the High Court of Chancery, because they may be then said to be
under His Highness Protection, when they obey his Ordinances, which are for
Gods glory and the Peoples good, as this Ordinance it is hoped, cannot but be,
and also that thing so irregular, and unlimmittd, at Doctors Commons, which
calls it self, with all that rabble Rowt belongs thereunto, a Court of
Probates, etc. when sitting, which formerly sat in the Star Chamber place at
Westminster, where when there were Bishops and a King, or a King and Council
and Bishops, held a Court there, called the Star Chamber from the place; and
it is believed by judicious men, though they were cried but against for
Injustice, Extortion and Opressing of the People, and acting Arbitrarily
against Law, that these have exceeded their Exorbitances, and have exacted, and
extorted from the People, since their being, which was in comparrison but the
other day, abundantly more then they, only these have some colourableness for
their exacting of Fees by the Act of Parliament made April. 1653. to continue
in force until the first of Octoher, 1653. and no longer, the remainder of the
Fees taken by the Registers, their sallaries, and under Officers being paid,
and Clerks, the overpluss or profits to be paid to Commissioners for the use of
the Navy. Reader, I will give you an account of one Extortion Acted in this
Court of Probates, June the 8. 1654. by which a Widow with five Children was
oppressed against the Statute of the 21 Hen. 8.5. In my own sight and
knowledge, since obtainmed of the Statute Law to curb their Exactions and
Oppressions thereof, which was thus; A Minister of the Court of Probates agreed
with the Widow, before he would deliver her the Administration under the Seal
of the Court, for 3. l. for which she paid him down presently 50. s. and
promised him 10. s. more, and then he delivered the Widow Letters of
Administration, her Husband dying Intestate, and her Inventory did but amount
to not full 20. l. and by Statute Law, he should have taken but 3 s. 6 d, if
they had amounted to 40. l. sterling, so they had not exceeded, and not above;
and I never knew this Statute repealed, and the unlawful Exactions are said in
the said Act, To be against Right and Justice; and I pray, why has not His
Highness the Lord Protector and His Council, since Parliaments have neglected
it, Power to ease the People in such unlawful Exactions of Fees as the
Chancery, and the Court of Probates by their Ministers exacted, Extorted and
taken to the great oppression and impoverishing of the People; witness this
distressed Widows Case with five Children, who has never been able ever since
to pay that money, where she was feign to borrow it to stop this Extorting
Ministers appetite of money, or scarcely to put clothes on her Children for
shift convenient: And Exaction, Extortion and Oppression are forbidden by Gods
Law and Word, which People, Officers, Judges and Ministers of Courts, who
forsake Gods Law, and Word, Psalm. 119.158. I beheld the Transgressors, says
David, and was grieved, because they kept not thy Word, Rivers of Waters run
down mine eyes, because they keep not thy Law. O that our Governors and People
would do the like: Wherefore hear your Elder Bro^hers Exhortation John Burt,
and suffer this my rebuke, for your sin against God, our deceased Father, whom
you have much abused, and belyed, and my self the Penman hereof, and also your
own self, and your malicious sinning has now found you out, and in our Fathers
life time also caused him, when you brought your Children, and set them up upon
his bedside, which sure was well done of you, that he might bless them before
he departed this life, and your self also, but he remembering how extremely you
had abused him, by possessing your self of his Keys, out of his Pocket, which
he had persued you to your own house for, though he were not so capable to
express by words, to you, as to reprove some, that others as well as your
self, might hear him declare himself demonstratively; yet you know he
remembered your ungodly abusing of him, and therefore would not acknowledge you,
or your Children, but did bid you and them be gone, be gone, take them away,
take them away, as though the sight of you and your Children, were both of you
a grievous vexation to him, he then extremely wringing his hands, and lifting
them up so, and then spreading them, doubling his dislike, saying, Be gone, be
gone, away, away, to you and your Children, and would not be quiet, whilst you
and your Children were in his presence; and though you made it your advantage
in his Infirmity to Possess what you could of his by your overreaching, and
fraudulent and unlawful dealing, or deceiving Policy; pray that it may not be
your Curse in which you think to have blessed your self; see Jaacobs
filialness, He durst not offend or abuse his Father when he was blind, though
his Mother bid him obey her voice therein. Genesis 27.8.12. My Father peradventure
will feel me, and I shall seem to him, as a Deceiver, and I shall bring a Curse
upon me, and not a Blessing; And by these your trespasses against our Father,
and my self, you have even almost destroyed me, your Elder Brother, in my
outward or Temperall Estate, God knows, by multitudes of Troubles and Losses,
and Law Suites, and Lawyers Answering, with the Money belonging thereto drawn
out and expended, the better to color your guiltiness, And I should make my
self guilty of all these your sins, and Trespasses, If I should not rebuke
you; I must therefore rebuke you, and that openly, if I will observe Gods
Commands, and Scripture Rules, For it is written, Levit. 19.17. Thou shall not
hate thy Brother in thine heart, but thou shall plainly rebuke him, and not
suffer sin upon him, says the Margent, or that thou bear not sin for him,
thou shall in any wise rebuke him; Wherefore, that you may not bless your self
in your evil Ways, saying, You have not sinned in all that you have done to
our deceased Father, and to my self, and to the Estate, as is herein related,
and charged by me, which you know is truth; See and read what the Lord
commanded Moses, to teach the People; which I told you before, are written in a
Book for our learning, for the time to come for ever and ever. Ye shall not
steal, neither deal falsely, neither Lie one to another, And ye shall not swear
by my Name falsely, Thou shall not defraude thy Neighbor, neither rob him, and
read Levit. 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. compared with Numb. 5.6, 7, 8. It is written, If
a soul sin, and commit a Trespass against the Lord, and lie unto his Neighbor
in that which was delivered him to keep, or in fellowship, or dealing, says
the Margent, or that which was put to him of trust, in a thing taken away by
violence, has deceived his Neighbor, or does by Robbery or violence oppress
his Neighbor, or has found that which was lost, and lies concerning it, and
swears falsely; Or has found that which was lost, and denies it, and
forsweareth it, and swears falsely, in any of all these that a man does,
sinning therein, or for any of these things that a man does, wherein he
sins, Then it shall be, because he has sinned, and is guilty, or when I
say, he thus sins, and trespasseth, that he shall restore that which he took
violently away, or the thing which he has deceitfully gotten, or he shall then
restore the Robbery that he has robbed, or the thing by violence which he took
by force, or the thing which was delivered him to keep, or the lost thing which
he found; Or all that, about which he has sworn falsely, Or for whatsoever he
has sworn falsely, he shall even restore it in the principal, and shall add
the fifth part more thereto, and give it unto him to whom it appartaineth, or he
shall both restore it in the whole Sum, and give it unto him to whom it
pertains in the day of his Trepass Offering, says the Margent, or in the
day of his being found guilty, or the same day he offers for his Trespass, or
give it unto him against whom he has trespassed; But if the man have no
Kinsman to whom he should restore the Damage, or to be recompensed for the
Trespass, of Lying, and Detaining, and Concealing, as before related; Herein is
used two several Translations, for the plainer expressing of Trespasses.
Therefore John Burt, now that it will be proved against you, that you are
guilty of concealing Mr. Whetstones Mortgage, and denying of it by Oath, and
cancelling it, and altering it, as before related, you ought both to make
Restitution to me, and to humble your self also, which you will find Christ
taught to men when he was upon Earth, which strengthens this Scripture, and
makes a threefold Testimony against you, or any obstinate Liar or Concealer,
or false Swearer, and sure you ought to observe it, and to conform thereunto,
Matt. 5.24, 25. Therefore if thou bring thy Gift before the Aaltar, and there
remembrest that thy Brother has ought against thee, leave there thy Gift
before the Aaltar, And go thy way, first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then
come offer thy Gift. Jesus speaking to his Disciples about offenses, said, Take
heed to your selves, Luke 17.1.3, 4. If thy Brother trespass against thee,
rebuke him, and if he repent forgive him, And if he trespass against thee
seven times in a day, and seven times in a day turn again to thee, saying, I
repent, thou shall forgive him; Thus you see by Scripture proved, That for
false swearings about things lost and concealed, or taken deceitfully, or
violently, or wrongfully gotten, or if it were delivered one to keep, the
principal shall be restored to him to whom it appertains, with a Fifth part
more also, or the next Kinsman, and I am sure you know not any so near as my
self; nay you bind me in 500. l. and Articles to to you, I being the Eldest
Son of our Father deceased, to sue out Letters of Administration under the
seal of the Prerogative Court, and therein to Discover the Estate, or any part
or parcel thereof; Wherefore I by these Lines demand from you a true and real
Discovery, and satisfaction in some measure porportionable, that is Whetstones
Mortgage for 100. l. and the use thereof for three Years past at Christmas
last, restored me, and my Dividend of the Mortgage of St. Edmonds Bury, and
the right and Interest of all Moneys or Writings by you concealled, that
belongs to our deceased Fathers Estate, or did belong thereunto, and I
require, that you receive these Rebukes and Instructions in love, and set your
self to observe them, and show it by your Answer hereunto, that I may receive
you, and embrace you, and forgive you: Jaacob, who in his youth, by his Mothers
persuasions and subtilty, subplanted his Elder Brother Esau, and caused Isaac
thereat to tremble, and after was feign to fly, and leave both Father and
Mother for fear of loosing his Life by his provoked Elder Brother, as was told
him by their Mother, yet many years after, he journeying near Esau his Elder
Brother, at his return from Prdan Aram, Jaacob sent Mess^ngers to call his
Elder Brother Esau Lord, and to desi^^ he might find grace in his sight, and
sent him a great Pr^sent, to appease his Elder Brother Esau, that so he might
be again accepted; and the Messengers were commanded to say, It is a Present,
thy Servant Jaacob has sent unto my Lord Esau; and when Esau had accepted, and
embraced his Brother Jaacob, and reconciled himself to him; I have seen thy
face (says Jaacob) as if I had seen the face of God, in that thou were pleased
with me; therefore Experience as well as Scripture teaches, How pleasant a
thing it is for Brethren to live together in amity, in Unity, and Prove. 18.19.
you may read, A Brother offended is harder to be won then a strong City, and
their Contentions are like the Bars of a Castle; and though your abuses to our
Father deceased have been very great, and those Abuses and Provocations you
have offered to me herein related, if you will say, it repents you therefore,
and submit your self as Jaacob did, and receive these my M^ss^ngers to you of
Love, and Peace; for open rebuke is better then secret love, for the heart of a
man disposing, and the Answer of the tongue, are both from the Lord, Prove.
16.1. These Lines (my Messengers) penned by Gods Assistance, are to desire you,
You will not let Satan fill your heart with bitterness, or harden it any
longer, or to conspire against me any more evilly; but receive the invitation
of Reconciliation, that we may keep the Feast approaching, before the Lawyers
Term, no^ with the old Leaven, neither with the leaven of Malice and
Wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of Sincerity and Truth, that God may
receive Glory therein, our Fathers Name honored thereby, and our selves
Established, to our enemies astonishment, that they may say, you have demeaned
your self as the Son of our deceased Father, not delighting in Frauds or
Malice, to destroy your Fathers Elder Son, and the Estate also; which if you
thus Declare your self, I hope, I shall not only receive you with the Spirit
of meekness, but I shall receive you as a loving Christian Brother, that might
be said to be faithful and dear unto me; and I shall labor also to restore
you in all meekness; All which will vex your Viperous brood, either Henry
Wood, that mally part fellow, or any others, who expect to get by keeping you
at Discord, and flatter you, That either Common Law or Equity will bear you or
them out in any fraudulent, or unjust Actions, for Truth is strong, and will
prevail above all the Enemies thereof; Thus believe: Captain Nathanael Burt,
the Eldest Son of his deceased Father, from whom he believes oy you proceeded,
and therefore truly desires your good in Christ Jesus.

From my House in Windmill Court, April 6. 1655. where I expect your Answer
within 6 days, otherwise expect to have it Printed, that truth may appear, as
it is plain truth, declared to public view. By N. B.

POSTSCRIPT.
READER,
SEe and discern what great advantages, Practisers have belonging to that is
called Law, Justice and Right, or Equity to make themselves rich by defending
or pleading for Concealers, Combinators, Defrauders, detainers of other men's
Profits and rights, who labor by Demurring, lying and false swearing to color
it, and not to be brought to light; for every one that does evil, hates the
light, least his deeds should be made manifest, or reproved; and these
Practisers do not only labor to extinguish Truth, but at length, many times
themselves possess that Inheritance or Portion belongs to those whom they have
hightened by their Dissentions; Let all Fathers be entreated, if they have any
Estate to leave their Children, to dispose of it by Will, to avoid discord, and
disscention among Brethren, and the eating up of their Estates by the Ravening
Estate destroying Practisers belonging most of them to that Hell fraught with
Iniquity, and Liars called The High Court of Chancery; And observe also thus;
by John Burts Combination, am I kept bare of Moneys, and by the Charge and loss
I daily feel, am necessitated, and was fain to render my body to Prison to save
my Bayl from the malice of Peter Tomson, who red a Daughter of mine in stead of
marrying of her, who complying also with John Burt, forced her to make an
Affidavit against me in Chancery, without any subpena thereto, to please him
and her Husband, would persuade her also, if she obeyed him not herein, how
should he live in Peace with her or could he love her, if she would not be
ruled by him, and do what he would have her do, though against her own
Father: Is not this unrighteous Brat, full of Malignity, malitiousn^esse and
Envy? and is ^e not dissobedient, that would combine to stop his Wives Father
from receiving several Moneys to dissable him to pay him, and then to throw
him into Prison; Is not such a one without Christianity? though he breaks
bread with Mr. Nerton, and may he not be said to be without natural affection,
without understanding, inplacable, unmercifull, as Romans 1.28, 29, 30, 31, 32.
and may it not be said, that such who Act thus, are delivered up, or given over
to a Reprobate mind, which the Marginall Notes render thus, into a mad and
froward mind, whereby it comes to pass that the Conscience being once put
out, and having almost no more remorse of sin, men run headlong into all
kind of mischief; thus Diabolical Practisers of the Law will sell the Right
and Interest of the Righteous Person for a pair of shoes, or a piece of bread,
thus are thy People eaten up all the day long by them as bread, but these
Gormorants may in time be caused to Vomit up their morsells again, for as the
Crown indureth not to every generation, so Riches are not for ever; for though
the ways of wicked men, and such who are greedy of gains, would take away the
Life and Liberty of the owners thereof Prove. 1.19. Malice shall slay the
wicked, and they that hate the Righteous shall perish, for though the troubles
and afflictions of the Righteous are many, The Lord hears, and delivers
them out of all their troubles, Psalm. 34.17.19, 21. But these Politic Foxes,
and other subtle serpentine fellows, who pretend they are Lawyers, but indeed
they are Enemies to the Law both of God, and of England, and also the Peoples
Privileges and Liberties, and such Countors or Pleaders, whether Sergeants,
Counselors or Attorneys, Solicitors or other the Plaintiffs or Defendants
Friend, either Doctor or Proctors; For though Lawyers say, an Englishman is not
to Plead his own Case, yet that ancient Law-book called The Mirror of
Justices, will tell you, Though every one be not admitted to Plead, some are
admitted to plead in all Actions without Tutors, and some but in fellonies;
and where any Person is not capable, or in a Capacity; therein Countors or
Pleaders are allowed to defend their Clyents Causes, according to the Rules of
Law, and the Customs of the Realm, and every one that knows not how to
defend their Causes in Judgment; and there are many that do, says the Author.
page 65. 128. And therefore Pleaders are necessary; so that, that which the
Plaintiff, or Actors cannot, or know not how to do themselves, they may do by
their Sergeants, Attorneys or Friends; Again says he, Countors are Sergeants
skillful in the Laws of the Realm; who serve the Common People to declare and
defend Actions in Judgment; And every Countor is chargeable by Oath, That he
shall do no wrong nor falsitie; and also that he put no false Dilatories into
Court, nor move or offer any false Corruptions, Deceits, Leasings or false
Lies, nor consents to any such, nor false Witnesses; and I say of the Law of
England, next unto Gods Sacred Law, 1 Timothy 18. Which is good, if it be used
lawfully, which is made for lawless and dissobedient Persons, etc. And for
Liars and Perjured Persons, and one that Writ concerning Courts in King Henry
the Eights time, says, Note that an Oath ought to have three Companions,
Truth, Justice and Judgment; And if that be wanting, it is no Oath but
Perjurie; and St. Paul says, That the Law is made for offenders, for Liars and
perjured Persons; Perjury is called a great offense, whether in a procured
Witness, or acted by one Personally in his own Case, when it shall be
discovered and proved to be his own Act, that by his own consent and
agreement, he shall wilfully a d corru^^ly in any Court of Chancery, or Court
of Probates, etc. formerly called the Prerogative Court, or Spiritual Court,
or in any of the other Courts formerly belonging to the Kings or Queens of
England; All the Judges of England, 9. Ed. 4.53. did manifestly affirm, That
the Chancery, Kings Bench, Common Pleas, and Exchequer be all the Kings Courts,
and have been time out of mind, and so that no man knows which of them is
most ancient, used 19. Ed. 4.4. and Cooks Preface to the Eighth Report,
practice of the High Court of Chancery, page 56. and choice Cases of Chancery.
page 141. A Subpoena was awarded out of this Court, to Answer a Bill of
Perjury, committed by the Defendant Goze, in swearing for the impotencie of the
other Defendant, whereas he was not above 50 years old, and not able to
travel, Griffeth plaintiff, ap Jenkin and Goze Defendants, Anno 21, 22. El^z.
and are not the Courts now called His Highness Courts, the Lord Protect^r; The
Chancery had a Sovereign Power above ^ll other Courts of Equity, it being a
Court of the distribution of the Kings own Conscience, and Bills are Exhibitted
here in the vacancie of the Lord Keeper, or Chancellor to his own Royal
Person, viz. To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, in His High Court of
Chancery, Practice of Chancery unfoulded, page 35. and will you not suffer the
distribution of His Highness Conscience, viz. OLIVER Lord Protector, the
present Governor, whose Name you know all men are now to obey, to be
distributed in His Highness High Court of Chancery, Perjury was fined, examined
and punnished, Transaactions of the the High Court of Chancery, page 156. 157.
Perjury to be examined here, Halse contra Brown, notwithstanding the cause,
was dismissed. 16. Eliz. fol. 401. Freeborn contra leisure in Trin. 20. Jac.
li. B. Mound. contra Culme, 40. pounds cost given for Perjury in Mich. 14. Car.
in the j^dgement Roll, the 37. H, 8 between Baskervile and Guill^ams, set on
the Pillory for procuring Perjury in the Spiritual Court; with diverse others,
not herein named, who were punished by Chancery Power; And I hope, since we
have such Presidents, when His Highness Conscience shall be distributed in His
Court of Chancery, as it has been in other Kings time, or Governments, The
Justices of other Courts of Westminster, have their Authority by Writ or
Patient under the Great Seal of England, being the Seal of Chancery, which is
Committed to the Lord Chancellor, or Keeper by the King, together with the
distribution of his own Conscience; Thus have Kings promised to Govern Gods
People, to maintain and defend their Persons, and their Goods, in Peace, by
Rules of Law; and this has His Highness the Lord Protector sworn to Govern
by the Laws, Statutes and Customs of this Nation; seeking the Nations Peace,
and causing Justice and Law to be equally Administered. This He signed December
16, 1653.

O. CROMWELL.
ANd this ought the peaceable People of the Three Nations to claim and expect
from His Highness, and to endeavor peaceably to obtain, and under this
Protection of His Highness O. CROMWELL, declared Lord Protector, as abovesaid,
I Claim and require the defense of my Person from violence, and injury, and the
Right, Title, Property, and Interest in my own Goods and Estate, in Peace
according to Gods Law, and the Rules of the Law of England, which comes nearest
to Gods Law, from fraudulent concealment, and from false Judgment, for it is
Written. Psalm. 119.150.165. Great peace have they which love thy Law, and
nothing shall offend them; but they that f^llow after mischief, are far from
thy Law. I read in a Book, called, For the sacred Law of the Land, Cap. 1. The
Precepts of Law are (as Bracton, De. Not. Deo. 1. To live honestly, wrong no
man, give every man his own; Our Savior comprehends the same in one Rule also;
Do as you would be done to, and this is called the Law and the Prophets, Matthew.
7.12. Presidents have only so much of Law, as they have of Justice; Chapter Just.
Hub. 270. Those and Laws are built upon Reason and Justice, Law and Justice
are inseparable. We read in our Old Laws, 1. Bract. l. 4. c. 4. In the time of
the Danish Kings, right was buried in the Realm, the Laws and Customs slept
together in their time, says Fleta, Judgment and Peace go together, 1. c.
29. and it is a good Consequence) that so common Justice and Right may be done
to every Man; Britton unites Peace and Law (in another place) as fully; Peace,
says he, cannot well be without Law. fol. 1. the Arbitrary will of man cannot
be Law, Laws cannot be just, without they be certain. It is the best Law
says the Illustrious Viscount St. Albon. Aphorism 8. which leaves least to the
Arbitrariness of the Judge, says Francis White the Author thereof in his
Preface, page 18. No man is assured, He shall either keep his Estate, or
transmit it to Posterity, but by the Laws, let the Inherritance be what it can
be, there is more taken from the Laws, which direct and fix the Descent, and
wall it in, then from our Parents; The poorest necessitated man, amidst the
calamityes of this present life, who lies under Oppression and misery, even
crushed almost to pieces, which might make him loath his Condition, he would
yet be more unhappy, were not the Law his Sanctuary; and here now being come to
the just and wholesome Sanction of the Laws, when they are obeyed and
Reverenced, I shall herein rest, and make it my Sanctuary, as of old it has
been to our Ancestors, committing my self in spirit to Jeovah the Great
Lawgiver, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords the Mighty GOD, and my
Person and Estate, and Franchise, and Right, unto the Protector Ordained and
set up by God, as Ruler and Governor of the Three Nations, and ought to be
God's Minister for our good, for Rulers are not a terror for good Works, but
for evil. Romans 13.1, 2, 3, 4. and to His Highness Conscience distributed, in
His Highness Courts; and in time, I hope to see Englands Laws, Statutes and
Customs maintained, and Justice and Law equally administered, and all false
Judgments rectified, and Judges punished, and the abusive Practice in His
Highness Courts reformed, for the Peoples tranquillity and Peace.

And so prays the Penman hereof, N. B.
April. 9. 1655.


Philostratus Philodemius,
WHo tendered the Consideration of Seasonable Observations to His Highness the
Lord Protector and His Council, relating to the High Court of Chancery, and the
Fees and Proceedings thereof, and in the 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, pages thereof,
in the Table, where he sets down the then standing Fees were taken, what will
content the Labourer, and what will be saved to the Common Wealth; The Six
Clerks demanded, says he, by virtue of a Pattent from the late King a gain
for Inrollment, the six Clerks, and the Three Masters of the Petty Bag; they
also demanded great Fees by color of a Pattent or Charter from the late King,
and the Examiners Office, demanded also by color of a Pattent from the late
King; says the said Author, the Subpoena Office is a Monopoly; Reader, I pray
observe, at the Subpoena Office, they have submitted to the Regulation of the
Ordinance made by the Lord Protector and his Council. I pray why shall not the
rest of the Pattentees submit to this Ordinance, as well as the Subpoena
Monopoly Office? also might not the Pattenttees and Monopolizers, which were
under the late King, demanders by color of Pattents from the King, extort
moneys from the People as these now do, although they are commanded otherwise,
which for their Information is Exemplified in the Table of Fees belonging to
the said Ordinance, in the 66 Distinction of the said Ordinance you may read
thus, That if any Register, chief Clerk, Examiner, Attorney of the said Court,
or Officer for making Subpoenas, shall either directly, or indirectly, demand
take or receive any other Fees, or sum of money, then what is contained in the
Table annexed, etc. And every such Offense shall be, and is hereby Ordained,
adjudged and declared, and shall be reputed and taken to be Extortion, and
shall be punished as Extortion, and that every Person or Persons so offending,
and thereof convicted, shall be, and are hereby dissabled to bear any Office
of Trust or P^^fit in the Common Wealth; you may herein see that the ^u^poe^^
Officers have submitted to the said Ordinance, and the table ^f Fees thereunto
annexed, least they should loose their several and respective Places, and be
diss^bled for nonconformance thereunto, it being so ordained by the Authority
aforesaid. The other Officers of Chancery that are greater in Place, can read
better then I, though they will not obey thereunto, Distinction the 65. It is
Ordained, That the Master of the Rolls, and Masters of the Chancery
respectively shall not demand, take or receive any other Fees then what are
contained in the Table annexed, and that every offense in that behalf shall be,
and is hereby adjudged and declared to be Extortion; and shall be punished as
Extortion.

Reader, This Ordinance must be obeyed, as all the rest this present Power has
made and Ordained, maugre all chose that call themselves Lawyers, or their
dependants, see and observe the Subpoena Officers belonging to the Lord
Protectors Highness Court of Conscience, the Chancery, in which I pray you all
to help me in your Prayers, that God will Enable O. CROMWELL who was sworn Lord
Protector the Sixteenth of December, 1653. by the Lords Commissioners, they
Administering the said Oath to him, that he may distribute a good Conscience to
the Peoples relief in Equity and Justice, that his face may appear as an Angel
of God;

So prays Captain, N. B

FINIS.

