A BRIEF EXPLICATION OF THE OFFICE OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARIE MOTHER OF GOD
Together with a small Treatise Concerning the institution thereof etc. Composed
by the R. F. E. VV. Priest and Monk of the Order of S. Benedict.

PRINTED AT DOVAY. BY LAVRENCE KELLAM, 1652.

Permissu Superiorum.



THE EPISTLE DEDICATORIE. TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPEVLL LADY THE LADY THROCKMORTON
WIFE TO SR. ROBERT THROCKMORTON Of Coughton Court in the County of Warwick,
Knight.
MADAME
I having had a good part of my education with your virtuous Grand mother of
happy memory, a myrrour of Charity and Christian piety; and with your
truly noble Father, one of that blessed number mentioned by the Royal Prophet
Psalm. 127.
fearing our Lord, and walking in his ways; who though be inherited large and
well gotten possessions, might well be said to have eaten the labors of his
hands, he having managed and improued them with singular prudence, and
dispensed them to the admiration of all that knew him: to whom our Lord made
good his promise, bestowing upon him a loyal pleasing consort, enriched with
all dowries of nature and grace* rendering her like to a fruitful vine by
blessing her with a numerous, honorable, and hopeful issue like to so many
Olive branches circuiting his table, And being by the special mercy of God
and their furtherance conducted to a peaceful harbor, where I found
commodious leisure to reflect upon the perilous ways I had formerly fieered,
to praise God for his ineffable goodness, and consider how I might disengage
myself in some small measure to them and the residue of my well experinced
friends, at least show my willingness not to be ungrateful, And having long
since learnt, that we are not borne to our selves, but that our Parents friends
and country* lay just claim unto us: yet wanting means equal with my
d^sires to dischardge this threefold obligation I at length made choice to
compose this work in honor of the most B. Virgin Mother of God (whose Dowry
this our now distracted country was sometimes not undeservedly styled, both in
respect of the peculiar devotion our religious Predecessors above other nations
of the Christian world bore toward her, and her reciprocal procuring by her
powerful intercession innumerable select favors for them) and with all humble
instance to beseech that immatulate benign Mother of mercy (who above all
pure creatures has ever freest access to the infinite treasures of our dear
Savior and her beloved son Christ Jesus, and can best dispense them to his
liking) to impart to each of these my creditors, in my behalf their due
proportion: they all (or the most sincere part of them) jointly meeting in
spirit at her throne of glory by their devout recital of her little office.

In this my work (if I may call it mine) I have indeauored (to my small Myte)
to emulate those glorious lights of Gods holy Church S. Gregory Nazianzen and
S. Basile in this one point that is recorded of them, vdzt, That they
interpreted the holy Scriptures not according to theit own talent of wit and
learning (which yet was highly eminent) but according to the Rule and
authority of their ancients. So^ that if each holy writer should demand of
me his own, I might vaunt as vainly as Aesops Bird; the Sentences being
theirs, I having only contributed the collection, fashioning, translation, and
placing as I conceived might probably delight with profitt. Wherein I bestowed
such hours as conuentuall Acts, obedience, and frequenting schools left to my
free disposal.

This small portion then (which I having now obtained leave to publish, may in
some sort though not absolutely call mine) was by me as far as I well might
some twelve years past designed to have been dedicated to that Saintlike Lady
my approved friend and your dear Mother: But she having fought a good combat,
consummated her happy course, conserved her faith, and being about two years
since called by the celestial spouse to receive a Crown of glory for her
reposed; amongst her Nine exquisite Daughters, who with heroical piety
render themselves genuine branches of that specious Vine, mutually representing
each the other, and laboring to adorn their pure souls with all solid
virtues, that they may one day happily be transferred hence to the completing
as far as their number extends those Nine Quires of B. Spiritts, I have
deservedly elected your La: to Patrorage these my ^npolisht lines: you being by
pr^^eminence of birth the prime branch and one of that mysterious number who if
I may not to prevent (...) and for civility sake say does best* yet I may
securely say does exceeding fitly personate to the very life that real friend
of mine.

Be pleased then to accept of this mean expression of my grateful affection,
it being yours thus already of right and the ambitious desire of*

MADAME Your Ladyships obliged friend and servant E. W.
This 25. of May 1690.
APPROBATIONS.
HOc opus cui titulus est (A brief Explication of the Office of the Blessed
Virgin MARIE Mother of God etc.) totum accurate legi; cumque nihil in eo
inuenerim a fide Catholica aut bonis moribus alienum, sed omnia valde sana and
sancta, quae potenter allicere possint legentium animos (qui in vulgari lingua
samilia prius non viderunt) ad Officum B. V. Mariae deuote recitandum, dignum
iudico vt typis mandetur. Datum Duaci 14. Septembris 1652.

F. RVDESINDVS BARLOE, Ord. S. Bened. Sac. Theol. Doctor and Professor.

Having perused and diligently examined this work entitled (A brief
Explication of the Office of the Blessed V. MARIE etc) composed by the R. F. E.
W. I find it in every part consonant to the Catholic faith and piety, and
most efficacious to the stirring up of Christian souls to a devout reciting of
the same: and therefore Judge it most worthy the press. In witness whereof I
have subsigned at Doway the last of Sept. 1652.

EDWARD DANIEL, Doctor in Sacred Divinity and reader of the same in the
English Coll. of Doway.

AN EXPLICATION UPON THE OFFICE OF THE B. VIRGIN MARY.
CHAPT. I. Containinge the scope and method of this work.
MY purpose is to leave nothing untouched, which pious Catholics, devoted to
the glorious mother of God, and accustomed to recite frequently the holy office
instituted to be said in the honor of so powerful an advocate, may desire to
understand; and therefore I am to discuss some general questions, and handle
such transcendent points, as may concern the whole office, before I can come
to treat of particulars.

Three things I find chiefly which may be doubted of, or demanded by those;
who are either little conversant in the ceremonies of the holy Church and
Ecclesiastical Institutions; or else are of a different Religion, which
teaches them to carpe at every thing, which they do not comprehend, and to
censure as superstitious, what their new fancies does not admit. To the end
therefore that the less learned Catholics may become sufficiently instructed
and satisfied in this matter, it will be necessary here in the beginning to
take away such scruples, and free the holy Church from falsely imposed errors,
and superstition in the instititution and practice of saying the foresaid
office.

The principal questions or doubts which may be made concerning it are these.
First by what authority and for what end it was instituted? 2. ly why it was
divided into so many parts or hours? and 3. ly why it is usually said in the
latin tongue by those who for the most part do not understand latin? To all
which I shall endeavor to give so clear and well grounded an swears, that
neither weak mynds shall have occasion to complain of hardness and
obsuritie, nor perverse and froward judgments (if any such happen to peruse
them) shall justly pretend any insufficiency or want of soliditie in them.

After these general points are clearly in their order discussed, and some
few slighter objections of lesser moment answered, it will be easier both for
me to proceed to the exposition of each particular part of the foreme^tioned
Office, and for the pious reader to understand what I shall write.

Moreover besides these I have (for the comfort and instruction of devout but
less learned Catholics) added some things to help such of them as recite this
holy office, that they may do so with due reverence and spiritual profit.
This I conceived necessary, and hope will not prove ungrateful.

CHAPT. II. Showing that there has been ever both in the old and new law a
public form of prayer.
IT is easy to be demonstrated both out of the holy Scriptures, Counsels,
Fathers, and the practice of the holy Church in all ages, that besides mental
prayer, and such vocal prayer as every one used priuatlie according to his
own necessity, and through pious particular instinct from God, there was ever
some more public form of prayer instituted for the greater conformity of
all true believers in their manner of praising almighty God, and for the more
solemn recounting of the benefits and mercies showed to his Church. How many
Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Canticles, do we find composed in the old
Testament, and accustomed to be said principally and generally by all those,
who were more particularly consecrated and addicted to the service of God? and
not only by them, but also at times convenient, and as their leisure did
permit by all sorts of people both men and women? who although they were not
obliged unto any set form of public prayer, yet they both might and did use
it to the honor of God, and with no small benefitt to their own souls.

What has bin said does evidently appear by the holy Scriptures and first of
the l. 1 Paralip. c. 6 v. 31.
old Testament. These are they (to wit the progeny of Leuj) whom David
appointed over the singing men of the house of our Lord since the Arc was
placed: and they mynistred before the Tabernacle of Testimony, singing, until
Solomon built the house of our Lord in Jerusalem. And he (King David) appointed
before the Arc of our Lord of the Ibidem c. 16. v. 4.
Levites, that should mynister, and should remember his works, and glorify,
and praise our Lord; the God of Israel.

And the Priests stood in their offices; and the Levites with the instruments
of the songs of our l. 2. Paralip. c. 7. v. 6. Leuit. 8. v. 35,
Lord, which David the King made to praise our Lord because his mercy is for
ever.

Day and night shall you tarry in the Tabernacle observing the Watches of
our Lord: which no doubt was a type of the Canonical hours observed in the
Catholic Church.

Then sung Moses and the children of Israel Exodus 15. v. 1.
this song to our Lord, and said: Let us sing to our Lord, for he is gloriously
magnified etc. Marie Ibid. v. 20.
therefore the prophetess, Arons sister, took a timbrell in her hand: and all
the women went forth after her with timbrills and dances, to whom she began
the song, saying: Let us sing to our Lord, for he is gloriously magnified etc.

This laudable custom of reciting Psalms, was also used by our Lord and
Savior Christ Jesus, and his Apostles as appears by the hymn they said
before they went forth unto the Mount Oliuet, Math. 26. v. 30.
which was sung, according to the custom of the Jews, after the eating of the
Paschal lamb: and (as Paulus Burgensis writes) did contain Six Psalms,
whereof the inscriptio^ was Alleluia vz. The Psalm Laudate pueri with the five
following Psalms, which the Hebrews called the great Alleluia.

In the primitive Church there was also such a form of public prayer ever
observed. St. Paul in his epistle to the Ephesians did exhort them to the use
of singing Psalms and Hymns in these words. Be you filled with the spirit,
speaking to Ephesians. c. 5.
your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Canticles, chaunting and
singing in your hearts to our Lord, giving thanks always for all things in the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ to God and the Father. He expresses singing in
your hearts because that is the chiefest, and of it self necessary, even whilst
we pray with our voice. The same he does admonish the Collossians saying Let
the word of Christ dwell in you abondantly, in all wisdom: teaching, Collos.
c. 3.
and admonishing your own selves with Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual
Canticles etc. Out of which sayeings of the Apostle we may gather with S.
Augustine that the custom of the holy Church in singing of Psalms and Hymns,
has had its beginning even from Christ and his Apostles. The custom (says
he) of singing Hymns Ep. 119. ad Ia. c. 18.
and Psalms may be defended by the Scriptures, since we have such profitable
documents, examples, and precepts thereof both from our Lord himself and his
Apostles.

S. Paul describing the manner of prayer used by Christians of the primitive
Church has these words. What 1. Ad Cor. 14.
is it then Brethren? when you come together every one of you has a Psalm,
has a doctrine, has a revelation, has a tongue, has an interpretation etc.
In which place of the Apostle, we have a certain type and example of the
Canonical prayers, which the holy Church uses at this prefent, in which
Psalms and Hymns are sung, and the holy Scriptures are read together with
their explications out of the holy Fathers. According therefore to the
foresaied custom of the primitive Christians, our mother the holy Church,
(guided and directed by the spirit of God) has conposed the office of the
Breuiarye.

CHAPT. III. Showing the Antiquity and by what authority the office of the B.
Virrgin was instituted.
THe office of the B. Virgin is also in every point answerable to the form of
prayer before mentioned, as consisting principally of Psalms, Hymns,
Canticles, and Lessons, out of the holy Scriptures, and is in all things
agreeing with the manner observed in the composition of the Breuiary.
Concerning the antiquity whereof, I have used much diligence by inquiry
amongst learned men, and perusing of diverse authors, to find out the certain
time when it was composed, and by whom: but cannot come to the certain
knowledge of it. Baronius seems to be of opinion, that it was compiled by
Peter Damian Cardinal and Bishop of Ostia, a monk of the holy order of S.
Benedict. His words Tom. II. in an. 1056.
are these, speaking of him, As he was the cause that the office of the mother
of God was introduced into his Monastery, so it is well known that from the
same fountain it was derived to all the Christian world etc. Yet Bartholomew
Gauantus in his Book entitled The treasure of the holy Rytes (in the examen
whereof he spent the greatest part of his life) shows it to be of far
greater antiquity, alleging the authority of Paulus Diaconus who in his
Exposition of the Rule of S. Bened. (which may be see^ in a Manuscript in the
Anicia^ Library of the College of S. Gregory in the City of Rome) does write,
That the Popes Gregory the 3. and Zachary, who lived before the year of our
Lord 752. did inioyne the Monks of the Cassine Congregation to recite the
office of the B. Virgin together with the Divine office. It seems therefore
that Peter Damian was not the inuencer or framet of it, but rather that he
restored a laudable custo^e, of reciting it, which in his time was abolished:
as Flaminius a Benedictin Monk in the life of the said Peter Damian does
affirm, saying, That Pope Gregory the Seventh (who held the chair of S.
Peter about the year of our Lord 1063) did send him as his Legate to
promulgate a Decree through out all Italy for the recyting of the office o^ the
B. Virgin mother of God, which had been for some time every where neglected
and omitted.

By what is already said it is manife^^ that this holy Office was instituted
b^ the authority of the bo^ye Church, having been proposed to the Monks of
Cassine by Pope Gregory the 3. and Zachary, and imposed in Peter Damians;
time by Pope Gregory the seventh upon all the Clergy in ^^alye. But afterward
it was ordained more generaly by Pope Vrbane the 2. in the Council of
Claramont Tom. II. An. an. 1095.
as may be seen in Baronius, who^ relates, That the saved Pope Vrbane the 2*
^auing pr^pared an expedition for the recovery of the holy land, and
considering the difficulties that were like to occur in that weighty
enterprise, brought best to have recourse to the prayers of the B. Virgin,
thereby to move God ralimightie to be propitious to his (...) ^ for that ^e
well know by experience, that all things how perilous or difficult soever,
would proced ^appily to which the help of the B. Virgin Marie did graciously
incline. That therefore he might endeare her by some service of his to afford
him her powerful patronage, he did ordain by consent of the Council of
Claramo^^, that the howerly prayers, and praises commonly styled the Office of
the mother of God, which was then and had been long frequented amongst the
monks of the institution of the said Peter Damian, should be dilated to the
Clergy, and recited by them worthily and cordially, to the end, that the most
holy Virgin might plead for them to her son; by which means the people of
God, who were to undergo so many and eminent dangers, might be supported by
her aid, and fortified by her defense. Whereupon the said office was piously
embraced generally by the Clergy, and after wards in ardged to the laietie both
men and women, to their great increase in grace, as all the faithful have
experienced, and do daily experience, who do use to say it often with due
reverence, and from their heart. Thus far Baronius.

It will not be amiss to set down in this place what may be read in Surius
Surius Tom. 5. in 6. October.
where he shows by what means S. Bruno, and all under his holy institute,
came by divine admonition to choose the B. Mother of God for their Patroness,
and to shelter themselves under her protection. What he writes thereof is to
this effect. The enemy (says he) of mankind, foreseeing the great damadge he
was like to sustain by the Angelical life of the Carthusian Fathers, did make
use of the fraudulent tongues of certain malignant persons, to persuade them
to desist from their austere course, by affirming that they cast themselves
into eminent danger of their lives by such singularity; so that they were
greatly perple^ed in mind, not knowing what to resolve upon. When therefore
they were deliberating together in this anxietie, what way were best for them
to take, God almighty (who never forsakes those that confide in him) sent
unto them a venerable man, who said unto them: Brethren you are in great
doubt, whether you were best to remain in this place, or to depart hence; but
I say unto you in the words of almighty God, that the ever B. Virgin mother
of God, will conserve and protect you in this forlome desert, if you will daily
read her howerly prayers in her honor: which having said, he suddenly
vanished, leaving them touched with incredible joy.

And for that Peter Damian has been a prime promotor of this holy Office,
whereby he is not without reason esteemed to have been the composer of it, or
at least to have much augmented and illustrated it, I will here set down Tom.
1. li 6 Epist. 32.
what he himself writes in his 32. Epistle to the Religious of the Monastery
of Gamugnensis; where after he has at lardge declared unto them certain
Constitutions, which he had ordained in his own Monastery of S. Vincent de
Monte Petrusa, and a fearful example which happend to one that had:
transgressed them, he adds I will relate unto you another thing which
happened in the foresaied Monastery. It was ordained in the same Monastery (by
himself no doubt who framed their other laws, though he express it not in
that place) and now almost for three years space observed, that together with
the Canonical hours, the office of the B. Virgin Marie should be said; when
as one Gozo by habit a monk, of a bad life but subtle wit, begane to
complain, that it was enough and abou^dantly sufficed which S. Benedict had
commanded to be observed, and that they ought not to be chardged with new
inventions. We are not (says he) more holy then our ancient forefathers, who
esteeming these things as vain and superftitious, have prefixed us certain
limits for what we are to sing, and have prescribed us our rule whereby to
direct our life: wherewith we ought to co^te^t ourselves, least by rashely
declining from them, we be lead through by-pathes into errors. What needs many
words? he seemed to combat with the Queen of the world, and to get the
victory, for by these subtle machinations, he allured the religious to
relinquish the said office. But behold the divine justice which is ever
vigilant, observing our iniquities. shortly after such adversities and
afflictions fell upon the said Monastery, that the monks were daily in
danger to loose their lives on every side: there were made roberies and
rapines of their goods, their corn was burnt, and their familiar friends and
servants were murdered, in so much that they became weary of their lives, and
were enforced to be at much expenses to obtain of the Emperor to interpose
his authority: which when they had compassed, it nothing at all auailed them.
Wherefore I being entreated by them (for he was employed abroad in many
Embassadges) to see if I could find some way whereby to redress these
calamities, did give them this answer. Christ (said I) is our peace, of
whom when he was newly borne of the B. Virgin the Angels did sing Glory in
the highest to God, and in earth Luc. 2.
peace: Because therefore you have banished out of your Monastery the mother of
true peace, these tribulations and calamities have deservedly been laid upon
you: which words the Monks having by many signs experienced to be most true,
being now in great distress, they begane to consider better with themselves,
and casting themselves upon the ground before me, promised with one consent,
that they would never afterward neglect their accustomed praise of the mother
of God. After which their humiliation and promise put in practice, the enjoyed
their desired peace even to this present.

CHAPT. IV. Showing the reasons why the holy Church has divided the divine
offi^e, and consequentlye this of the B. Virgin conformable unto it, into so
many parts or how^rs.
MY purpose is not to make a long narration of the diversity of opinions
concerning the number of the Canonical hours, the precise time when they were
said, and the space which was intermitted between them in diverse places: for
that the pious reader (whose comfort I hereby intend) would rather gather
leaves, then fruit by such a sterill discourse, relishing best with curious
palates, which sometimes are more delighted with the shadow then with the
substance. Notwithstanding so much as may serve for instruction, I will as
briefly as I can declare concerning this matter.

Our holy Father S. Benedict in his Cap. 16. Psalm. 118.
Rule has these words. Seven times in the day (says the Prophet) I have
said praise to thee, which sacred number of Seven will be accomplished by us,
if we perform the office of our service at the time of Mattines or ^auds,
Prime, Terce, Sext, None, Vespres, and Compline; because the Prophet spoke of
these hours, when he said, Seven times in the day I have said praise to
thee. For of the Nocturnes or night office the same Prophet also says At
midnight I arose to confess to thee. Wherefore at these times let us praise
and give thanks to our Lord and savior for the judgments of his justification:
I mean at Mattines or Lauds, Prime, Terce, Sext, None, Vespres, and Compline,
and at night let us rise to confess to him. Thus far our holy Father.

The said night office is not ordained without great reason, that we may be
found watching and prepared to receive the spowse, for that our savior does
seem to affirm, that the general Judgment shall be in the night time, In
the Math. 25. Luc. 17.
midst of the night a great noise was made: behold the spowse is at hand.
Moreover In that night two shall be in one bed etc. and in another place:
VVatch ye therefore for you Marc. 13.
know not when the Lord of that house comes, at even, or at midnight, or at
the cock crowing or in the morning least coming upon a sudden, he find you
sleeping; and that which I say to you I say to all, watch which night watch
Act. 16.
S. Paul and Silas did observe, as appears in the Acts of the Apostles.

Cardinal a Turre Cremata upon the Tract. 73.
Rule of S. Benedict says, that according to the ancient custom there were
eight Canonical hours: and Hugh of S. li. 2. Eccles. office c. 2.
Victor proves the same by this reason. In times past (says he) the
Nocturnes or night office were not only separated by a certain interposition
of time, but also were terminated with a proper extreme or ending, that is
with a collect or prayer: by which manner of terminatio^ the unity or division
of hours are usually distinguished. The same also is affirmed by diverse
others. Yet now (that laudable custom giving place to humane infirmity) the
common practice is, that the Nocturnes and Mattines or Lauds are recited at one
time, and make but one hour: and thereupon it is become the general received
opinion, that Tom. 3. page 94. Prouer. 22.
there are only Seven Canonical hours; according to which Peter Damian does
proceed, where he says, that there are Seven lesser sorts of sins into which
The just man (as it is written) does daily fall, but straightwaies gette^h
footing again: for that he sins not out of malice or deliberatly, but out
of humane frailty. The said sins are these that follow (vizt) Thought,
Ignorance, Inconstancy, Necessity, Infirmity, Oblivion, and Inconsideration.
For e^piation whereof the holy Doctors of the Church by the instruction of the
holy Ghost have ordained, that we do seven times a day offer our prayers to
God: for in very deed (says he) the offices of the seven Canonical hours
are like unto seven Baptismes, which wash away the seven stains which we do
so daily contract.

There are many Texts of the holy scriptures touching the number of Seven,
which may seem to have moved the holy Church to make choice of that sacred
number of times, wherein to praise our Lord: as in Genesis, in memory of the
benefit of our ^reation. The Seventh Genesis 2.
day God ended his work. Also in other places, as Naaman the leper washed
himself lib. 4. Reg. c. 5. Iosue 6.
seven times in the river of Jordan. And When the army of the Hebr^wes had
gone seven days about the City of Ierico, the seventh time, seven Priest
sounded seven trumpetts of the Jubilee, and the wall of the City fell down.
And Our Lord oast out of Marie seven devils. Mare 16.
With a multitude of other places which for breuity sake I willingly over
pass. Moreover our Lords Prayer consists of seven petitions: our savior
spoke seven times whilst he hung upon the Cross, and there are seven gifts
Apoc. 1.
of the holy Ghost. I saw (says S. John) seven candlestickes of gold, and in
the midst of them, one like the sun of man.

Ludouicus de Ponte in his tome of the Perfections of Christ, after he has
showed Tract. 3. c. 1.
out of S. John Chrysostom, that prayer is like to the sun, he does compare
the seven parts of the divine office to the seven Planetts, because by them
does descend into the Church the influx of light which warmeth and illuminateth
the spiritual life.

There remains yet one other reason, and that none of the least, which may
seem to have moved the holy Church to elect this number, of hours: and that
is because in them (as S. Athanasius, S. Basil, and Cassian affirm) the
principal works of our Redemption were wrought; and therefore they are with
good right celebrated in the holy Church, that the memory of those mysteries
may be the more frequently renewed, and the divine love become more fervent in
our hearts. I will here breefly express those mysteries. In the night time our
Lord and savior Jesus Christ did assume humane flesh in the womb of the B.
Virgin, and afterward was borne in the night, and did very often spend whole
nights in prayer. In the first watch of the night he was apprehended by the
Jews, and suffered much sorrow and contumely, the third day he rose again
about that time. After the Sunnerysing he was brought before Pilate, whipped,
scoffed at, and spit upon. In the Third hour he was clothed with a purple
gatment, crowned with thorns, and condemned to the death of the Cross. In the
Sixth hour his sacred hands and feet were fixed to the Cross with sturdy
blunt and rough nails. In the Ninth hour he yielded up his spirit, and his
side being opened with a spear, flowed blood and water in testimony of his
immense love, that had not leaft himself one drop of blood vnshed for our
salvation In Vespres time he did the day befere eat his last supper with his
disciples, and instituted the B. Sacrament of the holy Eucharist, and the day
following was deposed from the Cross. And lastly about Compline time he was
laid in the Sepulcher.

CHAPT. V. Showing the conueniency of r^citing the divine office in the latin
ton^ue, and con^equentlye this office of the B. Virgin.
POpe Gregory the seventh in his Epistle to the Duke of Bohemia did absolurely
refuse to co^descend to the request of the said Duke, who had desired to have
the divine office recited in the Slauonian tongue, returning him this answer.
That it would by that means not only become of lesser esteem with the
people, but also would be exposed to every ignorant man's censure, and be an
occasion, that the unlearned by their misunderstanding of it, and sinister
interpretation thereof, might fall into errors.

Origin does largely and elegantly Homil. 20. in Iosue.
prove the great benefitt, that the people may gather, whilst they recite
prayers, or attend to those that recite them, although they do not understand
what is said: he shows also that such prayers are pleasing to God,
delightful to the Angels, and terrible to the devil: and moreover, that
sacred words (though not understood) do in a certain hidden manner stir up
devotion in such as use them.

Surius affirms in the life of S. Lutgard Surius in 16. lunij.
Virgin, that althoug she understood not the Psalms, yet nevertheless, when
she sung with diligent attention Deus in adiutorium meum intend etc. in the
beginning of the office, and certaines Psalms following, she beheld the
spirits of darkness to be replenished with exceeding horror, and to desist from
suggesting bad thoughts, and take their flight.

And indeed the song which the little Math. 21.
children sung to our Lord Cryeing in the Temple and sayeing, Hosanna to tho
son of of David was most pleasing unto him: as is manifest by the answer he
gave to the chief Priests and Scribes, who chasing there at, said unto him
Hearst thou what these say? For JESUS replied, Very well. Have you never
read, that out of the mouth of the Infants, and suckings thou have perfected
praise? If then out of the mouths of those infants who did not understand,
what they sung (for they were infants indeed as S. Chrysostom and others
affirm) did proceed the perfect praise of God, how can any man have the face
to deny, that the Canon call prayers are grateful to God, which are performed
by holy virgins and other devout souls, that are unskillful in the latin
tongue?

But some may object unto me, how shall the ignorant and unlearned come to
know, that what they say is good, and tending to the honor of God? and, what
benefit or increase of devotion and spiritual comfort shall such rec^aue by
recyting what they do not understand?

To the first part of this objection I answer, that all which is contained in
the d^uine office is either collected out of the holy Scriptures, or out of the
works of the most famous men for learning and piety that ever lived, and
proposed by the authority of the holy Church (which is directed by the spirit
of God) to all good Christians to be said: which may suffice to secure them.
Moreover there is scarce one to be found so stupide, but that he does conceive,
in general terms at the least, what is intended in the said office. For by
the sermons of his Pastor, or spiritual instructor, or by reading pious
books, he will come to know, that the Majesty of God is praised thereby, the
B. Trinity magnified, and the assistance of the B. Virgin and the rest of the
holy Saints implored.

To the second part I answer, that pious Idiots who have a good will and
simple intention, do many times draw as much spiritual sweetness from their
diligent attention to the gravity and decency of Ecclesiastical ceremonies,
and divine praises; as the greatest number of those, who are skillful in the
latin tongue. For such as are well seen in the plain and gra^maticall sense
of the words, do not gather the choicest fruit out of the Canonical hours,
but such as penetrate the mysteries and secret sense of the Scriptures: of
which number who is he, that will presume to t^arme himself? I do not ask of
Grammarians, Rethoritians, or Philosophers only, but even of those, who
possess high seats in divinity schools. Let all Religious, Cannons, and
others of the Clergy speak their mynds freely, and I verily believe; the
greatest part of them will sincerely confess their want of knowledge in this
point, and that great light from God, much study, and frequent meditation is
necessary for the attayning thereunto.

In the lives of the ancient Fathers is lib. 16. de Humilitate.
declared, that one Abbot Joseph coming to Antony the Abbot to hear some
words of edification, the said Abbot Antony did ask of his own disciples,
how certain obscure places of the holy Scriptures were to be understood:
whereunto when every one had delivered his opinion, he answered, that they had
not given him satisfaction: and addressing himself toward Abbot Joseph, he
demanded his opinion concerning the meaning of those places; who answered, I
know not. Whereupon Abbot Antony gave sentence, that Abbot Joseph had found the
only true way to solue such doubts, who knew how to acknowledge his own
ignorance.

The holy Apostles themselves notwithstanding that they conuersed with the
Son of God so long time, did not yet understand the Scriptures until after
our Saviors Resurrection, as S. Luke Luc. 24.
does seem to affirm where he says. These are the words which I spoke to
you etc. Then he opened their understanding, that they might understand the
Scriptures. And S. John expresses this more clearlye saying. As Ioh. c. 20. v.
9.
yet they knew not the Scripture, that he should rise again from the dead. The
Princes also of the Jews and all those that inhabited Jerusalem in those
days did not understand the voices of the Prophets, which were read every
Sabbath; as may be read in the Acts of the Apostles. The ignorant Act. c. 13.
therefore ought not to be sollicitous or troubled at their defect in learning,
for there will not be exacted of them an account in the general Judgment, how
deeply they have diued into secret and hidden mysteries with subtilitie of wit
or learning, but how they have endeauored to love, and sought to have their
wills in all things conformable to the holy will of God.

Some holy men well experienced in internal affairs do affirm, that we have
certain affections toward God that reside in our souls, which require only
a good will to express them: and that it imports little, whether this be
done by significant words, or by words that have noe sense or connection in in
them at all, or by exterior signs, or otherwise how so ever; so that we
intend thereby to manifest the love we interiourly conceive and feel, and
desire to make known vnho him in the best manner we are able. One that is
tongue tied from his birth, but has his feet or other parts at liberty, may
praise God devoutly by signs of exultation, sighs, or beating of his breast. S.
Jerome writes of himself, that after he had implored the divine assistance by
violent beating of his breast, and continual tears: it seemed unto him very
often, that he was amongst the quiers of Angels, by reason of the wonderful
sweetness, peace, and spiritual joy of his conscience, which almighty God sent
him after such penance: and hereupon it is, that he is commonly pictured with
a stone in his hand, and his breast naked.

In the history of S. Francis is declared, that one of the disciples of that
holy Saint did for the most part use the vowell V. V. V. for his prayer; and
that with often repeating thereof, he was many times rapt into great ecstasies:
and the like has happened also to diverse others, who have used bodily gestures
according to the exigence of the soul well affected.

The spiritual sweetness which is derived into our souls by reciting the
divine office in the latin tongue, does spring principally from two fountains.
The one is, from our ready and humble obedience to the ordinance of the holy
Church, refusing all election on our part, and accepting that as best and most
convenient for us, which she has instituted for the conformity of true
believers in their manner of praising God. The other is, from the words
themselves which have proceeded from the mouth of almigtie God, and have been
dictated by his holy spirit to the Prophets, Patriarks, Apostles, and other
Saints: for these words originally coming from God, are most delightful and
pleasing unto him, and do cause a greater sweetness to the soul in exercising
them, and returning them toward God. Both which comforts are indifferent to
the learned and unlearned: for it rests not so much in the dullness or
subtilitie of the understanding, as in the weakness or force and goodness of the
will to perform this work, that it may be judged more or less acceptable in
the sight of God. Wherefore let the unlearned endeavor with all their forces
to Pray in spirit, that is, with a recollected mind inflamed and lifted up to
God. Let them I say in this sort present their devotions before the throne of
God. Let them intend to praise him with all their strength and might, and to be
grateful unto him for his benefits. Let them busy themselves in this alone,
and their reward will no doubt infinitely exceed their labors.

Thus much might suffice concerning this mutter: were it not that it will be
needful to explicate that place of S. Paul 1. Cor. 14.
to the Corinthians, where he seemed to command, that the prayers of the
Church be not performed in an unknown language; but rather in the vulgar, that
every one might understand them, and the people receive instruction. The words
in that place, which seem to make most for that sense, are these in the 14.
verse, and those that follow If I pray (says he) with a tongue (vizt
unknown) My spirit (that is, my affection) prays, but my understanding (and
the understanding of those that ^arken unto me) is without fruit. What is it
then? (that is, what remedy is best in this case?) I will pray in spirit:
(that my mind may receive refection) I will pray also in the understanding.
(that is, plainly, that all who are present may perceive what I pray) I will
singe in the spirit: I will singe also in the understanding. But if you
bless in the spirit: (that is, praise God in an unknown tongue, that your
spirit and affection only may be nourished) he that supplieth the place of the
vulgar, (that is, he that is an ignorant unlearned man, who is not skillful in
your terms) how shall he say, Amen, upon thy blessing? (that is, how shall
he be able to approve and confirm what thou have said, or wish the same with
thee?) because he knows not what thou have said. For thou in deed give
thanks well, but the other is not edified. Thus far the Apostle.

Concerning which you are to note, that the Apostle in this place does not
speak of the divine office, or public prayers of the Church; which even from
the beginning were celebrated in the Christian Assemblyes in the common or
known languages, that is to say, either in the Hebrew Greek or Latin, and
not in every particular vulgar tongue: but he speaks there of the Hymns,
Canticles, and prayers, which some private persons, unto whom God almighty
had granted the gift of tongues, were accustomed to pronounce at their
meetings in their own name, as being composed by themselves. For since that
the chief end, why the people were called together, was for the common
instruction, edification, and comfort of every one, such spiritual Caticles
and Hymns which for the most part were repleat with hidden m^steries, being
recited in a strange and unknown tongue, would prove altogether vain, and
without fruit to their auditors which the words of the Apostle following in the
same Chapter do sufficiently declare. I give God thanks (says he) that I
speak with the tongues of you all* but in the Church I will speak (that is, I
had rather speak) five words (a few words) with my understanding (that others
may conceive and understand my meaning) that I may instruct others also,
rather then ten thousand words in a tongue (vizt to auditors, that will not be
instructed there with. By this it is plain that the prayers of the holy Church
in an unknown language are nothing contrary to the Apostles mind: and that for
two reasons, first because such prayer is instituted more for the reuerencing
and worshipping God, then for the instruction of those that pray: and secondly
because such devout sacrifices spiritually offered to God, do not only stir
up affections and love, but also bring an inward spiritual light and
experimental knowledge both of God, and ourselves. Nothing therefore can be
deduced out of this place which may touch the Canonical hours or prayers,
which are performed in the latin tongue, by the public mynisters of the
Church, in the name of the whole people, not only with the approbation, but
also by the ordinance and command of the said Church. I have insisted the
longer upon this subject, because it is so often inculcated by our pretended
reformers, who vainly brag of the great advantage they have (which unlearned
Catholics want) by having their Church service in the vulgar tongue: every
ignorant man, or silly woman perhaps supposing, that now he or she does as well
understand what is there said, as S. Augustine, S. Jerome, and the rest of the
Doctors of the holy Church:

CHAPT. VI. Containing certain objections of lesser moment together with their
solutions.
The first Objection.
THis office seems over long and so to be misliked: both for that long
prayers are apt to breed heaviness and satietie, as also for that they seem to
oppugn the doctrine of our Savior where he says When you are praying Math.
6.
speak not much.

Answer. One hour in four and twenty will suffice for this profitable task.
Wherefore it ought not to be esteemed over long, especially considering, that
for the most part all men (except those that are studious of perfection) are
ouercharged with time; which they tacitly seem to confess by having invented
such variety of games and sports, which for that end they term passetymes,
to deceive the day, and make it seem short: or rather to deceive themselves,
and abridge their time of merit; if such passetymes be not used with
discretion, and for their true legitimate end, which is the conservation of
health, and to recreate their spirits, that they may be more prompt and
facilitated to perform the will of God with cheerefulnes, alacrity, and
sweetness, according to every man's vocation respectively. Neither is the length
of this office apt to breed heaviness or satietie: for that there is such
harmonious variety therein, that those who understand the latin tongue may
easily pick here and there something to delight them. If they find noe
spiritual comfort in the Psalms they may pass to the Lessons, Respo^sories,
Antiphones, Hymns, and other parts of the office. And like as the painful
Be, passing from one flower to another to gather her sweet burden, stays
longer upon some flowers, where she finds most of that pleasant juice she
labors in search of, then upon some other flowers, which in appearance are
more beautiful and fit for her purpose; So let the devout mind pass from one
part of this office to another, staying longest upon such places which move his
heart to the love of God, and do yield best increase of good desires. Let him
come with a good will and simple intention to praise almighty God in the best
manner he can by this form of prayer, which is instituted by the holy Church
for the conformity of true believers in their manner of praising God: and let
him, during the time he imploieth in reciting it, endeavor to keep his mind
recollected and busied with good thoughts; and no doubt God almighty, who has
reguard to the hearts of those that pray, will supply with his grace, what his
petitioner is not able to draw out of such devotions with his understanding and
will move his heart in so benign and sweet a manner, that such an one shall
many times experience greater comforts, and rest better satisfied, then another
will ever be able to compass with his great learning and subtle wit, without
the like infusion of grace.

To the place of S. Matthew where it is said, when you are praying speak not
much, I answer there follows immediately As the heathens, for they think
Math. 6.
that in their much speaking they may be heard. By which words it appears,
that our Savior did not forbid long prayer, for he himself spent whole nights
in prayer, and he says, we must pray always: and S. Paul exhorts us to
pray without intermission; and the holy Church has had even from the beginning
her Canonical hours of prayer: but he forbids idle and voluntary babbling;
like to that of the heathens to their Gods, who thought thereby their wants
would be the better understood by them; or of heretics, who by long rethoricall
prayers think to persuade God almighty: whereas the Collects of the holy
Church are most breife, but very effectual. S. Augustine Aug. Ep. 121. c. 10.
in his Epistle to Probus says, That if one continue long in prayer, he is
not esteemed to pray in much speaking, as some are of opinion: and immediately
following he adds, To speak much in praying, is to do a necessary matter
with superfluous words.

The second Objection.
2. To repeat often one and the self same words, as is used in some parts of
the office is very troublesome and forbidden by the wise man, when he says.
Ecclesiastici 7.
Iterate not a word in thy speech.

Answer. It is a common Proverb, Things ten times repeated are delightful.
Neither is all manner of repetition of words disliked by Ecclesiasticus, but
only a foolish iterating of vain words, or words without weight; such as
cannot be found in this office, where almost all the words are taken out of the
holy Scriptures, and are full of gravity and signification. And as the
continuance of affections, love and reverence to God is questionless very
laudable: so must it needs be grateful and laudable to continue any prayer,
though in the self same words, by which is signified the continuance o^
iteration of the foresaied devotion. More over the Kingly Psalm. 135.
Prophet repeateth these words Because his mercy is for ever twenty seven
times in one Psalm, as an occasion to procure and continue attention to the
wonderful works of God, which are therein recounted: and in another Psalm the
word Voice is seven times repeated Finally Pal. 2 8
Our B. Savior in the garden did thrice repeat the same prayer, and he spoke
thrice to S. Peter in the same words. Job. 21.


The Third Objection.
3. This office being intended to praise God for his graces bestowed upon the
B. Virgin, it seems to little purpose to have the greatest part of the office
to consist of Psalms, which make little or no mention at all of her.

Answer. The holy Church, in the institution of this office, had regard
chiefly to the honor and praise of God, which is principally intended by this
and all other offices^ and secondarily did appointe Psalms, which speak in
some of the verses of the B. Virgin, as I shall show hereafter in my
explication of them. And the same order is likewise observed in all the feasts,
which are celebrated by the holy Church: as for example, in the feast of the
Nativity of our Lord, the second Psalm is ordained to be said for the 7.
verse. The Lord said to me, thou art my son, I this day have begotten
thee. And in the Epiphany the 41. Psalm for the 10. verse. The kings of
Tharsis and the Islands shall offer presents. The kings of the Arabians and of
Saba shall bring gifts. And in the feasts of the Apostles the 18. Psalm for
the 4. verse. Their sound has gone forth into all the earth etc. And in the
feasts of Martyrs the 115. Psalm for the 5. verse. Precious in the sight of
our Lord is the death of his Saints. And in the feasts of holy Virgins the 44.
Psalm for the 15. verse. Virgins shall be brought to the king after her. And
so forth in all other feasts. But the rest of the offices, as the
Inuitatories, Antiphones, Lessons, Responsories, Verses, Chapters, and Prayers
are for the most part proper to the feasts.

CHAPT. VII. Shew^ng with what Reverence the Canoni^all howe^s ought to be
reci^ed, and usually were recited by many Saints.
Our glorious Father S. Benedict speaking in his holy Rule of the reverence
which is requisite to be used in

Prayer, has these words. If when we desire to speak to any great person
touching any business we dare not do it but with submission and reverence, with
far greater reason when we are to supplicate to God the Lord of all things,
we are to do it with all humility and purity of devotion. and in another
place, We believe (says he) that Gods divine presence is every where, and that
in every place the eyes of our Lord behold the good and the evil.
Nevertheless we especially and without any doubt believe this, when we present
ourselves to the divine office. Wherefore let us always remember what the
Prophet says. Serve Psalm. 2. Psalm. 46. Psalm. 137.
ye our Lord in fear. and again Sing ye w^sely. And In the sight of the
Angels I will sing to thee. Let us therefore seriously consider with
ourselves, what our comportment ought to be in the presence of God and his
Angels, and let us stand to sing in such manner, that our mind and voice may
accord together.

S. Bernard in the 2. Tome of his works, treating of the same subject has
these words. Let those that enter in to the Church put their had upon the
door, and say, Expect here all evil thoughts, intentions, and affections of
the hearts, and desires of the flesh: but Thou, my soul, enter into the joy of
our Lord God, that thou may see his will, and visit his temple. Concerning
which advice of S. Bernard of putting their hand upon the Church door, we may
note out of Nauar in his Enchiridion de Horis, that Cap. 17 n. 4.
the holy Church did ordain, that there should be placed a holy water pot at
the entry in to every Church; to the end that those who came to pray, there
might take holy water, in token that they ought to leave behind them at the
Church door all thoughts, which may distract or hinder them in their prayer.
Which laudable institution has been carefully practiced in England, as may yet
be seen in diverse Churches, where the holy water pot is placed in the Church
porch; but now serves to no other use, then to testify, with what reverence our
forefathers were accustomed to enter in to those Churches, whilst they were
holy, having holy Altars, holy Priests, and a holy Sacrifice in them: of all
which since they are now emptied, the holy water pot has little reason to
complain of its vacuitie.

S. Bonauenture writes that S. Francis De act. S. Fra^c. cap. 10.
did bear such reverence to the Canonical hours, that whilst he did recite
them, he would not lean to any place, but stood upright and bare headed: and
that he omitted not this custom when he traveled any journey; but would stay
in that place where he happened to be, when the time occurred that those hours
were usually recited, and not remove from thence although it rained never so
fast, giving this pious reason for his so doing worthy of so great a Saint:
If the body do quietly receive its food, which after wards will turn to
worms meat together with the body, with what peace and tranquillity ought
the soul to receive the food of life? Moreover he recited the Psalms with
such attention, as if God were present, and when the name of our Lord occurred
in the office, it relished most sweet with him, and he was so transported with
interior joy when he pronounced the holy name of Jesus, that he could not
contain himself from manifestation thereof by exterior signs.

Theodoricus de Apoldia in the life of Lib. 4. cap. 11.
S. Dominike does affirm, that the face of this holy Saint was very frequently
bedewed with tears, whilst he was reciting the divine office: and that if he
chanced to be forth of the Monastery, when the sign was given for the
beginning of the office, he would presently call the Religious together, and
perform it in that place.

Petrus Ribadeneira in the life of S. Lib. 5. cap. 1.
Ignatius the Institutor of the famous and flourishing Order of the Society of
Jesus writes, that when the said holy Saint did recite the divine office, he
experienced such divine consolations and shed tears in such abundance, that
he was forced to stop at almost every word: by which means he was feign to
employ a good part of the day in reading the Psalms.

Horatius Turcellinus writheth also Lib. 6. cap. 5.
of S. Francis Xauerius the Apostle of Iaponia, that before every Canonical
hour he was accustomed to implore the assistance of the holy Ghost, by saying
the Hymn Veni Creator Spiritus, which hymn he would pronounce with such
fervor, that his heart did seem even to leap in his body.

CHAPT. VIII. Showing the necessity of Atten^ion in prayer, what Attention is
best, and what will suffice.
ATtention is an intrinsecall and essential quality appertayning to prayer:
that is to say, Attention is so necessarily requisite whilst one prays,
that Sotus affirms, one is not esteemed to Sot. lib. 10, de Just. q. 5. a 5.
pray any longer, then his attention does endure. Which being a certain
truth, it will be needful in this place (for the better instruction of the
less learned, and comfort of tender consciences) to set down the diversity
of Attentions, which are described by the holy Doctors, and to show which of
them will suffice; that every one may take his choice out of them, as best
futeth with his capacity, or the portion of grace, which God almighty has
given, or bestowed on him.

The first division is into Interior attention and Exterior. Interior
attention is that, by which one applies his mind either to the holy words,
that he may recite them, or harken to them with due reverence; or to the pious
signification of those words, that he may recreate his spirit thereby.

Exterior attention is that by which one does actually pronounce the words
distinctly, and without error; keeping his eyes and the rest of the parts of
his body in modest and decent composition, doing nothing willingly, which may
divert or hinder his said interior attention.

The second division is taken out of S. Thomas of Aquine, and consists of 2.
2. ^. 43. a 13.
three pars. The first is Attention to the words, which may be fulfilled by
taking care that you read not one word for another, ouerpasse nothing, nor make
too much have; and endeavoring to pronounce every word distinctly and
reverently.

The second is Attention to the sense of the words, which may be observed by
attending to the sense or meaning of the words either literal or mystical,
that your affections may be inflamed thereby.

The Third is Attention either to God, or to the thing we demand of him;
which may also be kept by attending to the presence of God; contemplating his
infinite goodness, that is graciously pleased to be ever present with us,
beholding our actions, rewarding what is well done, and rectifying what is
amiss: or by converting our thoughts to our sweet Savior Christ Jesus;
calling to mind the infinite love where with he wrought that admirable work of
our Redemption, and taking for our subject to ruminate upon some one or more of
the passadges of his holy life, or bitter passion; and afterward sometimes
darting our affections and gratitude toward him, by some short but efficacious
or burning aspiration: or by having attention to the benefitts ^e ask of God
(vizt) either Chastity, Humilitue, Patience, Faith, Hope, the divine love,
everlasting life, or the like.

As for example, whilst we recite the Psalm Venite exultemus, to think upon
these words in the mystery of our Creation, Let us make man to our image and
likeness, discoursing briefly there of in our interior. As thus, O great
dignity to be like to God. With what care ought I to conserve this thy image
in my soul? Grant me my dear Lord, that I never defile it* or the like. And
whilst we recite the rest of the parts of the office, to take to consideration
some thing of the life, passion, or death of our Savior, beginning with the
mystery of his holy Incarnation, discoursing thereof in our interior. As
thas, O my soul behold the force of love! That we might become the sons of
God, God became the son of a poor maid, or the like: sometimes praising
almighty God, sometimes giving thanks unto him, and sometimes begging some
grace or benefitt according to our necessity, at other times wishing that his
will may be accomplished in and by us and all creatures, resigning our selves
to be disposed of by him for time and eternity, as may be for his greater
glory. In which employment if we spend the whole time that we are reciting the
office, it will be very profitably spent, notwithstanding that we be so attent
thereunto, that we scarce perceive that we are reciting the words of the office.

The first member of this division will suffice, but yet it is the meanest
Attention. The second is better, but yet is proper only to scholars, or such
whom God almighty has illuminated by extraordinary favor, who can pick
out here and there pious considerations to move their affections. The Third is
generally held the best, and is indifferent both to the learned and unlearned.
Sharpness of wit, and subtilitie of understanding, is not so much required
to perform this well, as is a good will and pure intention: for as S. Thomas
affirms in the place a fore said, even Idiotes, by this attention are very
often elevated in spirit above themselves, and all things created.

If those that are learned will use their understanding in this affair, noe
further or other wise, but to excite their will, by proposing sweet and moving
considerations unto her, and helping her by pretty industries of love to
continue her holy desires and affections, then they may seem to have
advantage of the simple and unlearned in the practice of this attention: but if
they do use their understanding to search curiously into hidden Mysteries with
quiddities of art, and busy themselves more in speculation, then in procuring
and conseruing good affections, then are they far short of simple and
ignorant, but well minded souls; for such their meditation will prove sterill,
and altogether void of that fruit which should be sought by meditation, which
it pious, holy, and ardent affections and desires to inflame our souls with
divine love. Moreover those that are learned are for the most part more subject
to distractions, as having their heads filled with multiplicitie of conceits
caused by sciences and much speculation: whereas the simple and unlearned are
free from such thoughts contenting themselves to admire high mysteries with an
humble reverence, captiuating their understandings to believe with all
obedience and simplicity of heart, whatsoever their Pastors and spiritual
guides shall declare unto them concerning almight^e God, and how they ought to
serve, reverence, worship, and love him; in noe sort presuming to search into
high mysteries further then he is pleased to reveal them, either by this
ordinary means, (vizt) by his substitutes; or by himself, when they are
treating with him in their interior: and so do for the most part make less
use of their understanding in pra^er, and more use of their will; and
consequently, Caeteris paribus, (as they term it) the prayer of such simple
poor wretches is as grateful to almighty God, and beneficial to their own
souls, as is the prayer of a great Doctor, and perhaps more.

In the Cronicles of S. Francis his order it is registered, that one Brother
Giles of the order of S. Francis, an unlearned but a holy man, on a time spoke
to S. Bonauenture (the General of the said holy order, and a great light of
Gods Church) in these words: Great mercy has God showed to you learned men,
and great means has he given you wherewith to serve and praise his divine
Majesty; but we ignorant and simple people, who have no parts of wit or
learning, what can we do which may be pleasing unto him? Unto whom the holy
Saint answered: If our Lord did no other favor to man, then that he might be
enabled to love him; this alone were sufficient to oblige him to do God greater
service, then all the rest putt together. The good Brother Giles replied: And
can then an ignorant person love our Lord Jesus Christ, as well as a learned
man? Yea (said S. Bonauenture) a poor old woman may perhaps love our Lord
better, then a great Doctor of Divinity. Where upon the good Brother
transported with exceffiue fervor of spirit, went instantly into that part of
the garden which looked toward the town, and with a strong voice cried out. O
thou poor, thou ignorant and simple old woman, love thy Lord Jesus Christ, and
perhaps thou shall grow greater in heaven then Brother Bo^a^enture. and having
so said, he fell into an ecstasy, and remained in it without stirring from
that place for three hours space together.

The Third division is into a formal attention, and a vertuall, which may be
gathered also out of S. Thomas in the Article a fore cited.

A formal Attention is that by which we keep our minds actually busied about
one of the said three Attentions, (vizt) either to the words, to their
signification, to God or sonie other pious matter.

A vertuall Attention is that which is thought to remain by force and
efficacy of the purpose or intention framed in the beginning of our prayer, to
attend by one of the said three ways. This attention does morally persevere,
and has influence into our prayer, until by some other act we do
expressly, or implicitly recall or disanull it? A formal attention is the
best: but such is our frailty and weakness, that few are found, who can
continue any long time in it and therefore God almighty unto whom our
infirmities are well known, does not exact it as absolutely necessary during
our prayer, but is graciously well pleased with our vertuall attention, as best
agreeing with the condition of mankind, since our fall by the sin of our
first parents. Which S. Thomas affirms expressly in his answer to the first
objection of the said Article sayeing, That man does prayer in Spirit and
truth who comes to prayer moved by the instinct of the holy Ghost,
notwithstanding his mind does afterward strave abcoade.

S. Thomas also in the same Article says, There are Three effects of prayer.
The first is to merit; And to obtain this effect, it is not necessary, that
our attention actually continue during the whole time of prayer; but the force
and virtue of our first intention, framed when we begane our prayer, does
render our whole prayer merito^ions.

The ^econd is to impotrate or obtain by (...), and to this effect the first
in(...) does suffice, which God almighty does principally regard: but if this
first intention fail or be wanting, our prayer is neither moritorious, nor
(...); for God does not harken to that prayer, to which he that prays does
not (...)

The Third effect is a spiritual refection of the mind, and to this effect an
actual ^ention is necessarily required, according ^o that of S. Paul. If I
pray (...) ^ (...), my Spirit remains without (...).

CHAPT. IX. Showing the causes of distraction, the means to prevent them, and
how to ^^rite ^y rejecting them.
THe principal causes which as^^(...) our minds in prayer, may fitly be
d^^ided into causes more immediate, and causes remote.

(...) does express three remote causes L^^. de (...). ^. 5. a ^.
of distractions. The first whereof is the continual infestation of the
devil, suggesting (...) and bad thoughts.

The second is our pronesse of nature to evil acts. For the sense and (...) of
Genesis 8.
man's heart are prone to c^^ll from their (...), which pronesse to evil acts
he and other Divines do term the habit of sins, or an ^^^^eterate custom
of re^oluing in our minds fading and corrupt things. For even as a corrupt
humor, having once wrong^t it self a pastadge, will not easily be hindered in
its course; even so our wavering and inconsiderate thoughts do slide on in
their course, and draw our mynds to such things, as we have accustomed our
selves unto.

The Third remote cause is the instabilitie and feeblenes of our mynds, which
we have contracted by the first stain of original sin: and as the rays of
the sun are always wavering, and cannot rest themselves upon the wallowing
wa^es of the sea, so the rays of the divine light cannot easily fix
themselves in an unsettled and inconstant heart. Thus far Sotus.

The causes more immediate are very many, but I will here specify only 10. of
the principal.

The first is the want of watchfulness over our hearts out of prayer, by which
means our minds are filled and incombred with a rabble of vnpro^itable
thoughts, which ordinarily will represent themselves to our veiw in prayer.

The Second is the ill custody of our eyes and ears during our prayer; through
which, as through two gates, such things which are seen or heard, do
violently press, and pass to our fantasy.

The Third is our natural instabilitie of mind, which cannot long continue
fixed upon one subjects but is much like in that property to a wanton horse,
that can stand on noe ground, but mu^^ still be trampling and pr^ncing here an^
there.

The Fourth is an inordinate desi^ of enjoying something, which like to ^
Fury, does vex and disquiet our mynd^ so long at it is deferred, and cannot
b^ attained.

The Fifth is a vehement solicitude or care taking, which hinders internal
peace.

The Sixth is anxietie of scruples, fearing least something were omitted, or not
well pronounced; or the like.

The Seventh is the sense of the words we read, which sometimes may minister
occasion of diuerting our mynds.

The Eight is variety of imploiments businesses or studies, where in our minds
have been too earnestly busied.

The Ninth is idleness or sloth, and the evil branches which proceed from them,
as ^epiditie, satietie; and the like.

The Tenth and last is subtraction of the divine light or grace: which
happens sometimes, either for that it was not well used, or that it was
remissely used, or to make us by feeling the want of it, to seek to recover it
with more fervor and earnestnes, and to hold it in better esteem, when he is
pleased to bestow it.

The several roots or causes of distractions being sufficiently declared, it
will be needful, that I do here set down some direction^ how to prevent
them. Yet it will be in vain for me or any other (as I conceive) to go about
to prescribe a means how to prevent them in such sort, that one by help there
of may be able to free himself wholly from them; for noe man whilst he
remains clothed with mortal flesh, can be so cleared from them, that they
shall never occur: and therefore my intent hereby is only to prescribe some
few instructions how to prevent them, that they may not have so facile
access into our mynds, nor through our fault molest us; and that when they
happen to assail us, we may convert them to our benefit and increase of
merit.

The best way the^ to avoid distractions in prayer, is to come unto it with
due preparation: and during the time we continue in it, to propose unto our
understanding some pious considerations where with to set her profitably to
work: which she can (if she be disposed) paint forth in such lively and moving
colors, that the will (which otherwise is a blind power) by reflecting on them,
will necessarily become enamoured of them, and consequently endeavor the best
^he can to determinate the understanding in such sort, that she may busy
herself in those, and refuse to admit of any other Images whatsoever.

If not withstanding such pious industries, during the time they are reciting
it, their mynds happen at any time to be alienated (as by all probability they
will, let never so good diligence be used) they were not best (in my weak
judgment) to stand to argue with (...) impediments: for that will be but to
expose themselves to eminent danger, the d^uill being too cunning a sophister
for them to grapple with, and desiring nothing more then to be disputed with,
remembering the victory be obtained thereby over our first parents. Neither
should they incumber themselves by seeking to find out by what window of their
senses those troublesome whisperers got entrance, or what was the original
cause of them: for this will be but lost time; but rather so soon as they
reflect, that they are drawn to extrauagances, let them auert their minds from
them as peaceably and quietly as they can, and convert themselves to what they
have in hand. If after such a civil repulse, the same or any other of what
sort so ever, do happen to return with greater importunity; let them auert
themselves from such unmannerly guests in a more disdainful fasshion: like as
some scornful dames are accustomed to do from a troublesome su^or. If this
remedy prevail not, the best way as I conceive is, that such convert their
minds sweetly toward our B. Savior (who inuiteth all men to have recourse to
him in their tribulations) making some short speech unto him, expressing
thereby how unpleasing such impert^nences are unto them, and imploring his
assistance in this, or the like manner.

Sweet Jesus be merciful unto me, This time I have dedicated to thy service,
Vouchsafe to help me, that I may attend to thee alone* or thus.

Behold dear Lord my frailty and weakness, permit me not to be separated from
thy sweet conversation. Arise o Lord, and let thine and mine enemies be
dispersed. And then return to prosecute where they left.

But if all these means fail; then let them humble themselves in the presence
of God, and acknowledge that this affliction is justly laid upon them for
their sins, and ill governing of their senses out of prayer; and receive it
from the hand of God as a token of his love to try their fidelity, and make
them more wary: resigning themselves, willing to bear it so long as it shall
be agreeable to his holy will: assuring themselves, that he will not permit it
to continue any longer, the^ may be for their maile; and that ^e will
graciously send them light and strength to make good use of it, if they
persevere in this conflict, not relying on their own weak forces, but wholly
confiding in his grace and goodness.

And in deed such like distractions (provided they have used such diligence in
resisting their assaults) are and ought to be esteemed altogether inuoluntary,
which although they hinder the sweetness of devotion, yet they do increase
the merit of Prayer, occasion being ministered unto Christians thereby to
manifest their love toward God, and zeal to his honor.

CHAPT. X. Showing two sorts of preparation to dispose our selves for prayer.
THe holy Doctors do discribe two sorts of preparations of the mind to dispose
it meet for Prayer: the one, Remote; the other, more immediate.

Remote preparation is to have our minds cleared from the guilt of mortal
sin.

Nanar speaking of this remote preparation in Enchir. de horis c. 14. n. 2
says that the minds of such as recite the Canonical hours, ought to be
cleansed at the least by contrition from all mortal sin. For although such a
sinner (says he) does fulfill the precept of the Church by reciting the
office* yet his prayer is not meritorious before God; for He that turns a
(...), his (...) from hearing the law, his prayer shall be execrable. Pro 28. n.
And S. Basil the great upon these words of the Prophet Isaie: I will turn
Isaie 1. verse. 15.
away my eyes from you, and when you shall multiply prayer, I will not bear
you, for your hands are full of blood, says, That a sinner obstinate in
malice, that shall lift up his hand to God, is like unto one, that having his
hands all imbr^ed in the blood of another man's only son, lately by him
slain, shall come to request something of the father of him, he has slain:
whereby he is rather like to exasperate him, th^n to obtain what he desires.

Bessens likewise in his sermon upon the fifth Sunday after Easter reciting out
of S. Augustine, de perfectione lustitiae contra Iulianum, that there is a
certain sort of Serpents, who when they approach near to a fountain to
assuage their thirst, do first disgorge themselves of their poisonous venom
before they attempt to drink of those pure waters, says, If then the basest
sort of bruit creatures will do this, with what purity ought good Christians
to approach to the fountain of living water, which is derived to our souls by
the conduites of prayer?

The more immediate preparation is to have our mynds freed from cares and vain
thoughts. For as S. Basil the S. Basil in Psalm. 61.
great says, It is impossible to make our selves capable of the divine grace,
until we have dispossessed our minds of all perturbations. And again, I have
observed (says he) that Physicians do not minister any sovereign potion
until they have euacuated all superfluous humors out of the bodies of their
patients. He adds further, That a vessel which has been imbued with
unsavory liquor is unapt to receive the influx of sweet ointments, until it
has been washed with much diligence. And finally he concludes it, as most
necessary, that those things which have filled our minds, be first powered out;
that there may be sufficient room for such other things, wherewith we purpose
to replenish them.

Cassian also in his Collections says; Colla. 4. c. 3.
That whatsoever we would not have to insinuate it self into our mind^ during
our prayer, that we must endeavor to banish out of the secret corners of our
hearts before prayer: For (says he) the* things which we have thought of
before prayer, do usually occur to our memory in prayer. Wherefore such
shall we experience our selves during our prayer, as we have labored to be
before we began.

S. Bernard lik^wise seems to hold the Lib. de meditate c. 6.
same opinion where he says, That when we enter into the Church to pray, we
ought to leave our tumultuous thoughts behind us, and to blott and raze out of
our memory all exterior solicitude, that we may attend wholly to God. For it
is impossible for one to hold conference with almighty* God, who even in
silence discourses with the whole world. Attend therefore to him, and he will
attend to thee.

But the way how to make it, is not yet showed, which notwithstanding is noe
less needful for the unlearned to know. Wherefore for the benefit of simple
but well minded souls, I will as plainly and briefly as I can, set down a
me^^ode how to prepare the mind, and keep it well employed: which they may
make use of, and I hope with profitt, until God almighty shall please to
inspire them with a better and more agreeable to the affections of their souls.

CHAPT. XI. C^ntaininge a form of Preparation before prayer, with Aspirations
of diverse Kinds.
THe Ecclesrastes gives this advice. Ecclesiastes c 5.
Speak not any thing rashly, neither let ^hy heart be swif to utter a word
before God. Wherefore it will be good, that when they come to pray, they pause
a while in silence; and consider attentively, what a weighty matter they go
about, (vizt) to treat with God almighty concerning the business of their
salvation. Next let them frame to themselves a firm bele^fe* that God is there
present before th^^ though^ disguised, and that perhaps if they prove
faithful, fervent, and perseuerant, he will (if it be ^o ^^nie^^ for them)
manifest himself unto them, as he did to S. Marie Magdal^^e, and since has
often done to many holy S^ints. Yet they ought not to frame unto themselves
any positive co^ceipt of him, as p^re God; supposing him to be present in this
or that form or shape: for he is a most simple Spirit, and cannot be compreh
^nd^d under any corporal Specie^ or Image: but a negative, (that is) that he
is neither (...), nor that, nor any thing which their ^a^tafie can represent
unto them. They are also to believe that he vieweth all their external
comportment, and all the internal desires, and affections of their hearts
prove cleanely, ^^e^ if their bodies ^er^ composed of transparent ^^ri^^ all,
^and i^^^^^^d with the son beams.

This done; let them ^^de^^our ^o g^^ into their ^^t (...) by so^e ^^ou^
A^piration. For ^^ the (...) sai^th, O^^ mile will d^i^^ out another. Wherefore
those that seek to free (...) ^^lu^s from distraction^, and to ^^der the
pass^^^^ a^^e into their Interior, must ende^^our. by some internal
employment (such as is the exercise of Aspirations) to expel the images of
their external affairs, and by little and little to win their minds (...)
their passions; and draw near to the image of God which he has impressed or
stamped in the Fund or bottom of their souls; as the Prophet* witnesses; The
light of thy countenance (o Psalm. 4.
Lord) is signed upon us, where they may find him so often as they will
withdraw themselves from the m^^^^ltuous noise of exterior business, and
convert their hearts toward him sweetly, and with a filial reverence.

But least this term, Interior, may seem to obscure, it will be needful
to give this short explication thereof.

Mystical divines do ^^ach; that whilst our minds are busied in any
exterior employment* although it be good and laudable, (...) not yet directly
tending toward God almighty, ^ that the said imploim^n^ does mediate or
interpose it self between us and hi^, and does as it were keep us out of
ourselves: that is, does hinder us from working, immediately to the end for
which we were created which is to have our eyes and hearts, fixed upon God, and
to direct all our actions and thoughts to praise and glorify him immediately.

Our first parents did perform this immediate tendance toward God, and so
remained always in their interior, until they did voluntarily extrouert and
distract themselves to reflect upon the forbidden fruit: of which fruit after
they had tasted, both they, and all that descend from them found, and do find
great repugnance and difficulty to keep themselves introuerted, or to remain
in their Interior for any long space; and therefore God almighty who is most
gracious and benign, having regard to human infirmity, does not exact of us
the practice of this introuersion at all times out of prayer, but in a very
imperfect manner. Yet when we come to prayer he does expect that we practice it
in some better measure, that our prayer may be performed with due reverence,
which we cannot well do unless we auert our minds from all exterior things,
unto which things whilst we remain attent, we are properly teamed to be
extrouerted, or out of ourselves: and that we convert of hearts to tend
immediately toward God, where in whilst we continue, we are termed to be
introuerted, or to remain and dwell in our interior. This may suffice for
the explication of that term.

The Aspirations that I here speak of may be these that follow, or such like;
either in a few words, or in many, as they shall find most proper for them. I
desire that they may not be recited vocally, but pronounced as it were
mentally: yet herein also let such proceed, as they shall experience
themselves best recollected, and moved to devotion.

Aspirations in a few words.
INdeed our Lord is in this place, and Genesis 28.
I was not aware of it. I will hold him, I will not let him go, until he have
given me his benediction.

O Lord thou commaundest me to love; give what thou commaundest, and command
what thou will.

O that I knew thee, and knew my self.

What is there for me in heaven, or what desire ^ on earth, besides thy self?
Heaven is not heaven to me without thee.

O Lord thou know all things, thou know I love thee.

When shall I come before the face of our (...)?

I desire to be dissolved; and to be with Christ.

Woe is me, that my soio^rning is prolonged.

Praise our Lord o my soul, let his praise be always in the mouth.

My beloved to me, and I to him: one to one, all to all, a creature to his
Creator.

My beloved is all fair, all swee^^, all delightful. He has wounded my heart.

If I may find favor in thy sight, show me thy face. Let thy voice sound in
mine ears: for thy voice i^ sweet, and thy face beautiful.

Thou art worthy (o Lord) to receive glory, and honor, and virtue, and
benediction.

Aspirations in more words. Speaking to the soul
DVst and ashes as I am, how dare I appear in the sight of my God, before
whom the powers of heaven do tremble? Yet be not dismayed, o my soul, He
has said, that he came to calumners and wh^t would he, but they should come
unto him?

How sweetly and mildly did he absolve the woman, that was taken in adultery,
who stood wholly abashed and confounded in his presence? Woman, where are thy
accusers? Has none of them condemned thee? Neither do I; Go thy way, and
sin noe more, O wonderful me^^y! O sweet answer I how can we fear to open
our greifes unto him?

He has said, come all to me that are heavy l^aden, and I will refresh you.
Be confident therefore (o my soul) heaven and earth may pass, but he will not
fail of his promise.

[Here Imagine, that you behold our, Savior nailed to the cross, and
discourse with, your self in this, or the like manner.]

O My soul behold the effect of love. Love drew him from the bosom of his
eternal Father, love caused him to converse with us poor wretches; love has
nailed him upon the cross in this cruel manner, love has done all this. But
what love? Verily noe other but that immense love, which he bore toward thee
even from eternity. Why tremblest thou at this? Take courage, his mercies are
about all his works. Come let us fall down at his feet: let us weep in his
presence; let us open the secrets of our hearts unto him; he will gladly give
us audience, His feet are fast nailed, he will not shrink from us. His arms
are spread abroad to receive and embrace us. His precious blood does flow from
all the parts of his body to cleanse and refresh us, His head is bowed down to
give us the sweet kiss of peace and reconciliation. His heart is open to give
us free entrance to his love. These torments, these wounds, and all ar^ ours.
Come let us offer him to his eternal father: let us beseech him to show his
precious wounds to his beloved father, and what he has suffered for us, and
nothing will be denied.

Aspirations in form of a Dialogue between Christ Jesus and a deuou^ Soul.
Christ Jesus O My son, behold how I have loved thee, I have known thee in
my offense from all eternity, I have created thee and infused into thee a
soul, wherein I have lively impressed my own image: and that thou might
know how noble a creature I have made thee; I have not refused to assume the
self same nature, and to become vested with flesh and blood, that I might
redeem thee.

[Here it will not be needful, that I express all the signs of love, which
God has manifested by the admirable work of our Redemption; and the good
inspirations and callings, where by he has withdrawn us from bad courses, and
has as it were lead us by the hand unto the way of life, but it is much
better, that every one call to mind and excogitate the good motions and
benefits he has received, and where with he finds himself best moved; and
suppose God almighty to have charged him with these graces and testimonies of
his love, answering in this or the like manner.]


The Soul. IT is most true (my dear Lord) thou did create me and redeem
me: but I have defiled my self, and am not worthy now to look thee in the
face. It was in thy power to have made me a stone, or a tree, or what else had
been thy pleasure: but such was thy immense goodness, that thou have made me one
of thy most noble creatures. I know (most sweet Lord) that thou have made
nothing in vain. Tell me then I beseech thee; tell me thy poor servant for
thy own sake, what is it thou requirest of me? Thou have given me grace and
light to decerne, that I am not made for my self: for I have often experienced,
that when I have given way to my own desires and affections, they have lead me
into manifold inconveniences. Vouchsafe therefore to tell me, what thou would
have me to do. Behold I am ready to perform whatsoever thou shall please to
command. [Then say unto yourself these words of the Psalmist, I will hear
what our Lord will speak in me, because he will speak peace to his people,
and listen in silence, supposing him to answer thus your pious request.]


Christ Jesus. O My dear son, I have given thee all that thou art or have,
yet I have given thee one thing so free at thy own disposing, that thou
may give it to whom or to what thou please. If thou art, as thou say,
ready to do whatsoever I command; my will is, that thou give me this one
thing, and I freely permit thee to use all the rest of my gifts, as best
likes thee. This alone will content me: and although thou should give me
all the rest, and detain this from me, I shall esteem them all as nothing*
Thy Heart it is I ask, Son give me thy heart.


The Soul. O My dear Lord, who does better deserve it then thy self? who can
more enrich it? I wish it ^ere in my power to give thee all men's hearts. What
do I desire more, then that my heart may be inflamed with the fire of thy
divine love? Behold; I give thee my self: do thy will in me for time and
eternity.

O Lord, such is thy gracious clemency and benignity, that thou despisest noe
man, reiectest noe* man that desires to come to thee: yea thou call every
man, thou allurest every man, and unto every man thou show the way to come
to thee; for it is thy delight to be with the sons of men. What is this (o
Lord) but a most evident proof, that thou art so good, that thou art not able
to deny thy self to them that seek the with all their heart?

What greater love dan one show then ^o give his own self? ^s thou ar^ al^^ ^^
ready, and desirous to do to all, (...) seek after the^ with a sinceere
^^ynd? Let us therefore (if it shall so stand with thy blessed will) make a
covenant between us. Thou shall take care of my welfare and remedy, and I will
take care of thy honor and service: and thou shall do with me what thou will,
and shall see to be expedient for thy greater glory and my salvation; and I
will be wholly thine, and depend upon thee alone.

Grant me (sweet Jesus) that I may desire nothing but thee: and that I may
so entirely and absolutely resign my self unto thee without all reserhation,
that I may never hereafter take my self from thee.

O fire, vouchsafe to burn me; o charity, vouchsafe to inflame me; o light,
vouchsafe to illuminate me.

O my Repose, o my Consolation, o my Hope, o my Treasure, o my Life, o my Love,
that always burnest and art never consumed.

When shall I perfectly love thee? When shall I embrace thee with the arms of
my soul? When shall I for the love of thee contemn both myself and all the
world? When shall my soul with all her powers be perfectly united unto thee?
When shall she be wholly drowned and immerged in the bottomless abisse of thy
divine love?

O most benign, sweet, beautiful, wise rich, noble, precious, and most worthy
to be beloved and adored, when shall I love thee in such sort, that I shall be
wholly converted into love?

O life of my soul, who to give me life, did suffer death.

O good Jesus, o my sweet Lord and Savior. Grant me I beseech thee, that I
may altogether shun and detest all manner of sin; and that in all
sincerity of heart I may convert my self to thee, in such sort, that all my
thoughts, my desires, my memory, and all the powers of my soul and body may
be fixed on the alone.

I confess (o Lord) that I am not worthy to bear the name of thy son: and
yet I cannot choose, but acknowledge thee to be my father, for in very deed
thou art my father and my only confidence. Thou art the fountain of mercy
which do not repel unclean persons that come unto thee; but do wash
them, and give them consolation.

Behold then (o sweet comforter) how I the most desolate and abject creature of
all others come unto thee, bringing nothing at all with me, but the burden of
my sins. I most humbly prostrate my self at the feet of thy divine goodness,
craving mercy at thy hands. Pardon me (o my assured confidence) and through thy
infinite ^l^mency vouchsafe to purify my soul, and conduct it to eternal
life. Amen.

This mai^ be done diverse ways, either mentally or vocally, according as you
shall e^petience most spiritual advancement. You may take out of these*
aspirations such as shall best relish with your devotion, some at one time and
some at another: Yet I could wish you would at first take them as they are ^^r^
placed, and exercise yourself in so many of them at one time; as your leisure
will permit* and the next dai^ begin where you left; and so forth continue,
until you have at several times gone through them all. I could with also
that you would perform them in like manner sower or five times, if you find
them needful: and by that time I confide in God almighties, goodness that you
will be enabled (if you make use of these in due manner) to frame such of
yourself, and to express; our affections and desires with facility and
sweetness. And such expression made b^ yourself, mo^^d out of some pious
consideration of the goodness of God, showed unto us in the work of our
Redemption, or some other of his benefits, will be far more grateful unto
him, then if you expressed your mind unto him by reading vocally, or
pronouncing mentally these I have ^here set down, or any other how learnedly
or excellently penned soever. For God almighty regards not, whether that we
say be elequently delivered, and the words placed in mood and figure; but ^e
attends our hearts, and what we desire to say, and do express in our poor
manner.

Not much unlike to a tender mother, who is well pleased with the expression of
love in her little Infant that can scarce utter a word or Speak intelligibly;
yet comes and clips her as far as it is short arms can extend, and in it is
imperfect language lays open it is affections, joys desires, wants, and
troubles: running to her as it is best loving and beloved friend, refuge, and
hope of redress in all occurring exigents.

Some amorous souls will be moved with pronouncing only the holy name of
Jesus, or the word, Love, or such like* Others have need of many pious
considerations to excite their hearts to devotion. Moreover one and the self
same consideration will not produce the like effect at all times, through our
indisposition of body or mind: yet the most simple, plain, and humble way, and
least affected with curious set speeches or terms is the best; for you are
not so much to regard what to say, as how to love Wherefore you may proceed
herein as lovers do, who never think of observing order or method in their
discourses: but speak according as their affections guide them; little caring
whether there be connection in the words or no, or whether the words be proper
and significant or no, but take those which first occur.

After you have by such like industries as these gotten into your interior,
and disposed yourself to treat immediately with God, you may confidently begin
your Office: for this manner of preparation will abundantly suffice on your
part, that distractions may not have so^ free access into your mind, not be
imputed to you when they occur: whereas otherwise, if you presumptuously
attempt to begin it abruptly, you will expose yourself to be tossed here and
there with the wind of every vain im^gination.


CHAPT. XII. Showing what manner of reciting the Divine office, and
consequently the office of the B. Virgin is convenient, or necessary to be
observed.
IT appears by the common practice in a^ ages, that the divine office, and
this like wise of the B. Virgin, since it was instituted, has been performed
in public by mutual reciting: wherefore the same order (noe doubt) man
securely and profitably be observed in private, it being a resemblance of (...)
quire. Moreover the custom of two or more to recite the office together
seems to have been founded upon good reasons: first for that it is a great
ease and consolation next for that it ^ncreaseth alacrity and fervor, one
exciting the other with a pious emulation; and finally for that charity by
this means is well practiced, and much conserved. It is also consonant to the
holy Scriptures, for the Apostle commaund^ to that each one do Galla. 6.
bear an others burden, affirming, that by so doing they fulfill the law of
Christ, And our Savior himself said If two of Math. 18.
you shall consent upon ^arth concerning every thing what soever they shall
ask, it shall be done to them of my Father which is in heaven. For where there
be two or three gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of
them. The Prophet Isaie witnesses also, that ^e saw this form of praising
God observed in heaven, Seraphins (says Isaie 6.
he) stood upon the same, six wings to one and six wings to the other, and a
little after, And they cried one to an other and said, Holy, holy, holy,
etc.

Supposing therefore that it is not only lawful but exceeding commendable for
two or more to recite this office together, I will here set down what Order is
to be observed, when any number above two do concur thereunto.

If Three or more desire to perform the Office together, they are to divide
themselves into two parts: that is to say, if there be three of them, two are
to recite one verse, and the third the verse following; if there be Four of
them, two are to recite one verse, and the other two the verse following: and
so forth, be they never so many. Yet this alternation is properly used in
reading the Psalms and Hymns: for in the other parts of the office it
suffices that one or two do recite them, and the rest attend with diligence.
The preparatiue Prayers are to be said by all in a low voice only audible by
themselves: but the Psalm Venite exultemus, the Chapters, and Prayers are to
be said by one alone, the rest answering as is appointed in those places. The
Antiphones, Lessons, and Responsories are to be read by one of each side, the
rest giving attention.

When many recite the office together, it is not needful to have attention to
all of them, but it suffices to hear any of them. I have observed some in
reciting the office with others to mumble softly to themselves the others part:
which custom is much to be disliked; both for that it occasioneth scruples, as
also for that such whispering does often disturb others, hinder their own
attention, and tacitly infringe the common practice of alternation. Wherefore
such are to know, that it is far better for them to attend diligently to what
the other part does recite, and spare such their super fluous and prejudicial
labor. But perhaps they will say, that they cannot sometimes hear distinctly
what the other does recite: to which may be answered, that they are not bound
to hear every word distinctly pronounced; but it suffices, that they perceive
the others are not negligent in performing their part, and they themselves have
lisse^ed attentively.

For as much as concerns the manner of reciting in private the divine office,
and consequently the office of the B. Virgin by one alone: the practice in all
ages does likewise show it to be both sufficient and convenient. Yet because
some clauses or passages in the said offices seem to suppose more then one
person concurring, as for example, the Benedictions which are given in the
plural number, and Venite exultemus, Come let us rejoice, the word Oremus, Let
us pray, which is usually recited before every Prayer, Benedicamus Domino, and
diverse others where in the plural numbers expressed: In answer there unto, I
will here set down what Peeter Damian in his book entitled Dominus vobiscum
answers in general to such like objections. vz. That the rule of
Ecclesiastical tradition is to be uniformly observed, whether the office be
recited by one alone or more. For (says he) if the Doctors of the Church had
judged it meet, they would have prescribed one form of the divine office for
one alone, and an other for two or more: which since they have not, but have
taught us to keep one order with inviolable observance, we are to obey their
holy institution; which is founded upon good reason, deduced out of the
authority of the holy Scriptures. For they foresaw that whatsoever is offered
with due reverence in the divine office by every particular member of the holy
Church, the same is exhibited universally by the faith and devotion of the
whole Church, for the Spirit of the Church is one, where with one body is
viuificated or quickened, which is governed by Christ the head thereof. Moreover
the whole Church does consist of a coniuncture of diverse members, yet it is
without doubt but one body, founded upon the soliditie of one faith, and
anointed with one virtue of the viuificating Spirit: whence it is that the
Apostle says, One body and one Spirit, as you are called in one hope of your
vocation. Wherefore he concludes, ^t is meet that whatsoever is particularly
done in the sacred offices by any one whomesoeuer, that the holy Church
herself should be esteemed to do it with one consent, by unity of faith and
love of Charity.

THE EXPLICATION OF OUR LORDS PRAYER.
IT may seem great Presumption in me to attempt to explain this holy
Prayer, it being in it self most perfect, as having been composed by the
VVisdome of God, the second person of the Trinity, our dear Redeemer Christ
Jesus; and besides it having been already explicated at large by very many of
the holy Fathers, who have compiled whole treatisses thereupon.
Notwithstanding in regard I have undertaken to say something concerning* every
part of the office of the B. Virgin, as God almighty shall please to inspire
me with: for that the said office is usually begun with this holy Prayer; as
also for that few or in a manner none of the said expositions of the ancient
Fathers are extant in our vulgar tongue; confiding in the assistance of our B.
Savior, whose honor I principally intend, I will endeavor after my unskillful
manner to open this rich casket, and expose the precious gemmes therein
contained to the veiw of well minded souls.

Our Father.
Almighty God (who in the law of Moses would be styled Lord, and appeared
always to the children of Israel with such exceeding terror, that they
desired, that Moses might speak unto them, and not he) being in the law of
grace sweetly inclined to mercy by the perfect conformity of his only and
well beloved son, our dear Redeemer Christ Jesus to his holy will in all
things, was graciously pleased to take upon him a more familiar name; that
deposing all servile fear, we might be incouradged to treat with him with
filial reverence, love, and confidence.

S. Ianes ^aieth, That we m^st ask in Ia. 1.
says nothing doubting, if we will receive any thing of our Lord. And what is
there so efficacious to increase confidence, inflame the affect on, and
rejoice an humble soul, as to be assured, that the true living and almighty
God is so benign, that he is not only willing, but al^oe desirous to be
called Father by the faithful? Our Savior therefore by this sweet and loving
name of Father, inuiteth us to come to God wit^ a filial love, and firm
confidence in his benignity: assuring us that he will embrace us with a tender
affection, and that he ^ill be solicitous, that nothing be wanting unto us.
What man is there of you (says he) Math. 7
whom if his child shall ask bread, will he reach him a stone? or if he shall
ask him a fish, will he reach him a serpent? if you then being naught, know
how to give good g^ifts to your children, how much mo^e will your Father who is
in heaven give good things to them that ask him? And in another place. Be not
careful for your life, what you shall eat, neither for your body, what
raiment you shall put o^, etc. For your Father knows that you need all these
things. Seek therefore first the kingdom of God, and the justice of him, and
all th^se things shall he given you.

Although by the word Father in this Prayer may be understood the first Person
of the blessed Trinity, who is properly in the said Trinity God the Father,
yet according to S. Augustine by the word Father, the whole Trinity is here
designed, to whose Image we are created, by whose providence we are governed,
by whose grace we are adopted, and by w^ose infinite mercy we are redeemed.

By that our Savior would have us to say our Father, rather then m^ Father,
he signifies that all the faithful are fellow brethren, all sons of one and
the same Father, and therefore bound to reverence love and pray for one an
other: Yea that we are his brethren, as being by him adopted the sons of God,
and coheires with him of the everlasting kingdom, and made by grace what he is
by nature. Moreover thereby is signified, that God is the universal good, with
whom there is no acception of persons, who loves and seeks the common good.

Which are in Heaven.
THat is, in the Imperial Heaven; where he is pleased to glorify those, whom
he has ordained to eternal happiness. It may also metaphorially be
understood of the celestial Ci^tizens themselves, in whom he is after a most
excellent and singular manner by his beatificall presence: or of virtuous and
devout souls here on earth, whose conversation is in heaven; for of those the
Apostle says, You are the Temple of the living God.

God is in all things by his essence, presence, and power, penetrating,
inuironing, and conseruing all things: and is more near and intime to every
thing, then any part is to it is whole, or any thing is to it self; for he alone
slideth as it were into the essences of things: neither is any thing present to
an other, but only by virtue of the divine presence. The Prophet witnesses,
VV^^, do not I fill heaven Ierem. 23. Psalm. 138.
and earth? VV^^ther shall I go (says holy David) from thy Spirit, or
whither shall I fl^^ from thy face? If I shall ascend in to heaven thou art
there: If I descend into hell thou art present, (vizt) exer^^sing the act of
Justice. S. Augustine affirms, that God is in li. medita. c. 29.
all places without place, that he contains all things not being environed by
them, that he is present in all places without motion, that he bears all
things and is not burdened, and that he fills all things not being included.

Yet he is truly said to dwell in Heaven particularly, according to what he
has insinuated by his Prophet Isaie, Heaven is my seat and the earth my
footestoole, and we read in the Psalms Our Lord his seat is in Heaven,
having designed that place as his court; and there placed his royal t^rone,
where he does particularly manifest himself to his beloved.

Since then by these words. Our Father which art in heaven we acknowledge God
almighty now in the law of grace to have advanced us to so eminent a degree of
honor, as to adopt us his Sons, and co^eires with his own natural Son
Christ Jesus: let us esteem ourselves to remain in this world as in a place
of banishement, far distant from that happy region, whereunto we confess
ourselves to lay claim: let us hast^n thither, and have all our affections
bent thither wards; avoiding all things that may be any hinderance unto us in
the pursuit thereof: let us (I say) behave ourselves in all things as
besitteth the Sons of so potent and glorious a Father; in nothing regarding
our own private commodity, but rather employing our whole forces to set forth
his glory and magnificence, saying to that end the first Petition.

Sanctified be thy Name.
THese words may be taken in diverse senses: as First for the holy name of God
it self, which the Jews did hold in such exceeding reverence, that they dared
not to pronounce the word Iehoua, which signified the essence of God: and it is
a constant tradition that is was only once a year spoken, and that by the
high Priest, when he entered into Sancta Sanctorum. Ps. 75.
God is known in Iewrie, (says the Prophet) in Israel his name is great. Ps.
112.
and in an other place, From the rising of, the sun unto the going down the
name of our Lord is la^dable and Praise ye his name, because Ps. 99.
our Lord is sweet. S. Thomas of Aquine ^. 56 Isa^ae.
says, the name of God is great to be feared, holy to be ^euerenced, sweet to
be meditated on, copious to give mercy, efficacious to impetrate, powerful to
cause salvation, and secret to be known.

Secondly they may be understood so; that we desire hereby, that all nations
of the earth may come to the light of Faith: and that they may know, that God
alone is worthy of all praise and glory; and consequently, that they may
tremble at his Majesty, admire his works, be enamoured with his beauty, and
even languish to behold his unspeakable goodness, Ps. 65.
saying with the holy Prophet, Let all the earth adore thee, and sing to thee:
let it sing a Psalm to thy name. and in an other Ps. 95.
place, Show forth his glory amongst the Gen^iles, his marvelous works in all
people. Alas, wretched, ungrateful, and indeuoute as we are; how often do we
pronounce this petition without due attention, and consequently without due
reverence and spiritual fervor? Let v^ therefore do ourselves, what we
desire should be done by all men: that is to say, let us endeavor by
frequenting learned exhortations, reading pious books, and exercising
ourselves in holy contemplations, to come to know how excellent, how infinitely
good, sweet, and merciful a God we have; that by suc^ knowledge we may be
excited to serve and honor, love and praise him every where, and at all times.

Lastly they may be understood, that we desire by those words that our
heavenly Father will be pleased either to make us capable to comprehend his
sanctification, or at least to appear holy in our religious conversation:
which will be fulfilled in us, when men's all see the works which he has
perfected in us, and glorify his name therefore Vertu^^ men do sanctify God,
whil^^ by living holily they demonstrate God, who^^ they so serve, to be holy.
And contrary wise, Vicious men by their iniust and irreligious conversation are
truly said to commaculate and defile the name of our Lord; because they live
in such a manner, as though God did approve of injustice, and were not holy:
and do (as much as in the lies) embolden others by their wicked and dissolute
example to dishonor him. Hence it is that almighty God vpbraiding the
perfidious children of Israel says, You have polluted my holy Ezech. 36.
name* and again I will sanctify my great name which you have polluted amidst
the Gentiles.

Let thy Kingdom come.
THe Kingdom here mentioned is by some expounded of the militant Church: as
thus, Let thy Kingdom come, that is, let the militant Church in which thou
reignest by faith and grace, be multiplied and spread through the whole world;
and let her enemies especially the devils be cast forth of her, that thou
alone may peaceably reign in ^er.

By others it is expounded of the Kingdom of God, which the holy Evangelist
says is within us: and being Luc. 17
taken in this sense, the Kingdom of God cannot come, whilst sin reigns in
our hearts, and we do obey to the concupiscences thereof, and therefore we
pray, Let thy Kingdom come, that is stre^gthen us by thy grace, that we ma^^
be enabled through the assistance th^reof to free our hearts from the servitude
of sin, and to dispose ourselves by the practice of virtues, that thou may
peaceably enter and assume the government of our hearts. Of this Kingdom the
Prophet makes mention where he Ps. 22.
says, Our Lord rules me, and nothing shall be wanting to me. He has
cond^^ted me upon the paths of justice etc.

Finally it is expounded of the Triumphant Church: as* that we pray hereby,
that the walls of the Celestial Jerusalem may be reedified, and the ruin of
the Angels repaired; that the number of the blessed may become complete, and
the Kingdom of the triumphant Church fully established: and being taken in
this* sense, the iustmen, and such also who are imperfect, but yet do employ
their b^^^ endeauours to mo^tify their inordinate affections* and to reform
the image of God in their souls* may recite this Petition with much fervor,
and expect this Kingdom of God with longing desire: which our Savior ^ath
promised shall come or begin upon that terrible and joyful da^e, when the
Angels shall place such well minded souls on his right hand, and he pronounce
that Math. 25.
happy sete^ce, Come ye blessed of my Father possess you a ^ingdome, which
has been prepared for you ever. from the beginning of the world.

S. Gregory the great in his Homily Luc^ 12
upon these words of S. L^ke, Be ye like to men expecting their Lord when he
shall return from the marriadg^ that when he does come and knock, fort^ with
they may open unto him, has this inter pr^tatio^. Our lord com^th (says he)
when he hastneth a to judgment; but he knocks, when by the pangs of sickn^s
he shows, that death is near at hand: unto whom we open readily, if we
receive him with love. For he will not open to the iudg^ that knocks, who
trembles to depart out of his body, fearing to behold him as judge, whom his
conscience accuses him to have greatly offended. But he that is assured of his
life well spent does quickly open, because he does joyfully expect his judge:
and when the time of death approaches, does rejoice with confidence, that ere
long his labors shall be rewarded with a crown of glory.

Let us therefore endeavor to live with such innocence and purity, that we
may recite this petition with sincere affection, Expecting the blessed hope,
and aduen^ of the glory of the great God, and our Sauio^^ Jesus Christ, begging
with sighs and tears, that almighty God will be pleased even at this present
to reign in our hearts* and grant us light to see and know his will in all
things, and grace to perform it in the most perfect manner, saying to that end
the ensuing Petition.

Let thy will be done (...) earth it is in heaven.
THat is* grant us that live upon earth, grace to obey thee as pro^ptly,
reverently, and purely, as the blessed do that live in heaven, according as
our frailty will permit. There cannot be a more excellent prayer, then to
besee^h almighty God that (...) things may be paralleled with the celestial.
And what other thing do we desire, when we sai^ Let thy will be done upon
earth, as ^^ is in heaven, but that men may be made like to Angels, and that
is the will of God is accompli^^ed by them in heaven, so all we that live upon
earth, may not do our own wills, but his divine pleasure? (...) man is able
to sai^ this Petition with a sincere heart and true affection, but he who does
undoubtedly believe, that God almighty does dispense all things both prosperous
and adverse for our best ^^aile: and that he is more pro(...) and solicitous
for our welfare and (...) dir^^; then we are for our own, Whose will is (as
the Apostl^ witnesses) ^. ad Tim.
that all men he saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth And therefore we
may boldly confiding in his immense goodness recite the Petition following.

Give us this day our supersubstantiall bread.
FOr so ^^ is called by S. Matthew, he Math. 6
signifying thereby the nobility and ^^anscendent quality of that substance,
which exceeds all creatures in magnificence, and sanctification. The said
supersubstantiall bread is termed by S. Luke, Daily bread, he expressing
thereby Luca 11
the properti^ or nature of the use thereof. By th^^ word Daily is signified,
that we are not able to subsist one whole day without this admirable food.

When we ask this food, we demand (as S. Augustine, S. Cyprian, and other
holy Doctors of the Church do affirm) not only all necessary sustenance for
the body, but al^oe much more all spiritual food for the soul as namely the
bread of the ho^y Eucha^ist, which S. Denis calls supersubstantiall bread: to
wit Christ Jesus, the bread of life that came from heaven, and the bread of
life to us that eat his body, moreover the bread of understanding, the bread
of grace and holy inspirations. For we are not to think, that our Savior
taught us by this Petition to ask material bread alone, and other corporal
sustenance: for we have another life to provide for, besides that of the body,
vz the life of the soul, which is far more to be regarded. Not in bread
alone that is in corporal Math. 4
food, does man live according to both parts vz body and soul, but in every
word that proceeds from the mouth of God, that is, from the divine
understanding, and is revealed by the, Angels to holy men. The body indeed
may be sustained and conserved in the life of nature by material bread: but
the life of the soul is corroborated, and conserved in the life of grace by
the word of God, according to that, He that bears my ward, Joan. ^
and believes him that sent one, has life everlasting. Let us therefore beg
this spiritual bread with much instance: for our soul will soon saint, and
be in danger to perish, if God almighty do wit^ draw his good motions and
instigations to virtue; and we through want of them do fall to dispose
ourselves, that we may daily receive the body and blood of our sweet Savior
Sacramentally and spiritually, or at least spiritually.

B. the word to Day is signified, that this food is daily to be taken: and
that the food we received yesterdaie is not sufficient to sustain us, unless
it be given us to day also; or if it be not granted unto us, that this
happen not through our neglect and so in like manner during our whole life:
for there will be no day wherein we shall not have need of this bread to
^orroberate the heart of our interior man. The word to Day may also be
understood for this present life: in which sense, we desire that God almighty
will be pleased to grant us this bread whilst we remain in this life. For we
are assured that he will give it in the future life to all well deserving
people, When they shall eat and drink upon his table in his kingdom, and
Luc. 12.
When he shall make them sit down and minister Luc. 12.
unto them at he passes by^ yet notwithstanding we desire him to bestow it
upon us this day, because unless we receive it in this life, we shall not be
partakers thereof in the next.

And forgive us our debts, as we also do forgive our debtors.
THat is, Forgive us our sins and the punishment which we have deserved by
sinning, as we forgive them that have offended us, and are obliged to make us
recompense. O ineffable goodness of God I who by these words is pleased not
only to prescribe us a sweet and easy means how to mitigate the severity of
his judgments, but also does seem to be graciously content to leave it in our
power to limit him (as it were) to a certain form of sentence. For what other
thing can we conceive to be mean^ hereby, then that our Savior (who is to be
our Judge) desiring, that w^ should experience him in that dreadful day a
mild and facile, judge, was pleased to fore warn us according to what form he
purposes to proceed? Which undoubtedly will be in every point answerable to
the rigor or mercy we shall here show in pardoning one another: as we may
gather by the Parable of the ungracious Math. 18.
servant, who for that he did not show mercy to his fellow servant, was
delivered over to the tormentors, until he had pa^ed the whole debt which
himself did owe unto his Lord; our Savior affirming ^n the same place, that
even so our heavenly Father will do to us, if we do not every one of us
forgive our brethren from our hearts. And moreover our Savior says, If you
will forgive men their offenses, your heavenly Father will forgive Math. 6
you your offenses: but if you will not forgive men, ^^ther will your Father
forgive you your offenses. W^ence it appears, that if we will not now use
mercy, we cannot then e^pect any favor, but istice without mercy.

In the first Chapter of Judges is related, that Judas having taken Adonibeze^
prisoner, did cut of the extreme parts of his hands and feet, and Adonibeze^
said, Seventy kings having the extremes parts of their hands and feet cut
of, did gather up the relics of meat under my table: As I have done, so
has God repai^d me.

The debts here mentioned are in two kinds. The one, are offe^cs done directly
contrary to the will of God, ^hic^ induce death to the soul, and are therefore
called mortal sins. The other are done indirectly against the will of God,
or rather, Praeter voluntatem ipsi^s: that is to say, they are not done
contrary to his will; but yet they do not square agreeable to his wills or
thus, they are such, that if we do them, he will not be so highly displeased
with us, that we shall loose his favor, and be altogether d^priued of his
grace thereby; but if we do them not, he will be the better pleased with us.
As for example, if we adhere to any of his creatures; ^et ^ such sort, that we
will not any wise give consent to auert our selves from him to enjoy them, but
would willingly hau^ him and them also. These debts are commonly called
venial sinners and do not induce death to the soul; but yet do diminish the
seruour of Charity, and may be an occasion (if we committ them often without
seruple or remorse) to produce a bad effect. If we will only pardon trifles
and slight injuries, as some unkind words, some crossing of our desires, or the
like; God almighty will only remit these our lesser offenses and perhaps not
them neither, if we have greater injuries to remit, and shall refuse or neglect
to do it. But if we ill gladly and from our hearts pardon all sorts of wrongs
be they never so little, or never so great, so they be all we have to pardon:
as when we are taxed in our honor and good name, defrauded of our goods, or
that violence is offered to our person, or the like; then our heavenly Father
will no doubt cancel and deface the scedule wherein we have mortgaged our
everlasting patrimony.

Let us therefore be facile in pardoning one another: for if we be otherwise,
we pray against ourselves by this petition. Some there are who will faie, we
are content to remitt the fault, but no^ the punishment or satisfaction, due
thereunto; for that we purpose to infliet or exact according to the proceedings
of justice and equity: but let such beware least God almighty render them the
like, when their faults are discussed before his tribunal. Never the less
punishment or satisfaction is not always to be remitted, especially by a
Prelate or judge. For it would not be expedient for the offender, who perhaps
would abuse such clemency, and be imboldned thereby to offend. Wherefore if a
man had rather for his part benignely forgive the punishment, then scoke his
remedy by order of justice; but that brotherly charity or fraternall
correction does require the contrary: such an one may securely and confidently
beg of almlghty God not only for the remission of the guilt of his sins,
but also for the relaxation of the punishment due unto them.

We read in Ecclesiasticus, that, He that will be revenged shall find revenge
of our Lord, and keeping he shall keep his sin. Vdzt if he seek revenge
contrary to the course of justice, out of evil intention, or out of: ancor of
mind: and in the same plate, Forgive thy neighbor harting thee, and the^ shall
thy sins be loosed to thee, when thou praiest. Charity requires that we
remi^t in^uries with three conditions; (vdzt) if the offender be truly
penitent, if the remission of punishment be not against justice, nor against
necessary discipline. Concerning which some may ask how M. arci
every man that is offended can forgive the offender his sins, since it is
written, Who can forgive sins but only God? To whom may be answered, that
God alone does remitt sin simply by grace, ^aking away the guilt or stain of
the fault, and releasing the punishment which according to divine justice was
due to the sin: but man does remitt sin after ^ fashion, (vdzt) as much as
concerns the injury or offense done to himself, and the satisfaction due to
him. According to which the holy Church does does teach all good Christians a
form, how to absolve their neighbor in such cases; which pious Catholics
do use that is, to say I beseech God toforgi^e you, and I do ^or the
offenses we do by commission or ^om^ssion against our neighbor, a^e done
also against God, who sai^t^, ^s long as you did it to one of these my lea^^
brethren, you did it to me. and Math. 25.
a little after, (...) long as you did it not to one of these lesser, neither
did you it to me.

And lead us not into temptation.
ACcording to S. James, God tempts Iaco. 1.
no man. Which is to be understood, of the ^ostile and deceitful tentation,
which is ordained to the evil or detriment of him that is tempted: for with
this sort of tentation God tempts not any man, as the Apostle witnesses in
the same place saying, that God is not a rempter of evils; but that to this,
Every man is tempted by his own concupiscence abstracted and allured: the
which concupiscence when it has conceived, that is, when by some imperfect
consent our mind not resisting or rejecting it, we do obey, yield, or give way
unto it, brings forth sin: and sin when it is consummate, that is, when
our mind does deliberatly fully and perfectly yield to the committing or liking
of the act, or motion, whereunto the said concupisce^ce does move or incite
us, ingendreth death. And therefore our blessed Savior did warn his beloved
disciples, and in them all others to watch and pray, that they might not enter
into this sort of tention, saying, VVatch ye and pray that Math. 26.
ye enter not into tentation. The Spirit indeed is prompt, but the flesh weak.

Yet God almighty tempts his elect with the temptation of probation or
trial, which is ordained to the good or benefit of them that are tempted; of
which sort was that, where God is said, to have tempted Abraham: and in the
Genesis 22 Sap. 3.
book of VVisdome, where God is said to have tempted the just, and to have
found them worthy of himself: And this he does, not that he himself by such
trial may come to know any thing concerning them, which he does not know
already: for the beloved Disciple of ou^ Lord affirms of him, that He know
all, and that It was not needful for him; Ioh. 2.
that any should give testimony of man, for he knew what was in man: and the
Prophet David says, God knows the Psalm. 4.
secrets of the heart. But he does it, First that they may be purified,
according to that of holy Job, He has proved me as Job 23.
gold that passes through the fire. Secondly that it may appear, how they
love him according to that of Deuteromomie: The Deuteronomy. 13
Lord your God tempts you, that it may appear, whether you love him or no
with all your heart, and with all your soul. Thirdly that he may make known
their sanctity to others. Lastly that they may know themselves the better. We
do not therefore desire, that we may not be lead into this temptation:
because it moves us not directly to sin, as also for that we are taught by
the holy Apostles to rejoice, when such temptations happen unto us. You shall
rejoice (says S. Peter) Ep. 1 c. 1
a little now if you must be made heavy in diverse ^smptations etc. And S. James
says, Esteem it all joy, when you shall fall unto diverse Iaco. 1.
tentations etc. But we pray, that God almighty will grant us the grace of
patience and constancy, that we may make good use of it.

But as concerning the other tent^tion which commet^ from the enemies of our
soul, vdzt, the devil, the world, and the flesh, we pray thereby, that
although it be induced into us by imp^gnation, that is, although it take hold
of us moving us internally to evil, that we may not be induced into it by
consent* that is, that we may not be so cunningly i^ueigled and so forcibly
incited, that we shall be drawn to yield thereunto.

By these words therefore Lead us not into tentation we desire, that God will
not permit us to be tempted above our strength, nor leave us destitute of his
assisting grace: but will grant us fortitude to resist and make also with
tentation issue or fruit^; that we may be able to sustain it to his hono^ and
glory, and the benefit of our souls. Job was tempted, but could not be induced
to speak any thing foolishly against God: and Joseph was also tempted, as we
read in Genes^s: but neither of them can Genes. 39.
properly be said to have been lead into tentation, because they gave not
consent to what was suggested. Snarez affirms, li. de eratione vocali c. 8.
that neither the devil has power to lead us into tentation: neither can we
consent unto him farther, then God almighty is pleased to permit. Wherefore
(says he) we ask that God almighty will not permit this to be done in us,
no^ by us

God is said to lead us into tentation, when by subtracting his assisting
grace, he permits us to be lead. In which manner he is said to have hardened
the heart of Pharao: not that he did indeed harden his heart, but rather Pharao
hardened* his own hear^ by neglecting to concur with that suff^^iency of
grace which God had bestowed on him, and refusing to let the children of Israel
depart after so many admonitio^s. And therefore our Lord left him to himself,
as likewise the children of Israel afterward, when they refused to hear his
voice: as the Prophet ^^uid recounteth, Psalm. 80
And my people, heard not my voice: and Israel attended not to me, and I let
them alone according to the desires of their heart they shall go in their own
inventions.

For the more full and clear understanding of this petition, and of all that
has been said of it, you must know that we can do nothing that is good of
ourselves, but all by the help and assistance of Gods grace, as it is written,
Without me you can do Ioh. 15. 1. ad Cor. 12.
nothing. and in another place, No man can say Our Lord Jesus, but in the
Holy Ghost.

By these words therefore Lead us not into tentation we demand, that we may
neither be denied his grace and help, nor suffered to abuse our liberti^ by
rejecting such wholesome inspiration^ and motions, as he shall please to grant
us.

But deliver us from all evil.
SOme there are who think, that the word But does show, that this Petition is
not different from the former, but is rather an explication thereof. Collat. 9.
Of which opinion Cassian does seem to be, where he expounds these words,
But deliver us etc That is, (says he) Suffer us not to be tempted by the
devil above our strength, or ability to make resistance. Yet the common
opinion is, t^^t ther^ are seven Petitions contained in this prayer: which
Snarez does learnedly prove in the Chapter aforesaied, where he distinguishes
this Petition from the Si^t Petition, as follows; In the Sixth (says he) we
pray that we may not be permitted to be tempted: but in the Seventh, that if
we be permitted to be tempted, that we may be delivered from the evil
thereof, that is, from consenting thereunto.

S. Bonauenture in his explication upon this prayer says, That in the 5.
Petition, we ask to be delivered from evils past: in the 6. from evils to
come, and in the 7. from all present evils.

Amen.
THat is, let it be done. This word neither the Greek nor Latin interpreter
has translated, for the reverence thereof: because our Savior used it so
frequently. It is a fruitful signet of prayer, procuring recollection of the
mind: for by saying Amen, the mind is born breefly to all before recited, and
the affection of impetrating is renewed* and so the prayer is ended with
fervor, and has a more full effect.

S. Thomas of Aquine affirms, that 2. 2. q. 89 a 9. in Cor.
this prayer is the most perfect of all others: which he proves out of the
121. Epist. of S. Augustine to Probus in the 12. Chapter, where he writes,
That if we do pray well, and as we ought, we cannot say any thing which is
not contained in our Lords prayer. For Prayer is as it were an interpreter of
our desire toward God. Wherefore praying well, we ask those things only,
which we may well desire: And in our Lords prayer are not only asked all
things which we may well desire, but also in that order or method wherein
they should be desired For first of all the end it self is desired, and
afterward the means which conduce thereunto. Our end indeed is God, toward
whom our affection tends in a twofold manner, the one by desiring his glory,
the other by desiring to be partakers thereof. The first proceeds from that
charity where with we love ourselves in God: and therefore the Petition
Sanctified be thy name, is put in the first place, by which we first seek the
glory of God; and next Let thy Kingdom cona, by which we desire to attain to
the glory of his Kingdom. The means by which we are furthered in attaining
this end does conduce in one of these two manners, vdzt, either of it self, or
by accident. Of it self that good does conduce which is profitable for this
end. And that which is profitable for the obtaining beatitude is profitable two
ways: the one directly and principally, of which sort are meritorious works;
and to this the Third Petition, Let thy will be done, has relation. The other
instrumentally, as it were helping us to merit; and to this the Fourth
Petition, Give us this day our daily Bread, does correspond. The means which
does conduce to eternal felicity by Accident, is by removing the impediments
of our salvation. There are three of these impediments. The first i^ Sin,
which directly excludes us out of the Kingdom of heaven; and therefore we
seek to remove this by the Fi^t Petition, And forgive us our debts, etc. The
Second is Tentation, which hinders us in the observance of the divine will,
against which the Sixth Petition is ordained, And lead us not etc. The Third is
present penalty, which Lindreth what is necessary for the sustenance of our
life; against which the Seventh Petition is ordained. Thus far are the words
of S. Thomas, or to this effect.

AN EXPLICATION OF THE ANGELICAL SALVTATION, OR AVE MARIA.
A Preamble to the Explication.
Hail Marie, fall of grace etc. Although the name of Marie was not pronounced
by the Angel, in this salutation, yet it is fitly inserted by the holy Church*
both because we speak not now to the B. Virgin as being present with us in
such manner, as the was then with the Angell^ a^ also for that by this holy
name we are excited to greater reverence and devotion, which the Angel stood
not in need of Some do conjecture that the Angel did of purpose omit to
express her name in this place, that he might style her with the new and
admirable title Full of grace, reserving her proper name till a ^itter time.
For he added a little after, Fear not Marie: when b^holding her surpised with
such exceeding bas^fulnesse and humble modesty, he thought it requisite to
call her in a familiar manner by her own name; thereby to embolden her to give
audience, and answer to the rest of his embassage.

Blessed art thou among women. These words were spoken both by the Angel, and
by S. Elizabeth, not without mystery; that by this consent or accord of words,
the holy Ghost might appear to be the author of born these salutations.

Blessed is the fruit of thy womb Jesus. These words were spoken by S.
Elizabeth, except the holy name of Jesus* which the could not pronounce, for
that it was not then imposed. Nevertheless the holy Church does with good
reason express it in this place: both because no name can be more profitable
unto us: for there is no other na^^, under heaven given to men, wherein we must
be saved: as also because no name does sound more harmonious and sweet in the
ears of the B. Virgin, nor consequently can be more proper to procure favor,
which is observed in all sorts of prayer.

Holy Marie Mother of God etc. These words, and the rest following were added
by the holy Church; and as it is probably coniectured about the year of our
Lord 431. when by the means of Pope Celestine the heresy of Nestorius (who
denied the B. Virgin to be the Mother of God) was condemned in the Ephesine
Council.

Hail Marie full of grace, our Lord is with the.
IN ancient times it was held a very great matter that the A^gells should
appear unto men, and esteemed exceeding much to his commendation, that had
received them with reverence: but that an Angel should show signs of
reverence to any man or woman, it was never heard of, until the Angel Gabriel
saluted the B. Virgin saying, All hail, which signifies, God save you, peace
be with you, or rejoice.

Three reasons may be given, why it was not meet that the Angels should in
times past reverence men, but rather men reverence Angels. The first, because
the Angels are replenished with the splendour of the divine grace, which is the
reason that they ever appear with brightness and glory: but in men, if they
participate any thing at all of this grace, yet it is very little, and ever for
the most part accompanied with a certain obscurity. The Second because the
Angels are familiar with God, and men are remote and estranged from him by
sin. The Third because the Angels are pure Spirits, and men of a nature
subject to corruption. Wherefore it was not convenient that the Angels should
reverence any humane creature, until here might be found such an one, who did
exceed them in these three qualities: and this one was the B. Virgin, and
therefore the Angel saluted her with these words, H^^le full of grace: as if
he had said, for this reason I yield re^erence unto thee, because I
acknowledge, that thou do excel me in fullness of grace. It is a probable
opinion that the divine grace was in more ample measure infused into the soul
of the B. Virgin, then into the brightest and most excellent Angel that is in
heaven. Secondly he said Our Lord is with th^^, showing that the B. Virgin
excelled him likewise in familiarity with God. For our Lord was present with
her, as her son; but with him, as his Lord. Luc. ^
Neither was it ever said to any Angel as it was to her, That which of thee
shall be borne holy shall be called the Son of God. and again, The holy
Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most high shall ouershadow
thee. By which it appears that not only the son of God, but also God the
Father, and God the holy Ghost were present with her. O great dignity of
which no Angel was ever held worthy I Thirdly she excelled him in purity, for
she was not Cant. 4
only most pure herself, as the spowse witnesses in the Canticles. Thou art
all f^ire o my beloved, and there is no blemish in thee; but also she did, and
does procure purity in others by her exemplar life.

Blessed art thou among women.
THree maledictions did sin bring upon mankind, from all which the B. Virgin
was most free. The first was laid upon the woman, that with corruption she
should conceane, with grief she should bear her burden, and with pain she
should bring forth. But the B. Virgin conceived of the holy Ghost, bore and
bred with comfort, and brought forth our Savior with joy. Springing it shall
spring (says the Prophet) Isai. 35.
and shall rejoice joyful and praising. The second Malediction was given to
the man* In the sweat of thy face thou shall ear bread: from which the B.
Virgin was free, who attended to those things that appertain to our 1. Cor. 7
Lord, that she might be holy both in body and Spirit. The Third Malediction
was common to both sexes, vd^t, that (...) should return to dust; and from
this the B. Virgin was also free: for we believe that he was raised after her
death, and assumpted into heaven, which the holy Prophet foretold Psalm. 131.
saying, A^ise Lord into thy rest, thou and the Arc of thy sanctification.

Blessed is the fruit of thy womb Jesus.
IN the fruit which Eve did eat she sought for three things, and was defrauded
of her expectation in them all: but the B. Virgin found in her fruit all she
could desire.

The First thing which Eve sought for in her fruit was that which the devil
did falsely promise; vd^t; that she should be like unto God: but he lied* for
she by eating that fruit was not made like but* unlike unto God: for by sinning
his image in her soul was much defaced, and she estranged from God, and
banished out of Paradise. But the B. Virgin the true mother of the living, and
all that by her means do live in spirit, did and do experience this in the
sacred fruit of her womb: for through Christ both she and they are made like
unto God, We k^ow (says the Evangelist) Ioh. 1. c. 3.
that when he shall appear, we shall be like unto him.

The Second thing which Eve expected was delectation, because it seemed good to
eat; but alas it proved a bitter sweet: for she knew he self straightwaies to
be naked, and had great serrow. But in the fruit of the B. Virgin we find
sweetness and salvation, He that eats my flesh has life everlasting. Ioh. 6.


The Third thing which Eve sought in her fruit was the delight in beholding it,
because it was fair to the eye* but of this also she was soon defrauded,
when she considered with the eyes of her mind, that the beauty thereof (...)
false and deceiptfull. But the fruit of the B. Virgin was most beautiful to
behold, as the Prophet witnesses, Psalm. 44,
Goodly of beauty above the sons of men* and most delightful to
contemplate, as being the glory of the eternal Father, whom the Angels
behold with excessive joy and admiration. Eve could not find in her fruit what
she longe^ for, neither can a sinner in any sin whatsoever. Let us therefore
detest those false deceiving fruits which exteriourly appear fair and
pleasant, but interiourly are full of corruption, and breed the worm of
conscience: and let us seek in the fruit of the B. Virgin, the fullness of our
hearts delight, in which truly and only it may be found.

Holy Marie.
MOst fitly was the name of Mar^e given unto her, for (...) is by
interpretation Stella mari^, that is, the star of the sea: and as those that
sail by sea, are directed by the star of the sea unto their desired haven*
so all Christians are directed by the B. Virgin ^arie unto eternal rest.
Moreover, as that star does send forth it is rays without hurt to it self,
so did the B. Virgin bring forth her son, the light of the world without
prejudice to her Virginity. The rays of a star do not diminish the
brightness of the star, neither did the Son of the B. Virgin diminish her
integrity

S. Bonauenture speaking of this holy page 430 Lect. 1.
name of Marie has words to this effect This most holy, most sweet, and most
worthy name (says he) was most sitly given to so holy, so sweet, and so
worthy a Virgin: for Marie is by interpretation a bitter sea, or the star of
the sea, Marie signifies illuminated or illuminatrice, and Marie signifies
likewise Lady. Marie is a bitter sea to the devil, drowning his power and
brusing his head against the rock, which is Christ. Marie is the star of the
sea to men, guiding them through the turbulent waves of this world unto the
celestial haven Marie is illuminated by the glory of her divine son. Marie
is an illuminatrice to the Angelical spirits, by the glory wherewith she is
so illuminated, and unto men by her exemplar life and exquisite virtues. And
Marie is the Lady of all creatures, by being Mother to their Lord. O Marie thou
bitter sea help us, that in true repentance we may become bitter totally. O
Marie thou star of the sea help us, that we may be directed through the sea
of this world spiritually. O Marie thou illuminatrice help us, that we may be
illuminated in heaven eternally. O Lady* Marie help us, that we may be
governed by thy direction and power filially.

Mother of God.
S. Thomas of Aquine says, that in the 3. p. q. 35. a. 4. sedcon.
Chapters of S. Cyrill approved by the Ephesine Council is read, I hat if any
one do not confess Emanuel (which is God Amoungst us) to be God in very
truth; and (which follows) the B. Virgin to be the Mother of God, (for she
carnally or according to the flesh conceived and brought forth the word of God
made flesh) let him be Anathema, that is excommunicated. ad 1.
In the same Article be further says, That although it cannot be expressly
found to be affirmed in the holy Scriptures, that the B. Virgin is the Mother
of God; yet is expressly found in them; that Jesus Christ is true God, as in
the first, and in the 20. chapt. of S. John: and that the B. Virgin is the
Mother of Jesus Christ, as appears in the first of S. Matthew: wherefore it
necessarily follows out of the words of the holy Scriptures, that she is the
Mother of God. Moreover S. Paul teaches, That Christ who is above all things
God ^d Rom 9.
blessed for ^uer, is according to the flesh, of the Jews: but he is not
otherwise of the Jews, then by the means of the B. Virgin, therefore he who
is above all things God blessed for ever, is truly borne of the B. Virgin as
of his Mother. Also in the same Article he alleges these words of S. Cyrill
in his first ^d 2.
Epistle. As the soul of man is borne together with it is body, and is reputed
to be one therewith; so that whosoever affirms, that a Mother is Mother of
the flesh; but not Mother of the soul speaks very superfluously: the like we
conceive in the generation of Christ. For the word of God is borne of the
substance of God the Father; but because he has assumed flesh, it is necessary
that we confess, that he is borne of a woman according to the flesh. Our of
which words ^e concludes, that the B. Virgin is called the Mother of God: not
because she is Mother of the divinity, but because she i^ Mother according to
the human^tie of the person having divinity and humanity.

Pray for us sinners now, and at the hour of our Death. Amen.
S. Thomas alleges three reasons, why 2. 2. q. 83 a. 4.
it should seem that we ought to pray to God alone. The first is, because
prayer is an act of religion, and God alone is to be worshipped in that sort.
The Second is, because it is proper to God alone to know our prayer, especially
when we pray mentally. The Third is, because if we do pray to any of the SS.
it is not but only in regard they are conjoined to God: but there are some
that yet live in this world, and others that remain in Purgatory, who are
nearely conjoined to God by grace, unto whom notwithstanding we are not to
pray, nor consequently to the SS. in Paradise. Nevertheless this holy S^
holds the contrary to be true: which he confirms by that of Job, Job. 5.
Call therefore if there be that will answer thee, and turn to some of the
Saints. Next he explicateth the state of the question as follows, We offer
our prayer (says he) to any one in a two fold manner: the one as to be
fulfilled by him, the other as to be impetrated by him. In the first manner we
offer our prayer to God alone: for that all our prayers ought to be ordained to
obtain grace and glory: which God alone does give, according to that of the
Psalm, Our Lord will give Psalm. 83
grace and glory. But in the Second mau^er we offer our prayers to the holy
Angels and men: not that God may know our requests by them, but that our
prayers may have their desired effect granted by their intercession and
merits. And therefore it is said in the Apocalipse that Apocal. 83.
The smoke of the incenses of the prayers of the Saints, ascended from the hand
of the Angel before God. This is clear also* by the form of prayer used by
the holy Church: for we beseech the blessed* Trinity to be merciful unto us;
but we desire the Saints of what degree of glory soever to pray for us.

Finally this holy S^. Answers the former objections as follows* To the
first he says, that we by our prayer exhibit religious worship to him alone,
from whom we se^k^ to obtain what we pray for: because in so doing we
acknowledge him to be the author of all our good: but this we do not to them,
whom we request to be our intercessors between him* and us. To the Second he
saiet, that the dead (if we consider their natural condition) do: not know
those things that pass in this world, and especially the interior motious 12.
Moral.
of the heart: but (as Si Gregory affirms) that which is meet for the Blessed
to know, conterning the things that are done in this: world, is manifested unto
them in the: Word; yea the very internal motions of the heart: and indeed is
does exceedingly benefitt their excellency to know such petitions as are
exhibited unto them, whether they be made vocally or mentally; and therefore
they do know the petitions we exhibit, God manifesting them. To the last
objection he answers, that those who are in this world, or in Purgatory do
not as yet enjoy the clear vision of the Word, that thereby they might know
what ^e think or say: and therefore we do not by prayer implore their
suffrages: but of those that live, we ask by way of conference.

Having showed that it is lawful to pray to Saints, and in what manner we
ought to address our Petitions unto them, it will be needful also to prove,
that they both may and do pray for us; for otherwise if they neither could
nor would interceed for us, it were in vain to implore their assistance.
Concerning which S. Thomas above named frames Five reasons, why it should
seem, that the Saints now in glory neither may, nor do pray for us.

The First is, because an act of any one is more meritorious for himself, then
for others: but the Saints now in glory do not merit, nor pray for
themselves, because they are constituted in the end, for which they were
created; nor consequently do they pray for us.

The Second is, because the Saints do conform their will perfectly to the
will of God, so that they desire nothing but what God will: but that which God
will is always fulfilled; wherefore it seems in vain that the Saints should
pray for us.

The Third is, because as the Saints in glory are in a more eminent degree then
we, so likewise are those that are in Purgatory; because they cannot now
sin: but those that are in Purgatory do not pray for us, but rather we for
them; nor consequently the Saints in glory.

The Fourth is, because if the Saints in glory did pray for us, the prayer of
the superior Saints would be of greatest efficacy: and consequently we ought
not to implore the suffrage of the prayers of the inferior saints, but only
of the superior.

The Fifth is, because the soul of Peter is not Peter: and therefore if the
souls of the Saints did pray for us, whilst they are separated from their
bodies, we should not entreat S. Peter, but his soul to pray for us; the
contrary whereof the holy Church does practice: and therefore it should seem,
that the Saints at least before the resurrection do not pray for us.

Notwithstanding this holy Saint does hold the contrary to be true: which he
confirms by that of the Machabees, This is he that prays much for the
people and for the whole City, Jeremy the Prophet of God. Afterward he
explicateth the state of the question as follows, S. Jerome (says he) does
affirm that it was the error of Vigilantius the heretic, That whilst we
live, we may mutually pray for one an other: but after we are departed this
life, no man's prayer for an other is heard; especially since that the Martyrs
do desire to have their blood revenged, and can not obtain it. But this
opinion is altogether false: for since that Prayer exhibited for another does
proceed from Charity; by how much the Saints in the celestial country are of
more perfect charity, by so much the more do they pray for us that are but
upon the way to beatitude, and may have help by their prayer, and by how much
they are more immediately united to God, by so much the more are their prayers
of greater efficacy: for such is the divine ordinance that there should be
reinfused of the excellency of the superior powers into the inferior, as of
the splendour or brightness of the sun into the air. Whence is that of the
Apostle concerning our Savior, Going by himself to God, alwai^^ li^ing to make
intercession for us. And for this reason S. Jerome says against Vigilantius,
that if the Apostles and Martyrs being as yet vested with mortality, when they
might be solicitous for them selves did then pray for others: how much more
do they now after having obtained victory, crowns and triumph.

Finally to the first objection he answers that noe beatitude is wanting to
the Saints, who are in the celestial country, seeing that they are blessed,
but the glory of the body, for which they do pray* but they pray for us, who
are not as yet come to the last perfection of beatitude; and their prayers have
power to impetrate from two causes, that is to say, from their own precedent
merits, and the divine acceptance.

To the Second he answers, that the Saints do obtain by request, what God
has decreed to grant by means of their prayers: and they desire what they
esteem is to be accomplished by their prayers, according to the will of God.

To the Third he answers, that although those that are ^^ Purgatory be in a
more eminent degree then we, in regard they cannot sin; yet are they
inferior to us, in so much as concerns the pains they suffer: and
according to this they are not in state of praying for others, but rather that
prayer should be exhibited for them.

To the Fourth he answers, that it is the will of God that all inferior
things should have help of the superior and therefore it is expedient not
only to implore the assistance of the superior but of inferior Saints also,
for otherwise the mercy of God alone were to be implored. Howbeit it happens
sometimes that devout prayer made to a^ inferior Saint is most effectual;
either for that this is performed with greater fervor, or because it is the
divine pleasure thereby to manifest the holiness of that Saint.

Finally to the Fifth he answers, that because the Saints in their life time
have merited that they may pray for us: therefore we do invoke them by the
names where with they were called in this world; by which also they are best
known unto us: and moreover to insinuate our belief of the resurrection, as
it is read in Exodus, I am the God of Abraham etc. Thus far are the words of
this holy St. whose doctrine or rather the doctrine of the holy Catholic
Church in this point of praying to Saint is very learnedly proved by Suarez in
his second Tome de Virtute and statu religionis the tenth Chapter; where he
answers all the objections which seem to be of moment, that the devil has
ever suggested to any heretic: to which place of Suarez I remitt the studious
reader, for that it would be over long for me to recite his arguments, and
authorities out of the holy Scripture, which he there sets down at lardge.

This may suffice for explication of this holy Prayer, wherein there is
nothing contained (as may plainly appear) which is not either expressly
taken out of the holy Scriptures, or deduced out of the^ by good consequence;
except this last clause, which may well be warranted by the holy Scriptures
likewise: as namely by the 48. of Genesis. the 32. of Exodus the 15. of Jeremy.
the 16. of S. Luke. the 2. Ep. of S. Peter. the 1. chap. the 5. 6. and 8. of
the Apocalipse, and many other places, besides what I have here before set
down in this my explication. Wherefore let those who are accustomed to recite
this holy prayer be comforted, and confirmed in their pious devotion; and let
our pretended Reformers blush for shame, and cease to impugn it with their
false calumniations.

S. Bernard has this excellent sentence: Hom. 2. in Missus est.
If the winds of tentations arise, if you happen upon the rocks of
tribulations, cast your eyes to the star, call upon Marie: in dangers, in
distresses, in doubtful matters think upon Marie, invoke Marie: let her not
depart our of your mouth, let her not depart out of your heart: and to the end
you may the better obtain the suffrage of her prayers, endeavor to imitate
the pattern of her conversation. and in another place, Wherefore (says he)
does human frailty inserm: Signum magnu^.
tremble to approach toward Marie? Let us embrace her footsteps (o my
brethren) and with devout supplication let us cast ourselves at her blessed
feet: let us hold her, and not permit her to depart until she has given us
her benediction: for she is powerful as being the fleece placed in the midst
between the dew and the Arc, the woman between the sun and Moon. Marie
is placed between Christ and his Church. Moreover the same holy Saint says
in another place, Do thou fear to present thy self before the Father? he
has given thee Jesus for thy Mediator: but perhapps in him also thou may
dread the divine Majesty, and desire to have an advocate to treat with him in
thy behalf: have recourse to Marie.

Saint Anselme affirms that if the Blessed Virgin to procure us pardon, shall
show unto her dear son her breasts, wherewith she sometimes gave him suck,
he will show his sacred wounds unto his eternal Father, and nothing will be
denied us.

Certain memorable sayings of S. James the Apostle, and diverse of the ancient
holy Fathers concerning this Prayer.
S. Bonauenture in his mirror of the B. Virgin has words to this effect, In
this admirable salutation (says he) there are contained five most sweet
sentences, in which are insinuated unto us five most delightful commendations,
or praises of the B. Virgin, (vdzt) That she was most pure, most replenished,
most secure, most worthy, and most profitable. First she was most pure, because
she was with out blame; and therefore the word Aue was properly applied by the
Angel, signifying thereby, that she Tom. 6. pa. 430. Lect. 2.
was free from all maledictions (of which there are very many mentioned in the
holy Scriptures, which this S. rekoneth up, and she we^ with exceeding
perspicuitie, how clear she was from them all) for so it was most meet the
Mother of God should be; as Saint Anselme witnesses, It was most meet (says
he) that the Conception of that man should be of a most pure Mother, and that
she should shine with such purity, as greater cannot be imagined under God,
unto whom God the Father had decreed to give his only Son, that he might be
one and the same Son of God, and Son of man.

Secondly she was most replenished with abundance of grace, Full of grace. She
was truly full, and abundantly full, as Saint Anselme affirms saying, O
woman full and more then full of grace, by whose excess and ouerflowing
plenitude all creatures are bedewed, and recover life.

Thirdly she was most secure by the presence of God, Our Lord is with thee.
Saint Bernard says, that not only our Lord the Son was with her, whom she
clothed with her flesh: but also our Lord the holy Ghost, by whom she
conceived; and our Lord the Father, who begat whom she did conceive.

Fourthly she was most worthy, for the reverence due unto her person, Blessed
art thou among women. The said S. Anselme seeming to be astonished at this
benediction says, O B. and more then B. Virgin, by whose benediction not
only all creatures are blessed by the Creator, but even the Creator himself is
blessed by this creature.

Fifthly she is most profitable for the excellency of her offspring, Blessed is
the fruit of thy womb. For she brought forth that most excellent and potent
fruit which gave salvation to the whole world. Saint Anselme upon these words
says, By the fecunditie of the B. Virgin, the impure sinner is justified, the
condemned is saved, and the banished man is restored: for her happy childbirth
redeemed the inthralled, cured the diseased, and raised to life the dead world.

Saint James in his Liturgy has words to this effect, Let us make
commemoration of our most holy, most immaculate, most glorious, and most B.
Lady Mother of God Marie, ever a Virgin; and of all the Saints and just men:
that all of us may obtain mercy by their prayers and intercession. and a
little after he adds, Hail Marie full of grace our Lord is with thee etc.
because thou have brought forth the Savior of our souls. It is meet we call
thee truly B. ever B. Mother of God, more honorable then the Cherubins, and
more glorious then the Seraphins, who have brought forth the Word of God
without corruption. O full of grace, all creatures, the companies of Angels,
and generations of men do congratulate thee, who art a sanctified Temple, a
spiritual Paradise, a glory to Virgins, of whom God assumed flesh; and our
God is made a child, who is before all worlds. He has made thy womb his
throne, and thy bowels more lardge and ample, then the heavens. O full of
grace all creatures do congratulate thee, Glory be to thee.

Saint Chrysostom in his Liturgy says; It is truly meet and just to glorify
thee the Mother of God, and ever most blessed, and altogether incontaminate
Mother of God, more honorable then the Cherubins, and more glorious then the
Seraphins, who did bring forth without corruption. We magnify thee the truly
Mother of God. Hail Marie full of grace etc. because thou have brought forth
the Savior of our Souls.

S. Augustine affirms, that the Angel descended from heaven, sent by God the
Father to give the beginning to our Redemption, by saluting B. Marie, Hail
full of grace our Lord is with thee. She is therefore filled with grace, and
the fault of Eve euacuated: the malediction of Eve is changed into the
benediction of Marie. and after he has leardnedly handled the rest of the
words of this holy salutation, he adds, O blessed Marie, who is able
worthily to repaie thee thy due of thanks, and renown of praises, who have
succored the perishing world with thy peerless assent? what praises can
human frailty render unto thee, who with thy sole commerce have found out
the way of recovery. Accept nevertheless our thanksgiving of how small value
soever, or how far soever inferior to thy merits: and when thou shall
receive our desires, by thy prayers excuse our faults. Admit our prayers into
thy holy place of audience, and bring us back the Antidote of reconciliation.
Accept what we offer, return what we request, excuse what we fear. By thee we
hope to have pardon of our offenses, because thou art the sole hope of sinners;
and in thee most blessed is the expectation of our rewards. Holy Marie succor
the afflicted, help the weak minded, cherish those that weep, pray for the
people, be a mean for the Clergy, make intercession for the devout feminine
sex, Let all feel thy assistance, whosoever do celebrate thy commemoration,
Let it be thy care to pray incessantly for the people of God, who have
deserved to bear the Redeemer of the world.

Saint Ambrose upon the 2. of Saint Luke says, That she alone is fitly styled
to be full of grace, who alone did obtain that grace which none other had ever
merited, (vdzt) that she should be filled with the author of grace.

Saint Athanasius a so upon Saint Luke says, That since he is King, Lord,
and God, who is borne of the B. Virgin; the Mother that bore him, is properly
and truly esteemed Queen, Lady, and Mother of God. This new Eve is styled the
Mother of life, wherefore we call her again and again, and always, and every
way most blessed. We cry unto her, be my^ndfull of us most holy Virgin. Hail
full of grace our Lord is with thee; The Hierarchies of all the Angels and men
do promulgate thee. Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of
thy womb Mistress, and Lady, and Queen, and Mother of God intercede for us.

Petrus Chrisologus Archbishop of Rauenna says, That an Angel did treat with
Marie concerning Salvation, because an Angel had treated with Eve concerning
Ruin. and in another place he says, She is truly blessed, who was greater
then heaven, stronger then the earth, and more spacious then the world: for she
contained God, whom the world is not able to contain, she bore God who
bears the world, she brought forth her Creator, and nourished the nourisher
of all the living

Fulgentius Ruspensis in a Sermon in the praise of the B. Virgin has these
words, When (says he) the Angel pronounced All Hail, he gave her a
celestial salutation: when he said Full of grace, he showed that the
indignation of the first sentence was fully excluded, and the full grace of
benediction restored: when he said Blessed art thou among Women, he expressed
the blessed fruit of her Virginity; in virtue whereof all women, but
especially those who shall persevere in Virginity, may become blessed. Eve was
accursed, whom we believe to have passed to the benediction of glory through
Marie. Come therefore all you that are Virgins to the Virgin, Come all you that
conceive to her that conceived, Come all you that bring forth to her that did
bring forth, Come all you that give suck to her that gave suck, and you
little young maids come also to her that was a little young maid: for the B.
Virgin Marie has for this cause undergone in our Lord Jesus Christ all these
courses of nature, that she might be able to comfort, and assist all sorts of
women, that should have recourse unto her.

It will not be needful that I insist any longer upon this subject, for that
the studious reader will find nothing more frequent in the writings of most of
the ancient Fathers: and therefore I will only set down two examples which
may be a means to confirm such as exercise this devotion toward the B.
Virgin, and encouradge others to the like office of piety.

In the first Tome of the flowers of examples is related out of diverse grave
authors, that a certain venerable Archbp of Canterbury returning from the
court of Rome did take up his lodging in the famous and Princely Monastery of
Saint Bertin in the City of Saint Omers of the holy Order of Saint Benedict:
and the day following was conducted into the Chapter house; where he made a
speech to the Religious: in which amongst other remarkable things he declared
unto them, that when he was at Benenentum he understood of a certain Religious
man who was accustomed to recite daily Five Psalms in the honor of the B.
Virgin, which began with the five letters of her name. The Psalms were these
Magnificat, Ad Dominum, Retribue, In conuertendo and Ad te leuaui, before every
one of which he said the Angelical Salutation or Aue Maria. There was present
at this Sermon one Ioseius a Monk of the said Monastery of S. Bertin, who
gave diligent attention to what was said, and did from that time daily when he
had ended Mattins recite the said Psalms in the manner above said. It
happened one night about the feast of S. Andrew the Apostle, that the rest of
the Religious rising to the night office, the said Ioscius was absent. The
Subprior therefore looking about the Quire (as the manner is) to see who was
absent, perceived him wanting, and went straight to his chamber, and found him
dead: whereupon returning to the Quire he called together the Religious, and
brought the^ to their deceased Brother; where after they had uncovered his face
they beheld this wonderful spectacle, Five Rofes did issue out of his face,
one whereof sprung out of his mouth and tongue, one out of each eye, and one
out of each nostrill. There former sorrow therefore being changed into
excessive joy at the sight of this so great a mi^acle, they carried him into
the Quire, and laying him with his face open, they again more curiously veiwed
the said Roses, and found the word Maria written as it were in the Rose which
issued out of his mouth: whereupon they kept him unburied Seven days, in which
space three Bishops and very many of the Clergy and Laietie beheld this
admirable work of God. This happened about the year of our Lord 1162. Leo
being Abbot of the said Monastery, and Theodoricus Earl of that I rouince.

Cantiprat in his second Book of the Universe, relates a wonderful miracle
not unlike to the former of a certain ancient soldier, who being admitted
into the Nouiship in a Monastery of Cistercians, proved so indocible; that he
could not be brought to learn our Lords Prayer: wherefore his Master
endeauored with much labor to reach him the Angelical Salutation, which
likewise proved so difficult a task unto him, that he could not after much
time and industry retain in memory any more of it, then these words Aue Maria
gratia plena Dominus tecum. These words therefore by advice of his Master he
volued and reuolued and ruminated in all places, yea even at meal time: and at
length by long continuance conceived so great sweetness in them, that the sole
memory of the Mother of God did possess his heart and mouth in what business
soever he was imploved. Some years being passed in this devotion, this holy
man exchanged this life for a better, and being buried in the Church yard,
shortly after there grew out of his grave a tree of such a sort of wood which
was not usual in those parts, in the leaves where of were engraven in golden
letters Aue Maria gratia plena. The Bishop of the Diocese having notice given
him hereof by the Abbot of that Monastery, came to the grave accompanied with
a great multitude of people; and after he had veiwed the said tree, caused
some to dig about it, and found that it took root in the mouth of the said
holy man. The said tree having as it should seem performed the office for
which it grew (vdzt) to give restimonie of the sanctity of that holy man, and
how gracious the B. Virgin is to such as are devoted unto her as also how
pleasing it is to almighty God, that we honor his blessed Mother, did wither
and consume in the sight of them all then present, like as the Iuie tree we
read of in Jonas the Prophet. Wherefore by this holy Prayer let us often renew
in our memory the benefit of our Redemption, which began with this holy
Salutation: and let us beseech her who was, is, and ever shall remain most
gracious in the sight of God, to be our advocate and patroness in our greatest
extremities.

A prayer appointed by the holy Church to be said before the divine office.
OPen my mouth (o Lord) to praise thy holy name, cleanse my heart from all
vain perverse and impertinent thoughts, illuminate my understanding, inflame
my affection, so that I may be able to recite this office worthily,
attentively and devoutly, and may merit to be heard before the face of thy
divine Majesty, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

Pope Leo the X.th to such as after the office shall devoutly recite the
ensuinge Prayer has granted pardon of all the defects and faults contracted
out of human frailty in the performance thereof.
TO the sacred and undivided Trinity; to the humanity of our Lord Jesus
Christ crucified: to the fruitful integrity of the most Blessed and glorious
Virgin Marie; and to the generality of all the Saints be sempiternall praise,
honor, virtue and glory from all creatures, and to us remission of sins for
infinite worlds of worlds. Amen.

And blessed be the bowels of Marie the Virgin which bore the son of the
eternal Father, and blessed be the breasts that gave suck to Christ our Lord.
Pater noster, etc. Aue Maria etc.

A prayer to be said after the office of the B. Virgin approved by Pope Pius
the fifth of that name.
Receive (most mild God) for the prayers and merits of B. Marie ever a Virgin,
and of all the Saints the office of our service: and if we have done any thing
praise worthy, behold it propitious; but what has been negligently performed
do thou benignely pardon, who live and raignest in perfect Trinity for all
worlds of worlds. Amen.

An other Prayer or oblation before the divine office.
Ludouicus Blofius declares, that it was Moni. spi. c. 3.
revealed to S. Mecthild, as a most grateful thing to God, that those w^o are
about to recite the Canonical hours do unite them with the prayers of our
Savior. For (says he) by this means they will be reputed one exercise with
his, like as a small quantity of water mixed with a great Vessel of Wine is
noe more reputed water: and therefore he advises such to recite this short
Prayer to that end.

O Lord in union of the perfect attention, wherewith thou upon earth did
offer praise to thy eternal Father, I desire to perform these hours.

Another prayer or oblation after the divine office.
Benign Jesus I with humble confidence recommend all that I have here
vndeuoutly done in thine and thy dear Mothers praise to thy sweet heart, there
to be rectified and perfected. I offer it in union of that immense love,
wherewith thou did accomplish the admirable work of our Redemption, desiring
that it may redound to the eternal praise of thy holy name, to the increase
of glory of thy immaculate Mother, to the increase of glory of my Angel
Guardian, and all the Angels and Saints, and in particular of N. N. and to the
souls health of all the living and of the faithful departed according to thy
holy will. Amen.

HERE BEGINS THE EXPLICATION OF THE OFFICE.
Having now by Gods grace performed one part of what I promised in my Preface
to this work, I will proceed to the other, and explicate according to my poor
talent every part of this holy office, as they occur in their several
order: wherein if I seem over tedious, I desire it may be imputed to the care
I have taken to make all things clear and plain, suitable to the capacities of
them, for whose sake I have spared for noe pains to procure their comfort and
satisfaction.

The two first Verses.
O Lord thou will open my lips,
And my mouth shall show forth thy praise.
O Lord intend unto my help,
Lord make have to help me.
IN the Roman Breuiarie which is Lib. 2. offic. Eccles. cap. 6.
used by the secular Clergy, these Verses are placed as they are here in this
office of the B. Virgin. Which Hugh of S. Victor says was so ordained
because in Compline we have recommended ourselves to God, and shutt up our
mouths; remaining every one as it were at rest in our sepulchers attending to
God alone, unto whom we need not words to express our affections: but now for
that we again convert ourselves to praise him with our lips, we beseech him
to open them. This form of prayer is very ancient as may appear by the
book of the Jews entitled Berachoth, where it is declared that the Jews did
usually recite the verse, O Lord thou will open my lips etc. before all and
every of their prayers.

Notwithstanding our holy Father S. Benedict prescribing a form of the divine
office for all such as wage spiritual war under his holy standard, placed
the second verse O Lord intend etc. in the forefront of the office, and
appointed the first verse to be repeated three times afterward. The reason
which seemed In Rationa. li. 5. c. 2. number. 8.
to move him thereunto, is set down by Durandus (vdzt) because we are not able
to open neither our heart, nor our mouth to praise almighty God with out aid
from him: which reason agrees with that of the Apostle, No man can say 1.
Cor. 12.
our Lord Jesus Christ, but in the holy Ghost. Both these ways are very good
and approved by the Sea Apostolic: and by both of them we desire that we may
be assisted by Gods grace to begin and prosecute our prayer to his honor; for
without his aid (as S. John says) we can Ioh. 15.
can do nothing: and moreover that he will be pleased to repel the deceits of
the eu^ll enemy; for as the Gloss well In Psalm. 69.
notes, when we set ourselves to pray, then do the devils chiefly go about
to molest us, like to flies which corrupt the sweetness of an odoriferous
ointment.

Abulensis, Durandus, and others do affirm that the holy Church in
prescribing In 10. number. loco cit. n. 7.
the beginning of the divine office, and the beginning of Compline (by which
hour the office is consummated) does imitate the custom which we read of
Moses, who when the Arc was lifted up said Arise Lord, and be thy enemies
Li. number. cap. 10.
dispersed, and let them fly that hate thee from thy face. and when it was set
down he said Return Lord to the multitude of thy host of Israel. By which
form of prayer Moses did beseech God who seemed before as it were to rest
with the Arc and Camp of the Hebrews, to arise and direct them on their way,
and by his omnipotent power to disperse and put to flight their enemies, which
were upon the frontier on all sides: and afterward when they fixed their
tents, that he would convert himself unto them, that they might remain in
safeguard under the shadow of his wings. But what reason soever moved the holy
Church thereunto, it is certain, that those Verses in the beginning of the
office, and in the beginning of Compline, being pronounced with sincere
affection and confidence in Gods goodness, are of weary great power to profligate
the evil enemies, and frustrate Colla. 10. c. 10. Tom. 3. in 16. Iun^.
their machinations; as does appear by what may be read clegantly expressed
in Cassian and Surius, unto whom for brevity sake I remitt the studious
reader.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost etc.
AFTER the divine assistance has been thus implored, this Hymn of
glorification does follow in good order as a thanksgiving, considing that our
Lord has heard and granted our petition, Our Lord has heard the desire of
Psalm. 9. Psalm. 144.
the poor (says the Prophet) he has heard the preparation of their heart.
and in another place, He will do the will of them that fear him, and will
hear their prayer. When therefore this Hymn is recited it is the custom to
bow down and adore God then and there present, for the Prophet affirms God
is near to all that Ibidem.
invoke him.

S. Jerome in his Epistle to Pope Damasus which is registered amongst the acts
of the said Pope in the first Tome of Counsels did desire him to ordain,
that this Hymn might be recited at the end of every Psalm in the divine
office; that so the faith of Three hundred and eighteen Bishops in the Nicene
Council might be declared by his voice also: which was accordingly performed
by the decree of the said Pope in a Council held at Rome. Some are of opinion
that this Hymn was composed by the said Nicene Council to distinguish li. de
Sp. Sancto c. 29.
thereby the true believers from the Arians; but S. Basil affirms, that the
author thereof is not certainly known. Baronius says, that this Hymn was
used Tom. 4. in A. D. 382.
even from the time of the Apostles (which may be confirmed by the Litburgy of
S. James, where the Priest coming to the Altar begins with these words,
Glory be to the Father and the Son and the holy Ghost, three and one) and
that it was recited by the oriental Church at the end of their Hymns, as now
it is in the Hymns of the divine office which were composed for the greatest
part by S. Ambrose in imitation of the lib. 9. Confess. c. 1. li. 4. de oratione
c. 2. ^. 10.
said hymns of the oriental Church, as S. Augustine affirms.

Suarez says that the holy Church was moved by the especial providence of
God to institute, that the confession and glorification of the B. Trinity by
the accustomed Hymn Glory be to the Father, etc. should be added to the end
of every Psalm: because (says he) the use of the Psalms was of greater
antiquity then the law of grace, and by this means they do participate the
proper perfection thereof, and become complete and consummate.

Cornelius a Lapide dilating upon these words of the Apostle, For of him, and
by Romans 11.
him, and in him are all things, to him be glory for ever, Amen. does expound
this hymn of glorification in favor of such who repeat it often. Glory
(says he) be to the Father, of whom all things are as of the prime origin;
Glory to the Son, by whom all things are made as by wisdom, and men
redeemed as by their mediator. Glory to the holy Ghost, in whom are all
things as it were in a bond and consummation. Glory to the Father of whom is
all paternitie in heaven and upon earth, Glory to the Son by whom is all
filiation, Glory to the holy Ghost in whom is all holiness and
sanctification. Glory to the Father of whom is eternity, Glory to the Son
by whom is all form and beauty, Glory to the holy Ghost in whom is all
felicity and fruition. Glory to the Father of whom is all unity, glory to
the Son by whom is all equality, glory to the holy Ghost in whom is all
love and concord. Glory to the Father of whom is all power, glory to the
Son by whom is all wisdom, glory to the holy Ghost in whom is all
goodness Glory to the Father who created me, glory to the Son by whom I am
redeemed, glory to the holy Ghost in whom I am justified. Glory to the
Father who has predestined me, glory to the Son by whose precious blood I
am washed, and made clean, glory to the holy Ghost in whom I shall be
glorified for ever. Amen.

Alleluia.
NEXT in order follows the Angelical Hymn Alleluia which is song from
Easter until Septuagesima not without good reason: for holy David Psalm. 146.
Psa. 99.
exhorts, To our God let there be a pleasant and comely praise. and again,
Make ye iubilation to God all the earth serve ye our Lord in gladness: enter
ye before his fight in exultation. And this hymn signineth praise God with a
heart dilated through excess of joy. The holy Church therefore (because we
ought never to surcease from praising God, noe not then when we recount the
miserable estate of man by the fall of our first parents) has ordained that in
lieu of this hymn of exultation, the verse, Praise be to thee ^ Lord King of
eternal glory, shall be recited from Septuagesima until Paster, which is a
time of mourning and penance. li. 2. de Ritibu^ c. 20.
Stephen Durantus disputes this question at lardge, why the holy Church
should omit Alleluia from Septuagesima, and yet place in lieu thereof a praise
which seems equivalent thereunto? and after many solutions at length he
answers with S. Thomas, and the Gloss upon the ninth of the Apocalipse, that
this Hymn Alleluia besides the ordinary praise does insinuate a iubilation
which cannot be expressed in words.

Leo the 9. says that these two Hymns Cap. de Consecr. Hi. duo. Did. 1.
only are mentioned in the New Testament to have been song by the Angels,
that is to say, Alleluia, and Gloria in excelsis; both which are intermitted
in Septuagesima, to show that for the sin of our first parents we are
banished from communicating with the Angels in Iubilation: which Adam in the
state of innocence did enjoy; as S. John Damascene li 2. de Paradis.
affirms in these words, Adam in body was delighted in the terrestrial
paradise, but in mind he was present with the quires of Angels in the paradise
of holy spirits. The same also in effect S. Gregory the Great affirms in
his Dialogues, Dialog. 2.
to wit, that man in paradise was accustomed to enjoy the words of God, and to
be present with the blessed Angeliall Spirits in purity of heart, and hight of
contemplation. But we alas do now Psalm. 64.
sit and weep in Babylon of this wretched life, and upon the banks of the
rivers thereof, whilst we remember that Syon, where the Prophet says An
hymn becomes God. VVisupra. ^


S. Leo above named gives this reason why Alleluia is intermitted for nine
weeks precisely, and reassumed in the tenth week. There are (says he) nine
quires of Angels and the tenth quire sell by the sin of Pride, and thereby
disturbed the joy of the rest, until Man was created to supply their number:
but when he fell also by disobedience, they were again greatly discomforted
until our Saviors birth; at which time they begane to reassume their song of
joy, and afterward at his Resurrection and Ascension together with those
blessed souls which accompanied him unto his throne of glory, they conceived
full hope that their number should be made complete and their praise perfect.

S. Augustine says, that although this Li. 2.
Hymn might be interpreted both in de doctrina Christiana c. 10.
Greek and Latin, yet it has remained entire, because it relisheth best in
its own original, to wit in the Hebrew. Whosoever out of curiosity shall
desire to so more of the signification of this Hymn, let him peruse the 137.
Epistle of S. Jerome to Marcella, where he may receive satisfaction.

The Inuitatorie verse.
IN the divine office the Inuitatorie verse is usually varied according to the
nature of the office appointed for each day, and it is thus defined by Peter
Damian Tom. 3. c. 7.
in his book entitled Dominus vobiscum. The Inuitatorie (says he) is that
by which the communion of the faithful is invited to the praise of God.
Concerning which you must note that the communion of true believers be they
scattered abroad in never so many several countries, do yet make but one
mystical body, whereof Christ is the head: in whom they may and do meet
together in spirit in the divine praises by the feet of their souls, which
are the affections; and in this sort they are invited to come and join with us
in the praise of almighty God.

S. Augustine affirms, that if two just In Psalm. 94.
men be placed one in the East, and the other in the West, yet may they truly
be said to be together, because they are both in God: but although a just man
and a wicked man be linked in one chain, yet are they far a sunder, for the
one by loving iniquity has separated himself far from God, and the other by
loving God is nearely adjoined unto him: and if two such should praise our
Lord, by their voice that would be verified on the part of the vicked man,
which Isaie the Prophet writes This people Isaie 29.
honoreth me with their lips, but the heart is far from me.

The argument and division of the Inuitatorie Psalm which is the 94. in number.
THe Prophet does inuito all men that love God to come and rejoice, and praise
our Lord with him. Secondly he assigns diverse reasons to move them thereunto.
Lastly he exhorts them, that when soever or in what manner soever God
almighty shall be pleased to reveal his will unto them, that they give
diligent attention thereunto, and put it in execution without delay: least
being disobedient to his holy inspirations, they receive the same sentence
with our fore fathers in the desert, where of Six hundred thousand men fit to
bear arms only two (vdzt) Iosue and Caleb did enter to possess the land of
promise.

The explication of the Inuitatorie Psalm.
COme all you that believe in the true God, in what part of the world soever
you reside, come in spirit by the feet of your affections Let us rejoice, not
as vain worldlings do, whose greatest delights end in sadness, but To our
Lord the Creator and conseruer of us all. Let us make iubilation to God our
Savior, let us express with our voice to God our protector, our Savior, and
tower of refuge what we conceive toward him in our hearts, but want words to
explain. Let us prevent his face in confession, Let us hasten by thanksgiving,
and attributing all our good unto him to prevent him, least he come, and taking
us unprovided to receive him, do justly tax us with neglect and slothful
ingratitude. Let us upon the first touch of his divine grace accuse ourselves
and condemn the evil we have done, that when he shall come, he may find
something to approve and like well of, but nothing to condemn or cause his
displeasure. And in Psalms let us make iubilation t^ him, and in spiritual
songs let us express our intime thoughts and affections.

Let us do this first Because our Lord is a great God, not like the Gods of
the Gentiles which are framed of gold and silver by the hands of men, hau^ng
mouths and cannot speak, ears and cannot hear, feet and cannot walk, but
God who is of himself from all eternity, and who is so great a God, that he
makes Gods, not Gods by nature but by grace, for he has given power to those
that believe in his name to be the Sons of God. And he is also, a great King
above all Gods, for he exercises acts of soueraignitie not only over all the
former false Gods, and those that are Gods by grace, but also over all Kings,
Princes, and Judges of the earth, who are called Gods by participation of his
divine authority. Our God infinitely surpasses all these denominatiue Gods in
greatness: and therefore with good reason ought we to make iubilation unto
him. as also, Because he repelleth not his people, although he seem to be
angry with them for a time, pern^tting great afflictions to fall upon them,
and seeming to neglect their petitions, when they call to him for releife: for
indeed he is so benign and merciful, that he cannot utterly abandon them, or
refuse to receive them, when they recurre unto him by true contrition and
confidence in his goodness and clemency, but will convert all to their
benefitt. Nevertheless he may seem since to have repelled the Jews, who
were then his sole elected People: but indeed he has not repelled any of them,
but such as would by noe means be wone: for the residue being many thousands
of both sexes, who would harken to his voice, were received to mercy by his
only Son Christ Jesus, who was the angular stone that joined the two walls
of the Jews and Gentiles in one. The chafe only was repelled, but the good
corn laid up in the graneries. His dominion is not limited within the land of
Israel, but is extended to the uttermost confines of the earth. Because in his
hands, in his power, are the ends of the earth, and he beholds the hights of
the mountains, not only the highest places of the earth, but also the
Emperors and Rulers of the earth. These high mountains for a time did oppose
his Church, and endeavor to root out the Christian faith, but shortly after
they humbled themselves under his mighty hand.

Moreover let us rejoice to our Lord, Because the sea is his, and he made it,
and placed limitts thereunto, which it shall not ouerpasse: and his hands
formed the dry land and made it fit for habitation, Come let us adore, and
fall down before God, for he regards those a far of that are high in their
own conceits, but he beholds the humble with a gracious aspect. Come
therefore with reverence and submission all you, whose sins have made you
remote from God, come with humble, but yet firm confidence in his mercies, Let
us weep before our Lord that made us, Come securely, for he will not contemn
the work of his hands, which he has formed to his own image and similitude.
Since that we burn inwardly, and are scorched with the conscience of our
offenses, it is meet that with floods of tears we seek to extinguish those
flames. Alas such is our wretched state that we can blemish and defile the
sacred image of God in our souls, but we are altogether unable to restore it
to its primitive luster and beauty with out the help of him that formed it.
Come therefore, let us humble ourselves in his presence, and deplore the
lamentable estate whereunto we have brought ourselves through our manifold
iniquities, and then we may be confident of pardon: for he has said, he will
not despise an humble and contrite heart. He is both willing to remitt all how
exorbitant soever, and powerful to effect his will, Because he is the Lord our
God, and we are his people, and sheep of his pasture. In the text of the holy
Bible the last part of this clause is placed in this order, And we the people
of his pasture, and sheep of his hands: upon which words S. Augustine in his
explication of this Psalm says, Behold how elegantly the Prophet has
changed the order of these words, placing them as it were improperly, that we
might understand those to be the sheep which are the people. For he says not
the sheep of his pasture, and the people of his hands, which might seem to
suit better with those words, because sheep do properly belong to the
pasture: but he says, the people of his pasture, to show thereby that the
people are his sheep; for there are sheep which we buy, but not which we
have made. He had said before, let us fall down before him that made us, and
therefore he fitly terms us here, the sheep of his hands; for noe man can
make himself sheep. He may buy sheep, or have sheep given him, or may
come by them by stealth, but our Lord made us: wherefore we are the people of
his pasture, and sheep of his hands, which he of his ineffable goodness has
vouchsafed to make unto himself.

Our Savior says My sheep hear my Ioh. 10.
voice. If therefore you will be his sheep, To day, that is, every day
whilst it is said to day, for the day here mentioned shall endure until
time shall cease, If you shall hear his voice, that is, come to know his will
either by the lawful preachers of his holy word, or by reading the holy
Scriptures or the writings of the holy Fathers, or by his interior motion, or
otherwise in what manner soever he shall please to manifest his will unto you,
Do not harden your hearts, be not disobedient to his gracious inuitation and
call, but receive it thankfully, and put it in execution without delaie. The
Hebr. 4.
Apostle did exhort the Hebrews by these words to embrace the doctrine of
Christ, showing that the day was then come, whereof the Prophet spoke so many
years before. For (sa^eth he) if Jesus, that is, Iosue had given them rest,
the Prophet would not have mentioned another day. In times past our Lord spoke
unto his people by the mouth of Moses and other his holy Prophets, but now in
the law of grace by his only Son Christ Jesus. Let us therefore mollify our
hearts, let us not be As in the provocation, according to the day of the
tentation in the desert, at the waters of contradiction and other places in the
desert, Where (our Lord says) your fathers tempted me, proved me and saw my
works. They doubted in their hearts whether I we^e of power to give them food,
defend them from their enemies, and bring them to the land of Promise, but they
experienced me by my wonderful works to be the only true God. What should
move my people to be so incredulous and obdurate? What could I have done more
to show my love unto them, then that I have done? I brought them from Aegipt
where they were oppressed, I dried a passadge in the red Sea, that they might
pass without difficulty, and drowned their enemies in their sight, I went
before them in form of a cloud by day, and like a pillar of fire by night, I
fed them with Manna for Forty years space, in all which time neither the
garments they wore, nor their shoes were the worse for wearing.

Forty years was I nigh to this generation, guiding them, teaching them,
working wonders amongst them, and experiencing always to win their hearts,
And said, by my Angel to Moses, and by him to them, These always err in
heart. They err not through ignorance, they know what they ought to believe,
what they may lawfully desire, and what to do to please me; but they will not
know. I have often instructed them in my ways by my servant Moses; But they
have not known my ways, that is, they have disliked and would not approve of
my ways: and therefore all remedies failing, I have sworn to them in my
wrath. We must not conceive by these words that the passion of anger is in God,
but only that he swore to proceed to punish them, as if he had been possessed
with anger and wrath against them, for S. Thomas says, Anger is attributed to
God metaphorically. If they shall enter into my rest, that is, into the land of
Promise, I will cease to be that I am; as I live, they shall not enter for
their incredulity. These oaths are vertually included in the former words,
which do seem to be spoken by the figure Aposiopesis, wherein something is
not formally expressed, which yet is vertually included in the sense of the
words.

By the place of rest here mentioned is signified eternal happiness, for the
land of Promise was a figure of the celestial country. It is not here
expressed who shall enter into that rest: but in the book of Numbers we read
that our Lord Number* 14.
said, My servant Caleb, who being of another spirit has followed me, him
will I bring into this land, and Iosue, and the little ones, whom they said
should be a prey to the enemies. By Iosue and Caleb may be understood the
small number of the Jews, who filled with the spirit of God, did follow the
doctrine of our Savior; and by the multitude of those little ones the fulness of
the conversion of the Gentiles, whom the holy Church brought forth in the last
age: little ones indeed, because they entered by the gate of humility. The
Apostle speaking of the Rome. 11.
Gentiles says, that they were wild olives, and were taken and grafted in some
of the oline branches which were broken, and so made partakers of the root and
fatness of the olive. The faithful therefore of the Jews which are signified
by the boughs of that olive which were not broken, and all true Christians who
shall persevere in the union of the Catholic Apostolical doctrine, who are
meant by the wild olives which were inserted into the olive tree, these shall
enter into that place of rest. We hope also that those broken branches shall
again be reunited to the natural olive toward the end of the world.

Beho^d a Psalm full of joy and sweetness, a Psalm apt to inflame a pious
soul with the fire of the holy Ghost. It imports us to sing or recite it in
the beginning of the morning office with all attention and spiritual fervor,
that so by beginning the work of God with ardour, we may pass the rest of
the day with profitt Let us therefore do that whereunto we are invited in
this present Psalm; and when we rise to the morning office, let us begin
with couradge and alacrity, let us banish from our hearts all vain thoughts
and impertinent fancies, let us carefully busy our hearts with God alo^e,
saying to ourselves in our interior, or to such as are present, Come let us
exult to our Lord etc. and with a recollected and amorous mind, let us put in
practice those most noble acts, whereunto this Psalm does inuit us, which are
these that follow, (vdzt) To exult and make iubilation to our Lord, To prevent
^is face in confession of praise, and confession of our sins with tears of
contrition, To fall down before him, and adore our maker.

What is understood by Hymns Psalms and Canticles.
AFter the Inuitatorie Psalm follows an Hymn, by which is signified that
the mind being now inflamed with the divine love, cannot contain it self any
longer, but must needs break forth into a more sweet expression of its
interior affections. An Hymn may be thus defined, an Hymn is a Poem
declaring certain works of God and benefits showed toward mankind. or thus,
An Hymn is a Poem recounting the virtues and praise worthy actions of the
holy Saints, or exhorting us to amend our lives. The use of Hymns is most
ancient. S. Jerome affirms that all the Psalms of David before or after
which Alleluia is placed, are properly termed Hymns. Which words agree with
that of S. Matthew, where he Math. 16.
says, that our Savior and his disciples after they had recited an Hymn
went forth; which Hymn consisted of diverse Psalms, as has been said in our
second. Chapter of this work. In the primitive Church the use of them was weary
frequent as may appear by diverse of the Epistles of S. Paul, as namely by the
first to the Corinthians the fowerteeneth, the first to the Ephesians, and the
third to the Collossians. Philo Iudaeus says, that lib. de vita
co^templatiua. De diuinis nominibus c. 4. Ibidem ca. 3.
the disciples of S. Mark did not only contemplate, but also compose
Canticles and Hymns in the divine praise; and S. Dionysius makes mention of
one Hierotheus his instructor in the sacred letters, whom he affirms to have
composed hymns, some of which he sets down; and moreover, that he the
said Hierotheus together with the Apostles did set forth the divine praises at
the funeral of the B. Virgin mother of God, which words Necephorus expounding
says, that (...) 22.
they recited Hymns.

The Hymns which are used in the divine office were for the greatest part
composed by S. Hilarie, S. Ambrose, and S. Thomas of Aquine. Yet our holy
Father S. Benedict in diverse chapters of his Rule c. 9. 12, and 13.
in stead of the word Hymn has the word Ambrosian by which it may be
gathered, that the Hymns used in the divine office in his time, were
principally if not altogether composed by S. Ambrose. If we have regard to the
signification of the words, there is small difference between an Hymn, a
Psalm, and a Canticle. Yet the holy Fathers do use these words diversely; for
by the Psalms they seem to understand those which David composed to be song
to the harp and other musical instruments: by the Canticles those Ten
Canticles which are taken out of the other books of holy writ, and appointed
to be song at Lauds, Vespres, and Compline; Seven whereof are taken out of
the old Testament, and the rest out of new: and finally by Hymns are
understood certain Odes composed in the divine praise by Ecclesiastical
though not Canonical writers. Those that are desirous to read a more exact
narration of the difference between these three words, may find them
sufficiently discussed in the Commentaries of S. Jerome upon the fifth of S.
Paul to the Ephesians, in the Prologue of lib. 3.
S. Hilarie to his explication upon the Psalms, and in the Preface of
Euthimius to the Psalms, whereunto for brevity sake I refer the studious
reader.

Why the holy Church has made choice of the Psalms of David to be recited
in the divine office, rather then other parts of the holy Scriptures.
Cardinal a Turre Cremata upon the Tract. 75. in c. 18. Regulae S. Bened.
Rule of our holy Father S. Benedict does set down Eight reasons which may
seem to have moved the holy Church to make use of the Psalms of David in the
divine office, rather then the other parts of the holy Scriptures.

The First is, because sinners by reading of the Psalms are wonderfully
excited and animated to do penance, when they behold David chiefly celebrated
in the Church, who by penance became so great a Prophet, and more illuminated
by the spirit of God, then any of the rest of the Prophets: of which opinion
Praefa. in Psalm.
S. Ambrose seems to be, where he says, In the Psalms I am taught to avoid
sin, and to blush when I do penance. So mighty a King, so great a
Prophet does provoke me by his example, that I study with all diligence ^ither
to extenuate the fault committed, or to beware of the fault as yet not
committed.

The Second is, because there is not any one book of the holy Scriptures that
does treat so familiarly with God: for in almost every part of the Psalms,
the Prophet seems to discourse with God almighty, which is a very proper
method for such as pray. The Third is, because the Psalms are as it were ^
plentiful Mother of spiritual affections, abounding with celestial fruits,
as most of the holy Fathers do witness.

The Fowerth is, because the Psalme^ are very profitable to be read by all
sorts: for they minister spiritual nutriture suitable to the degree of
perfection that each man has attained or does aspire unto. Such as have newly
laid the foundation of C^ristian discipline, may there find comfort and
encouragement to prosecute their course: proficients that are advanced to an
higher degree, may there find matter wherein to exercise themse^ues: and
finally those that are happily arrived at the top of perfection, may there and
fe well to maintain their flames of love. The Fifth is, because this heavenly
philosophy is most apt to furnish every man abundantly with all doctrine
necessary to salvation; as best agreeing with those words of the Apostle where
he says, That all Scripture inspired by God is 2. ad Timoth. 3
profitable to teach, to argue, to correct, to instruct in justice. Concerning
which point see the Gloss in the beginning of the Psalter. The Sixth is,
because this Prop^esie excels all others in perspicuitie.

The Seventh is, because there is almost nothing contained in the Psalms, but
it is either the praise of God, or a Prai^r unto him; both which are most
proper for the divine office. The Eight end last is, because they are divided
into verses: and the manner of distinction there observed is esteemed of
learned men far better, then that of the other parts of the holy Scriptures
by verses or numbers; and consequently do best Psalm. 17. v. 50.
agree with the alternate modulation of a quite. The Grecian Fathers in their
exposition of these words of the Psalmist I will confess to thee among nations
O Lord, and will say a Psalm to thy name, do affirm that the Prophet did
fore show, that the Psalms by him composed should be song in all parts of the
world in the Churches of the Gentiles: and the same in effect does the Prophet
express in diverse places; as namely, I will confess to thee in the Psalm. 34.
v. 18. Psalm 56. v. 10.
great Church, in a grave people I will praise thee. And again, I will
confess to thee among peoples O Lord, I will say a Psalm to thee among the
Gentiles. and in many other places, which for brevity I omit.

Certain memorable sayings of the ancient holy Fathers in praise of the
Psalms of David.
S. Dyonisius does affirm that the Psalter li de eis nominibus cap. 3. Homil.
1. de Ezechiele.
is a certain Inventory of the whole Scriptures, wherein all the mysteries
thereof are succinctly discribed, and tempered with a wonderful sweetness of
the verse.

S. Gregory the great does write, that if the Psalms be song from the heart
and not with the voice only, they do prepare a way for almighty God to
enter into the most inward parts of the Soul: in so much, that either the
hidden mysteries of the Prophecy will be laid open unto it, or the good
spirit will be infused.

S. Chrysostom after he has admired Homil. 6. de Paenitentia.
why the Prophet David (whom he styles the musical Doctor of purity) should
be more frequented in all parts of the world, then the rest of the holy
Scriptures, adds these words. The Prophet David does adorn our life with all
sorts of benefits, making himself all to all; growing in years with children,
inuiting youth to prudence, giving to virgins modesty and purity, and to old
men strength. Sinners he provoke to Penance, saying Confess to our Lord for
he is Psalm. 117. Psalm. 18
good. He fortifieth those that have made good progress in penance, saying
The sins of my youth and my ignorances O Lord remember not. He exciteth those
that have received great graces to thanks giving, saying What shall I render
to our Lord for Psalm. 115.
all things he has given me? He recalleth to confession such as often fall
into a ^^lapse, saying If thou will observe iniquities O Psall. 1^9.
Lord, who shall sustain it? Finally he concludes, O excellent harp,
congregating the minds of all men through out the earth, like unto certain
strings in one consonance.

S. Basil the great says, that in this Homil. in Psalm. 1.
one book of the Psalms is comprised whatsoever is necessary for all men's
use in the rest of the holy Scriptures. It foresheweth future things with most
certain oracles, it contains an historical narration, it establishes laws
to order our lives more holily, it prescribes and advises every one what is
best to be done; and in a word, it is a plentiful and common promptuarie of
all doctrine, wherein the Prophet by his only provident and industrious care
has devised and excogitated, what may best conduce to the salvation of every
one: which the said holy Saint does particularly recount in the same place;
adding further, that the verse of the Psalms does cure our souls with the
well proportioned modulation of the numbers, which is rather a pleasant then a
bitter medecin; and moreover, that the Psalms are a preservative to
profligate the inchauntments of the devils, a means to procure the patronage
of the Angels, a target of security in the terrors of the night, a quiet
rest in our daily labors, a protection to infants, an ornament to those that
are in the flower of their age, a comfort to old men, and finally a fit attire
for women wherewith to set out their beauty.

S. Augustine amongst other praises of the Psalms has words to this effect.
The holy Ghost (says he) beholding the minds of men to res^st and draw back
from the way of virtue, and to be inclined to the delights of this life, has
mixed the force and operation of his doctrine with the pleasant melody of a
song; that so whilst the hearing is delighted with the sweetness of the verse,
the benefit of the divine words may there withal find entrance, and make
deeper impression: according to the proceeding of skillfull physicians, who
when the diseases of their patients do require that they administer bitter yet
sovereign potions, least the diseased should refuse to take that which by all
probability will cause their recovery, in regard of the vnpleasa^tnes and
loathsome taste thereof, are accustomed to anoint the top of the cup wherein the
said remedy is contained with honey, or some such pleasant juice.

It will be over long to rehearse the praises of this admired book, which may
be read in almost all the works of the most famous writers, and therefore I
will conclude with these words of S. Ambrose. In all other parts of the holy
Praefa. in Psalm.
Scriptures (says he) are here and there singular or special remedies for
singular or special persons, according to their singular or special needs;
but the book of the Psalms contains a certain general medicine or remedy
for the souls health of all mankind, and for each souls particular infirmity
or need. Whosoever does read them may have there a special remedy wherewith
to cure the wounds of his proper passions, and whosoever also does desire to
enter the lists in a spiritual combat, may there as in the common place for
the exercise of souls in the martial feats of virtues, find diverse sorts of
maisteries or co^flicts prepared, and make his choice of such as he shall judge
most fit for him, and wherein he may with most facility attain the crown of
victory.

What is meant by an Antiphone.
BEfore every one of the Psalms is placed an Antiphone in most parts of the
divine office. S. Isidore says that the lib. 6. orig. c. 9.
word Antiphona signifies in Latin v^x reciproca or a reciprocal voice, that
is, a voice which one wing of the quire returns to the other; from whence it
comes singing it in an exchanged order. It also appears by the works of
the li. 1. de Eccles. officijs c. 7.
said Saint in another place, that Antiphones were first of all used in the
Greek Church, and afterward introduced into the Latin Church by S. Ambrose.

Antiphones are for the most part taken out of the Psalms, or else are some
devout sentences desumed out of some other part of the holy Scriptures, and
acco^modated to the nature of the office of that day; according to the tune
where of the Psalm following is sung. They are as it were a breathing fit
between the Psalms, wherewith the mind is recreated, and recouereth new
fervor and alacrity to prosecute that which follows.

Amalar says that an Antiphone does resemble the virtue of Charity: for it
joins the works of two brothers in one. The Psalms may be referred to
works, and the Antiphones to the love wherewith each lends to other his
helping hand. An Antiphone is song by turns alternatly by both quires, because
charity cannot be exercised between fewer then two. The two Cantors do
signify the vicissitude of charity, who of both sides in their turn or order
do as it were lift or pass the Antiphones from one side to the other. Finally
the two quires were prefigured by the wings of the living creatures stretched
forth in length and meeting together, which the Prophet Ezechiel saw in the
figure of the coming of Christ, and of the new testament: for that conjunction
of their wings is the same that the Antiphones do perform.

The title of the 8. Psalm and 1. in number in the nocturne office of the B.
Virgin, A Psalm to David himself, belonging to the end, for Presses.
SAint Augustine affirms that the Prophet In Psalm. 1.
David did sing but 9. Psalms only with his own proper voice, and that the
residue according to their several titles were pronounced by one of the four
chief Chanters, to wit either by Asaph, Eman, Ethan, or Idithun. In the
person of David is prefigured our Savior, to whom of all others the
signification of the word David may most fitly be applied: for David is by
interpretation, strong of hand, or worthy to be desired. Belogning to the end,
that is, to Christ, for The end of the law is Christ: unto justice to Roma. 10.
every noe that believes, who is the glorious perfection of al good things.
For Presses, that is, for the merits of his painful passion, wherein he was
as it were trodden under the feet of the Jews, and all his sacred blood forced
out of his veins. Which Metaphor Isaias also uses, demanding Isa. 63.
of Christ Why is thy clothing red? and thy garments, as theirs that tread in
the vine press? and answering in Christ's person I have trodden the press
alone. The word Presses may be morally applied to the holy Church, where
Christ is the vine, the Apostles are the branches, and spreaders (that is)
preachers of the Gospel, Christians are the grapes, Christian virtues the wine
as namely Patience and Fortitude in afflictions, whereby the good are purified
and severed from the midst of the reprobate, as wine is pressed out of the
grapes, barrelled and laid up in cellers, and the husks and carnells cast to
hoggs or other beasts.

Theophilactus says that the Hebrewt In Comment. super Ioh.
did in ancient time sing this Psalm at the feast of Scenopegia in the month
of September, when they had gotten in their harvest: thereby giving thanks to
God the bestower of all for their good harvest of corn and wine. Christ Jesus
the fruit of the womb of the B. Virgin is our harvest of corn, for he is the
bread of life which descended from heaven: and he is likewise our vintage, for
he has given us his body for our food, and his precious blood for our drink.
Since the Jews therefore gave thanks by this Psalm to God the bestower of
all good things for their carnal food, how much rather ought we to offer up
unto him this Psalm by the hands of the B. Virgin in thankfulness for our
spiritual food, beseeching her to make intercession for us, that we may
convert it to our souls benefit.

An historical exposition of this Psalm.
O Lord of all, by thy omnipotent power; and particularly Our Lord, for thou
have selected us out of all the generations of the earth to be thy peculiar
people, and we alone have chosen thee for our God, unto whom we will exhibit
all honor and divine worship, and to none but thee only. How maruelouse is
thy name thy glory and the fame of thy greatness in the whole earth? not only
in Jury, where thou have been pleased to manifest thy infinite goodness and
immense power by innumerable signs, and miracles, but also in the uttermost
bounds of the earth! Because thy magnificence the confession of thy praise is
elevated not only above the earth, but also above the heavens: which with
their continual and ordinate circumuolution do never cease to proclaim to
all creatures thy incomprehensible majesty; and which is more to be admired,
even Out of the Mouth of infants and sucklings thou have perfected, established
and altogether made manifest the Praise of thy holy name, because of thy
enemies, to wit, that incredulous people who will not acknowledge thee for the
author of all things, but do with great fury oppugn those that love and
honor thee, and thee in them, may blush at their own malice and gross
ignorance, when they shall behold sucklings to set forth thy glory; and
moreover that thou may destroy and confound the wisdom and subtilities of
the enemy of all mankind and the revenger also of the injuries done to thee,
executing the severity of thy justice upon misbeleeuers, and such that
acknowledge thee for the true God, but deny thee in their actions and
dishonor thee in their bad lives. Because I shall see thy heavens those huge
vast celestial orbs, the works of thy fingers, which thou have made by the
wisdom of thy divine understanding, the goodness of thy will, and the actiuitie
of thy creatiue power, which are thy fingers, the Moon and stars which thou
have founded, placed fixed and disposed in their proper spheres. I cannot
sufficiently admire What is man? Adam the very first man that was created,
what is he? That thou who art of such immense Majesty, as those thy
stupendous works do show thee to be, art mindful of him furnishing him
with all things necessary in due season? Or the son of man the offspring of
that first man Adam, what is he that thou so graciously visitest him with
manifold favors and benedictions? Yet when I considere the excellency of his
nature, I perceive thou have good reason to be solicitous for him, for Th^^
have diminished him a little less then the Angell^; in dignity and excellency
of nature thou have made him little inferior to them: true it is whilst he
remains in this life, he is something inferior to them in regard that he is
clothed with a body subject to corruption, and they are pure immateriall
substances; but at the general resurrection he shall be like unto them
impassible, glorious, and capable to behold thee clearly as thou art. Yea in
this life with glory and honor thou have crowned him, according to the soul
thou have formed him to thine o^ne image and similitude, and endued him with
three. Angelical powers, memory, understanding, and will, and other graces
which he en^oyed during the time he remained in original justice: and
according to the body thou have adorned him with beauty, comeliness, and
many other ornaments, and have appointed him over the works of thy hands, made
him Prince and Sovereign Lord over all thy creatures. Thou have subjected all
things under his feet, commanded all thy creatures to do him homage and obey
his will. All sheep and oxen and other domestical creatures, Moreover all the
beasts of the field untamed and sauadge creatures, the birds of the air and
fishes of the sea, that walk the paths of the sea. This dominion over thy
creatures man enjoyed fully and absolutely before his fall, noe one of them
making the least resistance against him: for as Saint Augustine says, so
long as lib. de Na. and gra. 15.
raison in man remained subject and obedient to God, the inferior powers of
his soul were also perfectly obedient and subject to raison, the body to the
soul, and all creatures to man. But when man had once transgr^ssed thy holy
precept and thereby became disobedient to thee, the inferior powers of his
soul begane presentlye to be rebellious to raison, the flesh to the spirit,
and creatures though naturally subject to him to disobey him. And albert he
still retained the dominion over them, which through thy infinite goodness and
clemencye thou did again also confirm upon him fully and entirely
according to right, yet according to exercise or power to execute his right
thou have justly weakened him for his demerit. Since therefore thou art our
Lord so potent and of so great Majesty, as thou art pleased to manifest unto
me by these thy wonderful and magnificent works, I cannot conclude my song
more fitly then as I begane saying, O Lord, our Lord, how marvelous is thy name
in the whole earth? because etc.

The ancient holy Fathers (grounding themselves upon the words of S. Paul the
2. to the Hebrews, and the first to the Corinthians the 15. as also upon the
authority of our B. Savior himself in the 21. of S. Matthew) do apply the
words of this Psalm wholly to Christ our Lord and his holy Church. Wherefore
I shall here unfold the prophetical sense of this Psalm, using as near as I
can the very self same words which I find set down in the works of the said
holy Fathers, which are to this effect.

The prophetical sense of this Psalm.
IN this vale of tears we cannot see God; for it is written, Man shall not see
Exo. 33.
him and live: nor consequently can we come to know how admirable he is other
wise then by his effects; which are in two sorts, that is to say, natural and
supernatural. By the first God appeared always and every where sublime; for
by the contemplation of his natural effects all men might perceive how
incomprehensible a workman he was. But by the second he chiefly showed himself
to be of infinite power and Majesty, in the time of the law of Moses, not to
all the world, but to some few people: but in the time of the law of grace he
has showed himself admirable in the whole earth, in all the parts whereof he
has wrought wonderful things, and manifested to the inhabitants the hidden
and secret things of his wisdom, revealing unto them the mystery of the
Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection* and Ascensian of Christ, and other
wonderful testimonies of the Christian law and faith; by all which the name of
our Lord is made exceeding admirable and altogether inscrutable even to the
utmost confines of the earth. David therefore foreseeing in spirit the
supernatural works of God which were to be wrought in the coming of Christ,
and manifested to the whole world, stricken with admiration said, as follows.

O Lord of all things, and particularly Our Lord, who with true Religion and
due reverence do worship thee in faith of the Messiah to come, how marvelous
by the future preaching of the Gospel is thy name shall thy fame and glory
be, not only in Iewry, but also in the whole earth? in all the parts whereof
thy holy Church shall be dilated: Because thy magnificence the humanity of
Christ, that most noble sumptuous and magnificent work of thine is elevated,
shall be exalted from terrene humility, and placed at thy right hand above
the material heavens, and above all the Angelical or celestial powers; for
then it shall be diuulged through the world that thou have given to Christ thy
Son in his assumpted humane nature all power in heaven and upon earth. Yet
so inscrutable are thy judgments, that thou will not make choice of such as
swell with humane learning and greatness to promulgate these thy divine
mysteries, neither will thou reveal thy perfect praise to them: but out of the
mouth of abject simple and unlearned people, who not so much in regard of age,
as in respect of their resemblance to the property of children, may well be
termed Infants and sucklings, thou hact perfected, thou will perfect divine
praise to be song to thine and thy Sons holy name, and wilt by them
proclaim thy law wherein thy praise is contained. And this thou will do
because of thy enemies, to convince the Priests of the Synagogue, as also the
Priests of the Idols and the professors of humane wisdom, who by impugning
thy new law will become thy enemies, that thou may destroy, disperse, and
cause to desist from their manner of religious worship, the enemy, the people
of the Jews, who will be the prime enemies of the Messiah, and the revenger
the Gentiles, who by thy divine ordinance shall revenge the injuries done by the
Jews unto him. Because I (who am only one of those Infants and sucklings, as
having been brought up a poor simple sheep heard) shall see thy heavens, shall
attentively consider those wonderful subtle works of thine, which thou did
make with exceeding facility, as being the works of thy fingers: the moon
and stars which thou have founded, which thou have created of nothing to
stable and incorruptible being. I cannot sufficiently admire, what is man? the
whole race of men, what are they? or what service are they able to do thee,
that thou who art of so great power and Majesty as these thy works show thee
to be art mindful of him? of them? preventing them with thy divine grace and
heaping innumerable benefitts upon them without any the least merit on their
part, but merely moved thereunto by thy own immense goodness? Or the son not
of men, that is, begotten of men according to the ordinary course of nature:
but of man, borne of the Virgin Mother of God, Christ our Lord, who in respect
of his humanity will be in some sort a creature, what is he? That thou
visitest him, that thou will visit him, assuming his humane nature to the
personal union of thy divine nature. Verily (O Lord) this thou will do out of
thy divine grace alone, not moved thereunto by any fore goeing merits of Christ
as man. Thou have minished him vdzt Christ our Lord a little less then the
Angels. If we consider his humane nature precisely abstracting from the graces
which he shall participate by such hypostaticall union thou will make him in
some respects inferior to the Angels, for thou will make him passible and
mortal: but if we consider him as he shall be in that state of union, he
shall transcend them far in dignity and excellency. Indeed for a small time
during his Passion thou will minish him a little less then them, but after his
Resurrection, with glory, with renown and praise worthy fame, and with
honor, with reverence that shall be exhibited in token of his virtue, thou
have crowned him, thou will crown him and adorn him on all sides, and have
appointed him over the works of thy hands, and wilt constitute him Lord and
King over thy creatures, and give him all power in heaven and upon earth. Thou
have subjected all things except thy self alone under his feet, under his
humanity, by which his divinity will de^cend unto us. All sheep simple
devout souls, and oxen learned Doctors and Preachers, who cultiuate the hearts
of the faithful; Moreover all the beasts of the field, sinful loose living
people, who wander up and down without a guide in the broad way of the
pleasures of this life following their own concupiscence, The birds of the
air, proud men puffed up with the wind of vain glory, And the fishes of the
sea that walk the paths of the sea, curious worldly men, who employ their
w^ole study in search of temporal pleasures and commodities, which quickly
vanish like to the passadges of the fishes in the sea. The Prophet ends with
the same verse he began, to show that Christ is the beginning and the end;
and that we ought to begin and end all our works with his praise.

S. Augustine upon those words wha^ is man that thou art mindful of him, or
the son of man that thou visitest him? distinguishes man from the son of
man in this sort, Every son of man (says he) is a man: but every man is not
the son of man, for Adam was a man, but not the son of man. Those that
bear the image of the terrene man, who was not the son of man, are signified
in this place by the name of man, and are as it were disioyned a far of from
God; and therefore he is said to be only mindful of them: but those who
bear the image of the heavenly man, the new Adam, who was the son of man,
are more properly called the sons of man; with whom God is nearely present,
illustrating them with the light of his countenance, and therefore he is said
to visit them. The new man is borne of the old because spiritual regeneration
begins by the change of the old secular life, according to that of the
Apostle That is not first which is spiritual, but that 1. Cor. 15.
which is natural: afterward that which is spiritual. The first man of earth
earthly: the second man from heaven heavenly. Such as is the earthly, such
also are the earthly: and such as the heavenly, such also are the heavenly.
Therefore as we have borne the image of the earthly, let us bear also the
image of the heavenly.

By the birds of the air which are borne aloft and sing continually, may be
understood the Angels that inhabit the highest places, and sing continually
the praises of God. And by the fishes of the sea which dwell in the lowest
places and are mute, may be understood the devils which inhabit the
remotest places from the throne of God, and are mute as to the praising of him.

The explication of the 18. Psalm, and second in number in the Nocturne office.
THE ARGUMENT.
THis Psalm consists chiefly of two parts; wherein the holy Prophet shows
two ways, whereby every man may come to the Knowledge of God and of divine
mysteries. The one by comtemplating the heavens, which by their beauty,
greatness, and exact motion do express after a silent manner the Majesty,
power, and wisdom of their Creator, according to that of the Isai^ 40.
Prophet Isaie, Lift up your eyes and see who has created these things. The
other by the law of God, whereby men are taught how to frame their lives
conformable to the divine will. The holy Fathers (grounding themselves upon
the authority of S. Paul in diverse places) do interpret the words of this
Psalm to be spoken by the holy Prophet of the Apostles, Evangelists, and
other preachers of the new law, and of the sincerity and excellency of the
same law; wherefore I will first set down the Prophetical, or rather indeed
the true literal sense of this Psalm, and afterward the plain literal
sense as the words seem to import.

The heavens, the Apostles and Evangelists, who are termed heavens, in respect
of their celestial conversation and eminency of grace, and for that God
dwells in them in a sublime and unspeakable manner: in which sense likewise
all perfect and spiritual men are called heavens in diverse places of holy
writ, Hear ye heavens what things I Deutero. 32. Isa. 1.
speak, and the earth hear the words of my mouth. And the Prophet Isaie,
Hear ye heavens and give ear o earth. These heavens declare the glory of
God to wit the Kingdom and excellency of Christ, and the firmament, the
holy Church established upon the rock which is Christ, and perfect men who
are firmly placed in her as stars in the firmament declares unto us the
works of his hands, to wit the virtues and miraculous works of Christ,
wrought by his divine power principally, which is as his right hand, and his
humanity instrumentally, which is as his left hand.

Day unto day utters the word, wise, holy, and divinely illuminated men
do impart unto learned and spiritual men out of the fullness of their
knowledge doctrine concerning the divine nature of Christ, according to that of
the 1. Cor. 2.
Apostle, we speak wisdom among the perfect. And night unto night shows
knowledge such contemplatiues from whom the sun of Justice (they being now
well grounded in a spiritual life) for a long space withdraws his rays of
sensible devotion and comforts, leaving them in aridity and darkness of
spirit, and affordinge them only a glimpse of his beauty as through an obscure
cloud, leadinge them maruelously by a very painful yet more secure and
meritorious way, do show to others in this estate of desolatio^ and knowledge
how to comport themselves in the like exige^ce to make right use of such
substraction of grace.

There are noe languages nor speeches whose voices are not heard, understood,
and spoaken by the Apostles; for they spoke with all toungs, and every one
understood them in his own proper phrase of speech. This verse according to
the latin translation may admit this construction. Non sunt loquelae neque
sermones there are noe languages or speeches quorum non audiantur voces little
of which language^ and speeches the voices of them to wit^ of the Apostles are
not heard, and th^^ construction seems to agree with the verse following.

Their sound has goone forth into all the earth, for the Apostles did cast
lots and divide the nations of the earth amongst them, and they in person
visited the principal parts thereof, and to the rest their sound has gone
forth, videlicet their doctrine has been published by their disciples. Certes
(saietht he Apostle) into all the earth has the sound of them gone forth, and
unto the ends of the whole world the words of them. And unto the ends of the
round world the words of them this was foreshewed also by the Prophet Isaie.
From the ends of the earth we have heard praises, the glory of the just one
and Isa. 24.
in another place, I will send of them that shall be saved to the Gentiles,
into the sea, into Affrike and Lidia, them that hold the arrow: into Italy and
Greece, to the Islands far of, to them that have not heard of me, and have not
seen my glory etc. The Apostle alleges this verse to prove that faith is
of hearing, and of the preaching of the Apostles: whence it follows, that
this Psalm does speak of Christ and his Apostles, and of the preaching of the
Evangelical law.

He has put his tabernacle in the sun. These words are expounded two ways.
The first is, that he (to wit Christ our Lord) has put his tabernacle, his
assumpted humane nature which is the temple of his invisible deity, in the
sun, to wit in this inferior world, in the sight of all men: by which means
he that before did dwell in inaccessible light, was seen upon earth, and was
conversant with men. The second is, that Christ has put his said tabernacle
in the Blessed Virgin, in whose womb he dwelt for nine months. Our Lord Ierem.
31.
(says Jeremy) has created a new thing upon the earth, A woman shall
compass a man. and the Prophet Zachary, Praise and Zach. 2.
rejoice o daughter of Sion: because lo I come, and will dwell in the midst
of thee. The Blessed Virgin is called the sun in regard of the most excellent
splendour of divine grace in her, of whom the Spouse says in the Canticles,
Thou art Cant. 4.
all fair o my love, and there is no^ a spot in thee. and in another place,
Fair as the Moon, elect as the Sun, as also for that she gave light and
life to thee world. And himself Christ our Lord as a bridegroom coming forth
of his bridechamber, to wit out of the womb of the Blessed Virgin, in which by
putting on humane flesh he did espouse the holy Church unto him.

He has exulted as a giant, Christ shall come joyfully, and descend with
longing desire into the womb of his most dear Mother, to run the way, to
prosecute the work of our Redemption with all speed, and to show us the way
of life in his hol^e conversation. His coming from the top of heaven, to wit
from the bosom of his eternal father into the womb of the Blessed Virgin,
from the intellectual heaven unto the sensible earth. This his descent was not
by change of place, but by appearing after a new and unheard of manner. And his
recourse his return or ascension even to the top thereof, unto the same place
whence he came fort^; as our Savior witnesses of himself saving, I came forth
from the Father, and Job. 16.
came into the world: again I leave the world,

and I go to the Father. Neither is there, that can hide himself from his
heat. None can excuse themselves from the love of Christ; for his benefits are
so many, so great, and manifest, that none can plead ignorance: or thus, none
can hide themselves from the operation of the holy Ghost, who is the burning
love, proceeding from the Father and the son: or thus, in the law of Christ
grace will so abound that none can with just cause subtract themselves from
the receipt thereof.

The plain literal exposition.
AMongst all things created (all which do in their manner praise God) The
heavens by their beauty, greatness, motion and influx into these inferior
things, do most clearly and in a transcendent manner show forth the glory of
God, affording abundant matter to excite all such as shall contemplate them,
to confess the Majesty, wisdom, power, and providence of the Creator: and
the firmament wherein God almighty Genesis 1.
placed the Sun, Moon, and stars declares the works of his hands, of
what sort and excellency they are.

Moreover the heavens do not only show forth the glory of God, but also do
manifest it after an admirable and stupendous manner. First without
intermission or ceasing The day present utters unto the day following the
word, to wit certain sensible signs, which do represent unto us the glory
of God: and in like manner the night present shows unto the night following
Knowledge, which may be learnt by contemplating those principal works of
God in the firmament, to wit the Moon and stars; in such sort, that what we
are not able to draw out of such consideration in one day and night, we may
more fully conceive by the succeeding days and nights.

Secondly they show forth the glory of God in the words of all forms of
speech, for There are noe languages or speeches whose voice are not heard: or
thus according to the latin text, There are noe languages or speeches of which
the voices of them to wit of the heavens, the firmament, day and night are not
heard: for these do by the foresaied sensible signs as it were speak all
languages and speeches: and every one hears them, that is, vndestandeth them
in his own language; and consequently there are noe people how barbarous
soever, that do not perceive and understand the doctrine, which the heavens,
the firmament, day and night do deliver concerning God.

Thirdly they show forth the glory of God to the whole world, for Their sound
has gone forth into all the earth, and unto the ends of the round world the
words of them. By the word, sound, is not here understood any corporal consent
or harmony, such as some philosophers did suppose: but that confession of
praise which does arise out of the beauty of the heavens considered by men.
He, God almighty, who remains ever in the heaven of the blessed, and is
there beheld clearly as he is in himself, in this world as being a place of
peregrination has put his Tabernacle or Pauilion in the Sun as in the most
noble portion of the heavens, whence he is graciously pleased to represent
himself unto us in a manner best suting with the estate we now live in, and
fittest to manifest the admirable effects of his immense power, and infinite
goodness; for the Sun is the common parent of all things, giving life and
light unto them: and himself to wit the Sun returning from the lower
Hemisphere and ascending our horizon all glorious and resplendent is as a, to
wit like unto a comely and ritchly arrayed bridegroom coming forth of his
bridechamber. He, the Sun has rejoiced, exulted and showed signs of
alacrite and infatigabilitie, to run the way, to pass the immense space of
the heavens with wonderful celeritie, much like as a courageous and mighty
giant does to run a race. His coming forth is from the top the extreme part
of heaven, to wit, the East, where he arises* and his recourse circuition or
return even to the top thereof, to the other extreme, to wit the West:
neither is there any man or created thing what soever that can hide himself, or
it self, from his heat, influence, and viuificating virtue, which penetrateth
even into the depth of the sea and the most intime bowels of the earth*

In this sort the heavens, the firmament, and all their resplendent ornaments
which we behold with our eyes, do declare unto us the glory of God and excite
us to his praise: but the divine law which we perceive by our ears does much
more clearly show us ^ow to direct our lives in order to God, and far more
efficaciously move us to conform our actions to his divine will, as may
appear by the properties thereof. For first The law of our Lord is immaculate,
free from reprehension, not permitting sin as humane laws do, but rendering
the obseruers thereof pure and without blame, Converting souls, causing men to
descend into their interior, and there to consider their bad ways and return
to God, and live: withdrawing them from unlawful things to embrace virtue, and
from vain fading things to thirst after the chief and immutable good.
Secondly The testimony of our Lord is faithful, true and most worthy to be
credited, revealing and testifying the will of God, what his pleasure is we
should know, what he requires we should do, and what we should refrain from;
what pains and torments he will inflict upon such that trangresse his
commandments, and what reward he has prepared for those that observe them:
giving wisdom, the light of spiritual prudence, to little ones, to wit to
simple and humble men, that they may by the help thereof know how to decline
from evil and do good; for to such God almighty unfolds many high
mysteries, according to that of our Savior, I confess to thee, o Father Math.
11.
of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and have revealed them to little ones.

Thirdly The justices of our Lord be right, just and full of equity, leading
us to beatitude without error, and therefore making hearts joyful, which
observe them for love. For it is naturally delightful to a man to behold that
he lives well according to the rules of virtue, and procures internal peace,
security of conscience, and firm hope of salvation: but contrariwise, it is a
corrosiue to a man's heart, to see himself a slave to sin and vice, and
procures horror, sadness and despair, if God do not mercifully move him to
tears of repentance, whereas A secure mind is as it were a continual Proverb.
15.
feast. Fourthly The precept of our Lord is lightsome clear and manifest,
illuminating the eyes of our interior, to wit our understanding and Memory,
that we be not immerged in the darkness of vice, but may remain always in
God.

Fifthly The fear of our Lords is holy, That servile fear by which we tremble
to offend God out of the consideration of the severity of his justice is good:
but that filial fear which arises out of the consideration of his goodness
and mercy, by which we dread to displease God, because we love him and tender
his honor, as being our benign Lord and Father is truly holy, and permament
for ever and ever, for it begins here and remains even in the next world
habitually, and actually also according to reuerentiall subjection, but not
according to flight, which pertains to fear: because the blessed are
confirmed in grace and assured that they cannot be auerted, and therefore do
not fear any future evil, but are subject to God with a reuerentiall fear.
Sixthly The judgments of our Lord be true, justified in themselves: The
commandments of our Lord, which are called his judgments because by them he
will judge mankind, and which are the square or rule to discern virtue from
vice, and good works from evil, these commandments, I say are most true,
and justified in themselves; that is, they need not be demonstrated to be
just by any one: for in respect they are the commandments of God, they are
sufficiently proved to be just. Moreover the ten commandments of which David
chiefly speaks in this place, in regard they are all as principles of the law
of nature, do contain in them such justice, that they are just in all places,
times, and particular cases, and admit noe dispensation; whereas other laws
do often want the circumstances of time, place and persons, that they may be
just: and therefore are to be desired above gold and much precious stones, to
be preferred before riches in what quantity soever, for the just shall have
an hundred fold in this world, and in the world to come life everlasting: and
enjoy such bliss as far exceeds all terrestrial treasure and happiness
which either eye has seen, or ear has heard, or has entered into the heart
of man. They are also more sweet pleasant and delightful to our souls then
honey, or the honey comb is to our taste, which contains plenty of the
purest honey, as I can say by experience.

For thy servant keeps them, and in keeping them is much reward, Many favors
and blessings are obtained even at this present, besides what may justly be
expected hereafter, relying upon thy faithful promises. Sins who
understands? who is able to perceive or mark every sin? truly noe man:
for such indeed is man's frailty, that he is in noe sort able to know, shun,
and deplore his daily defects and ignorances. He hops but not without some
fear, for he does not certainly know whether he be worthy of love or hatred:
for man cannot be justified compared with God, If he will Job. 9.
contend with him, he cannot answer him one for a thousand. Which being so,
what better or more present remedy then to have recourse to God by humble
prayer? saying, from my secret sins which either when I commit, I am ignorant
I do commit, or else do not know to be such, cleanse me, o Lord, by causing
me to remember them in as much as is expedient, by infusing such sorrow as may
suffice in general, and granting me grace from hence forth to beware of them
as much as is possible: and from other men's spare thy servant, and permit him
not to be seduced by their bad example or instigation, nor to give them just
cause of scandal, or to do any thing by which he may be guilty of their
failings. For such is my confidence in thy immense goodness, that
notwithstanding I happen to fall into these secret defects and ignorances, and
that the evil enemy and wicked men do suggest occasions of sin unto me:
Yet If thou mercifully aiding me, they shall not have dominion over me, in such
sort, that wittingly and willingly I do give consent, and yield myself
subject unto them, then shall I be immaculate; and shall be cleansed although
not altogether (for that cannot be expected during this mortal life) yet
without doubt from the greatest sin, from pride, which is the root of all
vice and most odious in thy sight.

And then exteriourly the words of my mouth shall be such, as may please
thee, and interiourly the meditation of my heart grateful in thy sight
always. Which I beseech thee O Lord happily to bring to pass, who in
prosperous things art my light and fortitude, and in adverse my helper and
redeemer.

In this Psalm are wonderfully expressed by the Prophet the grounds of the
Christian faith, the preaching of the Apostles, the Incarnation of the divine
word, the praise of the Evangelical law, an acknowledgment of his own
frailty, and an invocation of the divine mercy. Let us therefore sing it or
recite it with all fervor of heart, beseeching our sweet Savior who for our
sake humbled himself so low as to become the son of a poor maid, to
extinguish all pride in us, and to grant us his holy fear.

The exposition of the 23. Psalm and 3. in number in the Nocturne Office.
THE TITLE. The first of the Sabbath, the Psalm of David.
COncerning which you must note that the Jews in reverence of their Sabbath,
did number the days of the week from that day, calling the day immediately
following the first of the Sabbath, and so forth of the rest. The Gentiles
called the days of the week by the names of the Planets to wit Su^nedaie,
Moonedaie etc. but the holy Church does call our Sabbath, which was the first
of the Sabbath according to the Jewish account, our Lords day in honor of
the Resurrection of our Savior on that day, and the day immediately following
the first Feria, and so forth of the rest; signifying thereby that all good
Christians ought every day to feriate, that is, to live holily, abstayning
from sin and vain unnecessary employment, yet not desisting from lawful
labors. The sense therefore of this title is, The Psalm written by David for
the glory of the Resurrection of Christ, which was to be upon the first of
the Jewish Sabbath, when Christ rising on that day, should have all power
given him in heaven and upon earth.

THE ARGUMENT.
Holy David by this Psalm does intend to show how of the innumerable
multitude of men only Christ and some few (few indeed I may say in respect
of the multitude of others) shall enter into the celestial house of our Lord.
And therefore least perhaps any should believe that the residue of mankind did
not belong to God, but were created by some other Principle, as afterward the
Marcionists and Manichees did suppose, he declares and proves in the
beginning of this Psalm, that man and all things else whatsoever are our
Lords, as being their Creator and conseruer. which being so, he admireth the
inscrutable judgments of almighty God, that out of the plenitude of the earth
so small a number compared with the rest should ascend in^o the mount of our
Lord, that is, into his holy Church: and that even of those all should not
persevere in his holy place, and dispose themselves to receive the benediction
and the mercy from their Savior, that is, to be made partakers by him of the
merits of his death and Passion; but only such as should have the four
conditions he there specifieth Next the Prophet addresseth himself toward the
Princes of darkness, commanding them to open their gates that Christ may enter
and set free the captive souls, whose ransom he has paid upon the Cross.
And lastly he speaks ^o the celestial powers to open their gates, that
Christ and his blessed train and all others that shall even until the end of
the world take up their Cross and follow him, may enter and keep an eternal
Sabbath.

The exposition of the Psalm.
THe earth is our Lords, and the fulness thereof, all things therein contained,
to wit men, beasts, all that grows thereon, or is within her bowels: the
round world the circumference of the earth, and all that dwell therein, all
these are our Lords, as being their Creator governor and conseruer. Because he
has founded, firmly placed it, the earth or round world upon the sea, upon
certain arms of the Ocean which inuiron it. Yet this is not to be understood
as though the earth properly speaking were above the sea: for the earth is the
Center of the universe; whence it is necessary, that it be in the midst of
the world, and consequently according to its natural seat encompassed by the
waters, and for the greatest part in the midst of them: but it is said to
be placed above the sea, because by the divine providence it is not wholly
overwhelmed by the waters, but that part which boundeth upon the sea and the
superficies thereof is higher then the sea, that creatures may live and feed
thereon. Me then (says our Lord) will Ierem. 5. v. 22.
you not fear? who have set the sand a limit for the sea, an everlasting
precept that shall not pass, the waves thereof shall swell and shall not pass
over it.

And upon the rivers has prepared it, made it an habitation fit for men and
other living creatures.

The two precedent verses, as likewise the rest of this Psalm may be
explained in a more spiritual sense, as follows.

The earth, the Church militant remaining upon earth, and producing plentiful
fruit of holy conversation is our Lords, and the fulness thereof, the whole
virtue, grace and perfection of the faithful ought by all right to be
ascribed unto him, as being the author and giver thereof: the round world, the
holy Church spread through all the confines of the earth, or collected of
people from all the ends of the earth, and all that dwell therein, all the true
believers established in Ecclesiastical unity of faith and operation. All
these belong to our Lord Jesus Christ, who has purchased them with his
precious blood, That he might present to himself Ephe. 5.
a glorious Church not having spot or wrinkle.

Because he has founded it upon the Sea, upon secular men wallowing and
wavering as the Sea from one vanity and inconstancy into an other. or thus,
He has founded it, he has strengthened his Church upon the Sea, upon the
persecutions, tribulations, bitternesses, and inconstances of the world. Yet
this is not to be understood, that these before named are the bases or
foundations of the Church: but that Christ has established his Church in such
sort against them, that although they should never so much endeavor to
subvert her, as the vast billows of the sea do menace to inuolue and swallow
up the earth, yet she shall subsist, and never be altogether overcome by them.
And upon the rivers, upon vices gliding like rivers inordinately and without
ceasing from one sensual pleasure to another, but never satiating, has
prepared it, disposed the holy Church to combat against them. VValking in
flesh (says the Apostle) we 2. Cor. 10.
war not according to the flesh, for the weapons of our warfare are not
carnal, but mighty to God. Since therefore all things are our Lords as has
been proved, Who shall ascend into the Mount of our Lord? who from the
servitude of sin shall ascend to the obedience of the holy Church? who shall
forsake the world and enter into religion? who from imperfection shall ascend
to perfection? who from this vale of tears shall ascend into the Kingdom of
heaven? Or who shall stand in his holy place? who shall persevere to the end in
the said mount of our Lord? verily all men shall not. It is true indeed that
many wicked and reprobate people do ascend into the mount of our Lord: but
they stand not there; for that belongs only to them, in whom are found the
four properties following. The innocent of hands, who has not injured any man
by his actions, and of clean heart, who has his heart purified from the
stain or guilt of sin and affection thereunto: that has not taken his soul
in vain, that has not neglected to fulfill those things for which his soul
was created, and infused into the body, to wit to adorn it with virtues,
knowledge necessary to salvation, and the like; nor sworn to his nighbour in
guile, has not promised any thing which he intended not to perform, has not
constantly auerred for truth, what he could not prove, nor confirmed any thing
with an oath with intent to deceive his neighbor; by which means he will
neither have sinned in thought, word, nor deed against God himself* or his
neighbor. He whosoever he be that observes these things, he it is, that
shall receive blessing, divine gifts and graces together with increase of
them, and prosperous success in all he undertakes, and mercy the grace of
perseverance, of God his Savior, to wit of our Lord Jesus Christ. This is the
generation of them that seek him, Such just and innocent men as this, are the
generation that seek God their Savior by faith, holy desires, and good
works, of them that seek by Prayer and contemplation in present, with
confidence hereafter clearly to behold the face of the God of Jacob,
incouradged by those words of our Savior, Blessed are the clean of heart, for
they shall see Math. 5.
God. Behold what is required of such as desire once to enjoy the clear vision
of God, from which we are as far distant, as we fail of this innocence.

The words following are esteemed to be the voice of the Angels that attended
upon our Savior after the separation of his blessed soul from the body upon
the Cross; and first to the Princes of darkness, when they descended with him
into Lymbo Patrum.

Lift up your gates ye Princes, desist ye Princes of darkness from further
exercising the right, and power you have hitherto had to detain the souls of
the elect for the guilt of original sin, and he ye lifted up o eternal
gates, which have been shut from the beginning of the world, that none could
depart thence; and shall remain shut for ever to the damned for as much as
concerns their freedom, and the King of glory shall enter in, and set free
the captive souls, whose ransom he has paid upon the Cross. The devils
stricken with admiration at this voice, demand of the Angels.

Who is this King of glory? that descends unto us in so unusual a manner,
with such splendour and security? Unto whom the Angels make answer, it is Our
Lord, strong in regard of his divinity, and mighty in regard of his humanity:
our Lord mighty in battle, in his Passion, wherein as in a new sort of combat,
not by force and contention, but by suffering innumerable indignities,
reproaches, scoffs, strokes, wounds, and finally an ignominious death he has
vanquished Goliath, subdued the Prince of the world bound him, cast him forth,
and taken from him his spoils.

Again the Angels attending upon our Savior, at his Ascension into heaven do
call to the celestial powers saying.

Lift up your gates ye Princes, set open the passadge into heaven o ye
celestial powers, The time that God prefixed by his inviolable decree, that
none should enter Heaven till his Justice were satisfied, is now happily
expired, and the dreadful schedule of man's condemnation is cancelled. Open
therefore your gates at lardge, and the King of glory will enter in triumph,
attended with a specious train, the trophies of his glorious victory over
theirs and our mortal enemies, being the first fruits of his painful
labors, and an earnest penny that he will infallibly repair our ruin, and
bring us daily a blessed sort of Citizens into the vacant habitations of
Lucifer and his adherents, that rebellious crew, that once disturbed our joy.
And be ye lifted up o eternal gates, and be ye laid open o ye gates of
eternal life, and the King of glory shall enter in

The celestial powers hearing this voice, and beholding Christ to ascend with
such brightness and Majesty do inquire of the superior Angels.

Who is this King of glory? unto whom the Angels attending upon our Savior
do make answer, The Lord of powers, the only Son of God the Father, who is
the Lord of the Sabbath, and of all the celestial powers: He is the King of
glory, the Prince of joy, the fountain of eternal felicity, who is of such
excellency, that even according to his humanity, all power Math. 23.
is given him in heaven and upon earth.

Behold how excellently and briefly the holy Prophet does teach us by this
Psalm to contemplate the divine Majesty, to the end to excite us to reverence
and holy fear. He teaches also how we must dispose our selves if we desire
to be numbered in the list of the elect, thereby exhorting us to purity and
cleanenesse of heart; and finally he unfolds unto us the happy mystery of
Christ's Ascension, thereby to erect our hearts to the love of heavenly things
according to that of the Apostle, Seek the things that are above, where Christ
is fitting Collos. 3.
on the right hand of God: mind the things that are above, not the things that
are upon the earth.

The exposition of the 44. Psalm and 4 in number in the nocturne Office.
The title an exposition thereof.
Unto the end; for them that shall be changed, to wit for Gentiles and Jews
who shall be converted to Christianity, and other sinners who shall be
changed here in this world by justification, and in the next by glorification.
To the sons of Chore, to those that shall imitate Christ crucified on Mount
Caluary, for Chore is by interpretation Caluaria: for understanding, for their
instruction in the mysteries treated of in this Psalm. A Canticle for the
beloved, for Christ, of whom God the Father affirmed, This is my well-beloved
Math. 17.
son.

THE ARGUMENT.
THis Psalm is a Epithalamy or wedding song, composed in honor of the
spiritual nuptials between Christ the Spouse and the holy Church the
Espoused. The two first verses may be understood in two senses. The first and
most profound sense (which is set down by S. Augustine in his exposition of
this Psalm) is to suppose them as spoken by God the Father; and then they
importe the incomprehensible generation of the Son of God before all world.
The second sense is, that they be understood as spoken by the Prophet of
himself, and then they seem to be a Preface or dedication of this work of
his to the Kingly Spouse, whose virtues and excellencies he sets forth most
elegantly in the following verses, showing how the daughters of Kings, and even
the Queen herself inamoured of his beauty and exquisite virtues does covet
to assist in his presence. Next he proceeds to celebrate the praise of the
Espoused, describing her ornaments, and instructing her how to comport
herself, that she may become most pleasing in his sight. And lastly he
shows what offspring they shall have, and how pious and diligent they shall
be to promote the honor of the Spouse and the Espoused.

The exposition of the Psalm.
MY heart has uttered a good word, my Paternall mind, or I my self who am the
paternall mind, most simple and pure, or my eternal understanding, or my
fruitful memory out of the fullness of its infinite fecunditie and immense
goodness, and out of the fountain it self of my essence have intellectually
brought forth, have from eternity said and truly begotten an only Son,
consubstantiall to me, who is the Good word. By that he is called good Mare 10.
is showed that he is God: For none is good but one God. I the eternal Father
tell my works to the King, to Christ my beloved Son, the King of Kings, as
Christ himself affirms, The Father loves the Ioh. 5.
Son, and shows him all things that himself does. Whatsoever the Father
knows in himself that he expresses in his Word: in such sort, that
whatsoever is contained in the essence of the Father, that clearly shines in
the Son; for he is the only begotten of the Paternall mind, the eternal
word, the word of his understanding, and full expression of his wisdom.
Finally whatsoever the Father in order of things has created even from the
beginning, that he said from eternity in his word, and made by him in
convenient time: as S. John witnesses, Ioh. 1.
All things were made by him. and again, That which was made in him was life.
My tongue, my understanding is the pen of a Scribe wri^ing swiftly, may be
compared to the pen of a Scribe writing swiftly in two respects. First,
because as the word that is written with a pen does not sound and pass away,
but is expressed in silence and remains firmly: so the word of the Father
is not sounding, passing away, and unstable, but secret, firm, immovable and
eternal. Secondly, because as the pen of a Scribe writing swiftly does write
a word without labor or notable delay: so the divine understanding speaking
internally produced his word in the very instant of eternity without motion,
labor or tarriance; as the eternal wisdom who is the word and Son of God
affirms, saying Our Lord possessed Proverb. 8.
me in the beginning of his ways, before he had made any thing from the
beginning: from eternity I was ordained. The depthes were not as yet, and I
was now conceived etc. Moreover he that writes a great volume in a short time
is not so properly said to write swiftly, as he that comprehends that great
volume in a few words, and yet omitteth nothing. God the Father in his eternal
word comprehended all things that ever were* are, or shall be: and therefore
he does justly affirm of himself, that His tongue is the pen of a Scribe
writing swiftly.

These two verses may also be expounded as being the words of the Prophet;
and then the sense of them seems to be as follows.

My heart, my understanding out of the plenitude of divine illumination and
Prophetical knowledge has uttered, has produced, said internally, and
expressed with the mouth a good word, this present Psalm, which is a good word
repleate with high and most delightful mysteries. I tell my works to the
King, I sing, write, and dedicate this present Psalm, and all my other actions
to the honor of the M^ssias the King of Syon, of whose spiritual nuptials I
purpose to treat. My tongue is the pen of a Scribe writing swiftly, My
tongue in writing this Psalm was the pen of one writing swiftly, that is, of
my self; who write it without premeditation or labor, as I received it from
the holy Ghost; or of the holy Ghost, who causes those whom he does inspire
to write fast without searching for exquisite words to express what he
dictateth.

O heavenly Spouse, thou art Goodly of beauty above the Sons of men. There
was a threefold beauty in Christ. The first eternal divine and infinite,
which belongs unto him by reason of his divine nature, he being the figure
and substance of the Father, whom the Angels behold with delight. The second
beauty of Christ was created and spiritual, which consisted in the perfection
of his wisdom, the excellency of his grace, the eminency of his charity
and other virtues, and this his beauty was without comparison greater then of
all the elect together. The third beauty of Christ was created and corporal,
which consisted in the due proportion, seat, and quantity of members, and in
the meet super infusion of lively color. This beauty of Christ was exceeding
great and admirable, First because noe natural perfection was wanting unto
him, Secondly because it was most fit that so holy and fair a soul as his
should be infused into a body proportionate, Thirdly because the body of
Christ was assumed of most pure matter, to wit of the purest blood of the most
worthy Virgin, and Finally because it was formed and composed by a most
skillful and infallible agent, to wit the holy Ghost: and therefore we may
piously believe, that our Lord Jesus Christ in corporal beauty also did
excel all others, even Absolon himself. Grace is powered abroad in thy lips,
fruitful and efficacious eloquence, sweetness and affability of speech is
given thee, that none shall be able to resist thy words: therefore in regard
thou art so powerful to win all hearts God has blessed thee for ever. The
word ( Propterea) in the latin text, which here is Englished Therefore, does
also signify Because, and being so taken the sense of this verse is as
follows, Thou art goodly of beauty above the Sons of men, grace is powered
abroad in thy lips, because God has blessed thee for ever, to wit with
Hypostaticall union which shall remain for ever, and is the fountain from
which all gifts and graces do flow most copiously into thy humanity, o
Christ. The first sense is good and proper, yet the Second seems to be
preferred. Be girded with thy sword upon thy thigh, o most mighty, o Thou who
art not only most beautiful and gracious, but also most strong and ^aliant,
prepare thy self to combat with the unjust ryrant, who has by fraud
circumuented thy beloved, and detaineth her captive for original sin. The
sword here mentioned is the doctrine of Christ, who says of himself by the
Prophet Isaie, He has made my mouth as a sharp Isa. 49. Ephe. 6.
sword. Take upon you (says the Apostle) the sword of the spirit, which is
the word of God. With thy beauty and fairenes, not so much with thy
corporal beauty as with thy wisdom and Justice, which are the splendour of
thy Soul, Intend, incline and have pious regard to the salvation of thy
people, and endeavor to the uttermost to procure it, Proceed prosperously
advance and march forwards with happy success from the bosom of thy eternal
Father into the womb of thy immaculate Mother, from her womb into the manger,
from the manger to the Cross, and from thence extend thy dominion over the
whole world, and reign in the militant Church, placing thy throne in the
hearts of thy people by faith and grace, and in the triumphant Church, by
affording them the clear vision of thy glory. And do thou reign in this
sort, Because of thy truth thy irreprehe^sible righteousness in words and deeds,
and mildness, affability, sweetness, and mercy toward the humble and
obedient, and justice, severity toward disobedient and haughty spirits: and
thy right hand, thy divine nature, which is the right hand of thy humanity,
shall conduct thee maruelously, shall direct and teach thee the principles of
government, how to rule thy people, subdue thy enemies, and dilate thy dominion.

Or thus, because of thy truth and mildnes and justice, that is, because of the
acts of these virtues and their merit, in regard thou have been true in thy
life and doctrine, mild and patient in adversity, and in all things just and
righteous, not seeking thy own but thy Fathers glory, and the salvation of
mankind, therefore thy right hand shall conduct thee maruelously, eleuating
thee from the earth to heaven, and constituting thee Judge of the universe. For
Christ did merit his Ascension and judiciary power by his holy conversation
and exinanition of himself, taking upon him the form of a servant, humbling
himself and beco^ming obedient even to the death of the Cross. Christ in all
things spoke and observed the truth, as he witnessed of himself before Pilate
saying, For this I was borne, Ioh. 18.
and for this I came into the world: that I should give testimony to the truth.
He was also mild, for he taught his disciples saying, Learn of me, for I am
meek and Math. 11.
humble of heart. And he* was just, as S. Stephen affirmed of him to the Jews
saying, Which of the Prophets did not your Fathers persetute? and they slew
them Act. 7.
that foretold of the coming of the just one etc.

The verse following is both written and distinguished diversely: whereby the
sense does differ much. Some write it and point it as follows.

Thy sharp arrows, the peoples underneath thee shall fall into the heart of
the Kings enemies and being so written it seems to yield this sense. Thy
divine doctrine, and thy grace moving the hearts of the hea^ers are thy sharp
arrows. With these the Infidelles (who before were rebellious and disobedient
to thee) being wounded, shall be converted and become obedient to thy holy
laws, and by their example draw thy adversaries (many of the obdurate Jews,
and other Tyrants that persecute thee and thy holy Church) to embrace thy
doctrine also.

Others make two points after the word (fall) and expound it as follows.

The Gentiles and many also of the Jews wounded with the forementioned arrows
of Christ, shall become obedient to the faith: and those arrows shall have
such force and efficaci^, that they shall prevail against the hearts of the
enemies of Christ the King and Messiah, as may appear by the example of S.
Paul, and other persecutors of the Christian faith.

Finally others to with S. Augustine and Dyonisius the Carthusian write it as
follows.

Thy sharp arrows, the peoples underneath thee shall fall in the heart of the
Kings enemies, that is, in the midst or the thickest of them. Or thus, they
s^all fall in the heart, that is, their fall shall be spiritual by the
obedience of the mind, not corporal. And having thus obtained a full conquest,
Thy sea^e o God for ever and ever, thy tribunal of Justice, and thy throne of
glory o Christ, who art true God, shall be firmly established, and remain
for ever: a rod of direction, of justice and equity, is the rod of thy
Kingdom the scepter by which thou shall govern the holy Church (which is the
Kingdom) with just correction and equal retribution, according to that of the
Prophet Isaie, He shall not judge according to the sight of the eyes, nor
rebuke according to the hearing of the ears: but he shall judge the poor in
justice, and shall rebuke in equity; and he shall strike the earth with the
rod of his mouth, and with the spirit of his lips he shall kill the impious.
Thou have loved justice and hated iniquity: whereof thou have given good
testimony by beco^ming obedient even to the death of the Cross, to satisfy the
justice of God, and take away the sins of the world; and therefore God, thy
God, or according to S. Augustine and others that follow the Greek text,
therefore o God, o Christ true God and true man, thy God the God of all, who is
in a most singular manner thy God, has anointed thee in respect of thy
humanity with oil of gladness, with the glory of resurrection and ascension
above thy consorts, in a more full and excellent manner then he has King David
and all other holy Kings, exalting thee in glory, placing thee at his right
hand, and giving thee a name which is above all names, that in thy name every
knee bow of the celestialls terresttialls and infernalls.

Myrrh and Aloes and Cassia from thy garments. By Myrrh which preserves dead
bodies from putrefaction, is signified Mortification, which preserves souls
from the filth and corruption of concupiscence. By Aloes which takes away
hardnesses, and asswageth swellings of the Lunges, is signified Humility,
which takes away the obdurateness and stubbornness of the mind, and the vain
puffings up of Pride. And finally by Cassia which grows in moist places and
springs very high, is signified Faith, which grows in Baptism. The virtues
therefore which are designed by Myrrh Aloes and Cassia do proceed from thy
humanity o Christ, which is as it were the garment of thy divinity: and not
only from it, but also from howses of Iuorie, from chaste and pure souls, in
whom thou dwell as in clean shining odoriferous howses, out of which
virtues, the daughters of Kings, religious souls, that have got dominion over
the world the flesh and the devil, have delighted thee, have given thee
exceeding great contentment to behold them run so fast after the sweet odors
of thy garments, by exercising themselves continually in those thy virtues, in
thy honor, with pure intention merely to please and glority thee.

The Queen the holy Church thy beloved spouse stood on thy right hand in
golden raiment, clothed with charity, compassed with variety of all other
virtues and graces inwardly, and environed outwardly with variety of estates,
^rders, and professions, all united in one faith. Hear daughter attentively
what thy spouse, who is also thy Father, shall say unto thee either by
himself or by the mouths of his holy servants, and see, consider by faith all
things which he shall propose unto thee, and incline thy ear with all
humility and readiness to obey his holy will, and forget thy people, lay a
side all inordinate affection to thy old consorts, and the house of thy Father,
cease also to love thy kindred carnally.

And then the King will covet thy beauty: Christ Jesus will be inamoured of
the beauty of thy mind and desire to unite thee unto him in spiritual
wedlock. Be careful therefore to dispose thy self in this sort, because he
fane exceeds in beauty, power, wisdom, wealth, and glory all the Princes
of the world, who have hitherto sued for thy love: for he is the Lord thy God;
and they, to wit all that shall believe in him shall adore him: according
Daniel. 7.
to that of the Prophet, All peoples Tribes and tongues shall serve him. And
the daughters of Tire of that great city near to the land of Judah called
Tire, by whom are signified the Gentiles, shall present him with gifts; all the
rich of the earth shall beseech thy countenance, shall with humble prayers and
gifts seek to win thy favor, that they may be admitted to be of thy
train, and by thy means be brought unto his presence. All the glory of that
daughter of the King (who sometimes is called the Queen, the spouse of Christ,
and the Church) is within, in interior virtues and beauty of her mind, not in
exterior vain fading things: in borders of gold, in works of charity,
clothed round about with varieties, with the acts of diverse virtues. In these
consists her glory, and with these she trimmeth and adorneth herself, that
she may appear amiable in the eyes of her spouse, who is not delighted with
exterior vain dressings and attire. Virgins shall be brought to the King
after her, in the first and principal place after her, Virgins shall be
brought to thee o Christ; and next after them her neighbors, holy widows,
and such as lead their lives in lawful wedlock, using it for the true end for
which marriage was instituted, and not for carnal delectation, shall be
brought to thee. They shall be broug^t in joy and exultation of body and
spirit: they shall be brought into the temple of the King, into the Kingdom
of heaven, after their passadge out of this place of banishement. For thy
Fathers, in the place of the holy Patriarks and Prop^ets thy Fathers (o holy
Church o spouse of Christ) there are borne to thee sons, Apostles, Bishops,
and Priests: thou shall make them Princes over all the earth, and they shall
prescribe laws to the whole earth, which never yet any temporal Monarch could
do. They, and all those they shall begett in Christ Jesus, shall be mindful
of thy name in all generation and generation, shall seek to dilate thy glory
in all ages. Therefore shall peoples of all nations, ^^ome the holy Apostles
and their successors have taught and inst^ucted, Confess unto thee for ever,
shall praise thee unto the end of the world, and for ever and ever, for
eternity. This their praise shall begin in this world, and continue in the
future without end. By the espoused here mentioned all Expositors do
understand the holy Church, because the Apostle in the 5. to the Ephesians
does most clearly teach, that the holy Church is the espoused of Christ.
Notwithstanding all that is here spoken of her in this Psalm may also be
fitly applied to every perfect soul; and principally to the Blessed Virgin,
who although she be the Mother of Christ according to the flesh, is
nevertheless the espoused of Christ according to the spirit, and amongst the
members of the holy Church is deservedly allotted unto her the chiefest place
of dignity: which is the reason, that this Psalm is appointed to be song in
all her feasts and in the feasts of the other holy virgins.

The title and argument of the 45. Psalm and fifth in the Nocturne Office.
Unto the end, to the Sons of Chore, A Psalm directing to the end, which is
Christ; to the faithful, who shall imitate Christ crucified: For secrets, for
hidden mysteries, which shall be reueiled in the later days. This Psalm is
fitly placed next to the former: for in the former was foretold the exaltation
of the holy Church by the spiritual nuptials with Christ our Lord, and in
this is foreshewed the persecution which shall happen unto her after the
departure of her beloved spouse unto his heavenly Kingdom, and her delivery
from those afflictions which shall principally come to pass toward the end of
the world.

The exposition of this Psalm.
Our Lord is a refuge unto us, when we are enforced to fly persecution, and
strength, when we tolerate it: and in both flying and tollerating he is an
helper and comforter in tribulations, which have found us exeeedingly, which
have happened unto us above measure. Therefore will we not fear, when the
earth shall be troubled, although the earth be wonderfully shaken, and
mountains transported into the heart or midst of the sea with great
violence. Or thus, therefore we that hane placed our confidence in God, will
not fear; when earthly men, who have had their affections wholly bent upon
terrene and transitory things, shall tremble with great horror in the day of
judgment, and the proud and mighty men of the world shall be thrown into
the very depth and midst of hell. Or thus, as being the words of the
Primitive Church having placed her hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, Therefore we
will not fear with a carnal humane and inordinate fear when the land of
Judah, or the people of the Jews shall be troubled, laboring in vain to
extirpate the young plants of Christ, and blot out the memory of him in men's
hearts: neither will we then fear, when the Apostles and disciples of Christ
shall be enforced to leave Iewrie, and pass to the Gentiles, inhabiting the
midst of the earth. Their waters have sounded, the clamours and false
accusations of the Jews and Gentiles have sounded before the tribunalls of the
Presidents and Kings, whither they have conuented the disciples of Christ, and
were troubled to behold that they labored in vain to hinder the propagation
of the Christian faith: the mountains were troubled, the high Priests and the
Princes and Potentates of the earth were moved, some to impatience and
persecution, and others to Penance and imitation, in his strength, beholding
his divine power, in whose name the Apostles wrought wonderful signs and
miracles for confirmation of the doctrine which they promulgated.

The two following verses are expounded dives ways, and first of the Militant
Church.

The violence of the river, the fountain of sacred Baptism, makes the
militant Church the City of God, joyful with spiritual gladness. The
highest, God who alone can make clean him that is conceived of unclean seed,
has sanctified his tabernacle the Church of the elect, or the elect
themselves, who according to the Apostle are the temple of the living God, in
whom he will dwell and walk. God is in the midst thereof, of the foresaied
temple, as a strong pillar sustaining it on all sides; who says of himself,
that Where there be two or three gathered Math. 18.
together in his name, there he is in the midst of them. It shall not be
moved, the holy Church shall not fail in her faith, nor be suppressed or
overwhelmed by tentation and tribulation, because God will help it in the
morning, presently, so soon as she shall call upon him for aid, early, in
the spiritual Aurora, to wit in the instant of infusion of grace, or
illumination of the holy Ghost.

Secondly they are expounded of the Triumphant Church as follows, The
fountain of wisdom, or the inundation of the holy Ghost makes the
triumphant Church joyful with the joy of beatificall fruition: the highest
Has sanctified the hearts of the blessed, which is h^s tabernacle. God is in
the midst of the triumphant Church, therefore it shall not be moved from the
state of beatitude. In the instant that any of the blessed thall be received
into the Kingdom of glory, God will confirm them in grace.

Thirdly they are applied to the Blessed Virgin as follows, The word of God
Christ Jesus our Lord, in whom is the original source and immense plenitude
of all true delight, has filled his blessed Mother with joy and exultation,
assuming humane nature in her sacred womb: Christ has sanctified her and
preserved her from all impuritie. He has rested nine months in her womb, and
ever since in the Center of her immaculate soul. She shall not be moved from
good to evil, but shall remain stable and immovable in God, because he will
sanctify her, and fortify her in perfection of grace even in her Mothers womb.

Nations are troubled by the preaching and miracles of the disciples of our
Savior, some to Penance and admiration, others to obstinacy and opposition,
and Kingdoms are inclined, are humbled to faith and holy obedient
conversation, learning of Christ who was mild and humble of heart: He, Christ
gave his voice, by himself his disciples and their successors, and the earth
was moved. The said humiliation of Kingdoms was foretold bythe Prophet Isaie
in these words, He to wit Christ Isa. 26.
will how down them that dwellon hight, the high city he will abase. By the
high city is understood Rome which at that time was Lady of the world, of
which the same Prophet a little after ^aieth, The foot shall tread it down,
the feet of the poor mai^ the steps, of the needy. By the poor man is
understood S. Peter a poor fisher man and by the steps of the needy the
preaching of S. Peter and Paul, who lived in voluntary poverty: for by their
preaching the unbelieving glory and magnificent ostentation of the Romans was
brought to embrace Christian humility. The Lord of hosts is with us, Christ
the King of glory, the virtue and wisdom of the Father, who is styled
Emanuel, that is God with us, has come unto us and dwelled with us in his
assumpted humane nature: the God of the Patriarch Jacob is our defender.

Come ye that desire salvation, come, not so much by corporal motion, as by
faith and affections of the heart, and see the works of our Lord, and
consider, and ponder seriously in your mynds, what wonders he has put upon the
earth, to wit the Incarnation of his only son, the making of a Virgin to
conceive and bring forth a Son, and yet remain a Virgin; and innumerable
other admirable works far transcending the ordinary course of nature: taking
away wars even unto the end of the earth, causing an universal peace over
all the world at the time of the birth of Christ our Lord, as a figure of the
spiritual peace which our Savior brought unto all mankind, to wit peace
between God and man, according to that of the Apostle, God was in Christ
reconciling 2. Cor. 5.
the world to himself, and peace also between the Jews and Gentiles. He is
our Ephesians. 2.
peace, who has made both one etc. He shall destroy the bow, and break
weapons: and shields he shall burn with fire. This peace which Christ shall
bring shall be so universal, and endure for so long a space, that men shall
convert their weapons and warlike engines to other uses, according to that of
the Prophet, The Isa 2.
law shall come forth of Sion, and the word of our Lord from Jerusalem, and he
shall judge the Gentiles and rebuke many peoples; and they shall turn their
swords into coulters, and their spears into sithes etc.

This verse may be expounded in a more spiritual sense as follows, He
shall destroy the bow, Christ shall lay open and destroy the hidden deceits of
the wicked, endeavoring by flatery and fair promises to seduce the good; and
break the weapons, to wit open persecutions and manifest diabolical
invasions: And the shields, to wit the fallacies wherewith perverse men do
cover and defend their errors, he shall burn with fire, by condemning the
perverse to hell fire, or illuminating and inflaming the hearts of the
faithful to discern and resist their machinations. Be quiet, abstract your
hearts from vain evil and unprofitable things, adhere to me with your whole
mind, attend to me, fix your desires upon me, and simplify your actions, and
see by affectionate contemplation and experimental gust, that I am God your
Creator, prouisor, Savior, and governor that never cease to have care of you,
that am always ready to help you, and to infuse consolation, in such sort,
that you may even by experience acknowledge, that I am your God. Whosoever
has a desire to taste, and prove this experimental gust of God, must of
necessity keep a diligent watch over his heart, fly concupiscence, contemn
pleasures, shun dissolution or loosenes of life, repel and quit himself
from superfluous employments of body and mind, and seek and sigh incessantly
after that one thing only necessary. Make unto you new fallow Ierem. 4.
ground (says the Prophet) and sow not upon thorns: be circumcised to our
Lord, and take away the prepuces of your hearts.

I shall be exal^ed among the Gentiles, I the only son of God and Savior of
the world, by the preaching of my disciples shall be ackowledged, honored and
worshipped by the Gentiles; according to that of the Prophet, From the rising of
Malach. 1.
the sun even to the going down great is my name among the Gentiles. I shall
be exalted in the earth, in the peoples of the Jews, near the end of the
world, when the fulness of the Gentiles has entered.

The Lord of Hosts is with us etc. This verse in regard of the sweetness of the
signification and dignity thereof, is iterated for to imprint it the better in
the heart of the Chanter. What I have said before may suffice for explication
thereof with this observation, That whereas Exodus 3.
in Exodus we read that God almighty styled himself the God of Abraham, the
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, affirming, that this is his name for ever;
the Prophet here expresses only the God of Jacob: for this reason as it may
seem, because as Jacob supplanted his brother of the benediction and
inheritance; so the son of God who alone assumed humane nature, supplanted
the disobedient Angels of the benediction and inheritance, which was as it were
due to them by prioritie of Creation, and obtained it for man kind.

Behold how full this Psalm is of divine mysteries, in which faith is
corroborated, hope in God is established, fortitude is excited, the beginning
of the newborn Church is explicated, the grace of Baptism is commended, the
benefits of God recounted, the Incarnation of Christ is designed, the faithful
are invited to the consideration of the divine works, the divine power is
openly declared, a most sweet and paternall admonition is contained, the
magnificence of our Savior is set forth, and finally the most excellent
benefit of his holy Incarnation is repeated, to show that it cannot be to often
remembered. Let us therefore endeavor to sing this Psalm with all fervor of
devotion, beseeching almighty God in our hearts to be our refuge and comfort
in all our necessities both corporal and spiritual.

The title and argument of the 86. Psalm and 6. in The Nocturne Office.
TO the children of Chore, to the faithful imitators of Christ; a Psalm of
Canticle, a Psalm containing spiritual joy. In this Psalm is sung the praise
of the City of Jerusalem, by which noe doubt the Christian Church ought to
be understood. For although that which is said in the beginning of the
Psalm, to wit That the foundations thereof are in the holy mountains, may
be applied to the terrene City of Jerusalem: yet the rest, to wit That the
Babylonians, Aegiptians and Tyrians are in it, does not squarre therewith. But
to the Church militant or triumphant all that is said does fitly agree.

The exposition of the Psalm.
THe foundations thereof. The Prophet expresses not the name of the thing
whereunto the word ( thereof) has relation: for the same reason (as it may
seem) which moved S. Marie Magdalene to say unto him whom she supposed to
be the gardener, Sir if thou have taken him away tell me where thou have laid
him etc. O excessive love, She believed noe man's mind could be ignorant of
him with whose fervent love hers was filled, and wholly possessed. In like
manner the Prophet in regard of the ardent love he bore toward the holy
Church, does not express the name thereof: and yet the words following do
show that he had relation thereunto, as being the thing he foretold in his
heart. His words are these, The foundations thereof to wit of the holy Church,
which I contemplate in spirit, are collected and established in the holy
mountains, in Christ the mount of mountains principally, and secondarily in
the Apostles and Prophets, who do sustain the spiritual fabric of the
Church, according to that of the Apostle. Other 1. Cor. 3.
foundation noe man can lay, beside that which is laid: which is Christ
Jesus, and in another place, Build upon the foundation of Ephe. 2.
the Apostles and Prophets. Our Lord loves the gates of this spiritual Sion,
our Lord accepts and approves of the Sacraments, virtues, Exorcisme,
Catechism and Baptism of the holy Church, which are as it were the gates and
entrances into a spiritual life, above the tabernacles of Jacob, before or
rather then the rites and ceremonies observed by the children of Israel,
whilst they lived in tents and Pauilions. In the Prophecy of Malachias God
almighty does seem to dislike and reject the Synagogue and her manner of
worship, and to approve and gratefully accept of the Christian Church and the
form of service used therein, I have noe Malach. 1.
will in you (to wit the Synagogue) says the Lord of hosts, and gift I will
not receive of your hand. But of the holy Church he says, From the rising of
the Sun even to the going down, great is my name among the Gentiles, and in
every place there is sacrificing, and there is offered to my name a clean
oblatio^.

Morally by Sion are understood the speculators of celestial things, and by
Jacob the supplanters of vices. Our Lord therefore does love Sion, to wit the
virtues and good works of contemplative men, more or better then the
tabernacles of Jacob, to wit the inhabitants of the earth designed by Jacob:
who although they live in the grace of God, have not as yet thoroughly mortified
their coneupiscences and altogether subdued vice, but have need to combat
daily against inordinate motions. Nothwithstanding that these labor more then
speculatiue perfect me^, yet they merit a lesser guerdon or reward then they:
because their acts do not proceed from such sincere perfect and fervent love,
as the acts of contemplative persons; neither do they operate so readily,
peaceably, sweetly, and delightfully as contemplatiues: and speaking
absolutely, by how much the more readily quietly and delightfully any man does
execute the work, of God, by so much the more does he merit. Glorious things
are said of thee o City of God, not only of the triumphant Church, but also
of the militant, to wit that the Son of God shall visit her in person, and
that all nations tribes and peoples shall flock unto her from all parts of the
earth, and make suite to be admitted to inhabit within her walls; which is
insinuated by the words that follow, I will be mindful of Raab and Babylon
knowing me. Raab in this place is not the proper name of that woman who hid the
messengers of Iosue, but according to S. Jerome it is here an apellatiue name
designing as a property pride or proud, whereby are designed the Pagans given
to idolatry, and rebellious to God: and Babylon is by interpretation
confusion. The sense therefore of these words seems to be, I will be
mindful by showing mercy of Raab and Babylon, to wit of the proud Gentiles and
of those that live in the confusion of sins, knowing me by faith after I am
so mindful of them. This our Lord performed sending his Apostles to the whole
world, of whom S. Simon and Jude preached the Gospel to the Babylonians, and
converted the greatest part of them to the faith of Christ. Behold the
forreiners the Philisthians, and Tire, and the people of the Aethiopians, these
were there, to wit in the City of Christ. These nations are here expressed by
name, because they bordered upon the land of Judah and did first embrace the
Christian faith: yet by them are designed all the infidels of the whole world
which came o^ shall come to join in union of faith with the holy Church.
Shall it not be said of Sion, Man and man, is borne in her; and the highest
himself founded her. As if he should say, yes it shall be said of Sion,
that many men or almost every man shall be regenerated in her by the Sacrament
of Baptism, and that God founded her.

These words are otherways delivered by very many of the most learned and
ancient Fathers as follows, Shall not man say to Sion, and man is borne in
her, and he the most high has founded her? As if the Prophet had said, Yes
verily Man shall say to Sion, to wit to the holy Church, as follows, and
Man is borne in her, Christ God and man is borne of the B. Virgin, the most
worthy member in the Church: and he, to wit Christ our Lord so borne in the
Church according to his humane nature, being the most high according to his
divine nature has founded her. By the man that shall say these admirable
things to Sion, Some do understand S. John the Baptist, of whom is Ioh. 1.
said, There was a man sent from God etc. For he was the first that announced
to Sion that Christ was come, of whom the Prophet Isaie says, Upon an high
mountain Isa. 40.
get thee up, thou that euangelizest to Sion: exalt thy voice in strength, say
to the Cities of Judah, behold your God. Others understand Christ to be that
man: because he very often said to the Jews and to his disciples, that he
himself was the man whom they expected should be borne the Savior of the
world. Our Lord will declare in Scriptures of peoples, and of Princes, of those
that have been in her. By this verse the Prophet does seem to make answer to
the interrogation made in the precedent verse And according to the first
interpretation thereof, to wit Shall it not be said of Sion etc. he seems
here to answer, Yes truly it shall be said, for our Lord will declare it
etc. But according to the second interpretation, to wit Shall not man say to
Sion etc. he seems to answer, Yes truly man shall say, that which follows
in the verse to Sion; and not only one that is a pure man, but that man who is
both God and man: our Lord shall declare it in a more perfect manner, in the
Scriptures of peoples and Princes, that all ages to the end of the world may
take notice, that the only Son of God Christ Jesus, God and man is borne in
her according to his humane nature, and that he has founded her according to
his divine nature. And moreover he shall declare and write down the names of
those that have been in her, who are so many, that he alone is able to do it.
By Scriptures of the peoples, some do understand the new testament, others the
books wherein the names of the elected people are registered, which shall not
be published until the day of Judgment, when the book of life shall be
opened: and by the Princes are understood the Apostles, who as it is written,
were constituted Psalm* 44.
Princes over all the world.

The habitation in thee holy Church, designed here by Sion, is as it were of
all rejoicing, is like to that habitation where all do rejoice. This verse,
may in some respects be applied to the militant Church by reason of the
exceeding joy and peace of conscience which true Christian Catholics do
possess, who rejoice in hope, as being of that number unto whom the Apostle
says, Rejoice Philip. 4.
in our Lord always, again Isaie Rejoice. yet it cannot properly be applied
thereunto, where we are to work our Salvation with fear and trembling: but it
agrees most properly with the happy estate of the triumphant Church, where the
blessed spirits do securely enjoy, what neither eye has seen, nor ear has
heard, nor has entered into the heart of man, without the least fear of ever
being deprived thereof.

Behold how excellently the holy Church is praised in this compendious Psalm,
how clearly the mystery of the incarnation of our Savior is insinuated, and
the joys of the celestial country commended. It behooves us to sing it by
so much the more devoutly and affectionately, by ^ow much the more clearly
the calling of the Gentiles is foretold in it. And in regard it is something
intricate, it behooves us to study to understand the true sense thereof, and
consider it attentively: for otherwise we shall not be able to recite it with
such devotion, as the mysteries therein contained do require we should.

The title and argument of the 95. Psalm and 7. in the Nocturne Office.
A Canticle to David himself, when the house was built after the captivity.
This title was prefixed by Esdras, and the Psalm was appointed by him to be
song when the Temple was reedified after the Babylonian captivity: but the
Psalm was composed by holy David upon occasion of the bringing back of the
Arc into Jerusalem, and ordained by him to be so^g at that time. Which
notwithstanding, it is certain that the principal intention of the Prophet,
and of the holy Ghost himself was to foreshew the coming of Christ and his
Kingdom: when (as the Apostle witnesses) ^oloss.
God did deliver us from the power of darkness, and translated us into the
Kingdom of the Son of his love. For as S. Augustine does well note, there is
noe mention at all made through out the whole Psalm either of the bringing
back of the Arc, or of the building of the Temple after the captivity; but
of the thing signified by the building of the Temple at that time: Therefore of
necessity we must either g^aunt that there is noe coherence between the Title
and the Psalm, or else expound them spiritually, as all the ancient holy
Fathers do to this effect. As by the captivity (say they) wherein the Jews
were lead away and detained prisoners by the Chaldeans, is figured the
captivity wherein all mankind was overcome, and held in thraldom and slavery
by the devils: So likewise by the building of the Temple in Jerusalem after
that captivity, is designed the building of the holy Church which is the
house of God, not with insensible stones, but with living stones congregated
and polished by Christ, and founded in him, In Ephe. 2.
whom (as the Apostle says) all building framed together, grows into an
holy Temple in our Lord: in whom you also are built together into an
habitation of God in the holy Ghost.

The sense therefore of the title is, A Canticle to David himself, written for
that time when the Church of Christ began to be built by the preaching of
Christ and his Apostles, after the freeing of mankind from captivity; which
was done by the Incarnation and passion of the Son of God, who redeemed
mankind from the power of the devil and the servitude of sin, as our Savior
witnesses of himself saying, Now the Prince of this world shall be cast
forth, and I, if I be exalted from the earth, will draw all things to my
self. The Psalm speaks literally of the two fold coming of Christ, to wit
to save, and to judge the world: it speaks also of the building and
sacrifice of the Church.

The exposition of the Psalm.
SIng ye to our Lord a new song, sing ye such a song as the new Master, the
fountain of wisdom Christ our Lord has brought with him and proposed to the
whole world; ^o wit A Hymn composed of his counsels, some whereof were
unknown before his coming. Such a new so^g is, One thing is necessary. and.
If thou will be perfect, go and sell the things Luc. 10. Math. 19.
that thou have and give to the poor. and. Call none Father to your self upon
earth, for one is your Father, he that is in heaven. and innumerable others
like to these, which are frequent in the new Testament. The Canticles of the
old Testament might not be song but only in the land of Promise, but such new
songs as these of the new Testament may be song by all the inhabitants of the
earth: and therefore Sing to our Lord all the earth this new and most sweet
song, That for the excessive Charity Ephesians. 2.
wherewith God the Father has loved us, he has sent his only Son into the
world.

Sing ye to our Lord and bless his name, praise him and recount his wonderful
benefits with iubilation of heart: saying, See what manner of Charity the
Father has 1. Io^. 3.
given us, that we should be named and be the Sons of God. Such sweet
sentences as these are called a new song, not only in regard of the newness
of time, but also in respect of the new and fresh devotion of the mind; and
for that they ought to be song by renewed men, in whom vain and dishonest
love reigns not any more, but true Charity. Let us therefore reform the
affections of our heart, and out of the fervent love we bear toward our
Savior seek for, and invent new songs in his praise, according to the grace
and internal light that God has given us: as the fond lovers of the world do
compose songs of him or her, whom they love carnally. Show forth his
salvation, praise ye and di^ulge ye Christ, by whom and in whom God the
Father does save us, from day to day, every day: for as day does succeed to
day without ceasing, so it is meet that praise should succeed to praise.

O all ye Apostles and Disciples of our Lord, and all others whosoever their
lawful successors, that have the zeal of the divine honor and brotherly
charity, Show forth his glory among the Gentiles which shall be converted,
that they may believe; and to those that are already converted, that they may
increase in love: and show forth his marvelous works in all peoples, his
creation of the world, Redemption of mankind, sending of the holy Ghost, and
all other his wonderful works. It is most meet that ye do this.

Because our Lord is great and exceeding laudable, He is an infinite and
immense goodness, and he is as laudable as good, and therefore cannot be
sufficiently praised by any creature: he is terrible above all Gods, more to
be feared then all those which the Gentiles did adore as Gods. Almighty God in
himself is all sweet, benign, and lovely; for as S. John affirms, 1. Ioh. 4.
God is charity. Yet he is said to be terrible, in regard that he is as it
were constrained to seem so to proud stubborn and disobedient people, who
will not be won by lenity and sweetness. Moreover he is said to be
terrible, because it is more grievous to be separated from him, then from all
the creatures or delightful things in the world; as also for that none can
inflict so cruel torments as he can: whence is that of the Evangelist, Fear
not them, that kill the Math. 10.
body and are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him, that can
destroy both soul and body into hell.

For all which reasons it is manifest, that he is more to be feared, then the
Gods of the Gentiles; as also Because all the Gods of the Gentiles are Devils,
reprobate Angels, who for their pride and disobedience were thrown down by
him from heaven, and cannot hurt us further then he shall please to permit: but
our Lord made the heavens. It is generally known that many of the Gentiles did
worship certain wicked men for Gods, to wit Saturn, Jupiter, Mercury, Priapus
etc. and that many others did adore the Sun, Moon, Stars, fire, water, and
the beasts of the earth, as S. Paul does infinuate to the Romans. How then can
all the Gods of the Gentiles be said to be devils? To which may be answered,
that those wicked men are called devils by participation of devilish
wickedness: like as some men are called Angels by participation of Angelical
dignity and office; as S. John calls the Pastors or Apoc. 2.
Bishops of the Seven Churches in Asia Angels, and the Prophet Malachias
calls Malach. 2.
a Priest the Angel of the Lord of hosts. and as concerning the other things
which were adored for Gods; although they were not devils, yet because those
that exhibited worship unto them believing certain deities to be in them, did
by such their worship serve the devils, therefore it is that all the Gods of
the Gentiles are said to be devils; and the things that are immolated to them
to be immolated to devils.

Confession and beauty in his fight: holiness and magnificence in his
sanctification. This verse is expounded by the holy Fathers four several
ways; and in effect as follows, First, that in contemplating God is seen
all beauty and matter of praise: holiness and magnificence in his sanctuary.
Secondly, that praise and purity is exercised in his presence: holiness and
divine worship in his sanctuary. Thirdly, that praise is sung to God by his
Saints in heaven for the beauty which they behold in him, who is indeed the
fountain of all sanctity, purity, glory and Majesty; as is acknowledged by
those blessed spirits of whom consists the triumphant Church: wherein he
does manifest this his beauty, which is here termed his sanctification, or is
sanctuary. Fowerthly, that in those whom God almighty is graciously pleased to
behold with the eyes of his mercy, this his sight causes remorse of
conscience, and confession or acknowledgement of their faults, by which means
they attain to interior beauty and purity of heart.

Bring ye to our Lord, ye families of Gentiles, bring ye to our Lord glory and
honor: bring ye to our Lord glory unto his name, The Prophet repeateth here
Bring ye to our Lord three times, and ends with glory to his name, as in the
beginning of the Psalm he repeated thrice Sing ye to our Lord, ending with
bless his name: thereby (as the holy Fathers do note) obscurely insinuating
the most high mystery of the B. Trinity, which afterward in the new testament
was to be diuulged more clearly.

Take ye up hoastes, bring with you gifts and sacrifices: not such bloody
sacrifices as are now offered in the Temple, but such as the Apostles and their
successors shall teach you to offer; to wit the sacrifice of a contrite heart,
confession of sins, prayer, fasting, almesdeeds, and the like, according to
that of S. Peter, Be ye Epist. 1. c. 2.
a holy priesthood to offer spiritual hoastes acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ. And enter into his courts, into the Catholic Churches and other
places deputed to the divine worship, and especially into the Temple of your
hearts; descending into your interior, and there praising and adoring God
within you by contemplation, love, and watchful custody of your senses: for
The temple of God is holy: 1. Cor. 3.
which you are. Adore ye our Lord in his holy courts, adore ye in his
material temple, to wit in the house of Prayer; yet much rather in his
immateriall temple, to wit the mind or spirit: for our Savior says, God is a
spirit, and they that adore Ioh. 4.
him must adore in spirit and verity: and in another place, When thou shall
pray, enter Math. 6.
into thy chamber, and having shut the door, pray to thy Father in secret, to
wit with a settled and recollected mind.

Let all the earth be moved before his face, let all the inhabitants of the
earth be moved to chaste love, admiration, and obedience, and be auerted from
their bad ways, and converted to God, attending the benign presence and sweet
Majesty of Christ. Say ye o ye Apostles, and ye that shall succeed them, unto
the Gentiles, to whose conversion and information ye are sent, that our Lord
has reigned in the whole universe, and especially in the hearts of the
faithful by faith and Charity. Concerning which you are to note, that God
has reigned in heaven and earth by his omnipotency even from the beginning:
but his spiritual Kingdom in the hearts of men, where he reigns by faith,
began not especially in the hearts of the Gentiles until the coming of our
Savior, who by his passion and death dispossessed and cast forth the devil;
as may be gathered by these words of our Lord, Now the Prince of the world
Ioh. 12.
shall be cast forth, and I, if I be exalted from the earth will draw all
things to myself.

S. Augustine and diverse others of the ancient Fathers do read the last part
of this verse as follows, Our Lord has reigned from the wood, to wit from
the holy Cross, whereon he redeemed the world. Which words of the wood were
aunciently in the interpretation of the 72. Interpreters, and have been raced
out by the Hebrews, as S. Iustine affirms: which notwithstanding, Fortunatus
has placed them in the Hymn, which is sung by the holy Church in Passion
week.

The Prophet shows here by the effect that our Lord has reigned, because he
has exercised his regal power.

For he has corrected the round world, which shall not be moved, he has
converted the universal Church spread and di^ated through the whole world from
Idolatry and vice; by his own increpation and reprehension, according to that
of the Prophet, He stroke the earth with the rod of Isa. 11.
his mouth etc. as also by the preaching of his disciples and other servants:
and has established it so firmly, that notwithstanding it shall be soie
shaken by the tempests and whirlwinds of tribulation and tentation, yet shall
it not be moved in whole whilst the world shall endure. He will judge peoples
in equity. The judgment here mentioned is the judgment wherewith our Savior
judged in his first coming, to wit the judgment of discretion, or seuering
one from another, mercifully calling some to faith and grace, and justly
forsaking others: which discretion was altogether most just notwithstanding
that our weak judgments are not able to comprehend the reason thereof.

Let the heavens be glad, and the earth rejoice, the Sea be moved, and the
fullness thereof, to wit all therein contained: the fields shall be glad and
all things that are in them. What is spiritually understood by these has been
sufficiently declared in the precedent Psalms. Then shall the trees of the
woods rejoice before the face of our Lord, because he comes: because he comes
to judge the earth. By this repetition of be comes is insinuated the two
commings of Christ: in both which the Prophet inuiteth all creatures to
rejoice; in his first coming, because he came then in the form and shape of a
man, and sought to win all hearts unto him by his sweet benign conversation,
consecrating and disposing all things toward their perfection and the end for
which they were created: and in his second coming also, because he will come
to refine, and renew, and constitute them in such perfection, that they shall
remain for eternity.

He will judge the round world in equity, to wit without respect of persons,
and peoples in his truth, to wit in justice, rendering to every one according to
his works.

Tha title and argument of the Psalm and 8. in the Nocturne Office.
TO this David, when his land was restored to him. For that there is noe
mention at all made in this Psalm of King David's recovery of his Kingdom
which Absalon had taken from him, the expositors thereof do generally agree,
that King David upon occasion of the recovery of his land, being inspired by
the holy Ghost, did sing the restoring of the Kingdom of Christ in the hearts
of all mankind, which the devil had usurped by fraudulently inducing our first
parents to transgress Gods commandment, and had withheld from him, until he
by his painful death upon the Cross vanquished that tyrant, and obtained all
power in heaven and upon earth. In the first verse the Prophet speaks of this
said restoring of Christ our Saviors Kingdom unto him, to wit al mankind, or
the Church of the elect; according to that, Ask of me and I will give thee the
Gentiles Psalm. 2.
for thy inheritance: and thy possession the ends of the earth: but in the rest
of the Psalm he describes the dreadful coming of Christ to the general
Judgment, when his Kingdom shall be established in such sort, that it
remain for ever.

The exposition of the Psalm.
Our Lord of whom it is said in the Apoc. 19.
Apocalipse, That he has in his garment and in his thigh written, King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, from the time of his glorious Resurrection has
reigned in the militant Church, or in the hearts of his elect: wherefore let
all the earth rejoice, let all nations living upon the continent or maine land
congratulate him in this his regal dignity; and not only they, but also let
many Islands be glad, let the inhabitants of great Britanie, Ireland, Cyprus,
Sicilie, and all other Islands very many in number, which shall be converted,
make triumph and signs of joy thereat: for of these the Prophet Isaie says,
The Islands shall expest his Isa. 42. Ibidem.
law. and again, They shall give glory to the Lord and shall declare his
praise to the Islands.

A cloud and mist shall appear round about him, when he shall come to judge
the world with much power and Majesty; that Infidels and reprobate Christians
may neither have a clear veiw of his glorified body with their external
eyes, nor of his divinity with their internal, but only some little glimpse
of his glory to their greater confusion: Justice judgment with mercy, and
judgment severity of justice shall be the correction or supporters of his
seat, or the sentence of correction which shall proceed from his tribunal.
Justice and judgment (according to S. Jerome) is here said to be the
correction of the seat of our Lord: because the judgments of God before he
comes to judgment do seem somewhat imperfect, in respect that he permits
wicked people to live for the most part in great plenty, ease, pomp, and
delicacy, and suffers virtuous holy men to live in want, affliction,
contempt, and misery: but when he comes to the general judgment, that he
may render to every one according to his works, his seat shall be as it
were corrected. Fire which shall burn the whole world, shall go before him;
and inflame his enemies round about, but shall not touch, nor contristate his
elected friends; as is prefigured in the three children which the King of
Babylon caused to be thrown into ^ furnace Daneil. 3.
of burning fire, who were not touched by the flames, but the Chaldeans burnt
who were about the furnace.

The things that follow are denounced by the Prophet as though they were
already done, for the assured certainty thereof.

His lightnings shined to the round world, the earth s^w, and was moved. The
inhabitants of the earth shall see his lightnings and the other terrible
precedent signs of his dreadful coming, and wither for fear and expectation
of what shall come upon the world. The mountains melted as wax, before the
face of our Lord: before the face of our Lord all the earth. Some expound these
words literally of the material mountains, which shall be dissolved, and the
earth made plain and perspicuous but others expound them morally of proud,
ambitious, and vain glorious men, who shall be confounded and dissolved in
their hearts at the sight of our Lord: and not only they, but also terrene,
auaritious and sensual men; saying one to another, What has pride profited
us? Sap. 5.
or what commodity has the vaunting riches brought us? all those things are
passed away as a shadow, and as a messenger running before, and as a ship that
passes through the surging wanes, whereof when it is past the trace cannot be
found etc.

The heavens have showed forth his justice, the Sun, Moon, and stars, in
which shall appear great testimonies of the indignation of God, shall as it
were proclaim to the whole world, with what severity and rigor of justice he
will take revenge of mankind for sin: and all peoples have seen his glory,
shall see his glory in these and all other his wonderful works. And
therefore since that our Lord is of such power and Majesty,

Let them be confounded that adore sculptils, statues and images as Gods,
framed by the hands of men, which neither can hurt nor help them: and let them
blush for shame that glory in their Idols as though there were divine power
in them: for they shall then behold that those things which they adored for
Gods are mere painted blocks and engraven stones; and that our Lord whom they
would not here acknowledge is the only true God, unto whom all adoration, and
divine worship is due. Adore him all ye his Angels, To the greater confusion
of Idolaters do ye (o ye his Angels) adore Christ our Lord your Maker sitting
upon his tribunal. This place is alleged by the Apostle to the Hebrews to
prove Hebr. 1.
our Savior to be true God, And when again he brings in the first begotten
into the world (to wit at the day of judgment, for he speaks a little before
of his first coming) he says, And let all the Angels of God adore him.

Sion heard and was glad, The milita^t Church shall hear all that has been
before mentioned concerning the Majesty of our Lord coming to judgment, the
confusion of Idolaters and the adoration of the Angels, and shall exult with
spiritual joy.

And the daughters of Judah rejoiced, because of thy judgments o Lord, All
particular Churches members of the universal, or all the souls confessing to
our Lord in spirit and truth (for Judah is by interpretation confession) shall
rejoice, being moved thereunto by the consideration of thy just judgments o
Lord: who wilt leave nothing neglected, do injury to none, nor let pass the
oppression or violence used toward any unrevenged; but wilt exalt all those
that have been contemned, afflicted, and tormented for justice sake, and wilt
condemn to eternal flames those that placed their felicity in the pompes and
delights of this world. And they shall rejoice also, Because thou Lord art
most high over all the earth: thou art exalted exceedingly, inco^parably and
without measure above all Gods, both above those that by participation of thy
divine power are called Gods, and above those also whom the Gentiles falsely
worship as Gods You that love our Lord, hate ye evil; since that sin is so
odious in the sight of our Lord, that he will come with such fury and
indignation to take revenge thereof. All you devout souls that make profession
to fear and love him, abhor it in your hearts; yet not in regard of the
pain it induces, but because it is displeasing unto him and contrary to his
divine will: and then you may be confident, that you shall not only
experience him a mild judge toward you in that dreadful day, but also your
protector and comforter in all your present dangers and afflictions. For Our
Lord keeps the souls of his Saints, in this present life by infusion of
grace, and the ministry of his Angels: and in the day of judgment out of the
hand of the sinner, from the power of the first transgressor Lucifer and his
accomplices, he will deliver them, he will perfectly free them, and wipe all
tears from their eyes: for after that last sentence sinners shall noe more
molest the just with their malicious pretensions and false accusations.

Light is risen to the just, and joy to the right of heart. The light of
justice and the Sun of understanding shall arise to just men, and direct them
in the way of truth without error, teaching them to discern between just and
iniust, good and evil, and exciting them to elect in all things what is most
conform to the divine will: whence will follow exceeding peace of conscience,
and unspeakable joy of heart to the righteous, that shall walk simply and
humbly therein. or thus, The light of glory illuminating the understanding, or
Christ our Lord the Sun of Justice shall then arise to the just man,
directing him toward the clear vision of God, and ineffable delight
proceeding from the vision of God which he shall eternally enjoy, shall arise
to the right of heart. Wherefore Be glad ye just in our Lord, your most pious
Redeemer and most liberal benefactor, who shall come to the last judgment
with such preparation, and for so great benefit unto you: and with confession
of praise and thankfulness Confess ye to the memory of his sanctification,
praise him that has so graciously been mindful of you, that he might
sanctify you and bring you to eternal felicity: for which his singular
clemency and mercy showed toward you without any merit on your part, but
merely of his own imme^se goodness, you are obliged by all the laws of
gratitude to glorify his name incessantly, and never to forget him, who has
been mindful of you even before you had existence in nature.

In this Psalm we are admonished to weigh diligently the horror, distriction,
and severe rigor of the last judgment: and to consider from our heart how
horred Hebre. 10.
it will be then to fall into the hands of the living God, to behold him a
furious judge, to see the world all in flames, to see the whole troops of
Angels assisting Christ our judge against the unjust, before heaven and earth
to render an account of all our words, deeds, and thougts, to be confounded
and reproved before men, Angels, and devils, to hear that most bitter and
irreuocable sentence of damnation pronounced, Go Math. 25.
ye accursed into eternal fire, to expect the uncertain or rather certain
sentence of the judge, to behold the wide gaping Chaos of the infernal
dungeon, and lastly to be separated for ever from the society of the just,
and thrown into the abisme of hell, there to be scorched with vnextinguible
flames without any the least hope of ever departing thence. Wherefore let us
recite this Psalm with fear and trembling, and beg of our Lord grace to
co^porte our selves in such sort in this life, that we may merit to behold him
then as a gracious patron and mild Father, not as a severe judge.

The title and argument of the 97. Psalm and last in the Nocturne Office*
A Psalm to David himself, In the person of David is prefigured Christ our
Lord as has been said; The Prophet does by this Psalm inuit all nations
with heart, voice, and instruments joyfully to celebrate the two foresaied
commings of our Savior; yet he chiefly treats of his first coming to save
the world. The Prophet does in this as in many other of the Psalms speak of
things to come as if they were already passed, for the infallible certainty of
them: all which we now behold to be performed accordingly.

The exposition of the Psalm.
SIng ye to our Lord a new song: because he has done marvelous things, far
surpassing man's capacity; which are at lardge recorded by the Evangelists. His
right band, his divine power has wrought salvation to himself, has raised
his mortal body from death to life: or thus, has saved mankind for himself:
and his arm, his virtue and fortitude is holy.

God the Father Our Lord has made known his salvation, has proclaimed to
Zachary and the shepherds by his Angels, to S. Elizabeth S. Anne and holy
Symeon by the holy Ghost, afterward to S. John the Baptist, and finally to
the Apostles in the transfiguration of our Lord, that Christ Jesus is his
beloved Son, whom he promised should come and work salvation to all
mankind. In the sight of the Gentiles he has revealed his justice; first by the
star which appeared to the three Kings, and afterward by the preaching of
the Apostles he has revealed Christ our Lord; who is termed his justice,
because by him God has redeemed the world, not by his power only, but b^ the
way of justice. or thus, has revealed the precepts and cou^sells of the
Evangelical law in which the plenitude of justice is contained. The words and
sense of this most sweet verse are frequent in t^^ Prophecy of Isa^^. The Isa.
40.
glory (saiet he) of our Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh together shall
see, that the mouth of our Lord has spoken. And our Lord 52.
has prepared his holy arm in the sight of all the Gentiles: and all the ends
of the earth shall see the salvation of our God, and again, I 56.
have made my justice near, it shall not be far of, and my salvation shall
not tarry.

He has remembered his mercy, wherewith he mildly and sweetly not only spared
our first parents, but also promised that the seed of the woman should crush
the serpents head: and he has remembered his truth to the bouse of Israel, to
perform faithfully what he promised to Abraham, Jacob and his progeny;
according to that of S. Luke, He has received ^srael his child, Luc. 1.
being mindful of his mercy. As he spoke to our Fathers, to Abraham and his
seed for ever.

All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God by says in
Christ our Lord, diuulged by the holy Apostles; Marc. 16.
unto whom our Savior said. Going into the w^ole world preach the Gospel to
all creatures. For which singular benefit the Prop^et does here inuit all
creatures to praise and give thanks to our Lord, saying.

Make ye iubilation to God all the earth, O all ve inhabitants of the ear^h
with excessive and unspeakable joy of heart say ye praise to Christ our God,
chaunt with your voices, rejoice in your hearts, and sing on instruments.

Sing to our Lord on harp, on harp and voice of Psalm: on long dr^wne
trumpets, and voice of c^rnet of horn. According to the letter, the Heb^^wes
did ^se ^uch musical instruments as these, therewith to set forth the praise
of God. But being taken in a spiritual sense, by the harp is understood the
works of mercy or mortification of the flesh: by the long drawn trumpets are
signified the tribulations and adversities o^ this life: and by the cornet of
horn the contemplation or celestial things* by which all transitory things
are transcended. The sense therefore of this verse seems to be, Sing to our
Lerd on harp, with mortification of your flesh and works of mercy, that your
song ma^e be acceptable and delig^tfull: On harp and voice of Psalm, with
life answerable and concording to your voice, On long drawn trumpets, in
adversities, tribulations, and tentations give thanks to God, esteeming it all
joy when you fall Iac. 1.
into diverse tentations; And voice of cornet of horn, with vocal praise
proceeding from divine contemplation.

Make ye iubilation in the sight of the King our Lord, to wit Christ Jesus: Let
the Sea be moved, and the fullness thereof; the round world, and they that
dwell therein.

The rivers shall clappe with hand, This is Bellarme in bunc locum.
Metaphorically spoken; in regard that the noise of their motion compared with
the roaring of the sea, is like to that of clapping of hands. The mountains
together shall rejoice at the sight of our Lord because he comes to judge the
carth. If this be referred to the first coming of our Savior, all these are
said to rejoice, because he comes to govern the world with most just laws
not only as in times past with the Majesty of his invisible divinity, but
also in a corporal and visible Philip. 2.
form, Made into the similitude of men, and in shape found as a man, But if it
be referred to ^is second coming, these are invited to rejoice, because God
will then exterminate all sinners and renew all the elements.

Some expound the two precedent verses as follows, Let the Sea be moved and
the fullness thereof; to wit those that negotiate on the sea, and such as
inhabit the sea coasts* the round world, and they that dwell therein. The
rivers, to wit the faithful regenerated in the waters of baptism, and filled
with the rivers of grace, Shall clappe with hand, shall praise God by one
assent with exultation of heart and good works, And the mountains, to wit
contemplatiues, sublime in the practice of all virtues, shall rejoice at the
sight of our Lord: because he comes to judge the earth.

He will judge the round earth in justice, and the peoples in equity By
justice is here understood the rectitude and uprightness of his judgments,
and by equity his favor and clemency. I do here but lightly touch some
points, for that I have already said something of them in the former
explications.

Of versicles and the use of them.
AT the end of every Nocturne after the Antiphone id added a Versicle. Our
holy Father S. Benedict makes frequent mention of them in his Rule. They are
certain short, but sweet and efficacious sentences, accommodated to the nature
of the office, and for the most part are desumed out of the holy scriptures.
The holy Church has placed them in the divine office as they are here in this
office of the blessed Virgin, that is to say, In the Nocturne office after the
Psalms, in Lauds and Vespres after the Hymns, and in the rest of the Hours
after the Chapters. They are called Versicles, Durand. l. 5 Rational. c. 2. n.
40.
and interposed in the office after this manner for two reasons. The first,
because they signify, that if perchance we have gone a straie and been
distracted b^ vain thoughts in regard of the prolixitie of the Psalms, that
we ought to return to God, or at least to our own hearts according to the
diverse aduertissements and significations of the Versicles: Amalar ^^de ordine
Antiph. c. 1.
The second is, because by them the intention and affection of the mind is
turned from one thing* to another, that is to say, in the Nocturnes from
singing or reciting of Psalms unto reading of Lessons, from labor to rest,
from the praise of God to Prayer. They are usually song by the shrillest
voices, that they may the better revive the spirits of such as are performing
the office, and cause them to prosecute the rendue thereof with more alacrity.

Of Absolutions.
NExt in order follows the Pater noster, Or our Lords Prayer: after which is
added a short prayer to our Savior Christ (which is called an Absolution) that
he will be graciously pleased to purify, illuminate, and prepare us, that we
may worthily read the Lessons following. The reason hereof is rendered l. 1.
de diui no officio ^. 11.
by Rupertus, to wit, because we ought to ask the Lord of the harvest, that he
will be pleased to send workmen to gather his fruits, and open our hearts that
we may understand his laws and precepts; least the seed of the word of God
which we are about to hear, be devoured by the birds of the air, choked by
thorns, or frustrated of taking root by the hardness of the rocks. In this
office of the blessed Virgin this is asked by her intercession and the rest of
the Saints.

Of Benedictions.
THe Absolution being pronounced there is asked a Benediction and leave to
read the Lessons: because none are to usurp the office of preaching the word
of God without the permission of their Superiors. That the manner of asking
and giving these Benedictions may l. Dominus vobiscu^ c. 2.
be the better understood, I w^^ here set down the form ^^ereof as I find it
expressed by Peter Damian. He that is about to read the Lessons (says he)
does with a sign of great humi^itie ^owe his body and desire to be blessed,
not by the Priest, but rather by him whom the Priest shall appoint, saying
Iube Domne benedicere; which in effect is as much as to say, Sir appoint some
one to bless me, or may it please you Sir to cause some one to bless me. The
Priest therefore that he may correspond on his part to so great humiliation,
does not delegate this office of blessing unto any his inferior, neither does
he presume by himself to give the Benediction, but rather does beg of
almighty God who is blessed above all, that he will be pleased to give it.
Thus far are the words of Peter Damian. Which manner of asking and giving the
Benedictions by him here declared has been, and is generally practiced, when
the office is performed in public by any number: but when one alone recites
the office, the custom is instead of Domne to say Domine, because the
Benedictions are then asked immediately of almighty God. ^^e Bened^ctions in
the Br^uiary are given in the name of the blessed ^rinitie, but here in this
office of the blessed Virgin the first Benediction is given in the name of our
sweet Savior and his beloved Mother, and the second and third are asked by her
intercession.

Of Lessons and the profit that arises by them.
THe Benediction being given the, Lector or Reader proceedet^ to read the
Lessons; which are here in this little office of the Blessed Virgin taken out
of the four and twentieth Chapter of Ecclesiasticus for all times of the year
except Aduent, when they are taken out of the Ghospel. But in the other offices
of the Breuiary the Lessons of the first Nocturne are taken out of the old or
new Testament, of the second out of the writings of the holy Fathers and
Doctors of the holy Church, and of the third out of the Homilies of the
Fathers according to the nature of the office. The institution of reading
Lessons is very ancient, as may appear by the Acts of the Apostles where it
is written, That those that inhabited Jerusalem, not knowing the voices of the
Prophets that are Act. 13.
read every Sabbath, judging have fulfilled them. And it is clear by the
testimony of S. Paul, that Lessons were used in the primitive Church much after
the manner as they are at this present; When you come 1. Cor. 14.
together (says he) every one of you has a Psalm, has a doctrine, has a
revelation, has a tongue, has an interpretation etc. It was ordained by the
Council of Laodicea Cap. 17.
about twelve hundred years agone, that Lessons out of the holy Scriptures
should be intermixed with the Psalms; and long before that Council the said
custom was practiced in the holy Church, as Cass^an affirms. It will not
be needful l. 2. Insti^ut.
to insist much upon the proving of the antiquity and use of the Lessons, for
that it is manifest both by what has been said, as also by the Rule of our
holy Father S. Benedict, who lived above eleven hundred years past, and the
authority of S. Augustine in his preface upon the Epistles of S. John, and the
general practice of the holy Church in all ages. The fruit that may be
gathered thereby is manifold, some of which I will here particularize: First,
the mind which is perhaps as it were tired with the intense study of prayer,
may by this means have time to breath and gather new forces. Secondly, the
mind will be much recreated and delighted with the grateful variety and
profitable vicissitude of prayer and reading. Thirdly, those who perhaps would
not otherwise have the opportunity (by reason of their many exterior
imployements) to hear the Scriptures read, by this means do participate of
that benefit* and Fowerthly, the mind is by such reading furnished with
abundant matter to move holy affections, and becomes fattened and
strengt^ned with good desires, in virtue where of it may with much facility
pass through the rest of the office; according to that of the Psalmist, As
with marrow and fatness let Psalm. 62.
my soul be filled: and my mouth shall praise with lips of exultation.

Notwithstanding that the words of the ensuing Lessons are literally applied to
our Savior: yet are they placed in this office by the holy Church, which is
directed by the holy Ghost according to that of the Evangelist, The holy
Ghost Ioh. 14.
whom the father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and
suggest unto you all things whatsoever I shall say to you; and are mystically
expounded of the blessed Virgin both by the ancient and modern Fathers in
effect as follows.

The explication of the First Lesson.
THe most blessed Virgin the immaculate Mother of the eternal wisdom says
as follows, In all these things, to wit, which are before rehearsed in the
said Chapter I sought rest; for indeed the most pious Aduocatrix of mankind
does above all the blessed spirits, and next unto her dear Son our Lord and
Savior Christ Jesus covet the salvation of all people, and desire to inhabit,
and have her place of residence and repose in all men's hearts by holy
remembrance, virtuous imitation, and sweet louingnesse: and I shall abide in
the inheritance of our Lord, to wit, in the faithful and virtuous elect, who
are the inheritance and Church of our Lord. Then the Creator of all commanded,
and said to me that which immediately follows in the next sentence: and he
that created me, to wit the eternal word has rested in my Tabernacle, to wit
in my womb, where he assumed humane nature, and being made an infant did
reremaine for the space of nine months. He has also most graciously rested
in the tabernacle of my mind even from my first conception. And he said to me
commanding that which follows, Inhabit in Jacob, to wit in the Primitive
Church consisting of the Jewish elect, for in it our most blessed Lady was
corporally conversant, lived most exemplarily and holily; and afterward did
and does spiritually remain in the whole militant Church, possessing,
protecting, and governing the hearts of the faithful: and in Israel to wit
contemplative religious and spiritual persons, and eminent in the practice of
all virtues inherit, that thou may as it were by right of inheritance
possess them as being their Mother, their Queen, and their Aduocatrix, and
they also may possess thee by incessant, most pure, and fervent love as thy
servants, and Sons: and take root in mine elect by impetrating for them the
gifts of grace and virtues, that so they may be radicated in Christ, and
ever cohere and cleave to thee.

At the end of this Lesson as like wise of the rest is added Tu autem Domine
miserere nobis, that is to say, But thou o Lord be merciful unto us: which
custom is observed at the end of the Lessons in all other offices, except
those of the faithful departed. By which words is signified as Rupertus
affirms, that even the office l 1. de diuinis officijs c. 12.
of showing forth the divine word cannot be performed by us without
contracting some small dust of blame. For as S. Augustine says, The word of
predication is heard with more security then pronounced: and the reason
thereof is, because when the Preacher or denouncer of the word shall perceive
that he says well and deserves praise, it is a very hard matter if he be
not touched in some slight manner with the spirit of elation; and therefore in
respect that he walks upon the earth, and has his feet soiled with dust,
although he be otherwise wholly pure and clean, yet in regard hereof it will
be needful for him to implore the divine mercy, that so he may be washed
in that part and become altogether neat and pure.

After the Reader has pronounced the foresaied words, to wit, But thou o Lord
be merciful unto us, the whole quire answers Deo gratias, that is to say,
l. ^itato c. 14.
Thanks to God: which (as Rupertus affirms) is not referred to the said
last prayer of the Reader, but to the whole precedent Lesson; the quire thereby
giving thanks to God, for that he has graciously vouchsafed to break unto
them the bread of his divine doctrine, least they should have perished with
famine of hearing the word of God. S. Augustine Ep. 77. Alipio Aurelio.
does extol this manner of thanks giving as follows, What better thing
(says he) can we bear in our mind or pronounce with our mouth or express
with our pen then Deo gratias? there can noe sentence be said more breefly,
neither is there any thing more joyful to be ^eard, nor more lofty to be
understood, nor more fruitful to be done then this etc. This it is which S.
Paul does so frequently inculcate unto 1. Thessal. 5.
us in his Epistles saying, In all things give thanks, for this is the will of
God. This the Prophet David was most careful to observe, Psalm. 33.
I will bless our Lord (says he) at all times: his praise always in my
mouth. The holy Church therefore with good reason does ordain this manner of
thanksgiving to be often iterated in the divine office, that thereby we may
ascribe to God (unto whom does belong all that is best) whatsoever is well
done in our prayer, and render him thanks therefore.

Of Responsories.
NExt in order after every Lesson there follows a Responsory; which is so
called, because one alone having song a Lesson, all the quire does answer and
sing that which follows: which usually is taken out of the same part of the
holy Scriptures as the Lesson, or otherwise is composed of certain amorous
affections toward God, and sweet sentences corresponding to the nature of the
office of that day. The institution of them is very ancient: and most authors
are of opinion that the greatest part of the Responsories which are placed in
the Breuiary were collected and composed by S. Ambrose. They seem to be
ordained for this reason, to wit, that whereas in the Lessons we do as it were
hear God almighty most graciously to speak unto us, and put us in mind of his
wonderful works and of his excessive love toward the salvation of mankind,
or to propose unto us the holy life and Passion of his dear Son Christ
Jesus our Lord and Savior, or the acts and virtues of the blessed Virgin and
the rest of the Saints now in glory, we may hereby correspond on our part to
so great love, and in token of gratitude break for^h into his praise with
some sweet sentences expressing the affections of our hearts, admiring his
goodness and glorifying his name for ever These sentences are usually repeated
in the Responsories, that they may make the deeper impression in our hearts,
as also to show that when we have praised God all we can, we may begin
again and again, and yet never be able to praise him to the full.

The Lessons here being wholly of the blessed Virgin, and insinuating unto us
her Motherly care and sincere affection toward all mankind, the Responsories
are composed answerable to the Lessons, and are certain pious affections
toward her, extolling the imme^se goodness of God for his wonderful mercies
showed toward her, his infinite graces bestowed upon her above all pure
creatures, and his singular works wrought in and by her to the benefit of all
mankind.

The exposition of the Second Lesson.
ANd so in Sion, to wit in the holy Church speculating divine things was I
established, made firm and powerful, as being replenished with all virtue and
grace, that I might be able to succor and relieve all faithful souls: and
in the sanctified City, to wit in the holy Church likewise I rested,
corporally and spiritually: corporally so long as I lived in the world in
mortal flesh, and afterward ever since I was assumpted into heaven, I cease
not to rest spiritually in the holy Church recommended unto my custody: and my
power was in Jerusalem, in the triumphant and militant Church. In the
triumphant I am allotted a prime place of dignity in respect of my maternall
authority, by which I am made the Mother of God, and for which I am exalted
above all the Angelical spirits. The Kingdom of mercy in the militant Church
is also conferred upon me, for which I am styled the Queen of mercy, and have
dominion over the invisible enemies. And I took root in an honorable people,
to wit in the Christian people, for whom I have obtained that they may take
root, and be established in all grace and virtue by frequent procuring them
divine gifts and pious reformation, and by strengthening them in good. And in
the portion of my God his inheritance, to wit the inheritance of the said
Christian people: for by my intercession that portion which almighty God has
allotted to his beloved, to wit eternal happiness, shall be the inheritance
of those faithful Christians who are predestinate by him from all eternity to
enjoy his essential vision: and my abiding is in the full assembly of the
Saints: that is, amongst the devout and holy ones I am detayned and will
persevere, for with such I am well pleased to remain.

The explication of the Third Lesson.
I Am exalted as a Cedur in Libanus, Like as the high tree called a Cedar is
elevated in mount Libanus, sends forth a sweet savor, and is not subject to
putrefaction: so I am devoutly honored by all good Christians above all pure
creatures, highly reverenced, experienced sweet to every one, and am entire and
free from all corruption of sin and reprehension. And as the fruit of the
Cedar has virtue to heal languishing people: so my favor, my prayer, and my
consolations have power to cure all diseased hearts. And as a Cyprus tree in
mount Sion. Like as that most solid tree does yield to noe burden, nor can
be suppressed by any weight, but does sublimely appear in mount Sion: So I
remain amongst Christian people most strong and hardy; neither did I ever yield
to any vice or was overcome by any tentation, but have obtained for that people
manifold comforts by my intercession and merits. As a Palm tree in Cades I am
exalted, Like as the Palm tree in the town of Cades does appear most
gorgeously, and in its top branches is most comely and pleasing to behold: So
I by the gifts and ornaments of grace and glory am made most bright, and
delightful to the veiw above all creatures. And as a Rose plant in Jericho, As
the Rose is the most beautiful of all flowers, so the blessed Virgin is the
most beautiful of all women: and like as the water distilled out of Roses does
assuage pain and cleanse the eyes; so the blessed Virgin does mitigate all
the anguishes and sorrows of this present life, and illuminate the internal
eyes. As a fair Olive tree in the feilds, Like as the olive tree is ever
green and flourishes, produces a sweet fruit, and designeth peace, piety,
and mercy; So the most illustrious and unparalleled Virgin has continually
flourished in wisdom and virtue, has brought forth a most sweet fruit,
generated the restorer of peace to all mankind, and does from time to time
reconcile us to almighty God, and is the Mother of all mercy and the source of
piety. And as a Plane tree by the water in the streets I am exalted, By the
Plane tree whose leaves are soft and broad, is here expressed that the most
blessed Virgin is altogether meek gentle and courteous, that her words and
works are most ample by the latitude of Charity: and that like as under the
broad spreading branches of the said tree people may be defended from the
scorching beams of the Sun, or the violence of a sudden storm; so all
that shall fly for succor unto the secure harbor of her power and piety,
shall be graciously received and protected from the heat of persecution and
boisterous storms of tentations and tribulations. I gave an odor as Cinnamon
and aromaticall balm Like as Cinnamon is sweet of taste, has a strengthening
operation, and is good against indigestion and debility of the stomach: So I
am sweet to those that love me, and do strengthen them, that they may be
able to digest the food of their souls, and become ruminating and clean
creatures, meditating day and night of those things which appertain unto God.
I send forth also a fragrant savor of good fame, Charity, Piety, and
wisdom, wherewith I recreate and delight those that reverence and serve me.
And like as aromaticall balm that odoriferous, royal, exquisite and exceeding
precious tree has the virtue: or operation of warming and strengthening: So
the incomparable and most pure Virgin, singular and most excellent, sprung of a
royal stem, solaceth all deuou^ souls and procures them the grace of
fortitude and fervor of divine love. As chosen Myrrh have I given the
sweetness of odor. Like as the best Myrrh is bitter, preserves from
corruption, and scatters abroad a pleasant odor: So the blessed Virgin was
replenished with the bitterness of most vehement compassion when she beheld
her beloved Son nailed upon the Cross, and does continually condole with
sinners, obtaining for innumerable people the grace of compunction: she
preserves also very many from falling into sin, and pours forth a
fragrant odor; in so much, that whosoever shall piously call her to mind shall
experience himself sprinkled there with.

Of the Canticle or Hymn Te Doum laudamus.
THe ancient custom of recyting this Canticle or Hymn in the divine Office
may be proved by the Rule of our holy Father S. Benedict, where he
appoints that after the fouerth Responsory (to wit of the third Nocturne) the
Abbot do begin the Hymn Te Deum laudamus. Concerning the original
institution of this Hymn S. Darius Bishop of Milan (who lived in the time of
Iustine the elder about the year of our Lord. 540. as S. Gregory affirms in
his 3. Book of dialogues the 4. Chap.) in his Chronicles writes as follows,
By l. 1. c. 10. Chronic^.
blessed Ambrose (says he) Augustine was baptized and confirmed in the name
of the holy and undivided Trinity, all the faithful of the City being
present and beholding it; at which time according as the holy Ghost gave them
to speak, they pronounced the Hymn Te Deum Laudamus, all that were present
hearing, seeing, and admiring: which has been generally received and
religiously sung ever since by the universal Church in all ages even unto
these our days.

The Title and argument of the 92. Psalm and first in the Lauds.
PRaise of Canticle to David himself, in the date before the Sabbath, when
the earth was founded. It seems that he who appointed this title, was
desirous that the ensuing Psalm should be sung upon the Sixth Feria or Friday,
which is the day before the Sabbath: because therein is declared that the
earth was founded, or according to some books inhabited. Which is fitly said
to have been done on the Sixth Feria: for on that day man was formed who should
be Lord of the earth; and by this the earth was first established, which was
created for man. On this day not only man but also all living creatures were
created which inhabit the earth, and therefore on this day the earth began
first to be inhabited. On the same day also by the Passion and death of
Christ Jesus our Lord and Savior the earth was renouated, and the Kingdom of
Christ established, the Prince of the world being cast forth. All which
notwithstanding the holy Church does appoint this Psalm to be sung at Lauds
upon Sunday about Sun rising or day break: because although our Savior
purchased his Kingdom with the price of his most precious blood shed for
mankind on the Sixth Feria, and thereby laid the foundation of the new earth,
yet he received possession of his Kingdom at his glorious resurrection early
in the morning upon Sunday, at which time he put on beauty and strength. The
words of this Psalm may be applied both to the Creation, and Reparation of
the world as follows.

The exposition of the Psalm.
Our Lord has reigned, he has put on beauty, glory and regal Majesty: Our
Lord has also put on strength, power and fortitude, which are equally
requisite to support a Kingly diadem, and has girded, prepared, armed, and
settled himself to reign. If these words be referred to the Creation of the
world, Christ as God is said to have begun to reign when he had created the
world, for then he first of all began to have subjects upon the earth over
whom he might exercise dominion. But if they be referred to the reparation of
the world, Christ as man at the time of his Resurrection did receive the
government of the Universe, put on the beauty of a glorified body; and put on
fortitude, all power being given him in heaven and upon earth; and girded or
settled himself earnestly to ptopagat^ his Kingdom to the utmost confines of
the earth. It is manifest that our Lord has reigned in this sort,

For he has established, firmly fixed the round world, as the center of the
universe: which shall not be moved according to that of Ecclesiastes,
Generation passes and generation Eccle. 1.
comes: but the earth stands for ever. Christ likewise by his dolorous
passion and glorious resurrection has founded and established the Militant
Church spread through all the regio^s of the earth in one faith and religion:
which shall not be moved, but shall persevere in the same faith and worship
unto the end of the world, for Christ shall reign in the house of Luc. 1.
Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be noe end.

Thy seat o Lord is prepared from that time, to wit from the Creation of the
world, or the resurrection of Christ. Yet thou did not the^ begin to have a
being, for thou according to thy divine nature art from everlasting, from
eternity. Concerning which you are to note, that the word ( art) does not here
signify the simple existence of the divine nature, but the fullness of his
being, wherein all things are contained. For God was not poor, or had need of
any thing before he created the world; neither was he more wealthy or better
stored after he had created it: for he created not the world that himself
might increase thereby but that he might communicate his goodness to us, and
therefore he created not the world as being compelled by any necessity, but as
being moved thereunto by his infinite charity and mercy; and with the same
charity and mercy he has repaired it, for So God loved the Ioh. 3.
world that he gave his only begotten Son, that every one that believes in
him perish not, but may have life everlasting.

The rivers o Lord have lifted up: the rivers have lifted up their voices.

The rivers have lifted up their waves, above the voices of many waters.

The surges of the Sea are ma^u^lous; marvelous is our Lord on high.

If the words of these verses be referred to the first sense, they signify the
manner whereby God almighty made the earth habitable, that it might be a
firm seat for all living creatures. For i^ the beginning of the Creation the
waters covered the superficies of the Universe, and the inundations of the
waters were elevated with a terrible motion: but God who is infinitely more
high, more excellent, and powerful repressed their fury, closed part of them
in the concauities of the earth, and appointed limits to the rest which they
shall not transcend.

In the Second sense, by the rivers which lifted up their voices is understood
the Apostles and other principal planters of the Christian faith, who being
filled with the waters of life, did pass through the world like unto so many
heavenly rivers, and eleuate their voices, preaching the Gospel of Christ
with great freedom. By the rivers which lifted up their waves, is understood
the Jews, who even in the very beginning contradicted the Gospel in all
places and raised persecution against the disciples of Christ. By the surges of
the Sea which are far greater the^ the waves of the rivers, is understood the
persecutions of the Infidels and other adversaries of the holy Church. For
like as when the rivers enter into the Sea, the salt waters do rage and swell
at the entrance of the fresh waters: so the Infidels did begin to rage and
swell at the preaching of the Apostles, as being contrary to their doctrine and
manners. But our Lord dwelling on high has showed himself far more to be
admired, since he has gotten the victory over all the persecutors and tyrants,
and propagated his Kingdom through out the earth, notwitstanding they impugned
it to the utmost of their power. For the word ( in altis) which here is
interpreted on high, some read in high things, and expound it as follows, The
persecutions of the Infidels are indeed marvelous; but our Lord is far more
marvelous in high things, to wit in the wonderful miracles, sublime signs,
and never before heard of prodigies, which he has effected by those that
believed in him: in so much, that the holy Church amidst the most cruel
persecutions that ever were, did not only not fear nor fail, but was
exceedingly dilated, augmented, and strengthened; and sustained all sorts of
torments with wonderful alacrity and cheerfulness, until at length the
tyrants yielded, and the Roman empire it self submitted its stubborn neck to
the yoke of Christ. And therefore o Christ,

Thy testimonies, thy words where with thou have testified and solemnly
promised by the mouths of thy holy Prophets and Apostles concerning thy said
Kingdom, that thou will establish it and defend it in such sort, that hell
gates shall not prevail against it, are made credible exceedingly, are
confirmed with so frequent and evident miracles, that they cannot be denied
to be most true: but do as it were enforce us to believe, that thou will
perform in due time and order whatsoever thou have said; as may appear
also by what thou have already most faithfully brought to pass. From
henceforth therefore it is most meet that the holy Church (which is thy house)
be holy, immacula^e, and adorned with all purity for evermore, in respect
that she has for her guardian and protector so mighty and provident a Lord,
from whom she has alreaoy received such singular benefits, and may justly
hereafter expect far greater, relying on thy most faithful promises: for
Holiness becomes thy house o Lord for length of days.

Behold here a short Psalm, but yet replete with mysteries, wherein the soul
has a sweet, confident, and amorous conference with God. Let it not therefore
be sung by us in a cold and aride manner, but with fervor of devotion and
holy desires. And that we may be able to sing it in this sort, let us
cleanse our selves from all stain or impuritie of our flesh and spirit, that
our body may be the temple of the holy Ghost, and our soul the seat of the
eternal wisdom.

The Title and argument of the 99. Psalm and Second in the Lauds.
A Psalm in Confession. The Prophet does here inuit the people of God often
and attentively to confess unto him with confession of praise, both for that
he has created, nourished, and conserved us, as also because the memory of
him is most sweet, and his fidelity and mercy toward us perpetual.

The exposition of the Psalm.
MAke ye iubilation to God all ye who inhabit the earth: say ye an Hymn
unto him with such abundant and ineffable joy of heart, that the ioyfulnesse
of your devotion may endure noe limits, but through the excess and vehemence
thereof may break forth by exterior signs, which yet are far short of
expressing what you feel interiourly. It is most meet that ye rejoice to God
in this manner; because as his Majesty does infinitely exceed our imbecillitie
and unworthiness, so the ioyfulnesse which we conceive touching him ought to
transcend our proper infirmity, elocution, and manner of declaring our mind.
Serve ye our Lord, obey ye his divine precepts; not out of a servile fear,
but in gladness, willingly, promptly, and with a filial love, for God loves
a cheerful giver. 2. Cor. 9.
Serve him with gladness; yet not dissolutely or irreuerently, but in
gladness accompanied with fear or respect, according to that, Serve our Lord
in fear: Psalm. ^
and rejoice to him with trembling. It cannot be hard to serve him in this
manner, love being the summarie of his commandments Romans 13.
and the fullness of his law. For what is more sweet and easy then to love?

Enter ye in before his sight, enter ye into the material temple of God,
where he is present in an especial manner, and most graciously gives audience
to deuou^ people; My eyes (says he) shall be opened 2. Paralip. 7.
and my ears erected to his prayer, that shall pray in this place. Enter I
say in exultation of heart, and with an attentive and inflamed mind; that he
may behold that your affection toward him has moved you to come into his
presence, and that you come not of necessity or co^pulsion. Enter ye also
into the immateriall temple of God, to wit into your souls; place your selves
there near unto his sacred image, and discuss your interior, open your
hearts unto him with an humble confidence, and treat with him concerning the
business of your salvation, inuenting many pretty industries of love to
express your affections, and gain his favor; for he alone ca^ satiate your
desires.

Know ye not only by faith, but also by natural reason and experimental
gust, that our Lord into whose presence I inuit you to come and praise him, he
is God our Creator and conseruer, then whom nothing can be imagined more
excellent. He it is unto whom we are indebted for our being, and all that we
are or enjoy; For he made us, and not we ourselves. Although our parents do
cooperate to the union of our souls to our bodies which are begot by them, yet
do they in noe sort concur to the production of the soul it self, it being
created by almighty God of nothing, as the world it self was created by him
without the influence of any other cause besides himself: and therefore we Men
must needs acknowledge a more singular dependence of our Creator, then any
other of these sublunary things, amongst which we are conversant in this life.
For they are produced by the immediate causes upon which they depend not only
by means of disposing the body, and rendering it fit to receive the soul or
form with which it is to be animated or informed; but also by immediate
influence and co^currence to the production of the soul or form it self:
whereas in us Men this is proper to God alone to produce our soul without the
least help of any secondary cause at all. This the Mother of the holy
Machabees 2. Ma chab. 7.
did confess saving unto her children, I know not how you appeared in my
womb: for neither did I give you spirit and soul and life, and the members of
every one I framed not: but in deed the Creator of the world, that has formed
the nativity of man, and that invented the origin of all. etc.

O all ye His elected people, and the sheep of his pasture, whom he feeds
with his Sacraments, and sustaineth and nourishes in mind and body with his
gifts and graces, enter ye, not so much with corporal steps as with
advancement of your mynds into the practice of virtues which are his gates,
through which you are to pass into eternal life: enter (I say) in Confession
of your sins. For proceeding according to order, this ought to precede our
other works of virtue: for by such confession sins are remitted, grace
given, and men are fitly disposed to praise God. But if we omit to do this, it
will be in vain for us to seek to enter into his said gates; neither will
any thing we do seem grateful unto him, as he affirms by the mouth of the
Prophet Isaie saying; When you shall stretch forth, Isaie 1.
your hands I will turn away mine eyes from you, and when you shall multiply
prayer, I will not hear: for your hands are full of blood. VVash you, be
clean, and take away the evil of your cogitations from mine eyes etc. Being
therefore thus prepared enter ye also with humble confidence into his courts
in Hymns, for your praises will then be most delightful unto him. By the
courts of our Lord diverse of the holy Fathers do understand the latitude of
Charity and other principal virtues which a soul so cleansed by Sacramental
confession, and practiced in inferior virtues ought to aspire unto; by which
they may attain to perfection in this life, and acquire an answerable place
of glory in the next: but some others do suppose the Prophet to allude to the
Three Courts of the Temple, whereof one was for the Priests, another for lay
men, and the third for women.

Amongst the divine Attributes for all which he is most praise worthy, Praise
ye his name here for three of them chiefly. First because our Lord is sweet,
mild, benign, and soon moved to pity and compassion. Which if you desire to
make trial of, Taste ye and see that our Psalm. 3^ 2. Cor. 1.
Lord is sweet. He is the Father of mercies, and God of all comfort. Secondly
praise him, because his mercy is for ever, Our Psalm. 102.
Lord is pitiful, and merciful: long suffering and very merciful. As a
Father has compassion of his children, so has our Lord compassion on them
that fear him. Thirdly and lastly praise him, because his truth is even unto
generation and generation. As he is most merciful promising benefits gratis,
so he is most faithful and true in constantly performing what he has
promised, as he witnesses of himself saying, Heaven and earth shall Luc. 21.
pass: but my words shall not pass.

Behold here a Psalm replete with Angelical sweetness: which we ought to sing
in the person of the holy Church with diligent attention, rendering our selves
efficaciously obedient to the pious exhortations therein contained by
iubilating to our Lord, serving him with gladness, attending to his presence
incessantly, and confessing him to be our God by faith and works, which we
cannot by any means perform, unless we do daily with entire hearts abhor
and detest the greater sort of vices, and diligently (to the utmost of our
power) shun, correct and deplore the lesser sort of sins by frequent
confession, and firm purpose of amendment, weighing carefully that saying of
Solomon, He that hides Prouer. 28. v. 13.
his wicked deeds, shall not be directed: but he that shall confess, and
shall forsake them, shall obtain mercy. These things are requisite to the due
performance of the acts where unto we are invited in this present Psalm, for
those acts are altogether deiforme, celestial, Angelical, and of incomparable
merit.

The title and argument of the 62. Psalm and third in the Lauds.
A Psalm of David when he was in the deser^ of Judah called Ziph or of Idumea.
Holy David when he was enforced to hide himself in the desert from the
furious persecution of Saul, and could not have access to the Tabernacle of
God, nor to Jerusalem, where he had a longing desire to be in the inheritance
of our Lord, did take occasion by that his affliction to deplore his own
estate, and the estate of all other just men living in the exile of this
present life, and vale of tears whcih is repleate with vices and tribulations,
and sterill of good things and true felicity, and to express the exceeding
great desire he had to pass out of this world unto the celestial country.

The exposiiion of the Psalm.
O God of all, and in a special manner My God, in regard of thy peculiar
favors and graces abundantly bestowed upon me the unworthiest of thy
creatures, protecting me from evil things, promoting me in good things, and
directing me in a particular manner to my last end, as also in respect of the
singular love and reverence, wherewith I love and worship thee alone and above
all things, to thee ^ watch from the morning light, presently, ^o^ soon as the
day appears, and the spendor of thy divine grace does illustrate m^ soul, I
arise, by erecting my mind toward thee with a cordial affection to
contemplate, love, and adore thee.

My soul has thirsted after thee, The appetite of my soul, to wit my will
has coueted with an intellectual and exceeding great desire to obtain thee
the fountain of all goodness, who alone can satiate her: and my flesh, to
wit my body or my sensual appetite has thirsted to thee very many ways, by
reason of diverse and manifold necessities.

Concerning these words of the Prophet you are to note that whether the Flesh
be taken for the body only, or for the sensitive appetite, it cannot fitly
be said to thirst to God directly, and immediately: for God being an
immateriall and simple essence can only be attained with a sole immateriall
appetite, as he is only comtemplated with a sole intellectual eye: neither
can the flesh precisely taken according to it self desire (properly speaking)
or thirst, but for as much as it is informed with the soul; for desire rather
belongs to the whole compound; and to the soul, then to the flesh. Whereas
therefore the flesh is here said to thirst to God, it may be understood two
ways. First, because it is an an occasion to the soul to t^irst to God. For
The body that is corrupted burdeneth the Sap. 9.
soul: and the soul by reason of her union with the body falls into many
necessities, solicitudes, afflictions, and miseries; and consequently t^ereby
she has so many causes or motives of sighing and longing after God as she
experienceth in herself impediments which interpose themselves between her
and God^ and do retract and remove her a far of from him. Such impediments
as these the Apostle felt when he said, Unhappy man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body Romans 7.
of this death? Secondly it may be understood thus, My flesh, to wit, my
sensitive appetite thirsts to God, not directly and immediately, as if God
were the object of its desire, but because those things which it longs for,
it desires according to the will of God, that is to say, according to the
command of reason and the direction of moral virtues.

In a desert land, and inaccessible, and without water, so in the holy I have
appeared to thee. The Prophet seems to signify by these words, that the
desert and sterill place where he then remained, barren of things necessary,
and much more of delightful things, was nevertheless profitable unto him to
find out God. For the soul by how much more she is destitute of carnal
delights, or at least wise by how much more she remoueth her affection from
terrene things, and places herself in a certain desert or abstraction of
mind, by so much the more easily she may ascend to contemplate and relish
heavenly things. I (says he) remaining in a desert land, and inaccessible,
and without water, so have appeared to thee, that is, so have showed and
presented my self before thee in ascensio^ of mind as in thy holy, that is,
as if I were in thy sanctuary in Jerusalem, where there are many motives of
piety and the sollemne use of Religion, that I might s^e thy strength and thy
glory, thy power and Majesty. S. Augustine does expound this desert land to be
the world forsaken by true men, and inhabited by beasts, to wit, by carnal or
sensual men: which is said to be inaccessible, because it is a difficult
matter to pass through it, and to find out the narrow way which leads unto
eternal life; and to be without water because although it has some few
puddles of putrified water, to wit carnal wisdom, yet it wants water from
heaven, to wit, true wisdom, unless God of his singular grace do vouchsafe
to show the way to those that wander in this desert, and sprinkle his dew from
heaven upon it. In this desert land therefore (says the Prophet) I have
appeared to thee, o God, as in thy holy. For I have not lived in this world
after the manner of worldlings, nor followed the steps of sinners: but have
served thee in ho^inesse and justice; that I might see clearly in the
celestial country thy virtue, to wit thy omnipotency, wherewith thou
disposest all things in heaven and earth, and thy glory, to wit, thy beatitude,
or thus, that I might see thy virtue and thy glory, to wit Christ our Lord. In
both which ways by the virtue and glory of God is understood God himself
sublime and glorious: so that we ought to operate all things we do to the end
that we may attain the divine vision as being our final reward; for which
reason our Savior says, This is life everlasting that they may know thee the
only true God, and ^ 17.
whom thou have sent Jesus Christ.

Because thy mercy is better then lives, my lips shall praise thee. The word
( because) seems not to be referred to that which goes before, but to that
which follows as thus, My lips shall praise thee, because thy mercy, to
wit, the presence of thy grace wherewith thou conseruest we in a spiritual
being, is better then lives, that is to say, is better then all sorts of
natural lives: for the gifts of grace do far excel those of nature; and it
is better not to be, not to live a natural life obnoxious to sin, then to
be without grace and charity, as our Savior affirmed of Judas saying, It
Mar^. 14.
were good for him if that man bad not been borne. Moreover the mercy of God
gives us life, and the same mercy conserueth it: and if we shall loose our
life for his love, he will restore it unto us in a far more happy manner; but
if we fall from his mercy to conserve our life, we shall deservedly loose both
our life and his mercy, according to that of the Evangelist, He that loves his
life shall loose it: and Ioh. 12.
he that hates his life in this world, does keep it to life everlasting.

So I will bless, glorify, and superexalt thee in my life, to wit, all the
time I shall subsist and remain in this life, as the Prophet says in another
Psalm, I will bless our Lord at all times: his praise always in my mouth. Or
thus, In my life, that is, I will frame my life in such sort, that my
conversation shall be a certain benediction of thy name, for I will ordain
and direct all my actions and words to the honor praise and glory of thy holy
name, and in thy name I will lift up my hands; that is, in the invocation of
thy name I will lift up my hands in prayer, expecting aid and comfort in
adversities from rhee alone, and giving thanks to thee in my prosperities. S.
Augustine upon these words gives this admonition, to wit, that all those who
lift up their hands to God in prayer ought also to lift up their hands to good
works, if they desire to obtain their requests.

The words immediately following seem to be the prayer which David made when
he so lifted up his hands to God. As with mar^ow and fatness let my soul be
filled: and my mouth shall praise with lips of exultation. Let my soul (o
Lord) be replenished with spiritual marrow and fatness, to wit, with
internal consolation, ardent charity, and thy divine grace: which are not
properly marrow and fatness, for that is a certain corporal thing, but yet
have a certain resemblance thereunto. For as those who are adorned with marrow
and solid fatness, not with swollen and puffed up fatness, are healthful,
strong, fair, well colored and pleasant; and contrariewise those that are
very lean, are aride, weak, sad and disfigured: so those that are
replenished with spiritual grace as with wholesome fatness, are devout,
fervent, and ever joyful, and contrariewise such as want it are soon cloyed
with spiritual things, weak, and ill disposed to do good, or to tolerate
evil. With this spiritual fatness therefore the Prophet desires to be
filled, and then he doubts not but he shall be able to praise our Lord with
such couradge, sweetness and alacrity, that he shall be enforced to discover
his mental joy and sweetness by exterior signs of exultation.

If I have bein mindful of thee in my bed, in the night time, in the morning I
will meditate on thee and contemplate such things as will be pleasing to thee,
because thou have been my helper. Let us imitate this good example, and place
our selves in our bed as in our tomb, for sleep is a certain resemblance of
death: and who knows when he lays him down to rest, whether he shall awake
or not, until the sound of the trumpet do summon him to the tribunal of God?
S. Augustine out of these words gatheret^ this document, to wit, That they who
desire to remember God, and to have his love and fear before their eyes
whilst they are employed or busied in exterior affairs, must of necessity
meditate on him, and consider seriously his benefits and promises before when
they are in bed, that is, in rest or tranquillity of mind and body For the
chief and only reason why most men do behave themselves in exterior
employments as if there were noe God that took notice of their actions is,
because they do not take some time of respite, wherein to recollect
themselves, and attend to the consideration of the end for which they were
created. And in the covert of thy wings I will rejoice. I will not confide in
my own strength, neither will I rejoice in my self, but under the protection,
shelter, and safeguard of thy power and mercy I will joyfully rest and securely
rejoice, for under, thy eagles wings I need not fear the gleade. My soul has
clea^ed after thee, has adhered to thy footsteps, obeyed and kept thy
commandments, not with an aride affection, but with the strong glue of fervent
charity, in such sort, that noe force of tentation has been able to separate
me from thee: and thou most graciously not only have not rejected me, but thy
right hand has received me, to wit, thy preventing grace has drawn me, unto
thee; as if he had said, Therefore I follow thee, because thou have drawn me,
and therefore I love thee and adhere to thee, because thou have first loved me,
and by loving me have caused me to love thee.

But they in vain have sought my soul, I being thus sheltred under thy wings
and received by thy right hand, my enemies have in vain endeauored to
extinguish my spiritual life, seduce my soul, or otherwise to hurt me: for
they shall not only not prevail against me, but also. They themselves for
their sin and malice shall enter into the inferior parts of the earth, to
wit, in to Hell, which the Prophet Isaie terms The deeepe* lake Isa. 14.


They shall be delivered into the hands of the sword, to wit into the hand of
the tormentors, they shall be the portions of foxes, that is, they shall noe
more dominere over just men, but shall be subject to the unjust devils, as
their part and inheritance. The devils are here rather termed foxes then
wolves or Lions, because they do more circumuent and overcome sinners by
foxelike subtilitie, then by Lionlike force and strength; for they cannot
enforce our will, yet they may suggest alluring tentations.

But the king, David himself (of whom he speaks in a third person) who
shortly after Saul was slain received the government, shall rejoice in God,
that has revenged him of his enemies, and advanced him to so great glory, and
all shall be praised that swear by him, to wit by the health or life of the
king, because the mouth is stopped of those that speak wicked things, that
heretofore have falsely accused him, as though he should conspire the death of
his sovereign.

Some do expound these last words of all Reprobates: whose mouths in the
day of judgment shall be stopped for all eternity, when as truth shall be
manifested, and none shall be able to deny it; in so much as their own
consciences shall then accuse them, and they shall then confess and
acknowledge despairing, We have erred from th? way of Sap. 5.
truth, and the light of justice has not shined to us.

Behold here a most sweet and affectionate Psalm, the virtue and sweetness
whereof a devout and piously amorous soul may relish spiritually with
unspeakable contentment. Let us therefore endeavor to be ever mentally attent
to God, according to that of the Apostle to Timothy, But be thou Vigilant,
labor in 2. Timo. 4.
all things, be sober. and of Christ to his Disciples, VVatch ye and pray,
that ye Math. 26.
enter not into tentation. Let our soul thirst to God, and living in flesh,
let us not converse according to the flesh following the tracts thereof, but
let us exhibit ourselves in the presence of our Lord God in holy desires, and
let us above all things be most sollicitous to remain in the state of grace,
rather wishing not to have being, then to be without the mercy charity and
grace of God. To conclude let us praise God at all times, in all places, and in
our conversation, lifting up pure hands unto him, and laboring to the utmost
of our power to profit in his divine love.

The title and argument of the 66. Psalm and 4. in the E^udes.
Unto the end, in Hymns, a Psalm of Canticle to David. According to the
letter, this Psalm is an invocation and thanksgiving for the Incarnation of
our Savior: or an expression of the vehement desire holy David had to behold
the coming of the Messiah. It consists chiefly of three parts. In the first
he beseeches God to bless and illuminate him with his grace, that he may
know his ways. In the Second he exhorts all people to praise God for his
direction and just judgments: and in the Third to praise God for the fruit
which the earth bath brought forth, to wit, Christ Jesus the happy fruit of the
womb of the blessed Virgin.

The exposition of the Psalm.
O God have mercy on us, blot out our offenses and remove all impediments which
may delay the coming of him, whom thou have promised to send to work our
redemption, and bless us, not only with pl^nty of all temporal benefits; but
much rather illuminate thy counteuance, upon us. These words are taken in
diverse senses; for first God almighty is said to illuminate his countenance
upon us, when ^e remoueth the clouds of his indignation, and beholds us midly
as his Sons, as his friends, and as being reconciled to his favor. Secondly,
when he illuminateth us by infusion o^ wisdom and charity, and disposes us
to contemplate his divine understanding. Thirdly and lastly when he as it were
vnmasketh himself that we may behold him: which he chiefly performed when by
the mystery of the Incarnation he was seen upon earth and conuersed amongst
men. This manner of illumination the Prophet does seem to ask for in this
place, that God will be graciously pleased to show unto us his countenance, if
not in the form of God, yet at least in the form of man: which request he
likewise makes Psalm. 79
in another Psalm saying, Thou who fittest upon the Cherubs, be manifested
before Ephraim Benjamin and Manasses: raise up thy might and come to save us.
And have Mercy on us, preserve us from future evils, least by loosing thy
grace we become unworthy to receine the Messiah.

That we living in the banishment of this life, May know thy way upon earth
leading unto our true country, to wit, how to walk in the precepts of thy
divine law. Or thus, That we may know thy way, to wit Christ our Lord, who
says of himself, I am the way and the verity and the life: no man comes to
the Father but by me; who is also, in all nations thy salvation: according to
that of S. Luke, Mine Luc. 2.
^ies have seen thy salvation, which thou have prepared before the face of all
people: a light to the re^elation of the Gentiles etc. and in another place, All
flesh shall see the salvation Luc. 3.
of God. By this verse therefore the faithful do pray for the illumination
of the holy Ghost: that they err not in the way of this present life, but by
working may know, and by knowing may walk in the way of our Lord; of which
our Savior speaks in the Gospel, Stra^^e Math.
is the way that leads to life: and few there are that find it. and by these
words ( in all nations thy salvation) they pray that Christ may be
acknowledged and honored by all nations.

Let people o God, Confess to thee: let all people Confess to thee. Let the
worship and veneration of the false Gods cease, and to thee alone the living
God let all divine honor be given by all people.

Let nations called to the faith of Christ be glad with interior joy, and
exult by showing exterior signs of their inward joy: and this, because thou o
God by thy anointed iudgest people in equity; that is, the servile yoke of
the Prince of darkness being taken away, thou have constituted a most just
Kingdom in thy holy Church: and the nations in earth thou do direct,
governing them, and directing them by most wholesome laws to the port of
eternal salvation. S. Augustine interprets the words of this verse in the
future tense, as thus, Thou will judge people in equity, and refers them to
the last judgment: And the nations in earth thou will direct, and refers
them to the direction of this present life; according to whom the sense of
this verse is. Let nations be glad and exult, because if they happen to suffer
any evil here from men, the time will come when thou (o God) wilt judge people
in equity: and in the mean time the nations in earth which are subject and
devoted to thee thou will direct. Let people o God Confess to thee, let all
people Confess to thee, Here the Prophet again exhorts all people to praise
and give thanks to God, adding a new reason or motive, to wit, because the
earth has yielded her fruit. This fruit is Christ our Lord borne of the
terrene substance of the blessed Virgin, a fruit of such excellency, that in
comparison thereof all the fruit the earth has heretofore brought forth may
well be esteemed briers and thorns. Of this fruit the Prophet Isaie makes
mention saying, In that Isaiae cap. 4.
day the bud of our Lord shall be in magnificenee and glory, and the fruit of
the earth high. Yet taking the last words of this verse in a moral sense, The
earth is said to yield her fruit, when the holy Church does spiritually
instruct perfect and conserve her children: and when our body lives soberly,
and serves to the advancement of the soul, obeying in all things. The Prophet
does here as in many other places of the Psalms, use the preterperfect tense
for the future, because in his prenotion that was now done, which he
foretells to be done.

God, our God bless us, God bless us: and let all the ends of the earth fear
him. This in effect is as much as if he had said, Since all people do praise
thee (o God) and the earth has yielded her fruit, let there henceforth be a
grateful vicissitude between thee and us: do thou open thy liberal hand,
and fill us with all benediction, to wit, with abundance of all temporal and
spiritual benefits; and we (as it is most meet) will serve thee with a filial
reverence, and render thee the tribute of obedience and praise for ever. The
threefold repetition of the word God in this verse signifies the affection of
the Prophet. Yet it seems likewise to insinuate the mystery of the blessed
Trinity, which was afterward manifested to the whole world by our Savior and
his hole Apostles.

A certain grave author upon these words in the first verse of this Psalm, to
wit, God bless us, and illuminate his countenance upon us, has this
observation, Because (says he) many desire to be blessed by God with
abundance of temporal benefits, to wit with beauty, power, riches, honor
and the like: all which indeed do come from God, but yet are common to the
just and unjust; therefore the Prophet adds what is proper to the just, to
wit, illuminate his countenance upon us. This is proper to the just; whereas
the other mentioned things are common to all both good and evil: almighty God
so disposing, least if they should be given solely to the good, evil men
would think that God were to be worshipped for them; and if to the evil
only, infirm and fraise people would fear to convert themselves to God,
least these things should be wanting unto them.

Behold here a short Psalm, but full of fervor and devotion. Let us conform
the affections of our heart to the sacred words thereof, and with the whole
forces of our mind let us implore the divine mercy, that he will be pleased to
enrich us with the benedictions of Christ, and instruct us with the light of
his countenance. Let us also most heartely pray for the common good and for
the general souls health of all men, that all men ma^e confess to God,
honor, and love him.

The argument of the Canticle of the three children.
BY the ensuing Canticle the three men Sidrach Misach and Abdenago (who were
thrown into the furnace of burning fire by the commandment of Nabuchodonosor,
because they refused to adore the golden statue he had erected, as is at lardge
related by the Prophet Daniel) did inuit all creatures in their several
Daniel. 3.
degrees and natures to praise God: and they themselves did praise and glorify
him, who preserved their bodies that they were not touched by the fury of those
flames, and made their hearts inflamed with the fire of his love. Indeed by how
much the more one is inflamed with his love, by so much the more intensly does
he desire that God may be praised, loved, and honored by all l. 1. de
doctrina Christiana.
creatures: according to that S. Augustine, By how much the more fervent any
one is in the love of God, by so much the more does he endeavor by all the
means he can divise, that God may be beloved of all men: and by how much the
more sincerely any one does co^template God, by so much the more he does
undervalue and humble himself, and esteem the praise wherewith he does set
forth the glory of God to be the more insufficient; and therefore does
earnestly desire that God may be magnificently praised by all creatures, and
does his best to procure it.

The exposition of the Canticle.
ALl works of our Lord bless ye our Lord, praise, and superexalt him for ever
Although every Creature does not bless and praise almighty God with voice,
which is proper to Men; nor mentally, which is common only to Angels and Men:
yet in as much as all creatures being the works of God are good, the divine
goodness does shine in them, and each of them is as it were a certain rave of
its Creators perfection which thereby is known and made manifest; for as the
Apostle witnesses, The invisible things of God are seen, being understood by
those things which are made: his power also and divinity. Consequently in
this respect all creatures whatsoever are truly said to bless and praise
their Creator. All the works of God therefore are here invited to bless
praise and superexalt our Lord, every one according to its nature: Angels
mentally, Men with their voice and mind, and both Angels and Men as also all
other creatures, the works of God, by exciting and stirring up the minds of
those that shall rightly consider their natures, actions, and proprieties, to
extol the Creator and acknowledge his infinite glory and magnificence.

Bless our Lord ye Angels of our Lord: After the general inuitation of all
creatures they descend to particulars, beginning with the Angels who are most
immediate to God and most like unto him, as being pure immateriall substances.
By the name of Angels in this place are understood all the celestial and
blessed spirits, which as S. Gregory shows out of the holy scriptures are
divided into nine quires or orders: and although sometimes the name of Angels
be appropriated to those blessed spirits which are ranked in the lowest quire,
yet all the nine quires of them are also truly and properly called by that
name; which as she said S. Gregory does say, is imposed upon them by reason
of the functions and chardges wherein they are employed by almighty God,
concerning which the Apostle speaking of them in general says, Are they not
all ministering spirits sent to minister for them which shall recerue the
ininheritance of salvation?

Ye Heavens bless our Lord. By the Heavens are understood the celestial
orbs, of which by reason of their greatness, beauty, actiuitie, motions and
seueral^ other properties, the Prophet David does in particular and expressly
ass^uere That Psalm. 18.
they show forth the glory of God.

All waters that are above the heavens bless ye our Lord. Here it is c^earely
said that there are waters above the heavens: and it agrees with that we read
in Genesis, Genesis 1.
to wit, that God made a firmament, and divided the waters that were under the
firmament from those that were above the firmament: and God called the
firmament Heaven. It agrees also with that of the Psalmist, Praise him ye
heavens of heavens Psalm. 148. Psalm. 103.
and the waters that are above the heauenes. and in another place, Stretching
out the heaven as a skin, which couerest the highest parts the^eof with waters.
Which although it may perhaps seem at the first veiw contrary to natural
reason, and the sayings of the Philosophers, yet (as S. Augustine writes upon
Genesis) The authority of that part of holy writ is far to be preferred
above the perspicacity or capacity of humane understanding. But what manner of
waters they are it is not certain. The common opinion is that they are
corporal waters: and morally by them are understood the elevated and
illuminated mynds of the Saints, in which as in a mirror divine things are
clearly represented.

Bless our Lord all ye powers of our Lord. By these Powers some do understand
the mouers of the celestial orbs, whom the Philosophers called Intelligences
and S. Thomas in his Sum affirms to be of the middle Hierarchy of Angels,
and of the quire of Virtues, of whom holy David makes mention saying, Bless
our Lord Psalm. 148.
all ye his virtues: you his mynisters that do his will. Others by these
powers of our Lord do understand the efficient virtues in the celestial
orbs, which at their first Creation God almighty ingrafted in them, or which
are naturally in them; whereby they govern and work upon the elements and
mixed bodies, according to that of the Philosopher Man and the Sun engender
man: for the celestial bodies by these virtues are general causes of all
motions and alterations, generations and corruptions in these inferior things.

Sun and Moon bless ye our Lord These are the two great lights of which is
made mention in Genesis: the greater of them, to wit the Sun to govern the
day; and the lesser, to wit the Moon to govern the night. In the diligent
consideration of which lights especially of the Sun the Majesty of God does
wonderfully appear, according to that of S. Denis, This li. de diuinis
n^minibus c. 4.
visible Sun (says he) is an evident representation of the divine goodness
who is the eternal and intellectual Sun, the Sun of wisdom and justice.
Yea in the greatness, swiftness of motion, brightness, power, and influence
of the Sun we cannot sufficiently admire the eminency of the divine power and
wisdom. By the Sun is spiritually signified the understanding of truth and
goodness, and the splendour of Reason above the other powers: all which are
subject to it, illuminated and directed by it, least erring in the lubricity of
vice, they fall violently to their own destruction. B^ the Moon is signified
the inferior portion of the soul, as is is governed and ruled by the
superior portion thereof, and obedient to its direction.

Stars of heaven bless ye our Lord, The stars do manifold ways
represent the magnificence of their Creator in their beauty, motion, virtue,
plurality, situation, order and influence: They seem indeed unto us but
small; yet the least of them is affirmed to be greater then the whole earth:
and the cause of their appearing so small is only in regard they are situated
most remote from us. The glory of the stars (says Ecclesiasticus) is the
beauty of heaven, our Lord illuminating the Eccles. 43.
world on high. By them are designed virtuous men endued with wisdom, who
shine to others in words of edification, example, fame, and good life:
according to that of the Apostle, Do ye all Philip. 2.
things without murmurings, that you may be without blame, and the simple
children of God without reprehension in the midst of a crooked and perverse
generation, amongst whom you shine as lights of the world. and Daniel 12.
that of Daniel the Prophet, They that instruct many to justice shall shine as
stars unto perpetual eternities.

Every shower and dew bless ye our Lord. These are produced in the air and
are very profitable for the making fertile all such things as spring out of the
earth, and the conservation of the life of man. A shower or rain is caused by
heat reuerberating upon a clowd and dissoluing it into drops of water. The
shower, (says the Prophet Isaie) comes down from Isai. 55.
heaven and returns noe more thither, but inebriateth the earth, and waters
it, and makes it to spring, and gives seed to the sower, and bread to him
that eats. In the manner of the descending whereof drop after drop with a
certain coherence in form of little streams or most subtle water channels,
we cannot sufficiently admire the wisdom and goodness of God almighties
providence. For as holy Job says, If he hold in the waters, all things Job.
1^.
shall be dried, and if he send them forth, they shall overthrow the earth, to
wit, if they should fall together with violence: but God almighty of his
wonderful goodness preuenteht this, Who binds the waters in Job. 26.
the clouds, that they break not forth together downwards. Dew is a subtle
and slender vapor compacted together in the superficies of the earth, or upon
herbs by a te^perate coldness, both to nourish them, and refresh the air. By
Dew is signified the consolation and unction of the holy Ghost: and by a
shower is signified doctrine and preaching; according to that of the Prophet
Isaie, I will command the Isa. 5.
clouds that they rain noe shower upon it, speaking of the Synagogue of the
Jews.

All spirits of God bless ye our Lord. The spirits here mentioned are taken
for the winds which proceed from sundry parts of the earth, and conduce very
much to the budding forth of the fruits of the earth, and to the consolation
and refreshing of mankind. By them are signified the inspiration and
refrigeration o^ the holy Ghost.

Fire and heat bless ye our Lord. If w^ will seriously consider the
subtility, actiuity, and greatness of the elementarie Fire, it will
abundantly store us with matter of it is Creators praise. S. Thomas affirms
that the properties of divine things may fitly be expressed by Fire: for God
himself is termed by the Apostle a consnming Fire; charity also, yea and
the Luc. 12.
holy Ghost is for diverse reasons called Fire. By Fire is signified Charity,
and by Luc. 24.
heat (which is an effect of Fire) the fervor of charity: of which our
Savior said, I came to cast fire on the earth, and what will I but that it
be kindled. and the two Disciples said, Was not out heart burning in us
whilst he spoke in the way?

Cold and summer bless ye our Lord* Cold is either taken for the air, or for
the sharp quality of the winter season.

By it is mystically understood the extinguishing of vices and concupiscence:
and by summer the perfection of virtues: in which the elect do magnificently
praise almighty God, most humbly ascribing to his divine goodness as well their
^ecesse from evil as their access to good.

Dewes and hoarie frost bless ye our Lord. The Dewes here spoken of are most
frequent in the spring time: but hoarie frost is most usually in Autumn. By
Dew is designed prosperity, and by hoarie frost adversity in both which
pious and Virtuous men do equally give thanks to God.

Frost and Cold bless ye our Lord. Frost is caused by cold, and the most
vehement frost is occasioned by the North wind, according to that of
Ecclesiasticus. The cold North wind blewe, and of the water Eccles. 43. Psalm.
147.
there froze Christ^all, upon the gatering waters it shall rest, and as a breast
plate it shall put it self upon waters. and that of the Psalmist, He casts
his Crystal as morsells: before the face of his cold who shall endure? By
frost and cold is understood the constriction or obduration of the mind, caused
by substraction or suspension of divine co^ olations or sensible devotion: into
which estate whosoever comes by the diulne dispensation, let him praise God
in the best manner that he can and in noe sort neglect to prosecute those pious
exercises he has accustomed himself to perform, nor condeseend to solace
himself in exterior vain delights, but busy himself in some profitable
employment as reading, writing, or hand labor, and expect with patience the
reinfusion of those subtracted gifts, acknowledging his unworthiness, and
resigning himself to bear that affliction even during his whole life, if so
it shall seem good to the will of God: and noe doubt these aridities and
coldnesses will turn to his advancement in the way of perfection, and the
comforts he will receive afterward from the divine goodness wlll be far
more real and solid then he ever formerly experienced.

Ye and snow bless ye our Lord. Some by ye do suppose hail to be
understood. Snow is the dissolution of a cloud which by reason of excessive
cold cannot melt into drops, but is congealed in its descent and falls down
in form of locks of wool. The whiteness thereof is caused by reason that
the subtle and light spirits thereof in their congealing do strive to exhale,
but are stricken suddenly by force of the cold and kept in, by which means
they are turned into a froth, and seem white and clear. In ye Psalm. 147.
Psalm. 148.
and snow we may behold the immense wisdom of God, who (as the Psalmist
affirms) gives snow as wool. and again, Hail, snow, ye, spirit of
storms: which do his word. By these two are signified the scourges of God,
wherewith we are chastized; in which we ought to praise God, saying with holy
Job, I have sinned, Job. 33.
and indeed I have offended, and as I was worthy I have not received.

Nights and days bless ye our Lord. There are two sorts of days, The one is
called an artificial day, which continues during the space of time that the
Sun is seen in our Hemisphere: the other a natural day, which contains
all that space of time which an artificial day does, and the night following;
and is usually divided into 24. hours Night is caused by the shadow of the
earth, and designeth tribulation, and day prosperity. By Night is also
designed the obscurity of the old Testament or darkness of vices, and by
day the grace of truth in the New testament and illustration of the mind:
according to that of the Apostle, The night is passed, and the day is at hand:
Romans 13.
Let us therefore cast of the works of darkness and do on the armor of
light.

Light and darkness bless ye our Lord. S. Paul defines Light by its
effect, Light Ephesians. 5.
(says he) is that which makes all things manifest. It is a celes^iall
quality created the first day: by which is designed the increate brightness
of God. In a mystical sense it is taken for the illuminatio^ of the
understanding, or for the consolation and exhilaration of the heart; as
darkness (which is a privation of light) is taken for ignorance, or
desolations and heaviness of the heart.

Lightnings and clouds bless ye our Lord. Lightning is a wonderful hot and
dry exhalation, which after it is drawn aloft is environed on every side, and
constrained into straight limits by the force of cold, out of which it striving
to get passage, in that conflict fire flasheth forth the clowd bursting, and
thunder is heard. Clouds are caused partly by the celestial waters before
mentioned, and partly by moist vapors exhaled and drawn up by the Sun. By
them are spiritually signified the co^duits of grace, and the preachers of Gods
holy word: and by lightnings the corruscation of miracles, and the commination
or threatening of the terrible judgments of God; according to that of the
Prophet Isaie, I will command the Clouds that they rain Je. 5.
noe shower upon it. and that of the Psalmist, His lightnings shined to the
round Psalm. 96.
world etc.

Let the earth bless our Lord. The earth is the lowest and least of the sower
Elements, and a great part thereof is over flowne with waters: nevertheless
it does afford abundant matter of the Creators praise to all that shall
rightly consider the quantity, disposition, fertility, and other properties
thereof; as also how it is as it were the center of the Universe, and
remains firm and immovable in its place, notwithstanding its exceeding
weight which is not supported by any thing, but hangs wonderfully in the
midst of the world. By the stability and fertility thereof is signified
constant and virtuous men, whom the holy Ghost does make fruitful with the
celestial seed of the word of God, according to that of S. Luc. 8.
Luke, The seed is the word of God: and that which fell upon good ground are
they who in a good and perfect heart hearing the word do retain it, and yield
fruit in patience.

Mountains and little hills bless ye our Lord. By them are designed those
that are of great and of small power and authority in the holy Church; and
especially Prelates, and such as excel in the gifts of grace, according to
that of the Prophet Ioell, Mountains shall distill sweetness, and Ioell. 3.
the hills shall flow with milk.

All things that spring in the earth bless ye our Lord. If we attentively
consider the value, beauty, sweetness, delightfulness, and other innumerable
properties of the things that are produced within the earth, and of those that
spring out of it, we cannot sufficiently admire in them the wisdom,
sweetness, and beauty of the omnipotent Creator.

Bless our Lord ye fountains. Fountains are certain evident
representations of almighty God, who by reason of his Munificence,
liberality, and immense goodness toward mankind is often termed in holy
Scriptures a Fountain. By the^ are signified Doctors, preachers, and Priests,
unto whom it belongs Psalm. 67.
to communicate and impart to others the streams of wisdom and knowledge to
salvation, and distribute the gifts of grace, and the holy Sacraments; and of
whom it is written, In Churches bless ye God our Lord of the Isa. 12.
fountains of Israel. and in another place, You shall draw waters in joy out
of the Saviors fountains.

Seas and Rivers bless ye our Lord There is one great sea called the Ocean,
and diverse other particular seas as it were arms of the said great sea. From
the sea' as from the first fountain or head all Rivers issue, according to
that of Ecclesiastes, All rivers enter into the sea, and the Eccl. 1.
sea ouerfloweth not: to the place whence rivers issue forth they do return,
that they muie flow again. By the sea is sometimes expressed the inquietude,
restlesnesse, bitterness, and commotion of this world, to wit, of secular
men: according to that of the Prophet Isaie, The impious are as it were Psa. 57.
the raging sea, which cannot be quiet: Sometimes also by the sea are designed
the hearts of penitents moving themselves with bitterness and the waves of
internal compunction. By the rivers are signified the copious gifts of grace;
according to that of our Savior, He that Ioh. 7.
believes in me, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living waters, and
sometimes the excess of tribulations, according to that of Psalm. 92.
the Psalmist, The rivers have lifted up their waves about the voices of many
waters.

Whales and all things that move in the waters bless ye our Lord. These are
the principal ornaments of the element of water: and what mortal man is able
to explicate, the variety, profit, strength, and other properties of the fishes
of the sea? Verily if we attend to what is written by Philosophers concerning
the Whale, we shall find an ample subject of the Creators praise. By that our
Savior speaking to S. Peter and S. Andrew Mat 4.
said, Come ye after me and I will make you to be fishers of men, it should
seem that by fishes are understood men: in such sort, that by the VVhale are
designed the great and powerful men; and by the other creatures moving in the
waters are signified the lesser and simpler sort of people, all regenerated by
the waters of Baptism, and receiving thereby infused virtues and life of grace.

Bless our Lord all ye fowls of heaven, to wit of the air, where birds
fly. Who can worthily admire the wisdom, perfection, and Majesty of God in
the diversity, sweet modulation, swift motion, and other proprieties of birds?
By them are sometimes signified proud men raising themselves unto the height of
vanity: and devils flying in the air; of whom our Savior said, The fowls
of the air did eat Luc. 8.
it, that is, did take away the seed of the word of God. Yet in this place by
the fowls of the air some do understand Contemplatiues elevated aloft by the
wings of Prayer and Meditation: unto whom may fitly be applied that of the
Psalmist, Who will give me the wings of Psalm. 54.
a dove? and I will fly and rest? and that of the Prophet Isaie, Who are these
that Isa. 60.
fly as clouds, and as doves to their windows? and again in another place,
They that hope in our Lord shall change their Isai. 40
strength, They shall take wings as Eagies, they shall run and labor, they
shall walk and not faint.

All beasts and cattle bless ye our Lord. In these also the magnificence of
the most high artificer is unspeakably commended, who to declare his singular
wisdom in these his effects does speak many things of them to his servant
Job. S. Augustine affirms that those creatures which have the least of
quantity have the most admiration: for we more admire the works of the Ante
and Bees, the^ the vast bodies of other beasts. Hugh also of S. Victor
conformably speaking says, That the creatures which we admire for their
littl^nes, are so artificially and wisely formed, that we can scarce discern
whether we ought rather to admire the tushes of the Bore, or the wings of the
Moath, the wings of the Griffon or of the Gnat, the head of a Horse or of a
Locust, the thigh of an Elephant or of an Eagle etc. For in these small bodies
God almighty has so fully distributed all manner of lineaments suitable to
their several natures, that nothing seems to be wanting to them, which
nature has formed in the greatest. By beasts and cattle are signified men
following sensuality, who are invited to bless our Lord in that he has so
graciously spared them, and with such patience expected their amendment. These
after their conversion for the most part are accustomed to praise our Lord with
a grateful heart, saying with the Psalmist, But that our Lord has helped me,
within very Psalm. 9^.
little my soul had dwelt in hell. Yet in regard that bruit, sauadge, and
untamed creatures are properly called beasts; and bruit, tame, and domestical
creatures cattle: by beasts may fitly be understood carnal, cruel, and
intractable men; and by cattle, gentle, courteous, and tractable men.

Sons of men bless ye our Lord. Reasonable and intellectual creatures as
the Sons of Men are, ought to bless our Lord not only by affording matter
of the divine praise to such as rightly consider them: but by considering their
own excellency and perfection, as also the perfections in other creatures,
to magnify and extol with heart and mouth the infinite goodness wisdom and
power of almigtie God, acknowledging him by words and deeds the author and
fountain of all perfection, and cordially giving thanks unto him for all
benefits and gifts bestowed either upon them, or upon other creatures. Indeed
if we will attentively consider Man as touching his body, and soul, and other
circumstances concerning him, we shall find so much the more copious and
excellent matter of the Creators praise, by how much man is of a more high and
excellent nature then the rest of the forenamed creatures. For in the body of
Man how great goodness of God, how great prudence of so mighty a Creator does
appear? Are not the places of the senses and the rest of the members so
disposed, the form, shape, and stature of the whole body so delineated, that
they clearly show they were made for the service of a reasonable soul? Man is
not created as we see irrational creatures inclining toward the earth, but
with the form of his body bolt upright toward heaven: whereby he is
admonished, according as the Apostle exhorts, To mind the things that are
above, and not the things that Collos. 3.
are upon the earth. By how much the more and greater benefits therefore are
bestowed upon him, by so much the more he is obliged to praise God; and by so
much the more severe and terrible shall his doom of reprobation be, if he be
found defective herein.

Let Israel bless our Lord. Amongst all the generations of men the Israelits
are most obliged to God almighty for his especial graces and singular
patronadge: and consequently are bound by all the laws of gratitude to render
him due praise; Who declares his word to Jacob: his Psalm. 147.
justices and judgments to Israel. He has noe done in leke manner to any
nation: and his judgments he has not made manifest to them. Yet in respect
that the people of Israel for their incredulity and obstinate blindness are
become unworthy of that name, of whom the Apostle says, Behold Israel 1.
Cor. ^0.
according to the flesh: by Israel is now to be understood the people that are
Christians by faith and works, of whom the same Apostle says, Peace upon
the Israel of Gal. 9.
God; for they are frequently designed in the Prophets under the names of
Jerusalem, Sion, and Israel, especially in regard that the Primitive Church
consisted of the said people.

Priests of our Lord bless ye our Lord. These holy men having in general
terms invited all Israel to bless our Lord, do now here especially nominate
the Priests, on whom greater gifts are bestowed then upon the vulgar, and who
in respect of their office or function are peculiarly obliged to spiritual
exercises and the praise of God: unto whom Ezechias said, My children be not
negligent; 2. Paralip. 29.
our Lord has chosen you to stand before him, and to minister to him, and to
worship him, and to burn incense to him and of whom our Lord has said, I
will replenish the souls of the Priests with fatness. and in Exodus it is
also said, that The Priests shall be holy to their God. If then the Priests
Exodus 29
of the old law were bound to live so spiritually, continently and soberly,
whose priesthood was but as a type and figure of the priesthood of Christ and
his holy Church: how spiritually, continently, and temperately are the Priests
of the holy Church obliged to live? Verily so much the more perfectly ought
they to frame their lives, by how much their priesthood is more spiritual and
divine, and the sacrifice they offer more excellent, and the Sacraments they
handle of greater value.

Servants of our Lord bless ye our Lord. These words, do seem to be spoken
to those chiefly who ministered to the Priests in the divine worship, to wit to
the Levites, unto whom Deacons do succeed in the holy Church: yet they may
also be understood as spoken to all the faithful; for they are all properly
styled the servants of God, as being Created by him, and redeemed with the
precious blood of his most dear and only son Christ Jesus.

Spirits and souls of the just praise ye our Lord. You are to know, that
these words, Spirit and soul do express one and the same essence of a
reasonable soul: which in as much as it informs and gives life to the body,
is called Anima, that is, a soul: and by reason of its simplicity, and in as
much as it contemplateth heavenly things, it is called a Spirit.

Holy and humble of heart bless ye our Lord, not attributing your virtues
and merits to your own proper power, labor, or industry; but to the piety and
grace of the holy Ghost, who operateth in you both a good will, and ability to
perform your duties.

Ananias Azarias and Misael bless ye our Lord. These holy men having invited
all creatures to praise our Lord, do now provoke themselves thereunto, in
consideration of their present benefit, being miraculously preserved from the
fire of that flaming furnace

The verse following is not in the Text, but has been added by the holy
Church in the praise of the most blessed Trinity in the place of Gloria Patri:
which Pope Damasus by the persuasion of S. Jerome did institute to be recited
or sung at the end of every Psalm, as has been said heretofore.

Let us Bless, that is, Let us with heart and mouth exhibit devotion, praise,
honor, reverence, and divine worship in spirit and truth to the Father our
Creator, and the Son our Redeemer with the Holy Ghost our Comforter: and for
that these trhee persons are one undivided and most amiable God, Let us praise
him in three persons with one praise, and superexalt him for ever, speaking
well of him, thinking well of him; and ascribing unto him all that is good.

Thou art blessed o Lord in the firmament of heaven, and laudable, and
glorious, and superexalted for ever.

The argument of the 148. Psalm entitled Alleluia, that is to say, Praise
our Lord.
THe Prophet intending to inuit all creatures to praise our Lord, does reduce
them to two Classes, to wit, Heaven and earth; for these are the two
principal parts of the world, according to that of Genesis, In the beginning
Gen 1.
God created heaven and earth. Heaven is the seat of the Angels, and therefore
he begins with Praise our Lord from the Heavens, and refers to it all
superior things: and the earth is the seat of men; and therefore he adds in
the 7. verse Praise our Lord from the earth, referring unto it all inferior
things.

The exposition of the Psalm.
PRaise ye our Lord from the Heavens: praise ye him in the high places.

Praise ye him all his Angels: praise ye him all his hosts. S. Augustine
well notes upon this place, that the Prophet does not by these words command
the Angels to praise our Lord; or exhort them to praise him, as though they
were slack and remiss in this happy office, or did ever cease or desist from
praising him: for as S. John affirms, The Apocalip. 4. Psalm. 83.
four beasts had noe rest day and night, saying holy holy holy Lord, God
omnipotent. and the Psalmist says, Blessed are they that dwell in thy house o
Lord, for euer-and ever they shall praise thee. But he does hereby congratulate
them in this their praising God: like as we are accustomed to congratulate
those, whom we see doing some work with joy wherewith we are well pleased,
saying, courage, go too my Masters, or the like; which words we use unto them,
not that they stand in need of our encouragement to move them to begin that
work, but that we are delighted with that they are already in hand with.
Praise ye him Sun and Moon: praise ye him all Stars and light. The
Sun, Moon, Stars, and light are said to praise our Lord, when by their
beauty, efficacy, swittnesse, and other proprieties they do induce
intellectual creatures to admire and praise their Creator. Praise him ye
heavens of heavens, to wit, the greatest and highest heavens: and the waters
that are about the said heavens, let them praise the name of our Lord, as has
been said in the precedet Cantic^e.

Because he said intellectually within himself, to wit in his practical
understanding, that they should be created, and they were made of nothing,
that which they now are: he commanded by his divine will, and they were
created; for according to the Apostle, God almighty calls those Romans 4.
things that are not, as those things that are. as also that of Genesis, And
God said, Genesis 1.
be light made, be a firmament made etc So by saving all things were
created: for God is the cause of all things by his understanding, according to
that, Thou Psalm. 103. Psalm. 134.
have made all things in wisdom: and by his will, according to that, All
things whatsoever our Lord would, he has done in heaven and earth.

He established them, to wit, the Angels, Sun, Moon, Stars, and the
heavens for ever, and for ever and ever: for he has given them an
incorruptible being Notwithstanding we believe that the heavens and the lights
of the heavens, in as much as concerns their accidental form, shall be
changed and renewed for the better, as has been said in our former
explications. He put a precept, he prefixed them a certain form or manner of
working, and it shall not pass, but remain as he has decreed. He put a
precept to the Sun, that it should shine by day; and behold in so many
years this has been observed: to the Moon, that it should increase and
decrease for thirty days, and this course has not been altered: to the Sea,
that it should not transcend its limits; and behold the surging billows of the
Ocean come wallowing to the shore, burst, and return.

Praise our Lord from the earth all you that any wise appertain thereunto: Ye
Dragons and all depthes. By Dragons are here understood great fishes which some
call Leuiathans or Whales:: and by the depthes are understood the deep placee
where such fishes remain; according to that, Thou have crushed the heads of
the Dragons in Psalm. 73
the waters. Yet some in this place by Dragons do understand great serpents,
rough with scales, which dwell in dens, caves, and hollow moist places to
temper their natural heat: and do not creep upon the earth, but fly in the
air, and do exceed other creatures in vast quantity and horrid aspect.

Fire, hail, snow, ye, spirit of storms, to wit tempestious winds, exciting
sudden whirl winds and storms at Sea, Which do his word, do obey his
divine will, performing that for which they were ordained.

Mountains and little hills, trees that bear fruit, and all Cedars. Beasts
wild and untamed, and all cattle tame and domesticke, Serpents, and fethered
fowls. All these the Prophet does inuit to praise our Lord, according as has
been explicated in the precedent Canticle.

Finally the Prophet inuiteth Man to praise our Lord, for whom all things were
created, saying, Kings of the earth, all that have independent temporal
authority and absolute right to govern, and all peoples, that owe fealty,
homage, and obedience to their lawful Sovereigns: Princes, that have absolute
right to govern their subjects within their principalities, but yet are
subordinate themselves to the said Kings in some respects, and all Judges of
the earth, that have authority from Kings and Princes to determine differences
between party and party, and to pronounce sentence of death in criminal
causes.

And that he might comprehend all sorts of people of what age, sex, condition
soever, he adds, Young men and Virgins, old with young. All people therefore
whether they be Kings, Princes, or private persons, men or women, old or young,
let them praise the name of our Lord: because the name of him alone is exalted:
that is, he himself alone does infinitely surpass all things in nobility and
perfection. Eccles. 1.
Whence Ecclesiasticus says, There is one most high Creator, omnipotent, and
mighty King, and to be feared exceedingl^. and M^yses says, Neither is there
other God Deuteronomy. 3.
either in heaven or on earth, that is able to do thy works, and to be
compared to thy strength.

The Confession of him above heaven and earth, to wit, His praise is song in
the triumphant and militant Church. His glory (says the Prophet) shall cover
the heavens: and the earth is full of his praise. Yet in neither of them can he
be praised to the full; for all the tongues of men and Angels are altogether
in sufficient to express Abacuc. 3.
his immense goodness and infinite perfection. He has exalted the horn of
his people, to wit, the power and glory of the people of Israel, electing them
amongst all the generations of the earth, giving them divine laws written with
his own finger, protecting them miraculously against the fury of their
enemies, and governing them with singular providence and unspeakable love.

An Hymn, (which is the praise of God with a spiritual song) properly
belongs to all his Saints in heaven and earth: for they are worthy of all
praise, and they praise God incessantly: to the Children of Israel, a people
approaching unto him. According to the letter the Prophet calls, the Children
of Israel, to wit of the Patriarch Jacob the Saints of God; because in those
days almost all the world was inclined to Idolatry excepting they: whence it
is that Moses often says of them, Thou art a holy people to the Lord Deuteronomy. 7
thy God. The Lord thy God has chosen thee to be his peculiar people of all
peoples, that are upon earth. Yet in a spiritual sense by the Children of
Israel are understood, all the faithful, whether they be descended from the
Patriarch Jacob according to the flesh or not: for as the Apostle teaches, Not
Romans 9.
all that are of Israel be Israelites: nor they that are the seed of Abraham
all be children: but in Isaac shall the seed be called unto thee: that is to
say, not they that are the children of the flesh, they are the children of
God: but they that are the children of the promise are esteemed for the seed.
and to all such the Apostle says, Let the word of Christ dwell in you Colos.
3.
abundantly, teaching and admonishing your own felues with Psalms, Hymns
and spiritual Canticles in grace, singing in your hearts to God.

These are a People approaching to God. For as we go back from him by sin,
so we approach near unto him by virtues and good works. Faith shows the
true end for which Man was created, and the way leading thereunto: Hope
begins to tend thitherwards: Charity unites us to our end; and all other
virtues in as much as they are informed with Charity do knitt us indissolubly
unto our end, which is God himself.

Behold here a Psalm replete with the zeal of divine love: wherein the
Prophet expressing some few creatures by name, does exhort the whole machine of
the universe to praise the most high and holy Trinity; that so by them might
be fulfilled what he piously desired, but was unable by himself to perform.
Whilst we sing it, let us recollect our minds from all extrauagances, inkindle
in them the zeal of divine love, and conserve it with all vigilance Let us
contemplate in all especially in the celestial creatures the excellency of the
Creator. In this contemplation let us feast our spirit delighting ourselves in
his praise, and congratulating his ineffable felicity most affectionately.
Finally let us personally ourselves fulfill what we excite all other things
unto, by praising and glorifying almighty God, for whose praise and glory all
things were created: for truly it is more possible for heaven and earth to be
annihilated, then for a man not to be saved, who glories in the divine praise.

The title and argument of the 149. Psalm.
THe title prefixed to this Psalm is Alleluia: and it agrees well with the
words of the Psalm, which do wholly tend to set forth the praise of our Lord
and Savior, principally for the benefit of the perfect victory and final
triumph, which the faithful shall obtain in his second coming; when all the
adversaries of the elect shall be damned eternally, and the elect be freed
from all evil reassuming glorified bodies.

These three last Psalms have such connection and coherence one with another,
that they seem to be a continuation one of another: and this peradventure is
the reason why the holy Church places them together at the end of Lauds, and
appoints them to be song as one Psalm with one Gloria in the end.

The exposition of the Psalm.
IN the last verse of the precede^t Psalm the Prophet has these words, An
Hymn to all his Saints etc. and now he begins this Psalm with

Sing ye to our Lord a new song, as if he had said, O ye Saints that are a
people approaching to him, Sing ye to our Lord a new song for his new
benefits, to wit, for the benefits of our Redemption, renouation,
justification, and glorification: let his praise be in the Church of Saints,
in the congregation of devout people, in the Militant and triumphant Church; as
the Prophet Isaie recounteth, Isa. 51.
Joy and gladness shall be found in it, giving of thanks, and voice of
praise.

Let Israel, to wit, all such of the Jews that shall be converted, and all
other Christian people, who by faith and good life are reputed to be of the
seed of the Patriarchs, much rather then the children of the flesh: according
to that of the Apostle; Know ye therefore that they who Gal. 3.
are of faith, the same are the children of Israel. Let this true Israel be
joyful in him, that made him, to wit, in his Creator and redeemer, and let
the Children of Sion, to wit, particular Churches members of the universal
Church, or devout souls who are the children of the holy Church designed by
Sion, rejoice in their King, to wit the celestial Spouse our Savior Christ,
of whom it is said in the Canticles, Cant. 1.
The King has brought me into his Cellars, we will rejoice and be glad in
thee.

Let them praise his name in quire: on timbrell, and Psalter let them sing to
him. Let them not only sing a new song unto him with joy and exultation, but
let them also adioyne musical instruments to their voices, that his praise
may be more solemnly set forth. By the Timbrel is understood the
mortification of the flesh, because a skin is extended upon that instrument:
and by the Psalter upon which many strings are stretched at length, are
designed good works. The children therefore of Sion ought to sing to our Lord
on Timbrell, to wit, in chastisement of their flesh and refraining their
inordinate concupiscences; and on Psalter* to wit, in goodness of life, and
manners free from reprehension: that their life and manners may be consonant
to the words they pronounce; which manner of quire is most delightful to the
ears of almighty God. Let them do this.

Because our Lord is well pleased in his people: Proverb. 8. Ioh. 15.
to wit in his elect, whom he has loved from all eternity of his mere
benignity, and of whom he says My delights to be with the sons of men.
And he will exalt in the day of judgment Luc. 12.
the meek, to wit, those that are true Christians in faith and conversation,
and have practiced that lesson which our Savior proposed to all sorts of
people, saying, Learn of me because I am meek and Math. 11.
humble of heart. These he will exalt unto Salvation of body and mind, giving
them a double stole, complete beatitude and life everlasting.

The Saints shall rejoice in glory, to wit, in the celestial Kingdom, when
as their we^ping and lamenting in this world shall be turned into joy: they
shall be joyful in their bedds, to wit, in the celestial mansions, in which
they shall sweetly and happily rest in God by the delightful sleep of sincere
contemplation. Of these bedds our Savior says. I go to prepare you a place.
and again, Ioh. 14.
In my fathers house there be many mansions. The exaltations, to wit, the
highest praises of God in their throat, If this be understood of the
corporal throat it seems to follow* that in the celestial country there
shall be vocal praises, which Dionysius the Carthusian does most probably
conjecture. Yet (says he) it may be expounded of the spiritual throat, of
which we read in the Canticles, His fruit was sweet unto Cant. 2. Proverb. 8.
my throat: and in the Proverbs of Solomon, My throat shall meditate truth.
This is the throat by which the word of the heart is uttered, and in which
spiritual sweetness is tasted. and two edged swords in their hands. By these
two edged swords is understood the sentence of reprobation, which shall be
pronounced against the impious in the day of judgment by the Saints of God;
especially by the holy Apostles, and such as have for Gods sake given all they
had to the poor, and have followed Christ our Lord, not contenting themselves
to observe the commandments only, but also the Evangelical counsels: of
which number are many of the Primitive Church, and all Religious that have
lived according to their holy Institutes laboring for perfection in the best
manner they could; of which our Savior says, You which have Math. 19.
followed me, in the regeneration when the son of man shall sit in the seat
of his Majesty, you also shall sit upon twelve seats, judging the twelve
tribes of Israel.

To do revenge in the nations: chastisements among the peoples. These words,
and the rest following in this Psalm do show to what end the Saints have such
swords in their hands, to wit, that together with Christ they may take
revenge on perverse people for the sins and injuries done against God and
themselves, and inflict due punishment upon them. Moreover To bind their
Kings, to wit, the unjust Kings of the impious in fetters: and their nobles in
iron manicles, by saying with our Savior Bind his hands and feet and Math. 22.
cast him into utter darkness. And finally That they may do in them the
judgment written, to wit, that they may so judge the impious, as it is
decreed in the divine prescience, and ordered in the holy scriptures: whence
is that promise of our Lord to the just, You shall go forth, and Malac. 4.
shall leap as Calves of the heard. And you shall tread the impious, when they
shall be ashes under the sole of your feet in the day that I do, says the
Lord of hosts. This glory, to wit, to sit with Christ in judgment, and
denounce sentence against the world and the princes thereof is to all the
Saints, belongs to all the Saints by the ordinance of almighty God

Behold here a Psalm inuiting us to the divine praise and spiritual
gladness. In it the beatitude of the elect is discribed and the pains of the
reptobate are profitably set before us, that we may be excited thereby to do
our best to attain to the society of the Saints, and to abhor the works and
fly the torments of the impious.

The title and argument of the 150. Psalm and last in the Lauds.
THe title is Aleluia. The Prophet does by the insueing Psalm inuit all
creatures, but principally those of the triumphant Church to praise the
fountain of their beatitude and author of their salvation. In the precedent
Psalm he has unfolded the translation of the Saints into the celestial
country, and therefore he does with good reason in this exhort the same
society to render thanks to our Lord for so ineffable a benefit with all
sorts of musical instruments, thereby expressing the ardour of his affection
to have the praises of God set forth by all the best means possible.

The exposition of the Psalm.
O Ye celestial Cltizens Praise ye our Lord the object and cause of your
felicity, in his holies, to wit in his heavenly sanctuary, and in the blessed
spirits which are his sacred temples; rendering the tribute of thanks unto him
for the ineffable benefits he has bestowed on them, and ascribing unto him all
the dowers of bliss and glory where with they are happily enriched: Praise ye
him in the firmament of his strength, to wit in the Imperial heaven, or in
the stability of fortitude which he has given to the blessed, confirming them
in grace and goodness.

Praise ye him in his powers, to wit, in his holy Angels which are called
Virtues or powers; or in his potent effects; who has done and suffered so
great things for men, and has so wonderfully exalted his saints in judgment
in the celestial country. Praise ye him according to the multitude of his
greatness, according as he is diversely great in himself and in his works. He
is great in wisdom, Psalm. 1^9. Luc. 1.
of which there is noe number. He is also great in power, because there shall
not be impossible with him any word Moreover he is great in Mercy great in
Justice, great yea immense in all perfection. But here arises a doubt how any
man can praise God according to the multitude of his greatness, in regard that
he is infinitely greater, and more worthy then all the praise that any creature
can exhibit unto him? To which may be answered, That to praise God according
to the multitude of his greatness, is to praise him in the best manner we
can, and with all our forces, humbly acknowledging our selves altogether
insufficient to set forth his praise: and this will suffice on our part, that
we may be reputed to have praised him in that sort.

The Prophet does here nominate Seven instruments wherewith he desires the
Saints should praise our Lord not that musticall instruments have place in
heaven, but to design the ineffable and manifold delectation and iollitie of
the blessed in their praising of God; and therefore they are to be understood
in a spiritual sense.

Praise ye him in the sound of the trumpet, to wit with a magnificent praise,
as being the King of Kings, and the giver of all triumph; by whose gracious
assistance you have happily passed the warfare with the world, the Devil, and
the flesh, and obtained a full victory over them. Praise ye him on Psalter, to
wit, in thankfulness for that he has effected by his grace, that you have
been able to keep his commandments, the observance whereof is the Psalter:
and Harp, to wit, in thanksgiving for the mortification of our flesh in this
world.

Praise ye him on tymbrell, to wit * for the gift of immortality bestowed
upon your bodies sometimes corruptibile; and in quire, to wit, in the quire or
order of Angels whereunto you are united, praise ye our Lord, who has made
you equal to them: praise ye him on strings, to wit, with the consonances of
Virtues, and Organ, to wit, ^n the sweet harmony of all things conducing to
the divine praise.

Praise ye him on well sounding Cymballs, to wit, with heart and mouth.
Praise ye him on Cymballs of iubilation, to wit, in the said manner, with
great joy, exultation, and gladness. Let every spirit praise our Lord.

What is understood by the Chapters in this and the divine office.
THe next in order follows a Chapter. The Chapters in this and the divine
office are nothing else but short Lessons taken out of the holy Scriptures: by
which name our holy Father S. Benedict makes mention of cap. 12. and 13.
them in his Rule. The holy Church well knowing the benefitt which is acquired
by hearing the word of God read in due manner, has intermixed with all the
hours of the divine office Lessons out of the sacred Scriptures, yet in such
proportion that to the longer Nocturnes she assigns longer Lessons, and to
the short day hours shorter; which she has termed Chapters, because they
are short sections of Lessons, which may serve for refection of the mind in
all the day houers.

The explication of the Chapter at Lauds, taken out of the Canticles, Cap. 6.
Ver. 8.
THe daughters of Sion have seen her, and declared her to be most blessed.
All reasonable and intellectual creatures united to God by Charity, as well in
the Militant as in the triumpha^t Church, do frequently if not incessantly
behold the most glorious Virgin: and by how much the more eminent and
illuminated they are, by so much the more profoundly and clearly do they
contemplate her dignity, excellency, and glory; and deservedly proclaim her to
be most blessed, that conceived and brought forth the Savior of all, and the
fountain of true beatitude. And the Queens, the souls of the Saints which
have governed themselves laudably, and kept their flesh in due subjection to
the spirit, have praised her, confessing her to be the most pure of Virgins,
and the example of all perfection.

The exposition of the Canticle of Zachary commonly called Benedictus. Luc. 1.
BLessed be our Lord God of all; but in peculiar manner of Israel his elected
people, not only of the progeny of Jacob according to the flesh, but also
according to the Spirit: because he has visited assuming humane nature, and
wrought the redemption of his people, freeing them from their invisible
enemies, from eternal damnation, from the guilt contracted by original finne;
yea even from all sin, in as much as is requisite on his part, according to
that of the Prophet, Out of the Osee. 13.
hand of death I will deliver them, from death I will redeem them. The
Incarnation of Christ is the beginning of our salvation, which he accomplished
by his passion: for almighty God did not determine to save us by the
Incarnation alone of his only Son, but he ordained to consummate our
redemption by his passion. What therefore Zachary said He has wrought is to
be understood, as spoken in a prophetical manner for He will work, because he
was afterward completely to work our salvation, blot out our offenses, and
reconcile us to God, according to that of Isaie, He was wounded for our
iniquities, be was broken for our sins. and again, Our Lord has put upon
him the iniquity of us all. By his people are understood not only the Jews,
but also the elected people of what nation soever: which are the people of
God, by eternal predestination; and spiritually Israelites, to wit the people
seeing God, or contemplating him by faith; of whom the Apostle says, Peace
and mercy upon the Gal. 6.
Israel of God.

And bath erected the horn of salvation to us. By a Horn is sometimes
signified a public denuntiation of some matter of moment: according to which
interpretation these words of the Prophet may be thus expounded, And has
published and made known the Incarnation of Christ our Savior Sometimes also
by a Horn is designed power and strength, and particularly in diverse places of
holy scriptures Royal Power: and according to this sense the said words are
to be understood as follows, And has erected, that is, has raised up the
horn of salvation to us, to wit Christ his only begotten son the King of
Kings, whom he sent into the world, not to iudgs the world but that the world
may be saved by him.

In the house of David his servant, in the tribe and family of David of whose
seed and progeny Christ was borne. Some do refer the erection of this horn
of salvation to the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ, because he did then
clearly demonstrate the power and glory of beatitude by rising to an immortal
life, bringing forth the Fathers out of Limbo, and ascending to the celestial
Kingdom. This God almighty has not done improuisedly, but

As he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets that are from the beginning,
that is, as he foretold by the Saints that have been ever since the creation of
the world, who with words, signs, figures, or deeds have spoken of Christ, and
foreshewed his mysteries. For (as S. Augustine declares) Prophecy concerning
Christ was not wanting in any age: even Adam by words and deeds did speak of
him, and in like manner the rest of the Patriarchs and Prophets have done;
whence is that of S. Peter* God who foreshewed by the mouth Act. 3.
of all the Prophets that his Christ should suffer, has so fulfilled it and
again, To him all Act. 10.
the Prophets give testimony. Indeed it was most me^t that so great a mystery
should be foreshewed long before, and diverse ways, that the dignity thereof
might be known; and being performed might be proned more credible, and be
more firmly believed. In this therefore our faith is most certainly
confirmed, that all things which we believe and hold concerning Christ, we can
prove to have been in such manner foretold. It is here said in the singular
number, by the mouth of his holy Prophets, because all of them with one spirit
did prophecy of him, and with one assent, that he should come and work
salvation to us.

Salvation from our enemies, especially from our invisible enemies, according
as it is written, For this ^ppeared the Son of God, that he might dissolve
the works of the devil. Job. 3.


And from the hand of all that hate us. By which words may be understood our
Saviors delivery and securing of his elect from the power and wicked designs
of perverse men. Not that he has so delivered and secured the just and
righteous, that they shall not be afflicted, persecuted, or killed by them in
this life: but because our Lord by his death and passion has obtained such
grace for his beloved servants, that they shall not become subject to the wills
of bad men, nor be induced by them through inordinate fear to commit vice and
do unjustly; but shall by patiently sustaining the tribulations and
persecutions which they suffer by their means, be brought to eternal glory,
and so for ever freed from their infestation. This is that which was promised
by Micheas to the primitive. Micheat 4.
Church, Thy hand shall be exalted over thine enemies, and all thine enemies
shall perish Thus therefore the God of Israel has erected salvation to us, and
delivered us from our enemies.

To work mercy to our Fathers, to wit, to the end that he might procure and
impart complete felicity to the Patriarks, Prophets, and other just men long
since departed this life, transporting them out of Limb^, and placing them in
the celestial palace: as it is said of Christ, Thou al^o^ Zacha. 9.
in the blood of thy testament have let forth the prisoners out of the lake
wherein is not water, Or To work mercy to our Fathers, to wit, to the end
that he might mercifully fulfill what he has foretold he will perform unto
them. For this reason also these words are said, because Christ assumed
humane nature, not moved thereunto by our justice, but of his own immen^e
piety, as the Apostle writes to Titus, The ad Titu^ 9.
beuig^^ty and kindness toward man of our Savior God appeared, not by the
works of justice which we did but according to his mercy he has saved us.
And to remember his holy testament, to wit, that by this work of our
delivery he might show that he was mindful of his holy covenant and firm
league which he entered into with the Patriarchs and Prophets, unto whom Christ
as God promised he would be incarnated, and come into the world* according to
that of Isaie, For this cause shall my people know my name in that day;
because I Isaie 52.
my self that spoke. lo I am present, Of this testament therefore he showed
himself mindful by assuming humane nature in the womb of the blessed Virgin.

The oath which he swear to Abraham our Father, Of this oath we read in
Genesis, By Genesis 22.
my own self have I sworn (says the Lord) because thou ^ast done this
thing, and have not spared thine only begotten son for my sake: I will
bless thee, and I will multiply thy seed as the ^^arres if heaven: and in thy
seed shall be blessed all the nations of the earth. Where by the seed of
Abraham according to the Apostle Christ is understood (...) Abraham (says he)
were the promise^ said, Galath. 3.
and to his seed. He says no^, And to seeds, as in many: but as in one, And
in thy seed, which is Christ. By this oath therefore the eternal Father
promised that his only Son should be incarnated of the seed of Abraham. Who
by giving his Son unto us in the mystery of the Incarnation did also^ bosto^
himself upon us by ^^^^^^ple (...) hence it follows in this place; That he
would give ^onself (...): (...) the Son has gi^^^ (...), to (...) ting
^imselfe ou^ br^ther, our Savior, etc our advocate (...) ^is has communicated
himself: unto us diverse ways, for being borne and ^o^mersing in the world he
has made^ himself a companion of men in his l^st s^^^^^s he gave himself for
our so^^^^e, dying ^e gave himself for the price of our redemption, a^
r^igning in the celestial to (...) for our b^atificall re^ (...) God a brighty
^s also (...) to give himself (...), into (...) he infuseth charity and
divine grace; be^^^^^ such have and possess God as the object of the (...)
light and occupation: and which wonderful ^dignation the abundant liberality,
exceeding favor, and (...) of God toward us is clearly (...) because giving
unto us his gifts; he imparteth himself withal to be had; possessed, be
held, beloved and enjoyed, to be our conseruer, helper and protector ever at
hand. Yet in this place Zachary speaks literally of the donation wherein the
only begotten Son of God is given to us, by this that he has assumpted our
nature to work and consummate our salvation: whence is that of the Prophet, A
little child is borne Isa. 9.
to us; and a Son is given to us.

That without fear, to wit inordinate; earnest, secular or semile, being
delivered by the intarnation and Passion of Christ from the hand of our enemies
both visible and invisible. We may serve him the true God with the service of
divine worship.

In holiness, in purity of body, but much more of the mind, all terrent and
carnal affection being excluded: that is to say, in a perfect conversion of
the heart; all affections of the soul being reformed, rectified and reduced
toward God; for in this sort God ought to be served, according as he exacteth
of us its Leuit^^us, Do not contaminate your souls, (...).
for I am the Lord your God: be holy because I am holy. and our Savior
Christ reaches us, Be you perfect, as also your heavenly Man. 5.
father is perfect. It is therefore requisite that we do not only exhibit
our selves reverently and purely toward God* rendering what is due unto him, to
^itt all thankfulness and praise, all honor and glory: but also that we
comport ourselves justly toward our neighbors, rendering to our Superiors,
equals, and inferiors respectively what belongs to all and every of them,
and giving them good example and edification in all things, according to that
of the Apostle, The things that are of peace let us pursue: and Roma. 14.
the things that are of edifying one toward another let us keep. Put not a
stumbling block or a scandal to your Brother: do not destroy him for whom
Christ died. Whence it follows here, and justice, to wit, that we may not
only serve him in holiness, but also in justice: rendering unto him for his
immense goodness and mercy showed toward us all obedience and love, praise
and thankfulness, and to our neighbors respectively what is due unto each
one, before him, to wit, with a pure intention and internal attention,
placing our selves as in his presence, considering him as the King and judge
beholding all things and so desiring to please him alone, seeking his honor
and glory in all things, and doing all things freuerently wit^ a filial ^^are
and simple heart, not like unto hypocrites doing good works before men for
humane respects and to be praised and rewarded by them; that foe we may
truly say with the Psalmist, I have kept thy commaund^^neurs, and thy
testimonies: Psalm. 118.
because all my ways are in the fight:

All our days, to wit incessantly and perseuerantly. There is noe greater
folly then to spend this time not only unfruitfully but also vitiously which
is allotted unto us wherein to work our salvation with fear and trembling: for
after this life there will be noe occasion offered of merit or demerit. Let us
therefore now whilst we have health, ability, of body and mind, and many other
means to serve our Lord, labor to perform our duty toward him and our
neighbor, and to increase in perfection and his divine love. Let us do this I
say not one day or seldom or for a small time, but continually perseuering
therein to our last breath, for He that shall ^ath. 10.
persevere unto the end, he shall be saved. and the Apostle says, Doing good,
let us not Gala. 6.
fail: for in due time we shall reap not failing.

According to Origin, Zachary being replenished with the Holy Ghost did
declare two prophesies. The first concerning Christ, which extends it self
thus fa^re: and the Second of S. John, as follows.

And thou child, shall be called the Prophet of the highest, to wit, of
Christ, who (according to the Apostle) is above all things Romans 9.
God blessed for ever. There may two questions be asked concerning these
words. The first, how this prophecy was verified in S. John, in respect that
he being asked if he were a Prophet did answer, that he was not. Concerning
which you are to note, that S. John did not absolutely deny himself to be a
Prophet; which was very manifest by the authority of this place, as also by
the words of our Savior, who said, That a greater Prophet Lu^. 7.
among the children of women then John the Baptist, there is noe man: but he
denied himself to be such a Prophet as the Pharisees intended by their
interrogation, to wit, one of the common sort of Prophets of the old
testament; which indeed was true, he being (as our Savior witnessed) more
(...) a Prophet, who did not only foretell that Christ should come, but also
did demonstrate and show him present.

The Second question is why Zachary spoke to a child of eight days old, who
could not according to the course of nature have the use of reason? Whereunto
S. Ambrose makes answer, That Zachary knew the infant did supernaturally
understand his words, as he understood the incarnation of the Son of God, and
his corporal presence being in his Mothers womb. For (says he) S. John
being now bot^^e could hear the words of his Father, who did hear the
salutation of the blessed Virgin Marie before he was borne: and had sense to
understand, who had affection to exult. Yet others with venerable Bede seem to
hold, that Zachary foretold these things, not in respect of S. John's taking
notice of them, but for the instruction of those that were present. For we
speak to unreasonable creatures and things without life inuiting them to set
forth the praises of God, not that they have understanding but that we and
those intelligible creatures that hear this inuitation may be excited
thereunto.

For thou shall go, before the face of our Lord to prepare his ways* By these
and the following words Zachary shows the reason why he has said, that S.
John shall be called the Prophet of the highest: to wit, because he shall go
before the fate of our Lord, that is, before his corporal and manifest
presence, to prepare his ways to dispose the hearts of men to faith, charity,
and receiving of Christ, This (...) fulfilled by S. Ioha^ for he was borne
before our Savior, he began to preach and baptize before him; and he went
before him into Ly^bo* He prepared the ways of Christ likewise, for the means
whereby Christ came into the hearts o^ men was the preaching and baptism of S.
John: or if by his ways be understood the preaching and baptism o^ Christ,
the doctrine and baptism of S. John was a disposition to them both.

To give knowledge of salvation to his people, to wit, to exhibit or preach
to the people of the Ie^es knowledge by which true felicity may be acquired,
knowledge concerning Christ who is our salvation, and knowledge disposing unto
remission of their sins: for this knowledge was of force unto remission of
sins as a disposition and incitement, in respect that the people were induced
thereby to penance and the explicit faith of Christ.

Through the b^ wells of the mercy of our God, to wit, through the intime
secret and amorous mercy of the only son of God. Charity and mercy are
metaphorically called the bowels through which God was graciously moved to
work our salvation; according to that of the Apostle, God for his exceeding
charity wherewith be loved us, even when we were dead by sins, quickened us
together in Christ. These bowels of God in times past did as it were lve hid
from us; according to that of the Prophet Isaie, The multitude of thy bowels
and of thy mercies, they have held back themselves toward me. In which, to
wit, bowels of his mercy, the orient, Christ our Lord who is the brightness
of the eternal light, and splendour of his Fathers glory, from on high has
visited us, descending from the bosom, yea from the heart of his eternal
Father into the womb of the blessed Virgin. Christ is called Orient by the
Prophet Zachary, Zach. 6.
where he says; Behold a man Orient is his name. And indeed that name is
fitly appropriated unto him: for like as the light of the sun does arise from
the oriental part of heaven so the light of grace does arise from Christ who
shined unto us by his humanity. Whence it follows here, that this divine
Orient has visited us,

To illuminate them that sit in darkness of ignorance, and error, or
insidesitie, and in the shadow of Death, to wit, to impletie of life: which is
called the shadow of Death, because it seperateth the m^nd from God, as
natural death does se^ere the soul from the body; according to that of the
Prophet, Your iniquities have Isa. 59.
divided between you and your God. By the shadow of Death may also be
understood this present world, which in respect that it is a vale of tears and
a place of peregrination and exile, may be termed a shadow or solitude of
death, being compared with the celestial country. Moreover some by them that
sit in darkness do understand the Fathers that were detained in Lymbo, whom
Christ descended to illuminate presently after, his death upon the Cross* yet
properly by them that sit in darkness the Gentiles are designed, for whose
illumination our Savior descended; as appears by that of S. John, And other
sheep I have that are Ioh. 10.
not of this fold: them also I must bring etc. and by diverse places in the
Prophecy of Isaic where it is said, The people that walked an darkness, has
seen a great lightt: to them Isa. 9.
that dwelt in the country of the shadow of death, light is rise^. The
eternal Father also, speaking to Christ says, I have given thee for a light
of the Gentiles, that thou might Isa. 42.
open the eyes of the band, and bringforth the prisoners out of prison, and
them that sit in dar^nesse out of the prison house.

To direct our feet, to wit, our affections into the way of peace, that is,
into just and virtuous conversation: which is the way to peace of heart in
present, and to peace of eternity in time to come. Christ came into this
world, and suffered death chiefly that he might impart unto us this twofold
peace: for which reason he said to the Apostles, Peace I leave to you; my
peace Ioh 14. Ephesians. 2.
I give to you; and the Apostle says of Christ, And coming he Euangelized
peace to you that were far of: and peace to them that were nigh, to wit, to
the Gentiles and Jews: Let us then love, search for, and conserve this peace,
since our Savior says, Blessed are the peace makers: for they Math. 5
shall be called the children of God. and let us sing this mellifluous and
sententious Canticle with a fervent devotion ruminating and recounting the
ineffable benefits of God with a grateful and affectionate mind, especially
the Incarnation of the eternal word, rendering most cordially innumerable
thanks unto him who is above all God most glorious, sublime, and blessed for
ever and ever. Amen.

The ancient custom of reciting Kyrie cleison.
AFter the Antiphone at Benedictus, follows the supplication of the Litany as
our holy Fa: S. Benedict terms it in his Rule. The custom of reciting it
in the Latin Church in the Greek form of speech is most ancient, as S.
Augustine affirms, where he says, Ep. 178.
That supplication was made to God in the Greek tongue by all Christians both
Grecians Latins and Barbarians, bes^eching him to have mercy on them. In which
place also he yields the reason why it is so recited. The Council of
Valence under Leo the great does also Can. 3
make mention of this Custom, where it commands that Kyrie eleison be said
at Mattins Mass and Vespres: In this supplication 3. part q. 83. a. 4. in
corp.
(according to S. Thomas of Aquine) there is contained a commemoration of our
present misery, whilst mercy is implored by saving Kyrie eleison for the person
of the Father, Christ eleison for the person of the Son, and again Kyrie
eleison for the person of the holy Ghost against the threefold misery of
Ignorance, Fault and punishment. More may be seen of this subject in the
works of S. Gregory the Great. li. 7. Ep. 63.

Concerning the ancient custom of reciting Dominus vobiscum.
AFter the said Supplication of the Litany follows Dominus vobiscum, which
in English is as much as to say, Our Lord is with you, or Our Lord be with
you. It is noe other then a freindly salutation, and good desire exciting both
to pray and attend: and is taken out of the holy Scriptures, either out of the
Sixth of Judges, where it is said in the singular number, as also in the first
of S. Luke; or out of the second of Ruth, where it is said in the plural
number, as also in the second of Paralip. chap 15. This salutation at prayer
time is very ancient, as may appear by the Council of Bracar. 1. Can. 21.
where it is said to be derived from Apostolical tradition; and by S.
Dionysius in his book of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy. Concerning this
salutation two things are to be noted. The first is, that according to the
Rubrikes of the Roman Breuiary it is not to be said by any who is not at the
least a Deacon, nor by a Deacon in the presence of a Priest without his
license: but if any one have not attained to the degree of a Deacon, in steed
of it he is to say Domine exaudi or ationem meam. The second is, that those
that recite the hours alone are to say it: both because they do thereby
salute the whole Church; as also because they are in noe place commanded to
change or omit it, but rather the contrary is signified in the Breuiary.

To this salutation the Quire does answer Et cum spiritu tuo, that is to say,
And with your spirit; thereby rendering to the Priest or Deacon a good desire
equal or much like to his. For more of this subject I refer the studious
reader to the twelfeh Epistle of Peter Damian, which is entitled the book of
Dominus vobiscum.

Of the Antiphones of our Lady.
At the end of Lauds and Compline, as also at other times is usually sung or
recited in an intelligible voice one of the Antiphones of our Lady, according
to the time, and as it is prescribed in the Rubrikes prefixed before each of
them. The intent of the holy Church is thereby to impresse deeply in our
hearts the reverence and love of so great a Mother and Virgin; and with all to
admonish, us that we reco^mend into her sacred hands the office we have
immediately before sung or recited, beseeching her to unite it with her most
efficatious prayers, and offer it to the divine Majesty, that so it may
become grateful in his sight, and we receive pardon of all the errors, faults,
and negligences contracted by our remiss, tepide, and indeuoute performance
thereof.

The Antiphone Salve Regina (which is chiefly celebrated in the holy Church
with delightful variety of melodious devout tunes) was composed by Hermanuus
Contractus Count of Veringen, a man eminent both for his virtue and learning,
who l. 5. de Deipara Virgin c. 13. l. 3. de bonis operibus in part. c. 13. In
Comment. ad c. 3. prioris ad Corinth.
lived above Five hundred years agone, as Petrus Canifius affirms: by whom
also the Anthiphone beginning with Alma Redemptoris was composed, as Cardinal
Bellarmine declares. There is noe one part of the Office more distasteful to
the corrupt palate of the heretics of these times then the said sweet
Antiphone beginning with Salve Regina. Luther says, that it cannot by any
means be drawn to a good sense: and Peter the false Martyr writes, that it
cannot by any means be defended from impiety, since it attributes all those
things to Marie, which are proper to God alone. His reasons are set down by
Cardinal Bellarmine in the place above cited together with their solutions,
and are in effect as follows.

God is properly the Father of mercies, 2. Cor. 3.
therefore it is not lawful to call Marie, Mother of mereie, unless we will
adorn her with divine honors.

Christ is properly life, who says of himself, I am the way and the verity
and the Ioh. 14.
life, therefore Marie is equalled to Christ when she is styled life.

God is properly the author of consolation, 2. Cor. ^
therefore Marie cannot be called sweetness, unless she be affirmed equal
to God.

The Prophet witnesses that Hope is Ier. 17.
^^ be placed in God alone, who says, Cursed be the man that trusts in
man* therefore Marie is not to be called our Hope, unless perchance she is
now no more man.

Finally, God the Father it is that Ioh. 6.
brings believers to the Son: and the Son will show himself unto us,
when he shall make us blessed. how then shall Marie show Jesus unto us after
this exile, unless she also be God, and able to make men blessed?

To these reasons Bellarmine answers first in general, That if the form of
arguing used by Peter Martyr were good, it would follow that whereas the
Evangelist calls our Savior full of grace and Ioh 1. and 9.
the light of the world, these titles may not be given to any other: and yet
the Blessed Virgin; is styled in S. Luke full of grace, Lu^. 1. Act. 6.
and in the Act of the Apostles S. Stephen is termed likewise full of grace;
and Christ himself said of the Apostles, you Math. 5
are the light of the world. Moreover Christ is called in the holy Scriptures
Master, Father, Pastor, and Bishop; and yet it is manifest that these titles
are given to the Apostles in many places of the said holy Scriptures.
Wherefore Peter Martyr does not rightly gather, that because God is the Father
of mer^ies, they are impious who salute Marie with the title of Mother of
mercy.

Next he shows in particular how every part of the said Antiphone does most
fitly agree unto the blessed Virgin* and

First the title of Queen, both because all the Blessed (amongst whom she
has deservedly allotted unto her the most eminent place of dignity) are Kings
or Queens; for of them our Savior said, Blessed are the poor in spirit: for
theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. and again, Come ye blessed of my Father
possess you the Math. 25. 1. Math. 5.
Kingdom prepared for you. as also because she had King David for her Father,
and Christ Jesus the King of Kings for her Son.

Secondly the title of Mother of mercy, both for that she is the Mother of
Christ, through whom we have obtained mercy of God almighty, as also for
that she does daily impetrate mercy for us of God almighty. Moreover she is
called (according to the Hebrew phrase) Mother of mercy, that is to say,
Mother very merciful: in which sense we understand, The Father of mercies,
that is to say, the Father exceeding merciful

Thirdly she is called Life, not that she is essentially life it self, in such
sort as God; nor that she is the principal cause of life, as it is said of
Christ in the Acts of the Apostles, The author of life you Act. 3.
killed: but because she brought forth Christ, and by him is made Mother of all
that live a spiritual life; for so Eve was called Life, because she was to be
the Mother of all that should live a sensual life. Yet S. Epiphanius does note
that Haeres. 78.
Eve was called life not for that she was of herself worthy of so excellent a
name: but because she was a type of Marie, who does truly merit to be called
life; she being the Mother of Christ, and through him of all the brethren of
Christ also, and by this of all the living.

Fowerthly the name of Sweetness is by all right due unto her, in respect of
the innumerable and most excellent benefits wherewith she has rejoiced all
mankind, and does daily comfort all that suffer for the love of God in what
sort soever: for indeed t^ere is not any corner of the world in which there
does not shine some memory of her gracious sweetness. Whilst she yet lived
vested with a mortal body, she was sweet to behold, as being the most
beautiful among women, (which the spouse witnesses of her in the Canticles,)
she was sweet in her words, sweet in her gestures, and finally sweet in all
things* and shall we believe that she is less sweet being now adorned with a
glorified body, and exalted above the quires of Angels? certainly the reason
why some do not experience how exceeding sweet she is, can be not other, but
because they live impurely and immerge themselves in carnal delights, and
thereby do render themselves as it were insensible of the sweetness that may
be found in her by spiritual and pure minds; for such do behold her as their
princess, harken to her as their Mistress, love her as their Mother, follow
her as their Queen, and have her their propitious Patroness in the presence
of almighty God, and do experience her wonderfully efficacious.

Fifthly she is called our Hope, because next unto our Lord in whom we repose
our confidence chiefly, we put our trust in the intercession of his blessed
Mother as in a secondary and isntrumental agent; which S. Thomas of Aquine 2.
2. act 4.
shows to be law full. Neither is it an unusual Phrase to call others our
Hope besides almighty God: for the Apostle says speaking to the
Thessalonians, 1. These 2.
What is our Hope, or joy, or crown of glory? are not you before our Lord?
Moreover our Savior speaking to the Jews, Think not Ioh. 5.
that I will accuse you to the Father: there is that accuses you Moses, in
whom you trust, did not reprehend them, that they trusted in Moses; but that
they gave not credit to Moses.

The place therefore of Jeremy above Ierem. 17.
cited, to wit, Cursed be the man, that trusts in man, is to be understood
of them that place their chiefest hope in man; and do so confide in man, that
they do not in any sort confide in God: for it follows in the same place,
and his heart departs from our Lord. But those who piously and rightly do
confide in Marie, have their chiefest hope in God: for noe good Christian is
ignorant that he ought to rely principally upon God, and only secondarily
upon the assistance of his Saints. To conclude, this form of speaking; as
also the former is frequent in the works of S. Bernard and S. Ephrem, whom
noe man as yet ever dared to accuse of impiety: for S. Bernard called the Sermon.
1. de Assumpt.
Virgin Marie, Queen, and Lady, Mother of mercy, Holy, sweet* and (...)
^other place, he says of her, that she is his greatest confidence, Sermon. de
Aquaeductu. Sermon. de Deipara.
and all the subject of his hope. S. Ephrem also calls her, His hope, and
the hope of all Christians,

Sixthly it is well said to the blessed Virgin, And show (...) ^f^er this exile
the blessed fruit of thy womb Jesus. For truly it is not less to save men,
then to show unto them the Savior; and it is clear by the authority of holy
writ, that men may rightly be said to be saved by men: as for example by these
places, To all men 1. Cor. 9. 1. Tim. 4. Jacob 5.
I became all things, that I might save all Thou shall save both thy self,
and them that ^eare thee. He which makes a sinner to be connected from the
error of his way, shall save his soul from death. Them save, pulling out of
the ^^re. In Ep. Iudae.


If therefore the Apostles did not fear to say, that men might be saved by
them who labored for the salvation of their souls by word, example, and
prayers; why should the holy Church fear to speak to the blessed Virgin
reigning with Christ, and possessing ^^e first place in heaven next after his
sacred humanity, to show Jesus unto us after this exile: for noe good Catholic
does doubt but this ought to be understood in a orthodoxe manner, to wit by
intercession: in which manner these places following in the hours of the
blessed Virgin are understood, to wit, Give me strength against thy enemies.
Protect us from our foe* and Receive us at the hour of our departure, with
others of like nature. This (I conceive) may suffice for explication of such
titles, as are given to the blessed Virgin in this and the other Antiphones:
yet for more full satisfaction in this point I refer the studious reader to
the place above cited of Peter Canisius, where he may find them expressed more
at lardge, and confirmed with more authorities out of the holy Scriptures and
Fathers.

The Explication of the rest of the hours as the occur in order of the
office and first of Prime.
AFter Mattines and Lauds follows next in order Prime; so called from the
first hour of the artificial day to wit, from sun Rising: at which time
or soon after our holy Mother the Church has ordained and appointed that it
should be recited; thereby to beg the light of grace from the Sun of
justice, to guide our souls in the darkness of ignorance, as the corporal
sun does give light to the eye and helpelth to direct our paths. By Prime
according to some writers is signified the contumelio^s usage, which our
blessed Sauiou^ suffered in the morning, after he was apprehended and brought
before Pilate. Others and amongst the rest Hugh of S. Victor say, that it was
instituted in memory of the Resurrection of our blessed Savior.

The title and argument of the 53. Psalm and First of Prime.
Unto the end, in songs understanding for David, when the Zepheits were come
and said to Saul, Is not David hid with us* This title seems to show that
the Psalm following ought to be understood of David in the manner as some do
expound it. Yet others do affirm, that the Psalm does not so properly treat
of the history of the title, as of the matter which is mistically signified
thereby: according to whom I purpose to proceed in my explication.

In the first book of Kings its recorded, that David with his adherents
declining from the fury of King Saul did hide himself in the desert near
Ziph, and that the Zipheits desirous to please their King betrayed him: which
David understanding of, and considering the extremity he was then in, composed
this Psalm; thereby imploring the divine assistance, being destitute of all
humane help. Zepheits are by interpretation flowrishing, and do design the
Jews flowrishing at that time in all temporal prosperity: by David is
signified Christ, and by Saul, Pilate.

The Zepheits therefore, to wit, the Jews, did say to Saul, that is, to
Pilate, Is not David hid which us? have not we found Jesus seducing the
People? and do not we hold him bound with us? And consequently the Prophet
here in the person of Christ, or Christ himself as man being near his
Passion, and knowing that Judas was gone to betraye him to the Jews, and that
shortly after they would deliver him up into the hands of Pilate, speaks to
God the Father as follows.

The explication of the Psalm.
O God save me in thy name, O God by the singular virtue and infinite power of
thy sacred name, and for the glory thereof conserve and strengthen me in my
Passion, which I am shortly to endure against all natural horror, and the
fear of approaching death: and in thy strength judge me, Be thou my judge
rendering unto me for my merits and innocence thy powerful defense, and unto
them that persecute me the severe effects of thy just indignation.

O God hear my prayer, which I present unto thee for my mystical body, to
wit, for the congregation of the elect, that they may participate of my
sufferance. In which manner our Savior praie^ near the time of his dolorous
Passion saying, Not for the world ^^e I pray, but for them whom thou have
given me* and again, Holy Father keep them i^ thy name, whom^ thou have
given me etc. With thine ears, ^11. (...)
to wit, with thy wisdom in which tho^ know all things, and thy mercie^
wherewith thou graciously affordest relief to them that pray, receive the
words of my mouth, beseeching in my own behalf for the glorification of my
body. Glorify me o Father with thy self, with the Ioh. 17.
glory which I had before the world was.

Because strangers, to wit, the Jews, who though they be of the same extract
or lineage that I am, yet are far alienated from me in manner of life* and
will not be drawn to contract spiritual affinity with me. Or thus, Because
strangers, to wit the Gentiles, have risen up against me. For both of them
sought to apprehend our Savior, according to that of the Evangelist, The Band
therefore and the Tribune Ioh. 18.
and the mynisters of the Jews apprehended Jesus, etc. And the strong to wit,
the high Priests and Princes of the people have sought my soul, to extinguish
my corporal life and all memory of me: they have not set God before their ^ies
in this action they have not feared God, but men, for the Jews said, If we
let him alone, all will believe in him: and the Romans Ioh. 11.
will come and take aw^y our place and nation,

Yet I weigh not their malice, For behold God helps me, to wit, my divinity
does cooperate with my assumpted humanity. Or thus, It is manifest that they
proposed not God before their eyes in this their vehement purs^ite of me: for
behold God helps me, and frustrateth their malicious designs that they shall
not prevail against me. Indeed he will permit them to use my body for a time
at their pleasure, but my soul they shall not have power to hurt. Whence it
follows here, and our Lord is the receiver of my soul, For the word, to
wit, the son of God, true God assumpted his soul to his divine
personalitie: neither did he abandone it in the three days of his death; for
although at the time of his death and during the space he remained in the
sepulcher, his soul was separated from his body, yet both of them remained
united to the Word.

Turn away the evils to mine enemies: The mische^fe that is intended against
me turne^ it upon the deuisers heads. This was fulfilled accordingly, For the
Jews sought to kill our Savior and extinguish his name utterly; but the
contrary happened: for he was raised from death, and his name became glorious
through out the whole universe, and they in revenge of his innocent blood were
killed, dispersed, and made ignominious to all nations. Therefore it follows
here, and in thy truth, as thou have foretold by the holy Prophets, destroy
them with plague, war, and famine; as it came to pass in the reign of
Titus. Here you are to note that Christ makes this prayer either as conforming
himself to the divine justice, or as foretelling what was to come to pass, or
else as insinuating what they deserved to have fall upon them: for he does not
absolutely wish evil to his adversaries, especially since he himself has
commanded us saying, Love Math. 5
your enemies, and pray for them that persecute and abuse you.

I will voluntarily, freely, of my own accord, and with most ardent charity
sacrifice to thee, offer up my self upon the Cross to thee, o eternal
Father, to regaine thine honor, and reconcile man unto thee: as the Prophet
Isaie foretold saying, He was offered because himself Isa. 55. Ioh. 10.
would. and as he affirmed saying, I am the good Pastor, I yield my life for
my sheep. and again, Noe man takes away my life from me: Ibid.
but I yield it of my se^fe etc. And will confess to thy name with confession
of praise, because it is good, essentially good, pure, perfect and infinite
goodness; as it is written, One is good, God: who alone is Math. 19.
most praise wor^hy for himself. Christ our Savior in all his life did
confess to his eternal Father with confession of praise; whence he says of
himself, I Ioh. 8.
seek not my own glory. and again, The things that please God I do always.

I confess unto thee also Because thou have delivered me out ^f tribulation,
in the day of my resurrection, when thou will raise-me to an impassible life:
whereof the Apostle makes mention saying, Christ risyng again from the dead,
now dies noe more; death shall noe more have dominion over him etc. And mine
eye has looked down upon mine enemies, I have not feared them, nor regarded
their malice; but have remained constant and victorious in all conflicts.
Although Christ when his Passion approached did of his own accord admit some
apprehension of fear: yet he had not any inordinate fear; but of his own
power when himself pleased did depose that fear he foe admitted, and went
bouldly to meet his enemies that ca^n to lay hands on him. whence is that of
the Prophet, He is near Isa 50.
that justifies me: who is he that shall condeme me? Let us stand together.
who is mine adversary? Let him come, Behold the Lord God my helper. etc.

There are two causes for which we ought chiefly to praise almight is God. The
first is his goodness, for which rea^o^ our Savior says in the first place,
I will confess to thy name because it is good. The second cause is the
exhibition of his benefits, which is signified by those words, Because thou
have delivered me etc It is more worthy and meritorious to praise, honor, and
love God in respect of his goodness, then for his benefits; because it
proceeds purely from the divine charity: yet in imitation of our Savior we
ought to praise and love him for both respects.

Concerning the words in the 3. Verse, to wit, They have not set God before
their eyes, That man is truly said not to set God before his eyes, who either
does not believe, or if he do, does not attend the divine prou^dence, who does
not fear the judgments of God, who cannot be withdrawn from committing sin
neither by the terror of pains nor the love of reward, but transgresses the
law of God without remorse, and con^erseth without reverence in the sight of
^^e eternal judge, who beholds allthings. Ioh 15.
Of such an one it is written, Distress shall compass him as a King that is
prepared to battle; for ^e has stretched out his hand against God, and has
run against him with neck upright etc. and in another place, They subverted
their sense and declined their eyes, that they would not see heaven, nor
remember just judgments.

Behold here how great a fire of love is contained in this short Psalm. Let us
learn out of it to offer ardent prayers to God, to have recourse unto him with
confidence in all persecution and tentation, to address our speech unto him
amorously, confidently, and faithfully, to sacrifice ourselves unto him
promptly, to praise and give thanks unto him in all occurrences joyfully, and
to acknowledge his benefits gratefully.

The title and argument of the 84. Psalm, and second in Prime.
Unto the end, to the children of Chore, a Psalm. In the following Psalm the
Prophet treats of the captivity of mankind under the Prince of darkness:
from which we are set free by Christ our Lord. In the three first verses he
forerelleth our freedom from that thraldom: and in the rest he prays that
this his Prophecy may quickly be fulfilled. The reason why he expresses
things to come by words of the pretertense is, because what unto us is future,
in the prescience and decree of almighty God is already done.

The explication of the Psalm.
O Lord th^^ have blessed thy land: At length thine anger o Lord which thou
didt^ conceive against mankind is appeased: and in stead of the malediction
which thou gave after sin to thy creature, thou have now brought a
benediction, and have sanctified it by the coming of thy dear Son, who must
save it. Thou have turned away the ^apti^itie of Jacob, to wit, the sentence
of being eternally deprived of thy blessed S^cie^ie in heaven for original
sin, and the spiritual captivity whereby man was detained in thraldom by
the devil. This captivity of Jacob, to wit, of thy elected people corporally
or spiritually descended from the Patriarch Jacob thou have ^uerted from them.

Thou have for given the iniquity of thy people, pardoning thy poor creatures
as well the original sin where with they were defiled, as all their other
iniquities: and chardging thy only beloved son Christ Jesus with them,
according to that of the Prophet Isaie, Our Lord has put Isa. 53,
upon him the iniquities of us all etc. Thou have covered all their Sins
under the mantle of thy infinite charity, by which thou have gra^^ justified
sinners. Yet we must no^ think to have this thy justification imputed unto us,
and to participate of the merits of the Passion of thy dear Son Christ
Jesus, unless they be applied unto us in due manner by faith, charity, and
the Sacraments.

Thou have m^^gated all thy wrath: Indeed the meritorious satisfaction which
our beloved Savior has given thee in our behalf, has so fully appeased
thy^e anger, that thou have converted the severe revenge of thy justice into
the mild effects of mercy. Thou have turned away from the wrath of thy
indignation, from the great revenge of thy justice.

Convert us o God our Savior, and (...) thy wrath from us. Since thou art ^oe
sweetly inclined to mercy on thy part, bring to pass I beseech thee, that we
may perform what is requisite on our part: permit not that the continuation
of our wicked lives deprive us of the benefit^ of this universal ransom, but
convert us totally unto thee and thy service o God our salvation. O Jesus in
whom alone lies our assurance, our conversion is in thy hands. Hasten it
benign Lord, for by this means thou will hinder that we shall noe more
provoke thy just indignation, which we most humbly beseech thee to divert from
us.

VVilt thou be wrath with us for ever? subtracting thy help and grace for our
demeritt? or will thou extend thy wrath, to wit, will thou continue thy
revenge from generation to generation? upon all the race of men from the Father
to the Son for ever? Noe truly; for thy mercies are above all thy works. It
is thy property to spare and show pity, as thou have declared by thy Prophet
saying, I know the cogitations that I intend unto you, Ierem. 29.
cogitations of peace and not of affliction, to give you an end and patience.
Therefore

O God thou being turned toward us by the Incarnation and corporal presence
of thy only Son, shall quicken us, who lie dead in the guilt of sin, by
the life of grace in present, and by the life of glory hereafter. Whence our
Savior says, I came that they may have life, and Ioh. 10.
may have more abundantly etc. And thy people so quickened shall rejoice, not
in carnal, vain, and unlawful things; but in thee, congratulating with thee
in thy goodness, perfection, and beatitude, and exulting at thy singular
benefits and promises. Of this joy the Prophet Isaie speaks in the person of
the Christians, Lo this is our God, we have expected him, Isa. 25.
and he will save us: this is our Lord, we have patiently waited for him, we
shall rejoice and be joyful in his salvation.

Show us o Lord thy mercy, let Christ thy beloved Son the fountain of
mercy manifestly appear unto us thy poor creatures, who live in this hope:
and give us thy salvation, to wit Christ; by whom thou do save us, and
whom thou do give unto us gratis of thy own immense charity and
goodness, not in respect of our justice.

I will hear, I will observe attentively with the ears of my mind What our
Lord will speak in me by internal inspiration or Angelical illustration:
because by such internal discourse he will speak peace upon his people, he
will inspire such things as conduce to the peace of his people, things
concerning the Incarnation Passion and death of Christ, whereby the whole world
has acquired true celestial peace; for Christ is called the Prince of Isa. 9.
Luc. 2.
peace, at whose birth the Angels sung, In earth peace to men of good will.
whence it follows here.

Peace upon his saints, and upon them that are converted to the heart. This
manner of expression of peace does not only extend it self to the perfecter
sort of peoples; but to all sinners, who from Idolatry sensuality and
perverse judgment do return to the heart, to wit, to the use of reason,
beco^ming obedient to the divine law and what solid and sincere reason does
dictate. We are taught here to observe diligently what our Lord God does
speak in us, that we may condescend to his holy inspirations; for therefore
it is that Abacuc says, I will Abacus 2.
stand upon my watch and I will contemplate to see what may be said to me:
but to this it is requisite that we be able to discern which is a divine,
which an Angelical, which a natural, and which a diabolical instinct.

But yet his salvation, Christ the Savior is nigh to them that fear him. All
men will not cooperate with his grace, nor consequently participate of the
merits of our Saviors Passion, but only such as fear our Lord. The Prophet
says not, that the salvation of God is nigh to all men, but only to them
that fear him* with a filial fear: for such will freely and gratefully
accept of his mercy, and cooperate with his grace, endeavoring the best they
can to decline from evil, and do good; according to that of Ecclesiasticus,
They that Eccles. 2.
fear our Lord will prepare their hearts, and in his sight will sanctify
their souls etc and by this means detain Christ in their hearts, who says,
If any love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him: and we will
come to him, and abide with him. His salvation then shall be nigh to them that
fear him, That glory, to wit Christ the King of glory, who is the image of
the living God, the splendour of his glory, and figure of his substance, may
inhabit in our land, in the land of Judah; where be conuersed corporally
amongst men, as the Prophet Zachary witnesses saying, Praise and rejoice o
daughter of Sion: because lo I come and will dwell in the midst of thee

Mercy and truth have met each other, in Christ: for the mercy of God
appeared in his Incarnation, because ^t was effected by the ineffable mercy of
God that he should assume humane flesh; and the truth of God shined therein,
because he fulfilled in the Incarnation of Christ what he had foretold and
promised by his Prophets. Justice and peace have kissed, to wit, The just
satisfaction wherewith Christ satisfied for us by way of justice sustaining
pain for our faults, and the confederation of mankind with God accompanying
this satisfaction, are most amorously united in Christ: for he, (according to
the Apostle) is made unto us 1 Cor. 1 Ephesians. 2
from God justice and redemption. He is also our peace, who has made both one
etc. This justice and p^ace do also mutually kiss in us, who are redeemed by
him; for immediately upon this justification there follows peace in us,
whereby we are reconciled to God, and set at unity and concord with him. S.
Bernard upon these words says, that The Mercy and Truth of God did seem in
a sort to contradict one another about the mystery of the Redemption of man,
Mercy exacting that the miserable should be freed, but Truth dictating that
the guilty should be damned: yet in this meeting together Justice and peace
have kisled; because the miserable is redeemed, and his fault was not
unpunished.

Truth, to wit Christ (who says of Ioh. 14.
himself I am the way and the verity and the life) is risen out of the
earth, has assumed flesh in the womb of the most glorious Virgin, and by
being borne of her did spring forth as out of the earth, of which Prophet Isa.
45.
Isaie says, Be the earth opened and bud forth a Savior etc. And justice
has looked down from heaven, at the birth of Christ: both because then true
justice did descend from heaven justifying men by faith, as also because then
the wrath of Roma. 1
God was revealed upon iniquity. For it had never been known how great the
wrath of God is against sin, but that he was pleased to expiate it by the
death of his only Son: neither had it ever been fully known how great the
indignation of God will be in the day of judgment against the unjust, had we
not seen how exceeding grievous the Passion of Christ has been to satisfy
for the sins of others; For if in the green Luc. 23.
wood they do such things, in the day of judgment what shall be done? The
blessed Virgin is fitly designed by the earth as S. Bernard shows, For as a
field (says he) or the earth without all humane labor or industry does
flourish, not being sowed or cultiuated: so the womb of the Virgin did
flourish, so the inuiolate, chaste, and entire bowels of Marie brought forth
the flower of eternal viriditie, whose beauty and glory shall never fade.
Yet least it might seem impossible to any that a Virgin should bring forth
Christ, the Prophet shows the manner of his generation, to wit, that it is
not effected by humane but divine power.

For our Lord certes will give benignity, to wit supernatural fecunditie to
the preelected Virgin, and plenitude of grace; as the Angel declared unto her
saying, Hail full of grace our Lord is with thee etc. And our land, the
blessed Virgin Marie our saluatrix and aduocatrix shall give her fruit bring
forth Christ our Lord: of which fruit S. Elisabeth prophesied saying, Blessed
Luc. 1.
is the fruit of thy womb. But in a spiritual sense our Lord will give
benignity, when as he fills our hearts with grace, gives merciful audience
to our prayer, iustifierh us gratis, preuenteth the impious, conserueth the
just, and perfecteth proficients: and our land gives her fruit, when as our
body becomes obedient to the spirit, and imploieth it self in pious
exercises; for then we fulfill that of the Apostle, I beseech you exhibit your
bodies a Romans 12.
living host pleasing to God.

Justice shall walk b^f^re him, Christ our B. Savior shall teac^ nothing of
Christ, but what is just and holy: and shall set his stepps in the way, he
shall accomplish in work whatsoever he shall so teach: for a Doctor is then
said to set his steps in the way, when by living well he shows the doctrine
to be true, which he proposes to others, and is the way to eternal life.

S. Augustine expounds these three last verses in effect as follows. Truth
is risen out of the earth, truth of confession of sins, and the praise of God
begane to arise through Christ out of the mouths of terrene men, and then
Justice has looked down from heaven, that it might justify them so
confessing their sins and rendering praise. Yet this truth of confession of
sins shall not arise out of the said earth through the proper forces
thereof, but through the aid of the preventing grace of God: for it is our
Lord that will give benignity, who will make justice shine in the hearts of
sinners; and by this means, Our earth will give her fruit. Moreover man so
justified by the grace of Christ will always have justice before his eyes,
that he may perform all things according to the rule of justice: and so
Justice shall walk before him, bearing the law of God before him as a torch,
that he may not walk in darkness, and so secure and joyful ^e shall set
his stepps in the way, that he may happily attain to the celestial country
in the end.

What understanding is able to conceive, much less express the dignity and
praise of this present Psalm? wherein first the divine benefits are most
devoutly called to remembrance, and afterward this most efficacious prayer is
annexed, Convert us o God our Savior. Which verse is with good reason
appointed to be said at Compline against the darkness of the night, the
deceits of devils, and infinite necessities of man: to the end that day light
then departing, our mind being converted to God may be illustrated on all
sides with the light of grace; and being abstracted from all sensible things
may be immerged in the intelligible, immutable, and chiefest good and least
so singular a grace should be denied us in regard of our sins, it is most
fitly added, And auert thy wrath from us Let us therefore recite this verse
especially at Compline with fervent affection and firm confidence. In the
following verses hope of obtaining mercy is inflamed, and all pusillanimitie
and diffidence is eradicated. To conclude, the verse Show us o Lord thy mercy
and give us thy salvation does far exceed in sententious sweetness all the
delights of carnal things.

The title and argument of the 116. Psalm and last in Prime.
THe title is Alleluia, fitly agreeing with the Psalm: for therein the Prophet
does inuit all men both Jews and Gentiles to praise our Lord for the singular
benefitt of the Incarnation of Christ, for the accomplishing of what was
foretold of him, and for the conversion of the Gentiles. Christ is the Corner
Ephesians. 2.
stone in whom the Gentiles and Jews are joined together constituting one
Church, wherein there is noe distinction of a Jew and a Grecian; for as the
Apostle says, In Jesus Christ neither Circumcision Galath. 6.
avails ought nor prepuce, but a new creature. Yet because there are more of
the Gentiles converted then of the Jews, the Prophet foreseeing this does in
the first place inuit them, saying

The explication of the Psalm.
PRaise our Lord all ye Gentiles called to the faith, praise him all ye
peoples converted from Iudaisme.

Because his mercy is confirmed upon us, the sweet effect of his divine
clemency, or his grace is more copiously then formerly conferred and roborated
upon the whole race of men by the coming of Christ. And the truth of our Lord,
to wit, the fulfilling of his promises and the mysteries of Christ remains
for ever, in as much as concerns the fruit acquired thereby, that is, the
freedom of mankind: of which truth S. John makes Ioh. 1.
mention saying, Verity was made by Jesus Christ, who fulfilled all that was
foretold of him, and therefore hanging upon the Cross said It is consummate.
Or thus, Ioh. 19.
The truth of our Lord, to wit, the doctrine of Christ remains for ever, as
he himself witnessed saying, Heaven and Luc. 21.
earth shall pass, but my words shall not pass. Or finally thus, The truth of
our Lord, Christ the Son of God (who said I am the verity) remains for
ever; which Job. 14.
the Jews confessed saving to our Savior, we have heard out of the law that
Christ abides for ever.

This Psalm little in words but great in sense is exceedingly commended by the
holy Doctors: for it contains summarily what is treated of at lardge in the
rest of the Psalms. To be brief, what can be said more delightful to the
Gentiles almost destitute of hope? or to such as are in misery, blindness, and
the state of perdition then this, That the mercy of God is confirmed upon us?
Let this Psalm therefore be pronounced by us with a certain flame of holy
devotion.

The explication of the Chapter at Prime.
What is she that comes forth as Au^ora Cant. 6.
rising? To wit from her infancy: wherein she begane to have the use of
reason, making incomparable progress in a very short space, preceding and
producing Christ the true day of holy souls? Fair as the Moon, as the
Moon next to the Sun does shine most resplendently in heaven, and governs
the night* so the most illustrious Lady next to Christ our Savior the Sun
of Justice, shines most brightly above all others in the whole militant and
triumphant Church, and governs the militant Church in an especial manner,
which in respect of the triumphant is seated in darkness. Nevertheless she
is incomparably more beautiful then the Moon, yea the Moon is said to be
under her feet. Apoca. 12.
But she is fair as the Moon, to wit as the holy Church, for that the
diverse graces and virtues which have been here and there dispersed in many and
sundry members thereof, are collected and exceedingly more perfect in her.
Elect as the Sun, Next after Christ as man she is acknowledged to be the
most eleganr and preelected: and as the Sun is greater, brighter, and of more
efficacy then the rest of the Planets and stars, so the most blessed Virgin
next after Christ is greater in perfection, brighter in wisdom, and more
efficacious in virtue then all the rest of the Saints, as being Mother of the
Savior of the world, by whose means innumerable sinners are reduced to grace
and salvation. Terrible as an army of a camp set in array. In her was a well
ordered and most harmonious connection of virtues, a most excellent and
singular constancy of perfection, and by her Maternall authority she was
constituted Empress of the universe, and absolute Dominatrix of the adverse
powers.

The preamble to Tierce, Sext, and None.
THese three hours are often spoken of in the holy Scriptures, expressly
mentioned by the ancient Fathers, and have each one its proper mysteries which
it represents. Tierce signifies first Pilats sentence against our blessed
Savior to the opprobrious death of the Cross. Secondly it represents the
coming of the holy Ghost at Pentecost. Sext is in memory of our blessed
Saviors exaltation upon the Cross: and in imitation of S. Peter, who is said
to Act. 1^.
have ascended unto the top of the house at that hour to pray. None
designeth our blessed Saviors death: and is in imitation of S. Peter and S.
John who went into the Temple to pray at the Ninth hour. The Three hours
space which is allotted for each of these three little hours has relation to
the blessed Trinity: as S. Cyprian affirms, where he says, That we observe
with the Prophet Daniel to praise the holy Trinity thrice in the day by
these three Canonical hours; to every one of which there is a Trinity of
hours and Psalms allotted.

The title and argument of the 119. Psalm and first in Tierce.
THis Psalm and the fourteen immediately following, have for their title A
graduall Canticle, not without reason: for indeed they are repleat with
affections toward God, and proper for such as have learnt by experience to
esteem themselves pilgrims and banished men in the lands of their enemies,
sometimes lamenting the miseries of their exile, sometimes sighing after the
rest of the celestial Jerusalem, but ever exciting themselves to ascend and
advance forwards in the way of our Lord. Theodoretus and Euthimius do teach
that these Canticles are to be understood according to the letter of the
Ascension of the Jews from Babylon unto Jerusalem; the holy Ghost foreshewing
by the mouth of David the calamity of the Babylonian captivity, and the joy
of their freedom. But others do rather hold that they were composed to be
sung by the Priests and Leuits in their ascension of the fifteen degrees or
steps of the Temple of Solomon: for that there were so many steps, not only
Nicolaus Liranus and other modern authors, but also S. Augustine does write
in his treatise upon the last Psalm. There are (says he) so many Psalms
which are termed Gradualls because there were the like number of degrees of
the Temple. Yet which soever of these opinions is to be preferred, it is
certain that they were figures of the ascension of the elect by the degrees of
virtues; whereof the Prophet speaks in another Psalm saying, They shall go
from virtue to virtue. For by these degrees of virtues which are treated of in
the said Psalms (whereof the first is to depart from the vices of this world,
and tend by desire to the future world) we do ascend from this vale of tears
to the celestial Jerusalem. The sense therefore of the title is, that This
Psalm is a Graduall Canticle* because according to the letter it was sung
ascending to the Temple. Yet spiritually it is called a Graduall Canticle, to
wit, The exultation of the mind for the spiritual progress in virtue.

The explication of the Psalm.
When I was in tribulation I cried to our Lord: and he heard me. When I have
seen my self oppressed with afflictions, troubles, and tentations, I have not
done like those that murmr against God; who when they are not able to secure
themselves with their own forces do despair, and become obdurate: rather to
the contrary, I have had recourse to my Lord most sweet and powerful, I have
cried with all my forces to present unto him mine anguish, and he has
graciously heard me.

O Lord deliver my soul from unjust lips, and from a deceitful tongue. Come,
o my Lord (for so did I cry unto him) come, and deliver my poor soul from
the assaults which are made against it by perverse and blaspheming lips, which
with a shameless impudence do blaspheme and deny thine authority, thy care
of created things, and proper being. Deliver me from these Infidels, Atheists
and libertines, and from heretics also that have an honied flattering tongue,
hiding under a deceitful language the pestilent venime wherewith they
traitorously seduce simple souls.

The two verses following are expounded three several ways. First as being
the words of the Prophet speaking to his own soul,

What may be given thee, or what may be added unto thee to a deceiptfull
tongue? O my soul what remedy can thou excogitate? what counsel or aid
may be prescribed to arm thee, that a deceiptfull tongue prevail not
against thee? believe me, the most present and sovereign remedy I can
imagine, is The sharp arrows of the mighty, to wit, the all powerful word
of God more percing then a two edged sword, with the coals of desolation,
together with the examples of the approved servants of God burning with
charity, who have been converted from bad life to religious conversation. Make
trial therefore of this, for the knowledge of the holy Scriptures is very
powerful against a deceitful tongue: in such sort, that we shall neither
become fraudulent, nor be defrauded or overcome by impatience, if we will
seriously ponder how much a deceitful tongue is reproved therein; for it is
written, Cursed is the deceitful. and again, The Malach. 1. Psalm 5.
deceitful man our Lord will abhor^e. and in another place, He that speaks
sophistically is odious: in every thing he shall be defrauded. Grace is not
given him of our Lord: Ecclesiast. 37.
for he is defrauded of all wisdom. The words of the sacred Scriptures are
termed sharp arrows, because they transfixe the heart with the wound of
Charity, mortify sins, and penetrate the most intime parts of the soul:
whence it is written, He has made my mouth as a sharp sword, and has made me
as a chosen arrow of his quiver. Moreover the examples of the Saints are
termed coals of desolation, that is, of the destroyed: because they excite us
to love and imitation, and do demolish and destroy the fabric that the
devil has erected in us, to wit vice and sin.

Secondly they are expounded as being the words of the Prophet to a wicked man*
as thus, O impious man what benefit do thou acquire by seeking to circumnent
me, or what shall be given thee etc. what and how great punishment shall be
inflicted upon thee for the sins of thy fraudulent speeches? To which he
answers himself saying, The sharp arrows of the mighty* to wit the
punishments of almighty God which are exceeding sharp and grievous. These
shall be rendered unto thee for thy demerits, together with coals of
desolation, to wit, with the vnextinguible flames of hell.

Finally they are expounded as if the word ( tibi) were redoundant in the
sense, thus, O Lord deliver my soul from unjust lips and from a deceitful
tongue. For what may be given; or what may be added to a deceitful tongue?
That is, Verily it is so great an evil that malice it self cannot devise how
to augment it: which he shows in the following verse, where he declares by a
most elegant similitude what manner of evil a deceitful tongue is, saying,
That the words of such an one are like arrows, which of their own nature do
wound a far of and with exceeding celeritie, in such sort, that they cannot
easily be avoided, of the mighty, sent forth by a strong arm with great
force, not by a child or some weak person, sharp, well polished by the
fleacher, with coules of desolation, fiery, that they may destroy what
soever comes in their way. Such arrows as these are deceitful words,
especially when they are instruments of the devil to kill souls; which are
called by the Apostle, The fiery ^^hes. 6
darts of the most wicked one. The Prophet therefore having a lively
apprehension of these so exceeding gteat and frequent evils, takes occasion
to deplore his misery and sigh after the celestial country, saying,

VVoe is me wretch that I am that my seiourning my habitation in this present
exile is prolonged. This voice of the Prophet is proper for such as are weary
of this present life, and thirst after the celestial country with a longing
desire; who can truly say with the Apostle, Our conversation is in heaven.
and, I desire to Phil. 3. Phil. 1.
be dissolved and to be with Christ. and again, we have not ^ere a permanent
City etc. I have dwelt with the inhabitants of Cedar; with people obscured
with the darkness of errors and impieties. For Cedar is by interpretation
darkness; and Cedar was the Son of Ismael, of whom some do hold that
Mahomet is descended. My soul has been a long a seiourner in this region of
dissimilitude, prison of death, and tedious exile, hastening toward my true
inheritance, hastening from many things wherein it straieth daily to that one
thing only necessary, wherein it may be perpetually established.

With those that hated peace, turbulent spirits, murmurers, and violaters of
unity, love and concord, I was peaceable, bearing all things patiently. When
I spoke unto them lovingly, modestly, and according as reason and good
conscience required I should, they impugned me without cause, rendering me evil
for good; according to that of the Prophet Amos, They have hated Amos 5
him that rebukes, and him that speaks perfectly they have abhorred.

In this Psalm we are taught to begin our spiritual progress orderly by
retiring from our former vices; as the holy Scripture exhorts saying, Son
Eccles. 21.
have thou sinned? do so noe more: but for the old also pray that they may
be forgiven thee. As from the face of a Serpent flee from sins. Moreover we
are taught to have recourse to God in all tribulation, and to beseech him that
we may be freed in the manner aforesaied from the unjust lips and deceitful
tongues of others: and that we ourselves may not be infected with those
evils; for as the Apostle says Evil communications corrupt good manners.
Finally we are taught to despise this present life together with all the
pleasures and glory thereof: to desire from our heart the felicity of the
celestial country, and to converse peaceably with perverse turbulent men;
that so we may attain the benediction, whereof our Savior spoke saying,
Blessed are the peace makers, for they shall be called the children of God.

The Argument of the 120. Psalm and Second at Tierc^.
IN this Psalm the Prophet by his own example does teach, that aid is to be
expected from God alone: whom he assures us to have a provident care of such
as repose their confidence in him; and that he will conserve them at all times,
both that noe evil do hurt them either in prosperity or adversity, and
also that all they undertake may succeed prosperously. In this Psalm
therefore is treated of the Second degree of a spiritual progress, to wit,
To implore the divine assistance with confidence. In the two first verses the
Prophet speaks in the person of a pilgrim of this world travailing toward
the supernall Jerusalem with a longing desire but in the rest of the Psalm he
is thought to speak in his own person, one while wis^ing well to the said
pilgrim, and another while comforting and confirming him.

The explication of the Psalm.
IN this my tedious peregrination I have lifted up mine eyes with longing
desire unto the mounta^nes, toward the terrestrial and the celestial
Jerusalem, from whence I confide help shall come to me.

My help which I expect is from our Lord the Creator of all things, who made
heaven and earth, and whatsoever is conta^ed in them.

He is present every where by his omnipotency, and does see, hear, and assist
his people in all places: yet upon earth he is chiefly pleased to give audience
to his people in Jerusalem seated upon mountains; and the celestial Jerusalem
is his place of residence. To these mountains therefore I have raised mine
eyes.

Some by the mountains do understand the holy Angels eminent in dignity,
and far transcending us mortals in excellency of nature: who as the Apostle
teaches are ministering spirits sent to minister Hebr. 1.
for them which shall receive the inheritance of salvation; and by whose
assistance God almighty is pleased to be served for the aid of his afflicted
servants. In which sense the Prophet expected not his aid as principally from
them, and therefore he added, my help is from our Lord etc.

O devout soul thou have done wisely in that thou have not reflected upon the
vanities occurring in the way of thy peregrination, but transcending them (as
not worth regarding) have erected thine eyes, expecting aid and consolation
from the Creator of heaven and earth. Give he not I beseech him thy feet to be
moved, let him not permit thee to slip and fall in the way by yielding to
sin or tentation, but let him strengthen thy feet that they may persevere
firm and stable in their course to the celestial country. Neither do he
slumber that keeps thee. I beseech him likewise, unto whom thou have
recommended thyselfe, and who has taken thee into his protection, that he do
not depose the care of thee, be it for n^uer so short a time.

Courage thou holy pilgrim, Lo he shall not slumber, nor much less sleep
that keeps Israel. Although it seems sometimes (as men then believe) that
in the time of affliction God does dissemble the anguish of his elected, and
the tyranny of wicked men who persecuted them, as if he did not see and observe
what passed; much like to one a sleep: Yet credit me, he is not capable of
sleep, but is ever so watchful, that he will always be found vigilant for
their defense.

Our Lord keeps thee in particular, conseruing thee in good, and preserving
thee from evil in the way of this present exile: Our Lord is thy protection
upon thy right hand. Some read above thy right hand, and expound it, That our
Lord is thy protection of far greater strength and assurance then thy right
hand. Others read it as it is here translated, and expound it, That our Lord is
as it were a buckler upon thy right hand, or a Canopie borne on thy right hand,
covering thy head and body in such sort, that

By day the Sun shall not burn thee: nor the moon by night. For the grace
of God shall keep those that confide in him both in the time of prosperity
and adversity: the Sun or day of prosperity being usually as dangerous and
hurtful in a spiritual course, if not more prejudicial, then the Moon or
night of adversity, unless it be used with due circumspection.

Our Lord does keep thee from all evil, that it prevail not against thee.
Indeed he sometimes permits tentations, persecutions, and afflictions to
happen unto thee: yet he has ever a vigilant eye toward thee, that they take
not effect against thee; for he permits them either for his greater glory,
or thy conversion and amendment, or some other reason which can be none other
then the very best, as thou will experience in due season according to that of
the Apostle, Romans 8.
To them that love God all things cooperate unto good. To whom then can I more
fitly recommend thee then into the arms of his immense goodness? Our Lord
therefore keep thy soul, that it be not deprived of his grace, nor the flesh
prevail against it.

Our Lord keep thy coming in and thy going out, all thy actions both internal
and external. Or thus, Thy coming in, to wit, the beginning when thou
attemptest any good work: and thy going out, the consummation thereof; that
so every one of thy works may take beginning from him, and being begun may
be perfected by him. Or finally thus, Our Lord Lord keep thy coming in, thy
conversation in this world, whereby thou entrest into the place of this
peregrination: and thy going out, thy departure out of this world, when thy
soul is separated from the body. This thy coming in and going ou^ I beseech
our Lord to keep, and conserve thee to be lodged with him in eternity: of
which coming in and going out our Savior said, I am the door, by me Ioh. 14.
if any enter he shall be saved: and he shall go in, and shall go out, and
shall find pastures.

The argument of the 121. Psalm and third in Tierce.
IN this Psalm the Prophet describes the beauty, nobility, and felicity of
the City of Jerusalem, whereunto the Hebrews desired to return from the
captivity of Babylon. But as that City was a type of the celestial
Jerusalem, so the Hebrews returning from that captivity to the terrene
Jerusalem, were a figure of our peregrination and ascension to that supernall
Jerusalem: and therefore the whole Psalm may be understood of each
captivity, and of the pilgrims of each of them. Yet certainly the prime
intention of the holy Ghost is directed to the principal end: and indeed the
words do best agree therewith, as I shall endeavor to show in the ensuing
explication. The Prophet has placed this third Graduall Psalm very fitly
after the two former. For the first degree of internal ascension was to depart
from vice: the Second to implore the divine assistance: and the third (which is
here treated of) is Hope to attain the last end, or life everlasting.
Therefore speaking in the person of a man little regarding the delights of this
world, but most intensely attending the joys of the celestial mansion he
says,

The exposition of the Psalm.
I Rejoiced with a spiritual joy in the consideration of these thing, which
were said to me by internal inspiration, to wit, that we shall go after
this life, when we are cleansed from all guilt of sin, into the house of our
Lord, into the triumphant Church, the country of the blessed, the Kingdom of
God. We know (says the Apostle) that if our earthly house 2. Cor. 5.
of this habitation be dissolved, that we have a building of God, a house not
made with hand, eternal in heaven. Concerning which you are to note, that the
celestial country is termed a Kingdom, a City, and a house in diverse
respects: for in regard of the multitude and variety of the inhabitants it is
called a Kingdom; in regard of the Society and familiarity amongst the
blessed it is called a City; for although the number of the elect be almost
infinite, yet they know and love each other and are Citizens of the fame
City* and finally in respect that all the elect have one and the same father,
one and the same inheritance; it is called a house; where all shall be brethren
under one father God almighty. In this house, City, or Kingdom God is seen
face to face, and eternal security accompanied with complete beatitude is
found. There men shall be as the Angels, and have their desires satiated to the
full. Notwithstanding when death approaches which puts a A period to our
peregrination, all men do not rejoice with the Prophet in these things that
were said unto him, to wit, that we shall go into the house of our Lord: but
such alone as have disposed ascensions in their hearts, whilst they had
health, leisure, ability and means to do it, and truly say with him.

Our feet were standing in thy courts ^ Jerusalem, to wit, our desires,
contemplations, and affections of our hearts were fixed and established in thy
mansions o celestial Kingdom; ^n such sort, that our conversation was in
thee, and all our actions were ordained by us to attain eternal life. These
may rejoice upon good ground, when others that have been wedded as it were to
their senses and sensuality, shall be repleat with horror and confusion at
that voice.

Terusalem which is built daily until the consummation of the world of living
stones, as a City, in such sort, as befitteth the City of the eternal King
to be built: for it is built of precious, polished, holy, reasonable stones,
of Angels and men, as the Apostle affirms saying, In Christ all building
framed together grows into an holy temple in our Lord, in whom you also
are built together into an habitation of God in the holy Ghost etc. Whose
participation is together in it self. This clause is expounded diversely in
respect of the words ( in idipsum) in the latin text: which some interpret In
the same; according to whom the sense is, That all the Citizens of the
celestial Jerusalem do participate of the same goodness: because all of them
do enjoy the same eternal goodness, though not in like measure; but more or
less according as they have loved more or less. God almighty therefore is
the same, that is to say, the immutable and undivided goodness of the
celestial Jerusalem, whose participation, to wit the fruition, beatitude and
deification whereby it does participate the divine goodness is uniform and
sempiternall. Others admit of the former interpretation, to wit, whose
participation is together in it self, and expound it, That the goodness of
all the celestial Citizens is the goodness of every and each one of them;
and contrary wise. For since that love is of its own nature diffuse and
communicatiue; as in the celestial country there is the most perfect mutual
love of all the blessed, so there is the most full and absolute communion of
the beatitude of every and each one: one is as glad of the felicity of
another as of his own; yea they do congratulate each other, and according to
the doctrine of S. Denis the Superiors do impart to the inferiors of the
perfections bestowed upon them by almighty God. These things do not so
properly square with any terrene City: and therefore it should seem that
what is said in this Psalm of the terrene Jerusalem, ought to be understood
as meant of the celestial.

For thither did the tribes ascend, the tribes of our Lord: the testimony of
Israel to consesse unto the name of our Lord. Here the Prophet yields the
reason why he has said, Jerusalem which is built as a City etc. because
thither into that holy and sacred sanctuary did the tribes ascend: yet not of
what sort so ever but the tribes of our Lord, which bear the mark and
testimony of being infants of the true Israel. These elected people did ascend
to confess unto the name of our Lord, as he had decreed from all eternity,
and testified to his servant Jacob that they should: Ep. 1. beati Petri c. 2.
and were superedified as it were living stones, and spiritual houses; for of
the souls of the ^lect and the Angelical spirits is that glorious fabric of
the triumphant Church composed. They ascended also to that holy City,

Because seats sat othere in judgment, because there the thrones of Christ
and those that reign with him are firmly fixed and established: Semes upon the
house of David: according to that of the Prophet Isa. 9.
Isaie, He shall sit upon the throne of David and upon his Kingdom: that he
may confirm it and strengthen it in judgment, and justice, from this time
and for ever etc. and as the Angel promised to our Lady saying, Our Lord Luc.
1.
God shall give him the seat of David his Father, and he shall reign in the
house of Jacob for ever. The blessed reigning with Christ are the seats of
God; for The soul of the Sap. 7.
just man is the seat of the increate wisdom: and these seats do truly sit
in judgment; according to the promise of our Lord, You which have f^ll wed me,
in the Math. 19.
regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit in the seat of his Majesty,
you also shall sit upon tw^lue seats judging the twelve tribes of Israel
Moreover they are seats founded upon the house of David: because all the
regal and iudicia^ie power of the Saints depends of Christ, who in the
Ghospel is styled the Son of David, and received the seat of David his
Father, and shall reign in the house of Jacob for ever.

O all ye that aspire to this holy City, Ask the things that are for the
peace of Jerusalem, the things that conduce to the peace of Jerusalem. Or thus,
Beg ye of almighty God the gifts of the holy Ghost, whereby you may merit
to be brought to the peace of Jerusalem. And thou o Jerusalem obtain by thy
intercession abundance of spiritual graces for them that love thee, for us of
the militant Church who aspire to union with thee.

Peace o triumphant City be made in thy strength, in thy walls and
fortifications, and abundance in thy towers, in thy Palaces, that so thou
may enjoy complete felicity. For peace without abundance is a secure
possession of misery; and abundance without peace is a doubtful and
incertaine felicity: but when both these do concur, nothing is wanting
which may be desired to the rendering of a City happy and flourishing.
Concerning which you are to note, that this good wish of the Prophet to the
celestial Jerusalem does not signify any fear he had, least peace and
abundance might ever be wanting unto it; for he says of it in another place,
who has set thy ^sal. 147.
borders peace: and filled thee with the fat of corn: but it is only a
pious expression of his affections toward it, and of the joy he conceived in
the consideration of the felicity thereof; in which manner it is said in the
Apccalipse, Salvation to Apoc. 7.
our God, who sits upon the throne, and to the lamb etc. For my brethren
and neighbors sakes I spoke peace of thee, Out of the vnf^lned love and
charity which moves me incessantly to wish the b^st things to my brethren and
neighbors I preached unto them peace. but what peace? not the peace of or with
the world, which our Savior said expressly he came not ^o Math. 10. Philip. 4.
gine: but the peace of thee (o heavenly Jerusalem) which as S. Paul says,
passes all understanding etc. For the house if our Lord God I have sought good
things m^ther. Another consideration why I love, my said brethren and
neighbors is; for that they are the house of our Lord God: whom whilst I wish
well unto and seek to make enamoured of thy peace, I esteem my self to have
sought good things to the^ for by their union, thy number will be made
complete, and thy walls fully finished.

Behold a Psalm repeat with spiritual (...), the first verse whereof we ought
to pronounce with the fervor of divine to ^e and internal iubilation
considering that noe man can attain to this celestial Jerusalem unless he
be an unfeigned lover and diligent obseruer of peace and charity. Let us
therefore endeavor to make good progress in the true love of God and our
neighbor; weighing and fulfilling carefully that of the Apostle; I beseech you
that you walk Ephesians. 4.
worthy of the vocation in which you are called, with all humili^^e and
r^^dnesse, with patiencee supporting one another in charity, careful to Keep
the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace: for conuersing in the Militant
Church in this sort, they will be esteemed worthy to be introduced into the
triumphant Church, as being upon earth imitators of the celestial Citizens.

Concerning the Exp^cation of the Chapters as well of this Hour, as of Sext
and None, I refer the Reader to what has already been (...) in the
explication of the lessons, out of which the Chapters of these three Hours are
taken.

The rule and argument of the 122. Psalm, and first in Sext.
IN this fourth Graduall Psalm is treated of the fourth step of internal
ascension, to wit, To have an undaunted confidence in the divine mercy amidst
all adversities and distresses; in such sort, that one may be able to say
with holy Job. 13.
(...), Although he shall kill me, I will trust in him. The Prophet therefore
speaking in the person of a man extremely afflicted, yet confiding immoueably
in our Lord says,

The explication of the Psalm.
TO thee o my God, my sole comforter in tribulation, I have lifted up ^yne
eyes, attending succor; who dwell in the heavens, where thou art pleased to
manifest thy self in an ine^^able manner, is thou art indeed in thy self.

Behold as the eyes of servants are as it were fixed On the hands of their
Masters, observing their commounds expecting their favor and assistance, and
receiving with humble thankfulness what benefitt or recompense soever they
shall please to bestow upon them: and As the eyes of the handmaid on the hands
of her Mistress, in like sort; so are our eyes to our Lord God, imploring and
hoping for aid pardon and grace, Until he have mercy on us by granting what
we require, or at least wise doing what he knows to be most expedient for
us: and this not only in one or two necessities, but until the hour of our
death, for during our whose life we shall stand in need of his mercy.

Have mercy on us o Lord, have mercy (...) us, because we are much
replenished with contempt. The elect indeed are despised by the reprobate,
Religious men by seculats, humble men by the proud and poor men by the
wealthy: and as Job af^^rmeth. The simplicity of the just is derided. Job. 12.
The reason of this is manifest because good and evil are contraries, and
contraries cannot be at peace and unity one with another: and therefore in
respect that the just are mild and patient (as having learnt of our Savior not
to resist, but contrary wise when they are buffeted an one cheek to turn the
other) they are contumeliously handled, trodden under foot, vexed and scorned.

Because our soul is much replenished, to wit with confusion; and is made
reproach to them that abound, and contempt to the proud. Yet a time will come,
that this reproach will be converted to their eternal benefitt, and fall
heavy upon their adversaries; when at the day of judgment the Sap. 5.
impious shall say, These are they whom we had sometime in derision, and in a
parable of reproach: we senseless esteemed their lives madness, and their end
without honor; behold how they are counted among the children of God etc.

In this Psalm we are taught to raise the eyes of our heart toward God in all
our necessities, and not to desist until we have obtained mercy: for it
behooves us to pray always; and not to fail, but to persevere therein so
long as we are vested with mortality. We are also induced to this confident
and holy elevation by the example of our Savior, of whom it is written, That
lifting up his Ioh. 17.
eyes to heaven be said; Father the hour it come etc And again, Jesus
lifting his eyes Ioh. 11.
upward said, Father I give thee thanks etc.

The argument of the 123. Psalm and Second in Sext.
ALthough this Psalm may very fitly be expounded in the person of the holy
Martyrs now triumphing with Christ; or of any other of the Saints now in
glory, who have entered into the eclestiall Kingdom by many tribulatione yet
it may noe less properly be applied to them that are upon the way to^ards
eternal life, who being by the divine goodness freed from the evil of
tentations passions and persecutions, do render thanks hereby for their
delivery. In this fifth graduall Psalm is treated of the fifth degree of
internal ascension, to wit, Not to rely upon our own forces, but to ascribe
our delivery to the grace of almighty God: whence our Lord says, Least
Israel glory against ^ud. 7.
me, and say, by my o^ne force I am delivered. The Prophet therefore in the
person of such as have experienced the gracious assistance of almighty God
amidst their most grievous tentations and mortal dangers says,

The explication of the Psalm.
But that our Lord was in us, let Israel say, let the people seeing God by
faith acknowledge with a grateful heart saying, but that our Lord was in us,
with us, and for us, directing and protecting us in all occurrences.

When men, to wit infidels, heretics, tyrants and maleuolent people rose up
against us conspiring our ruin, in^licting severe punishments, and endeavoring
to the utmost of their power to induce us to the evil of fault: perhaps they
had swallowed us alive, we having noe means to escape their fury; for noe
humane succor could protect or secure us. This properly suteth with the
persecution of the holy Martyrs, whom Tyrants sought by all the ways they
could cogitate to induce to Idolatry, (...) the denial of our Savior Christ
whereunto if they had yielded consent, their souls had been absorpt not the
body, and so they: had been swallowed alive; for living in body they had
been dead in soul, and retaining the life of nature they had lost the life of
grace and glory.

When their fury was angry against us: perhaps waters of tribulations,
vehement persecutions had swallowed us, had prouailed against us. By waters are
signified great tribulations, according to that of the Prophet Isaie, Our Lord
will bring upon Isa. 8.
them the waters of the river strong and many, the King of the Assirians. and
that of Jeremy, Thren. 3.
The waters have sti^ed ever my be^d Isaied, I am undone etc.

Our soul has passed through a torrent, to wit sudden great troubles and
^entations, patiently sustaining them; and refusing to consent to what was
suggested perhaps our soul had passed through (...) intolerable water* that
is to say, Unless (...) Lord had succoureth us, we had been ^^presse drand
tempted above our strength, ^o (...) ou^ soul had been enforced to pass
through a^ intolerable water, to suffer such a persecution, as we could in noe
so^t have withstood. But God is faithful; who 1. Cor. 10 (...)
will no^ suffer us to be tempted about that which we are able Yea he will make
also with tentation issue; that we may be able to sustain (...).

Blessed, praised and glorified be our Lord for ever, who has not given us a
pre^ to their teeth, who has not withdrawn his helping hand from us, nor
left, us to the mercy less rage of our enemies; who persecuted us as it were
with open mouths, pretending already to tear us in pieces with their
venomous teeth. In deed he has given them power to afflict our bodies for our
future reward, but he has not in any sort permitted them to hurt our soul. for

Our soul as a sparrow is delivered from the snare of the fawlers. By these
fowlers or hunters are understood wicked men, instruments of the Devil, who
seek to deceive souls; according to that, Every Micheas 7.
one hunteth his brother to death and by the snares are understood all such
things whereby the soul is induced to sin (...) made subject to the power of
the Devil, whence is that of the Apostle, God gi^e them repentance to know the
truth, and they 2. ad Ti^o. 2.
recover themselves from the snares of the Devil, of whom they are held
captive at his will etc. From these snares our soul is dis^neangled by the
grace of God, and escapes out of them as a sparrow out of the net, making
vonderfull expressions of joy at the recovery of her freedom.

The snare is broken, God almighty giving the light of his grace to discover
the sub(...)ties and suggestions of the evil enemy, and fortitude to resist
them and we are delivered, the Devil being overcome, consent to sin being
denied, and adversity having noe power to hurt us. This we cannot perfectly
sing in this life by reason that tentations endure euc^ to the expiration
thereof: yea they are sometimes most impetuous at the very hour of our
departure. At what time then may we sing it perfectly, but in the life to
come? when we may pronounce with a joyful heart that of the Apostle Death is
swallowed up in victory: Death 1. Cor. 15:
where is thy sting? Yet we may in some sort sing it in this life, when we
have overcome some tentation; or escaped sinister occurrences by the assistance
of the divine goodness for the Apostle says, Thanks be to God that has
given us victory by our Lord Jesus Christ.

Our help is in the name of our Lord, to wit in his power; not in our
strength: for it is written, Lord thou will give peace to us* only in thee let
us remember thy name. In him therefore our help is placed, who made heaven and
earth.

In this Psalm we are taught to ascribe to God with true humility all our
triumph, spiritual progress, and gifts of grace: to recount his divine
benefits* devoutly rendering him the tribute of our thankfulness. According to
Hugh of S Victor, The devil does invade men by suggestion, touch them by
deliberation, swallow them by consent, transmisse them to the stomach by
operation, concoct them by custom, and digest them to death by damnation: for
by these degrees men descend into all.

The argument of the 124. Psalm and last in Sext.
IN this Sixth graduall Psalm the Prophet treats of the Sixth degree of
internal ascension, which is a certain immovable confidence in the goodness
of almighty God, drawn out of the consideration of manifold benefits already
received. For by how much the more frequently any do experience his singular
favors, by so much the more their confidence in him is established; in such
sort, that they are in a manner assured he will convert all things sweetly to
their eternal benefitt.

The explication of the Psalm.
THey that trust in our Lord, as mount Sion. Those that shall place all their
confidence and entirely resign themselves into the all powerful hands of our
Lord, shall be noe more subject to commotion, then is that holy Mountain of
Sion; by the shocke of the winds which is environed with diverse other hills. He
shall not be proved for ever that dwells in Jerusalem. He that makes his
constant aboade in the militant Church, and continues therein, shall not be
moved for ever from the Catholic faith: not that he is confirmed in goodness
according to the ordinary proceeding before he has run the course of his
life; but in as much as being a member of the Church, and endeavoring to keep
the commandments of almighty God, he may confidently hope to be defended
and conserved in it through the merits of our blessed Savior.

Mountains, to wit the Angels of God (who in respect of their excellency of
nature and grace are termed Mountains) are round about it, the militant
Church; as being ordained and sent for the custody of men. Yet least any
should think this to be sufficient, or place their confidence finally in them,
the Prophet adds, and our Lord round about his people from hence forth, now
and forever.

Because our Lord will not leave always or finally the red of sinners, the
power, persecution, and tyramie of the reprobate upon the lot, part, or portion
of the just, or upon just men, who are the portion and inheritance of almighty
God: that the just reach not their hands to iniquity, least they be overcome
and sin. For although he do for a time seem to leave the elect, permitting
them to be afflicted by perverse men, that so they might be purified and
meritt glory; yet he leaves not them finally.

Do well o Lord to the good in work, and right of heart in intention, giving
unto them increase of grace in this life, and beatitude in the next. Those are
said to be right of heart, whose affections are agreeable to the will of God
and to justice, whose eyes are simple, and intentions directed toward God.

But those that decline from the way of justice into obligations, into sins,
which oblige to punishment; our Lord will bring in the day of judgment on his
left hand, and wards or after before into hell with them that work iniquity,
with the devils: whose pr^de ascends always, who sin from the beginning,
who when they had fallen did not add to rise again, but remained obstinate in
evil. Peace upon Israel.

In this Psalm we are taught how happy a thing it is to confide in our Lord:
and how exceeding potent the protectors of the holy Church are, to wit the
Angels of God; who do enuirone Christians on all sides, passing hither and
thither as it were so many laborious Bees, that they may provide for our
souls health by restraining the devils, suggesting good things, rejoicing at
our progress, praying for us, and bringing Isa. 62.
us many graces. Whence is that which our Lord says by the Prophet Isaie,
Upon thy walls Jerusalem I have appointed watchmen all the night, for ever they
shall not hold their peace. Moreover the Prophet promised us in this Psalm,
that our Lord will not leave the rod of sinners upon the lot of the just, that
we might have confidence in all our afflictions, that at length we shall be
freed from them: and in the interim that we might expect with patience; Math.
10.
for He that perseuereth to the end shall be saved.

The argument of the 125. Psalm and first in None.
IN this Seventh graduall Psalm according to the letter the Prophet expresses
the joy and thankfulness of the Jews for their deliuer^e from the Babilonian
captivity. Yet being expounded in a mystical sense, it treats of the
seventh degree of internal ascension, which consists in Exultation, and
thankfulness for the delivery of the elect from the bonds of sin and
servitude of the devil:

The mystical sense of this Psalm.
When our Lord turned the captivity of Sion, when it pleased our good God the
Father of mercy and consolation to convert the Militant Church, or any of the
faithful from a confused life, from mortal sin, from present misery to a
well ordered life and the state of grace, we were made as men comforted, we
felt so great excess of joy and consolation, that we durst scarcely believe
so singular a^ happiness was indeed arrived unto us.

Then was our mouth replenished with joy: and our tongue with exultation, Then
was joy so abundant in our souls, that we have exteriourly manifested it:
and made appear by our Canticles of gladness, and Hymns of thanksgiving what
interior sweetness we experienced in that happy change of our condition.

Then shall they say among the Gentiles, Then shall certain secular men, or
other people whatsoever beholding the grace that God almighty has bestowed
upon us admiring say, Our Lord has done magnifically with them, exceeding
benignely, graciously, and potently. For the lovers of the world do frequently
extol in others, what they will not imitate: they admire beholding many to be
converted to Christ; to enter into religion, to change their manners suddenly
for the better, praising God in his effects; yet they pray not that the same
grace may be bestowed on themselves.

Our Lord has done magnifically with us: This is the same with that we read in
the Canticle of the blessed Virgin, to wit, He that is mighty has done great
things to Luc. 1.
me. Christ our Lord has done magnificently indeed with us, assuming our
nature, converting our first and general captivity, satisfying for original
sin, conuersing amongst men, uniting us unto him by grace, congregating the
Church of us, leaving unto us his body and blood in the holy Eucharist,
sending the holy Ghost, and conferring innumerable benefits upon us. We are
therefore Made joyful, and serve him cheerfully.

Turn our captivity o Lord, free us from all corruption of sin, constitute
us in the liberty of the sons of God, and take from us those sins, by
which we are daily circumuented and bound as it were in fetters: turn this our
captivity as a torrent in the south; that so we may be filled with the
gifts and graces of the holy Ghost, as a dried up torrent is filled with water
the south wind blowing.

They that sow in tears, They that now exercise themselves in the sorrows of
penance or tears of devotion, they that contemn transitory delights and
serve God with a contrite and humbled heart shall reap in ioyfulnesse the
effects of grace in present, and the fruit of glory hereafter according to the
quantity and goodness of their seed: for as the Apostle says, He that
sows sparingly, sparingly 2. Cor. 9
also shall reap: and he that sows in blessings, of blessings also shall
reap. There are five sorts of tears. The first are to obtain pardon of our
offenses: these purify from the stain or blemish of sin. The Second are for
the fearful apprehension of the future Judgment, and hell: these refrigerate
the ardour of concupiscence, and withdraw from all iniquity. The third are for
our habitation in this present exile: these minister sovereign liquor to a
thirsting soul. The fourth are for the defects of our neighbors: these fatten
the souls of such charitable mourners. The fifth are for the desire of eternal
life: these render a soul fruitful in all goodness.

The elect Going by the way of this present life, they went by the way of the
commandments of almighty God, and wept, according to some of the five sorts
of lamentation before said, casting their seeds, doing meritorious works:
which are termed seeds; because as fruit springs from seed, so of good
works arises the fruit of eternal life the infusion of divine consolation.
They cast therefore their seeds, they sent good works before them, and
gathered a heap of merits, which the laid up in Chrih; as he exhorts us
saying, Heap Math. 6
up to your souls treasures in heaven etc. and as the Apostle counsels us
saying, Gal. 6.
Doing good, let us not fail, for in due time we shall reap not failing.

But coming to the tribunal of Christ they shall come with exultation, with a
secure and joyful conscience, carrying their sheaues, the virtuous works they
have so collected: for their works shall follow Apoc. 14
them.

In this Psalm we are admonished to reuolue often in our minds the work of
our redemption. We are taught also what difference there is between the elect
and the reprobate. For the elect going in goodness do make happy progress
by weeping: but the reprobate do glory in this exile as if they were in the
country of their inheritance, making of a prison a paradise of delight: and
therefore coming to the tribunal of Christ, they come with sorrow and
heaviness, bearing nothing in their hands but the scedule of their damnation.
Whence it Luc. 6.
is said to them in the Ghospel, VVoe to you that are rich, because you have
your consolation: woe to you that now do laugh, because you shall mourn and
weep etc. Remember son (says Abraham in the Parable of Luc. 16.
the rich man) that thou did receive good things in thy life time and Lazarus
likewise evil: but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented. Let us then
despise the pomp, glory and vanity of the world, repress the desires of the
flesh, and bathe our cheeks with holy tears, considering that we can not now
rejoice with the world, and afterward reign with Christ.

The title and argument of the 126. Psalm and Second in None.
A Graduall Canticle of Solomon. Many of great talents who have endeavored to
expound this Psalm do confess that they have ever esteemed it exceeding
obscure, and have not after long study attained the literal sense thereof.
Yet they judge the most probable exposition to be that of the Greek Fathers
S. John Chrysostom, Theodoretus, and Euthimius; to wit, That the prophetical
exhortation therein does appertain to the people of the Hebrews after their
return from the Babilonian captivity: when as they laboring to reedifie the
house of God, and repair the holy City, were hindered and molested by the
bordering nations; in such sort, that they were constrained to build with one
hand, and hold their sword in the other. Which exposition seems to accord
with the title. This exhortation therefore is given by the Prophet to Solomon,
because he first of all built the house of God, and amplified the City of
Jerusalem: in respect whereof he is fitly introduced, as who should admonish
Zorobabel (that was as it were another Solomon) how he ought to comport
himself in reedifying, keeping, and inlardging the house of God and the holy
City. But in a higher sense, the true Solomon, to wit, the peace maker
Christ Jesus (who is our peace) does admonish us that aspire to true peace, and
aspiring do ascend from this vale of, tears to the vision of peace the
celestial Jerusalem, how we ought to build and guard the house or City of the
holy Church: and exhort every man in particular by good works to erect
himself a house in heaven, and keep it carefully; that he may when time
comes ascend to inhabit and possess it for ever: according to which later
sense I purpose to proceed. In this Eight Graduall Psalm the Prophet treats
of the Eight degree of internal ascension, to wit, of the manner, hour, and
order of rising to adore God.

A moral exposition of this Psalm.
Unless our Lord, Jesus Christ, or God the holy Trinity build interiourly by
faith, Charity, and grace, the house, the holy Church, or every member
thereof, in whom God does reside: as our Savior said, we will come to him
Ioh. 14.
and make abode with him etc. They, the Prophets, Apostles, and their
successors have labored in vain that build it, that by preaching, teaching,
living exemplarily; and working miracles have endeauored to convert souls,
inform the faithful, and erect the said house. For unless God almighty
infuse internal light, external preaching will profitt little. if any thing at
all; whence is that of the Apostle, Neither he that planteth is any thing, nor
he 1. Cor. 3.
that waters; but he that gives the increase, God.

Unless our Lord keep the City, the holy Church (which is termed a City
in respect of the union of the faithful) He every Doctor, Pastor, or Prelate
watches Philip. 2.
in vain that keeps it. For not only the beginning of our good, but also
our conservation, protection, and perfection is of God: and therefore as he
alone does build the holy Church interiourly by infusing faith, Charity,
hope, and the gifts of the holy Ghost, to which infusion holy Prelates and
Pastors whom he has called to that function do dispose the minds of men; so
he alone does keep it by himself, by conseruing those gifts in being which he
has so infused; and the Angels and men to whom he has recommended the
chardge or government of his Church do keep it instrumentally, and dispose it
exteriourly by exhorting to goodness, and removing the impediments of living
well.

It is in vain for you Prelates and Pastors of the holy Church to rise before
light, to apply your selves with all diligence to build and guard this house,
this City of our Lord, before the infusion of grace, before the irradiation
and reception of the divine assistance. As if he should say, Your labor will
produce noe effect, or profitt nothing at all; unless the grace of God be
propitiously present both with you and your audience. Rise ye therefore to
execute the office recommended unto you after ye have sitten, after you have
humbly implored the divine assistance, and with drawing your selves from
exterior affairs have rested for some space at the feet of a Crucifix,
meditating, contemplating, and praying that you may be admitted to enter into
the wine Cellar of the holy Ghost, and into the treasury of the wisdom of
God. Being therefore spiritually inebriated with the ardour of divine love and
ir^adiated by the light of verity, you may arise and pass to instruct others
and communicate with them of your plenitude: for then God will grant a
blessing to your labors, and one word of your mouth shall make deeper
impression in the heart of your audience, then whole sermons will otherwise
do. Rise then bouldly after you have sitten in this sort, Who eat the bread
of sorrow* unto whom the tears of fraternall compassion are food day and
night. For it behooves you daily to condole with your subjects, and not alone
to bewail your own, but their offenses also. Thou Ezech. 5
shall bear (says the Prophet Ezechiel) the iniquity of tho house of
Israel, whence 2. Cor. 11
the Apostle says of himself, Who is weak and I am not weak? Who is
scandalized and I am not burnt? and holy Job, I Job. 30.
wept sometime upon him that was afflicted, and my soul bad compassion on the
poor.

When he shall give sleep to his beloved, when our Lord (who is the prime
architect of this spiritual fabric) shall after you have faithfully
cooperated with his grace, grant you and the residue of his chosen friends a
long desired rest from your labors, that is, a happy death: Behold the
inheritance of our Lord are children: the reward of the fruit of the womb.
Then, to wit, at the day of judgment it shall appear; that you and they who
have been regenerated to God by. Baptism, and adopted his children, are his
inheritance: for then both you and the rest of his selected friends shall pass
into his eternal possession and inheritance, and become the reward of Christ
Jesus the sweet fruit of the womb of the blessed Virgin; who by his passion
and death has purchased grace and glory for you and them.

As arrows in the hand of the mighty: so are the children of them that are
shaken. By these children are understood all the elect, who are the inheritance
and reward of Christ: and by that comparison of them with arrows in the hand
of the mighty, is designed the spiritual power of the servants of Christ;
which was apparent and manifest both in their actions, as converting infidels
to the Catholic says, or sinners to pe^nance with the efficacy of their
doctrine, splendour of sanctity, and force of miracles; and also in their
passions, as suffering all sorts of torments with incredible patience and
fortitude even to the last gasp for the defense of the truth. These are also
termed, The children of them that are shaken, because they are the disciples
and followers of the Prophets and Apostles, whom the world did persecure even
to death it self.

Blessed is the man Christ, true God and true man, that has filled his desire
of them, of the said children. That is to say, He is truly blessed, because
he has brought his desire to the end he aimed at; which was to behold the
salvation and glory of his children, for whom he has done and suffered so
exceeding much. Therefore he shall not be confounded, when he shall speak to
his enemies in the gate. When he shall speak to the devils and wicked men in
the last judgment, he shall not be confounded: but rather shall confound, and
convince them of injustice and imbecillitie. For the whole contention of Christ
with the devil and his ministers (which has continued even from the beginning
of the world, and shall endure till the consummation thereof) has been, is,
and will be about the salvation of mankind; whom the devil has, does, and
will labor by all means possible to draw with him totally into hell: and to
this end he in every age raised up persecutions of the Jews, Paganes,
heretics, and wicked men of all sorts to band against the holy Church. But
when at the day of judgment he shall behold so many millions of the elect
reigning and triumphing gloriously with Christ, and most justly crowned: and of
the contrary, all power to be taken from him and his adherents (noe more hope
remaining for him and them ever to renew war with the elect) then Christ
shall not be confounded, but shall confound all his enemies.

In this Psalm we are taught to attribute the beginning, conservation,
process and consummatio^ of good works to God alone. Moreover we are taught
to extirpate pride, embrace humility, and so to proceed to the sleep of the
elect.

The argument of the 127. Psalm and last in None.
IN this Ninth graduall Psalm the Prophet treats of the Ninth degree of
internal ascension, to wit, Filial fear: whereby we are deterred from
doing evil out of a desire not to offend almighty God, whom we truly love.
It proceeds therefore from love; and is proper to those, who (as the Apostle
says) have received the spirit of adoption of ad Romans 8.
sons, and the Spirit of love: where as those that abstain from doing evil
out of a servile fear, that is, merely for fear of punishment which they
desire to avoid, may justly be said according to same Apostle to have the
Spirit of servitude. Ibid.


This degree is exceeding necessary for them that desire to make good
progress in a short space: for we read in Ecclesiasticus, that He that is
without fear Eccles. 1.
cannot be justified.

The explication of the Psalm.
BLessed are all now in hope, that fear our Lord, with a filial fear: that
walk in his ways, in his divine precepts; not in their own inventions, and
after the prauitie of their own heart: as it is written of the impious man, He
has gone wandering in the way of his own heart. etc.

Because thou shall eat the labors of thy hands. Because thou, whosoever thou
art that have this holy fear imprinted in thy heart, and walk in the ways
of our Lord, shall eat in heaven the fruit of thy good endeauours and
meritorious actions: according to that, The soul of them that Proverb, 13.
work shall be made fa^^e etc

Blessed art thou now in hope, and it shall be well with thee hereafter: For it
is said in the Gospel, Blessed is he that Luc. 14.
shall eat bread in the Kingdom of God. Or thus, Because thou shall live and
sustain thy self with the fruit of thy own hand labor, procuring food and
other necessaries for thy self by thy proper industry, blessed art thou, and
it shall be well with thee: for indeed such labor is very meritorious.

Thy wi^e, wisdom given thee by almighty God, as a fruit full vine shall
produce holy works, in the sides of thy house; in the intime powers of thy
soul. Wisdom is the knowledge of divine things: and is called the wife and
spouse of a man living in holy fear; according to that, Her have I loved, and
have sought her out from Sap. 8.
my youth, and have sought to take her for my spouse; and I was made a lover of
her beauty. By this wife may also be understood the eternal and increate
wisdom which is the spouse of a devout soul, and does fructify therei^ like
to a well cultiuated vine.

Thy children, thy acts springing out of wisdom shall be as young plants of
olive trees, ever flourishing, many, comely and strong, round about thy table,
in the circumference of thy faith, wherein all good works are founded and
radica^ed.

By Thy children may also be understood, such spiritual children as by thy
wisdom and preaching are generated and brought forth to Christ. Whence the
Apostle says, In Christ Jesus by the Gospel Cor. 4. Gala. 4.
I begat you. and again, My little children whom I travail with all again,
until Christ be formed in you. These children wisely instructed by thee, as
young plants of olive trees, shall be anointed with the unction of divine
grace, and become flourishing and fruitful in Christ, round about thy table,
in the circuit of spiritual doctrine, wherewith thou do nourish them as
with the bread of life and water of wisdom.

Behold so shall the man be blessed, Such gifts of grace shall be conferred
upon the man, that fears our Lord, as is above said. For With him that
fears our Lord Eccles. 1.
(says Ecclesiasticus) it shall be well in the later end, and in the day of
his death he shall be blessed. Indeed since nothing does separate us from God
but sin, nor any thing can hinder infusion of grace but our own negligence:
by this, that fear does shake of negligence, retract from vice, and expel
sin, it disposes our heart to all goodness, and is as it were the cause of
all our good. Our Lord out of Sion to wit the militant Church bless thee by
his Prelates and Pastors, and grant that thou may see the good things of
Jerusalem* the happy estate and continual progress of the holy Church all
the days of thy life. And tha^ (...) may see thy childrens children, them
thou h^^t spiritually begotten, begett others in like sort; that the holy
Church may be augmented in meritt and number: and so thou may behold the
Peace of Christ upon Israel, thy self, and other Christians contemplating God.

The preamble to Vespres.
THe ancient Fathers are so clear for this hour, and make so express
mention of it; that noe man could ever raise doubts of it, especially about its
institution and antiquity. The time allotted for Vespres is the evening. First
by reason of the proportion which it holds with Lauds: for as Lauds are
song in the last hour of the night, so Vespres should be song in the last
hour of the day. Secondly because our holy Father S. Benedict ordained that
Vespres be song always by day light, yet still in the evening. Cassian also
compares Vespres to the labors of those who were last called, and sent into
the vineyard of our Lord, who begane their work only at Eleven; and ended not
until twelve.

The mystical significations of this hour may be diverse. First it be
tokeneth the institution of the blessed Sacrament, which was in the evening:
for as the evening sacrifice, holocaust, or burnt offering, and the Paschal
Lamb (which was to be made at that hour in the old law) was a figure of the
holy Eucharist; so i^ our evening sacrifice of prayer a memorial of the
same. Secondly it represents our Blessed Saviors burial, which must needs
have been before the sun setting, by reason that the Jews Paschall Feast (on
which the were not permitted to bury the dead) begane presently upon s^^ne
setting.

The argument of the 109. Psalm and first in Vespres.
THe Psalm following has this Title prefixed, to wit, A Psalm of David: for
it belongs to David as the author thereof, and to Christ as the person
signified by David. In it the Prophet treats literally of our Savior, as
may be proved by our Saviors words: For when he demanded of the Pharisees
saying, What is your opinion of Christ? Whose son is he? and they answering
David's; he added, How then does David in Spirit call him Lord? saying, The Lord
said to my Lord, sit on my right hand etc. The Apostle also by this place
does show, that Christ is greater then the Angels, and coequall with his
eternal father, saying, To which of the Angels has God almighty said at any
time, Sit at my right hand? etc. This Psalm therefore treats of Christ
according to both natures, and of his magnificent Ascension, of his coeternitie
and consubstantiall identitie with the Father, of his universal dominion and
eternal Priesthood, and of the iudiciarie power which he shall exercise over
all creatures in the last day: and the Prophet unto whom God has made
manifest the uncertain and hidden things of his wisdom, says as follows.

The exposition of the Psalm.
Our Lord said to my Lord, God the Father, omnipotent Lord and father of all
creatures, said intellectually to Christ Jesus my Savior (who according to
his divinity is my Lord, and according to his humane nature assumed of my seed
is my son) Sit on my right hand, that is, After the labors of thy abo^de
upon earth, and the consummation of that work for which I have sent thee into
the world, come and seat thy self on my right hand, as being God and man; and
reign in my throne with coequall power and authority with me.

Till I make thine enemies, incredulous and unjust people, especially the
Jews, the footestoole of thy feet, subject to thy power and dominion in a
servitude so absolute, that they shall be as footestooles and stepping blocks
to be disposed of for ever at thy pleasure.

Our Lord, God the Father will send forth by his servants the holy Apostles,
the rod of thy strength, the doctrine of the Evangelical law, or the power of
thy regal dignity (o Christ) from Sion, from the place so called in
Jerusalem. For Sion was a mountain in Jerusalem where on the Temple was built,
and the Conclaue likewise stood, wherein Christ celebrated his last supper, and
appeared to his Disciples after his resurrection, and where the Apostles and
the rest which were congregated with them received the holy Ghost. From this
conclaue therefore and the Temple situated on mount Sion our Lord sent forth
the said rod of thy strength o Christ into the whole universe: for when the
Apostles had received the holy Ghost they presently issued out of the said
conclaue (where they remained enclosed for fear of the Jews) like to a swarm
of bees, entered the Temple, and begane to preach the Gospel of Christ: which
from thence was derived through out the whole world, as our Savior did
foreshew saying. You shall be witnesses unto me in Jerusalem and Act. 1.
in all Iewrie, and Samaria, and even to the utmost of the earth etc. and also
was foretold by the Prophet Isaie saying, The law Isa. 2.
shall come forth of Sion, and the word of our Lord from Jerusalem. At this
sending forth of the rod of the strength of Christ followed the conversion of
the world unto him: and therefore it is here added Rule thou o Christ In the
midst of thine enemies, in the heart or thickest of the infidels; who during
the time of their infidelity are thine enemies, but being converted shall be
constituted thy friends, and thou rule in them by thy self and thy
substitutes, the Prelates and Pastors of the holy Church. Of this dominion of
Christ the Zach. 9.
Prophet Zachary says, His power from Sea even to sea, and from the rivers
even to the end of the earth.

There is noe want of power in thee to subdue thine enemies, and dilate thy
dominion. For With thee the beginning, God the Father, the fountain of all
being is one and the same beginning, prime cause and author of all things
jointly with thee. Therefore to thee is attributed by nature absolute
principality, power, and soueraignitie over them: which although it appeared
but in a very obscure manner to us mortals in the day of thy infirmity, in
the time of thy peregrination upon earth vested with a servile and humane
form; yet In the day of thy strength, of thy victorious triumph, when thou
shall be seen in the brightness of the holy things, vested with the rays of a
holy Deity, the elect shining through participation of that beatificall light
shall lively and plainly see, and acknowledge that thou art in the Father, and
the Father in thee.

From the womb before the day star I begatte thee. If these words be
understood as spoken by the Prophet of himself, they import the generation of
Christ as man; and the sense seems to be as follows, I David have begotten
thee; yet not according to the ordinary course by conjugal embraces, but from
the sole womb of the most pure Virgin: and this before the day star arose,
for Christ was borne in the night This David might well say, as venerable Bede
affirms upon this place: for if David (says he) begatte less, less Marie,
and Ma^^e brought forth Christ, David also begatte Christ. But if these words
be understood as spoken by God the Father, they import the eternal generation
of Christ as God, which is noe other then a begetting of light from light, act
from act, God from God. For in the Father, Essence, power, and operation are
one and the same, and so the Father by understanding himself does produce a
word most like to himself, distinct from him in this one point, that it
proceeds from him: and as the Father by one veiw or reflecting upon himself
does fully know himself and all things that have already been created; so by
one internal conception he begets eternally one word within himself,
wherein his whole nature and perfection is altogether most entirely contained
and shines, and wherein all other things are comprehended and do shine. For
this reason this Word is termed the Image of the Father and exemplar of every
creature, and proceeds immediately from the understanding of the Father.
Christ therefore as God is begotten from eternity: like as, if the sun had
been from eternitie^, brightness had issued out of it from eternity; Whence
it is Eccles 24.
written, I come forth from the mouth of the highest the first begotten of all
creatures.

Our Lord swear, God the Father firmly promised, and sealed it with an oath:
and it shall not repent him, he shall not retract what he has so auerred: for
he has well weighed all circumstances before he so swear, to wit, that thou
o Christ as man art a Priest according to the order of Melchisedech. The office
of a Priest is to be a Mediator and advocate between God and his people, to
offer their prayers unto him, to pacify him, and bless them. All which are
found in Christ, and therefore he is a Priest. Of him it is written, If any man
shall sin we 1. Ioh. 2.
have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the just. and again; When we
were enemies Romans 5. Ephesians. 2.
we were reconciled to God by the death of his son who by the Cross killed
the e^mities in himself. Moreover he is a Priest for ever, according to that
of the Apostle, Christ for that he continues for ever, has an Heb. 7.
everlasting priesthood, whereby he is able to sa^e also for ever, going by
himself to God; always living to make intercession for us. Finally he is a
Priest according to the order of Melchisedech, First because as Melchisedech
offered to almighty God bread and wine, so he did offer or give to his
disciples his body and blood under the forms of bread and wine, by converting
the bread into his body and the wine into his blood. Secondly because as
Melchisedech is affirmed to be with out Father, Mother, and genealogy; not
that he had none of these, but because the holy Scriptures for some hidden
reason do pass them over in silence: so Christ is borne out of the natural
course of humane generation, in heaven without a Mother, and upon earth without
a Father: and Who shall declare his generation? Isa. 53. Hebr. 6.
Whence the Apostle to Hebrews says, Jesus the precursor for us is entered,
made a high Priest forever according, to the order of Melchisedech.

Our Lord on thy right hand, Christ our Lord sitting on thy right hand, o God
the Father, Has broken kings in the day of his wrath, such as have opposed
his holy Doctrine, and persecuted him in his members. These he has broken by
depriving some of the life of grace, others of their corporal life also, and
condemning many to hell fire.

He shall judge in nations, he shall judge nations themselves in his first
coming with the judgment of discretion, mercifully assisting some, and justly
relinquishing others: and in his Second coming with the judgment of
remuneration, rendering to every one according to his works, as the Evangelist
witnesses saying, The hour comes wherein all that Ioh. 5.
are in the graves shall hear his voice, and they that have done good things
shall come forth into the resurrection of life; but they that have done evil
into the resurrection of judgment.

He shall fill ruins, supply humane defects in his first coming by infusion
of grace into empty hearts, and enriching void minds with spiritual
benedictions: and in his Second coming he shall fill ruins, to wit of the
Angels, with them that are saved; repairing the celestial mansions made vacant
by the fall of the rebellious spirits. He shall crush the heads, he shall
humble the hearts in the land of many, in many places and habitations of men.
For in every land he has humbled some hautie spirits; and at the last
judgment he shall by the sentence of eternal death crush the heads in the
land of many captains and potent men, reigning with much ambition in many
lands: according to that of the Prophet The Lord of hosts has Isa. 23.
thought it, that he might pluck down the pride of all glory, and bring all
the glorious of the earth to ignominy.

Of the torrent in the way ^e shall drink, Christ in this world shall suffer
pain, tribulation, and most bitter death: of which torrent he spoke to S. John
and James saying, Can you drink of the cup that I shall drink of? Therefore
he shall exalt the head, he shall glorify and erect himself by rising in a
glorified body, and ascending to the Father that he may sit with him as
judge and Lord of all: for Christ as God raised, exalted, and glorified
himself as man, according to that, I have power to yield my life, and I have
power Ioh. 10.
to take it again.

Behold here a Psalm short in words but infinite in sense. In it the twofold
nature and simple personalitie of Christ is showed. Moreover in it the session
of Christ on the right hand of his Father, the deiection of his enemies, the
promulgation of the Christian faith, and the coetermitie and consubstantialitie
of the Father and the Son is described: and finally in it is declared the
Priesthood and iudiciarie power of Christ. We ought therefore to sing this
Psalm with much reverence, singular devotion, and profound contemplation in
regard of the dignity, sweetness, and sublimitie of the sense thereof.

The Title and Argument of the 112 Psalm and Second in Vespres.
THe title is Alleluia: which fitly agrees with the Psalm; it being wholly
composed in the praise of almighty God; chiefly for that he being of such
excellency as therein is declared, does not despise poor abject and simple
souls, but contrary to the proceeding of worldly Potentates, does elect them
for his peculiar friends, advance them to great honors, and shower his
singular benefits upon them.

The explication of the Psalm.
PRaise our Lord ye children, pure and innocent people of what age soever. The
Apostle does exhort us to become such children, saying, Brethren be not made
1. Cor. 14
children in sense; but in malice be children, and in sense perfect and our
Savior says, Math. 18.
unless ye be converted and become as little children, you shall not enter into
the Kingdom of heaven. Praise the name of our Lord, to wit his infinite power
and g^orie, or himself who is signified by his name.

Be the name of our Lord blessed from henceforth, now, and for ever, from this
instant with out delay, and for eternity let his name be celebrated.

From the rising of the Sun unto the going down* From morning until
evening, or from the East to the West, the name of our Lord is laudable, is a
subject worthy of all praise.

Our Lord is high above all nations, of greater dignity and excellency then
all the generations of men; according to that of the Prophet Isaie, All nations
as if Isa 40.
they were not, so are they before him: and they are reputed of him as
nothing, and a vain thing etc. And his glory above the heavens, above the
celestial citizens.

Who is as our Lord? who may be found of so great Majesty and sublime
nature, that he may be paralelled with the Lord our God? Who dwells on
high, and beholds the low things in heaven and upon earth, the blessed
Spirits, who by the virtue of true humility do even from the fall of Lucifer
acknowledge all their excellency as received from him: and mankind depressed
by the Serpent, also in particular such as resign themselves to his holy
will, and for his love do submitt themselves under all creatures.

Raising up from the earth, from carnal life, from the love of transitory
things and terrene thoughts, the needy, such as are void and destitute of
spirituallitie; enriching them with divine gifts, with the love of heavenly
things, and the contemplation of high mysteries: and lifting up to the Kingdom
of glory the poor, the humble, out of the dung of this corruptible body.

To place him there with Princes, with the holy Angels, with Princes of his
people, with the chiefest of his elect: for the Triumphant Church is one united
of good men and holy Angels. Or thus, That he may place him on his right hand
in the day of judgment with the Princes, of whom the Prophet Isaie speaks,
saying, Our Isa. 3.
Lord shall come to judgment with the ancients of his people, and his Princes.

Who makes the barren woman, the congregation of the Gentiles, to dwell in a
house, in the militant Church, a joyful Mother of spiritual children, whom
she regenerateth of water and the holy Ghost. In this sense the Apostle
alleges Gala. 3.
that of the Prophet Isaie, Rejoice thou barren that bear not, breakeforth
and cry that trauailest not: because many are the children of the desolate, to
wit, of Gentilitie, then of her that has a husband, to wit the Synagogue:
whose spouse and husband was God almighty; but he left her for her
incredulity, as the Prophet Jeremy Iere. 12.
does manifestly declare, saying I have forsaken my house, I have left my
inheritance, I have given my beloved into the hands of her enemies; mine
inheritance is become unto me as a Lion in a wood. The Prophet terms
Gentilitie or the people of the Gentiles Sterill and deso^ate, because they were
long forsaken by almighty God for their Idolatry* in such sort, that they
brought forth noe fruit of the holy Ghost, nor generated any children to
Christ: whence is that of Amia the Prophetess, The barren woman bare very
many, and she that had many children was weakened.

It is meet that we sing this Psalm with spiritual joy, it being composed
wholly in the divine praise. It imports us also to strive to become
children, that is, pure, innocent, and humble; that so we may merit to praise
God worthily, and to be beheld by him with a gracious eye; for Praiso is not
comely, Eccles. 15
in the mouth of the vicious

The third Psalm in Vespres which is the last in Tierce, as also the fourth
Psalm which is the second in None are already expounded in the said Hours.

The title and argument of the 147. Psalm and last in Vespres.
THe title is Allel^ia. In this Psalm the Prophet does exhort the people of
God both of the Triumphant and Militant Church to sing his praise incessantly,
giving thanks for his singular benefits showred upon them: and in particular
for that he has fortified them on all sides, placed peace in their borders,
blessed their of spring, fed them with the bread of life, and manifested his
hidden mysteries unto them above all other people.

The explication of the Psalm.
O Jerusalem praise our Lord, render the tribute of praise and thankfulness to
the Sovereign Monarch of heaven and earth you Citizens of the holy
Jerusalem, the City of peace and unity, and of blessed spirits that see him
face to face. Praise thy God o Sion, o all you that are called to the union of
the holy Catholic Church, and do contempla^e God your Creator, redeemer,
and conseruer by the eyes of faith: praise him in the best manner you can
excogitere, to wit, in purity of heart, and conversation without blame. And
that you may praise him the more worthily, remember the singular testimonies
of his good will showed toward you. Because he it is, that has strengthened
the locks of thy gates to hinder the enemy from surprising thee at unawares:
and moreover he has blessed thy children in thee. If this be referred to the
celestial Jerusalem, by the Gates here mentioned is understood the admission,
where by any of the elect are admitted to the fellowship of the blessed; and by
the Locks is understood the confirmation, whereby the elect are firmly
established in God: and so the sense of those words, He has strengthened the
locks of thy gates is, that God has made the confirmations of the celestial
Citizens so immovable and secure, that they cannot be broken a su^der by
any slight or force. The locks of the gates of this Jerusalem are
metaphorically said to be confirmed; because as a City of this world whilst
it is fortified with strong locks, boults, and barriers is held secure,
neither the enemies being of power to make forceable entrance, nor the
inahbitants willing or able to depart out of it; so the holy City is
altogether most secure, in respect that neither the reprobate can enter it, nor
the blessed will or can abandon it. But if they be referred to the Militant
Church, by the Gates thereof are understood Virtues, and especially Faith,
hope, and charity: and by the Locks are understood the Sacraments, which our
Lord has fortified by giving the efficacy of sanctification unto them in
virtue of the Passion of our Savior, in such sort, that noe man so long as he
shall remain within the fortress of the Catholic Church, and keep himself
in the shelter of the infused virtues through the force of the Sacraments which
he therein receives, need to fear the machinations of the evil enemy.

Who has set thy borders peace, o celestial Jerusalem, He it is that hurld
down to the abisse of hell like to a flash of light^ing that mutinous crew
that once to disturb thy peace, and in an instant begirt thee with a wall of
concord, of warreproofe which noe dissension shall ever penetrate: And fills
thee with the fat of corn, with the fruition of his divinity. For the
superessentiall divinity is the food of the blessed, whose vision or fruition
may well be termed the fat of corn, that is to say, the sweet refection
of the eternal bread: which refection is the essential reward of the blessed,
wherewith they are so fully enriched that they can desire noe more. I^ is his
paternall providence likewise that has established within thy circuits (^
Militant Church) that happy peace which the world cannot give, to wit,
tranquillity of conscience, which all those enjoy who remain within thy
precincts. Christ also does daily fill thee with that Sovereign food the
holy* Sacrament of his own body under the species of the purest wheat bread.

Who sends forth his speech to the earth, He it is who sends his only
Son the eternal word into the world to assume humane flesh for the salvation
of mankind* Or thus, He it is who sends forth by the ministry of his holy
Angels the divine law, the holy Scriptures, and celestial revelations to us
mortals. His word runs sw^fily, The Evangelical law and doctrine of Christ
was di^^lged in all places through the whole earth in a short time by the
preaching of the Apostles and Disciples, for Into all Psalm. 18.
the earth has the sound of them gone forth, and into the end^ of the whole
world the words of them. Christ indeed-sent* forth his speech to the earth,
when he said to his Apostles, Going into the whole world preach the Marc. 16.
Gospel to all creatures: but his word ran swiftly, when they did putt in
execution, and accomplished what he had foretold them, to wit That they should
be witnesses Act. 1.
unto him in Jerusalem, and in all Iew^ie, and S^mar^^, and even to the utmost
of the earth.

Who gives s^ow as w^oll, He it is also who by his divine power disperseth
the waters that are elevated into the middle region and there congealed, and
makes them gently fall not unlike to little locks of whitest wool, covering
the cultiuated feilds as it were with a woollen mantle, which defends the
tender blades from the sharp rigours of the hoarie frost. Scatters mist,
hoarie times made small as ashes. These mists cause fertility to plants that
are purified by the nipping cold of those grizely bearded rimes, which repel
all vicious sap from trees, and render them noe less abundant in fruits,
then well nourished in body and branches. Who casts his Crystal as
morsells, Crystal is generally esteemed to be certain pieces of vce here
and there dispersed in great gobbits: which by long condensation and freezing
is become so hard and solid, that it cannot by any means be dissolved and
yet retains the clearenesse and luster of the element whereof it is produced.
Before the face of his cold, of the excessi^e coldness, which he can send at
his pleasure in such extremity, that it will be of power to con^ert water
into Crystal, who shall end^re? As if he should say* noe man is able to
sub^ist at the presence thereof: for indeed there are some countries which noe
man can inhabit by reason of the excessive co^dnesse.

He shall send forth his word, and shall melt them: his spirit shall blow, and
waters shall flow. Almighty God is so powerful, that with the least word he
shall vouchsafe to let fall from his sacred mouth, he can dissolve all the
said snowes, frozen mists and congelations, and with one blast of a Southern
wind cause the waters to run as before.

These diverse effects of one and the same cause do signify unto us, the great
efficacy of his divine word, whereby he augments the number of faithful
Christians made pure and white as snow by faith, and the Sacraments; reducing
them to Penance signified by ashes, and thereby resolving all the mists and
hoarie rimes, which are the little obstacles that did congeale our souls, to
the end to render them more fertile in good works, when the Sun of Justice
does give them light and life ^yea dissoluing Crystal, that is mollifying
those rebellious obstinate and hard frozen hearts, which retain in appearance
the splendour of crystal, and show an exterior resemblance of worth and
value, and cannot be dissolved by any exhortation whatsoever. For when he
pleases to send his sacred word and holy spirit, manifested either by
internal inspiration or by visible miracles, and to breathe upon their cold
and frozen couradges, then, behold them in an instant converted into tears and
altogether inflamed with his love, and recurring to the rivers of Baptism.

Some expound the former words Who gives snow as wool* of the consolation
which the Saints receive in tribulation; according to that of the Apostle; I
am replenished with consolation, I do exceedingly 2. Cor. 7.
abound in joy in all our tribulateon. For snow does afflict with its
coldness, but wool does cherish with its warmth God therefore does give snow
as wool, because he gives snow, as if he gave wool: for he gives
tribulation, which is converted into the consolation of his Saints. Moreover
they refer these words Scatters mist as ashes, to penance, which is
designed by ashes: for God scatters the cloud or hoarie mist of tribulation,
whereby many are excited to penance: and so God gives mist as ashes, because
he gives mist as though he gave ashes, in regard that tribulation leads to
penance. Finally they expound these words, He casts his cristall a^
morsell^, of the greatest consolation which God almighty grants in
tribulation: for then he casts his crystal as morsells, when he gives ye
as though he gave bread; because even in the ye it self of tribulation he
infuseth the bread of consolation.

Who declares his word to Jacob: his justices and judgments to Israel. He
has not done in like manner to any nation: and his judgments he has not made
manifest to them.

The Prophet concludes showing what difference there is between the
Providence of God toward his people, and other nations. For he has taught
other nations by natural effects, that they might come to acknowledge their
creator by the consideration of created things: but he has taught his people
by his Prophets. O Jerusalem therefore praise our Lord who declares his word
to Jacob, to wit, to his people seeing him by faith, speaking unto them by
Moses and the Prophets; and who declares His justices and Judgments to
Israel by his servant Moses; unto whom he gave the law to deliver it to his
people of Israel. Hence thou may gather that he has not done in like manner
to any nation^ because to thee alone, and not to others* he has manifested his
said judgments* By his word, his justices, and judgments mai^ also he
understood aduertisements necessary to salvation; be it by word ^^ form
their manners* be it by statutes or ordinances for what concerns his service
and the due worship in his true religion; or finally be it by judgments for
that which appertains to the distribution of justice and right which must be
rendered to our neighbor: all which God almighty has in a peculiar manner
delivered to his elected people.

Behold a Psalm altogether replea^ with spiritual sweetness, erecting our
minds to the contemplation of heavenly things. In it the Militant Church or
every one of the faithful does inuit the triumphant Church to praise the
author of their be atitude; not that the blessed need our admonition, but that
we congratulating them, and (...)lating their felicity may be incited
thereby ^o labor to attain their union. Whilst therefore we repeat the
first verse thereof, let us ele^ate our hearts to the joys of that super^^all
palace, perlustrate that sacred City with the eyes of faith, and sigh after
the bliss thereof, for whose love we ought to flight all sensible and carnal
things. Let us attend after our poor manner what joys the glorified souls
do securely possess: whose City is fortified on all sides, that noe
adversity shall ever enter, nor danger approach it; whose Citizens are filled
with eternal benediction; whose borders are peace, in such sort, that they
exult in the inestimable security of their perpetual confirmation, being
satiated with the beatificall fruition of all goodness, fed with the most
pleasant taste of peace, and resting inuariably in the delightful embraces of
their Creator.

The exposition of the Chapter in Vespres.
FRom the beginning and before the world was I created, The sense of these
words as they are mystically expounded and applied by the holy Church to the
blessed Virgin is, I who being ordained from all eternity to be the Mother
of God the Savior and Redeemer of the world, was also constituted Mistress,
Queen, and Patroness of all who shall be saved through the merits and
Passion of him my beloved son, and unto the worlds end I shall not cease, to
perform that chardge, and by continual intercession to obtain eternal
happiness for such as shall have recourse to me and implore my assistance,
and in the holy habitation I have ministered before him, protecting and
governing the hearts of the faithful in the Militant Church with dominion over
their invisible enemies, and reigning in the Triumphant as Queen of Merci^,
and abounding with the graces of a Mother and a Virgin.

The argument of the Canticle of the most glorious Virgin Mother of God.
IT has been granted to some of the old Testament, that having received
singular benefits of almighty God they should compose and offer unto him a
Canticle in memory of them: as now we see the same favor bestowed upon the
blessed Virgin, who considering the ineffable benefits of God conferred upon
her and wrought in her, could not contain her self from rendering praise and
thankfulness; especially for that the only begotten Son of God did
vouchsafe to assume humane flesh in her womb. Hereof there was formerly a type
in Anna, who having by supernatural bounty conceived and brought forth
Samuel, did sing this rejoicing verse, My 1. Reg. 2
heart rejoiced in our Lord. which in some things is the same with this of the
blessed Virgin.

The exposition of the Canticle.
MY soul does magnify our Lord. O beloved Cosen Elisabeth, you beholding in
spirit what has happened unto me, do praise extol and magnify me, stiling
me blessed among women, and ^other of your Lord: but I knowing that I neither
have, nor am any thing of my self, do ascribe all my good to God almighty,
praise him and depresse my self. Indeed my soul altogether ravished and
elevated in the contemplation of the favors received from his immense
Majesty, does magnify him celebrating his praises with all its forces: she
imploies all her faculties and powers to sing his infinite greatness, and
publish his incomprehensible goodness.

And my spirit has exulted in God my Sa^iour, I have so many occasions of
gladness, that my spirit is altogether in ecstasy and replenished with joy
above imagination, that my heart is astonished with amazement: and I have
exulted with excess of internal consolation, in that God my Savior ha^^ been
pleased to serve himself of me to bring his salvation into the world.

Because he has regarded the humility of his hand maid: for behold from hence
forth all generations shall call me blessed.

He has respected, approved, and been ^^ll pleased with my humility, the
sub(...)sion and poverty of spirit whereof I have ever made constant
profession, and the most humble service which I have dedicated unto him: and
so has had pity of the affliction in which I lived to behold the Scepter of
my Father David in the profane hand of a stranger, and such a multitvde of
souls lost and precipitated into darkness by the Prince of error: and also
of the anxietie of my spirit expecting the light of the Messiah that so long
delaied his coming. But above all he has daigned to regard the humility of
his poor unworthy servant, and has beheld my will purely resigned to his:
and therefore from henceforth by reason of that benediction wherewith it has
pleased his goodness to replenish me, Behold, now he will come without fail,
and all sorts of nations shall call me eternally happy and blessed And not
with out good reason,

Because he that is mighty has done great things to me: and holy is ^is
name. Indeed the gifts which it has pleased the almighty to bestow on me,
surpass in greatness and excellency all other gifts how ad^^rable, rich*
exquisite, and magnifice^t soeu^^* for what is there comparable to the favor
which God has showed me, electing me for his Mother being a Virgin of humble
condition? that God would be come Man in my womb, to the end that one day he
might make Man God? that he has rendered me Mother of his Son, conseruing
inti^e the seal of my vowed virginity? All these gifts exceed humane sense
and judgment. Wherefore referring all to his omnipotency my soul has just
cause to magnify him, my spirit to be rejoiced, and all the whole world to
style me for ever happy: and I am obliged by all the laws of gratitude to
bless his glorious and holy name* upon which depends sactification and
salvation; a name admirable, a name* sacred, a name holy, a name of which the
virtue and power may be as little comprehended, as limited.

And his mercy from generation unto generations, to them that fear him. As
his omnipotency is without limits, his mercy also has made it self appear
infinite, extending it self from generation to generation, from Fathers to
their children upon all those that love and serve him, and with a filial fear
observe his precepts.

He has showed might in his arm: he has dispersed the proud in the conceit
of their heart* He has wrought most excellently, and showed the inexpugnable
power of his arm, which is the M^ss^as his only Son; by the invincible hand
of whom he has made all things. He has not employed for this admirable work
the Angels and celestial powers, by whom he was served heretofore: but he
has assisted himself by his own strong ar^e, his powerful Son to save
humane nature, and recover it from the mouth of hell and accursed Satan with
his proud impostors; whose arrogant and impudent designs he has frustrated,
subuerting his Empire under which he endeauored to subject the whole world.

He has deposed the mighty from their fear, and has exalted the humble. He
has ^^posed these mutinous and proud rebell^ from the glorious thrones: of
which they were unworthy, esteeming that what they had in their power,
Fortitude, and beauty, proceeded from noe other then themselves and from their
proper merits; without being willing to acknowledg^ the true author. He has
transferred the Priesthood, the Scepter, and judgment from the hands of them
who abused their power, and has placed them in the ^ands of the humble, meek
and patients who presume nothing of themselves, but rather with all submission
are humbled under the all powerful hand of his divine Majesty. These are they
that ou^ mighty God has heard, elected, and placed in honor and glory
immutable.

The hungry he has filled with good things: and the rich he has sent away
empty. He has replenished with solid and true benefits the poor, hungry,
and need^^* those that have suffered necess^^ies for his name, whilst
worldlings were glutted with excess of (...). He has comforted them that
cannot be sufficiently (...)iated with other nutriment then his word and the
celestial food of his Sacraments; and with* works of justice and piety,
those that leave all to follow him, and make profession of exact* poverty,
relying only upon his munificent goodness and mercy. Contrariewise he has
also forsaken and abandoned pridecausing riches, and audacious impudent
people, that have noe other stay then their own vain greatness, and confide
altogether in their proper industry; sufficiency, faculties and honors.
These presumptuous, auaritious rich men he has deprived of his succors* so
as finally he reduces them to nothing.

He has received Israel his child being mindful of his mercy. He has
extended his* assisting hand to his poor people of Israel his* faithful
seruents, who not hoping but in his aid, lay prostrate, cast down under the
feet of their enemies; and did not expect succor from any but him alone. He
has been mindful of his ancient mercies, of which he had promised to make
the effects appear to his elected long time since: he remembered the pains and
languishments which his beloved suffered in the expectation of the coming of
the Messiah: he has heard and attended to their cries, prayers, and ^owes, to
their common and ardent desires so continually repeated.

As he spoke to our Fathers, to Abraham and his seed for ever. Conformably to
the word he had given to our Fathers, to Abraham his beloved and his children^
having assured them, that from their seed he should be borne in whom all
nations should receive benediction and Salvation, that he would raise from
their seed to posterity his dear Messiah, who should sweetly govern his
people, and of whom the Scepter should be eternal, without end, durable
through ^^ infinity of ages, To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be
all honor and glory. Amen.

The Preamble to Compline, or Complete.
THe Etymology of this word Compline shows that this Canonical hour or
part of the office is the last of all, which concludes, finisheth, and
shuts up as it were the whole divine office: and therefore the glorious
Patriarch S. Benedict (from whom both Prime and Compline first received their
names) alluding to the word, in his holy Rule uses this phrase, Omnes in vnum
positi compleant. Cap. 42.
which is as much as to say, All the Religious being assembled after the
spiritual lesson (which was to be read before this hour) let them finish and
accomplish their daily task in singing of Compline. Thus Smaragdus and other
learned Commenters expound that place.

By this hour according to S. Rupert is designed our blessed Saviors sorrow
in the garden, his agony and bloody sweat, also the apparition made to his
Disciples, when he entered into the house where they were the doors being shut,
and gave them that heavenly salutation Peace be with (...)

As for the time prescribed by the holy Church for the reciting of his hour^,
Bellarmine, clearly shows out of, S. Rupert S. Isidore and others, that it
was ordained and instituted to be said after sun setting in the first hou^e
of the night, that is, within the com^asse of the first station or watch of the
night (which consisted of the three first hours after sun setting) in
memory of the a fore said mysteries. (...)


Other reasons likewise of the institution thereof are delivered by S. John
Chris^stome and others of the holy Fathers where they say, That the prayer
made at this time is first in thanksgiving for the benefits bestowed upon us
all that day. Secondly to beg pardon for all faults committed, being truly
sorrowful for them and purposing firmly amendment. Thirdly to obtain the
divine protection and help from heaven against our Ghostly enemies, that they
being driven from us, and our good Angels garding us, we may pass the night
without harm or sin.

The Argument and Title of the 128. Psalm and first in Compline.
THis Psalm is a Gradvall Psalm, and does treat of (...) of a spiritual
asc^^ (...) placed next after the (...) ^^rd it well befitting (...) God with a
quiet mind (...) things for Justice sake. The f^^^^^ (...) to be the words of
our M^^^ ^^lie Catholic Church, (...) the mouths of her cou^^^^^ ^^^^pions to
the thoughts or (...) the infirmer sort of her distress (...) ^^ewing them by
her examp^^ (...) no new thing to suffer, (...) And in the later part is
declared how it will fare in the end with her and their persecutors.

The explication of the Psalm.
OFten have they impugned me from my youth: let Israel say, Often have they
impugned me from my youth: yet they have not prevailed against me. Let the
holy Church now say for her own comfort, and as an encouradgement for her
afflicted children to bring forth fruit in Patience, That even from A^el the
^ust all along in every age, per(...), malicious, blasphemous, misb(...)g or
ill living people have (...) by all fair and foul me (...) (...)pt my
^^dgement, induce m(...) come as bad as themselves, or (...) ^o supplant (...):
but such has been the mercies of God toward me, that they have still failed
of their aim.

Sinners have builded upon my back: they have prolonged their iniquity. The
black workers of injustice have made my back^ their Anuile, hammering upon me
their wicked practices with frequent beauie strokes: neither will they desist;
but they and their bad of spring do still draw out the rod of their
iniquity. And I must Math. 13.
bear them thus, till our Lord dismount them: for so have I received command
from him.

Our just Lord will cut the necks of sinner. It is not me they chiefly
persecute: but God in me, or the good in me, that is, his. For the words I
speak which they dislike are his, the doctrine I defend is his, the works I
do his grace operateth with me. And therefore though our just Lord permit
them for a space such freedom to vent their spleen on me: yet in the day of
revenge his justice shall appear, by striking them in that part where they
depressed me and exalted themselves; not only bowing, but cutting in pieces
those stiff necks of theirs, that they may never more lift up their heads.
And since they will not be reclaimed.

Let them be confounded, and turned backward all that hate Syon. Be of good
cheer my children, Our Lord will wipe the tears from your eyes: and for the
reproaches you now sustain, you shall behold him standing with much confidence,
when they that hate you and me shall trembling be abashed; you shall see
them thrown headlong, in such sort, as they shall not be able to help
themselves.

Let them be made as grass in the tops of houses, which is withered before
it be plucked up. Whereof the Reaper has not filled his hand: and he that
gathers the sheaues his ^osome. And they said not that passed by: The
blessing of our Lord be upon you: We have blessed you in the name of our
Lord. They are seated now in high places of authority, sucking the blood of
innocents, oppressing the poor, or wallowing in Gluttony and obscene delights.
They seem to grow and flourish: but they want the root of Charity and dew of
grace, being even condemned before the day of doom. Of which contemptible
stuff the Angel will not gather into the barn of our Lord, but to cast into
unquenchable flames: nor to such a harvest gathering will the passengers of
this life traveling toward the celestial country say, God speed the work.

The Title and Argument of the 129. Psalm and second in Compline.
THis is the eleue^th Graduall Psalms short, but repleat with wholesome
doctrine, and used by the holy Church more frequently then the rest. It is
likewise one of the seven Penitentian Psalms, teaching the way of true
penance: It is recited also frequently for the faithful departed, and
properly: because if it be said in the person of a Soul detained in
Purgatory, the contents do fitly square therewith; such a Soul being in a
certain depth, longing to ascend, and expecting Gods mercy through the price
of its Redeemer. To be short it contains a hearty prayer to God, an
exhortation to the people, and a predictio^ of their then future redemption.

The explication of the Psalm.
FRom the depth I have cried to thee o Lord: Lord hear my voice. From this
place of exile and vale of tears, and from the low condition and abyss of
misery the weight of my sins have sunk me unto, all disconsolate I lowdly
call to thee for help. Lord hear my voice.

Let thine ears be intent to the voice of my Petition. Do not lissen unto
me like such as mind not their suppliants plaint, being before resolved to
show no favor: but lend a gracious ear unto me, and grant my request.

If thou shall observe iniquities o Lord: Lord who shall sustain it? If thou
shall take strict account of what offenses are done, and proceed to judgment
with rigor, what man may be found with so chaste a heart that dares presume to
justify himself in thy presence? As for my part I am conscious of my
insufficiency in this point; yielding my seife convicted, and casting my self
wholly upon thy mercy. Pardon me for thy goodness sake, and draw me up unto
thee.

Because with thee is propitiation: and for thy law I have expected thee o
Lord. I know thou art not delighted with severity, but easily inclined to
mercy: for which reason, and for thy law not of Justice but of Charity, which
thou have of thy ineffable goodness prescribed to thy self (That thou will
first offer mercy and inuit sinners to do works worthy of Penance:
afterward proceed to judgment, if they persevere impenitent) I have hoped in
thee not doubting of performance. My soul has expected in his word: my soul
has hoped in our Lord. My soul that was defiled by me with enormious crimes
and remaining long impenitent was deservedly reduced to exceeding sad
extremities, did yet expect in his word. That he would not remember the
iniquities of such as repent from the bottom of the heart: and was not
frustrated of her expectation, our Lord affirming by his Prophet upon the
expression of the intense sorrow I internally conceived for mine offense, That
my sin was tra^ferred. My soul I say that after innumerable select favors
was most ungrate fully disloyal, did yet hope in our Lord and found mercy.
Let no man then how grievous a sinner soever despair of pardon. The mercies of
our Lord are above all his works.

From the morning watch even until night^ let Israel hope in our Lord. From
the beginning of the day till the end of night let all men, and the faithful
people of God especially hope in our Lord. There is no time during life wherein
the couersion and penance of a sinner will not be accepted, whether it be in
the morning, at noone, or at night: that is to say, in youth, at man's estate,
or old age: or whether it be by day or night, that is to say, in prosperity
or adversity.

Because with our Lord there is mercy: and with him plenteous redemption. With
our Lord is mercy it self. Upon earth indeed in many places and persons may
be found remedies for particular miseries, being as it were little streams of
his mercy: but the ocea^ that can redress all is with him; and in his
eternal counsel and decree is the means and price to satisfy his Justice to
the full for our transgressions.

And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities. And this redemption
which whilst I write this Psalm is thus with him, I foresee shall in the
fulness of time be made manifest to the whole world: and he shall redeem the
people of God from the tyrannical captivity of the infernal powers, and
shall satisfy for all their iniquities: as we now behold happily performed,
our ransom being paid not with corruptible coin of silver or gold, but with
the inestimable treasure of the dearest heart blood of the immaculate Lamb
Christ Jesus his only Son our Lord.

The Title and Argument of the 130. Psalm.
THis Psalm is a Graduall Psalm wherein David does modulate the virtue of
Humility; not before two or three, but upon the theather of the universe: and
yet whereas in this he is the Trumpet of his own praise does he not
transgress that Precep^t, Let another praise Prouer. 20.
thee and not thy own mouth. For as it is unseemly to praise ones self when
necessity does not require it: so is it foolishness to be silent when just
cause does occur. Whence S. Paul when he said, Not he that commends himself
is appro^ued but 2. Cor. 10.
he whom God commends, did highly commend himself, finding it expedient to
retort the calumnies of Pseudo Apostles. David does then attribute to himself
the 1. Reg. 22.
virtue of Humility; not for, ostentation, but for that he was often taxed of
Pride and ambition, which vice he chiefly abhorred: and to vindicate himself
dot ^inuoke God the searcher of all hearts to be a witness of his singular
modesty, laying a heavy imprecation upon himself if he write not truth. This
is one of the Graduall Psalms, it teaching wherein true humility does
consist; and indeed there is no securer way whereby to ascend then it, our Lord
himself affirming, that every one who humble the himself shall be exalted.

Lord my heart is not exalted: neither are mine eyes los^ie. O Lord to thee my
heart lies open. Thou do both see and know that what I write is not to
praise my self but to clear some sinister aspertions. I call thee to witness
whom no subtle glosses can deceive, and may do it with security; I have no
internal pride, neither do I express any by external gestures.

Neither have I walked in great matters: nor in marvelous things above me.
Neither have I vainly bragged of any matters of consequence I have done, can
yet perform, or inted to archieue affecting popular applause, or being
ambitious of glory: neither have I presumptuously attempted any work beyond
my power to accomplish.

If I was not humbly minded: but exalted my soul, If I have not composed my
self ^o equality with others; but have had an higher, esteem of myself then
was fit, or have arrogated any thing to my self as of my self, and my soul
not acknowledged her sufficiency to have been from thee.

As the weaned child is toward his Mother: s^e retribution in mysoule. As it
fares with an Infant by some bitter ointment newly forced to forsake the
Mothers breast; sitting sadly on her lap, now with a longing appetite looking
toward the teat and strait with drawing his waterie eyes with a loathing
disdain, beating the place he chiefly loved, lamenting to be deprived of the
pleasant food he sucked fromthence: so let it be with my soul. Let her be
debarred of the delightful influence of thy divine comforts, and remain
respectively to her capacity a like disco^solate. A more unhappy punishment I
cannot conceive: the greatness of which misery he alone does know to whom
thou have graciously afforded a taste of their excessive sweetness*

Let Israel hope in our Lord: from hence forth, now and ever. Since I then
whom thou have advanced to such high dignity as to be the King of Israel,
and have enriched with such exquisite dowries of nature and grace, dare not
eleuate my self above the vulgar, nor presume any thing of my self as of my
self, but have the eye of my hope ever fixed on thee: let my people of Israel
do the like both at this present, and from this time forward for eternity.

The Exposition of the Chapter in Compline.
I Am the Mother of beautiful love, and of fear, and of knowledge, and of
holy hope. These words spoken by Ecclesiasticus of the eternal and increated
Wisdom are fitly applied by the Catholic Church to our blessed Lady, not
only as being Mother to Christ who is the Word and Wisdom of his eternal
Father, but also as being an especial and singular Mediatrix for all faithful
souls She is therefore said to be Mother of beautiful love, which is the
prime act of perfect charity, in as much as by her mediation and intercession
we beg and obtain that gift of almighty God: (...) in like fort of
filial fear, whereby we are deterred from doing ^uill because it is
dipleasing to God whom we truly love; and of Knowledge, to wit the gift of
understanding, which the Prophet begged of almig^tie God thereby to direct him
else in the search of his law, and could act himself in the path of his
commandments; and of holy hope, which is a pious confidence in God, from
whose goodness and mercy we may with out presumption expect to receive
eternal happiness in the future life, if so be we love and fear him in
this present, and endeavor to conform our wills to his by observing his
precepts.

The Argument of the Canticle of Symeon.
ALthough this Saintlike old Father reputed himself very unworthy to touch
the holy of holies: yet excess of love overcame reason, imboldening him to
receive the child Jesus, from the arms of his blessed Mother; whom when he had
embraced with much affection, devotion, and reverence, like to the Swan before
her departure, he sung this Canticle blessing, praising, and giving thanks to
God that had now been better unto him then his promise, which was that he
should not die till he had seen Christ our Lord: he now not only beholding
Christ, Luc. 2.
but being vouchsafed the comfortable honor to bear him in his arms. This
Canticle is fitly placed at the end of Compline, it happily crowning that hour
which compleateth the rest of the divine office. In religious Conuen^s recited
it is last at night: because at that time chiefly men ought to lay aside all
thoughts, but of God and their salvation; that with internal peace they may
dispose themselves to rest piously in our Lord, bearing with holy Symeon
Christ Jesus, if not in their arms, yet with much fervor in their devoutly
amorous hearts.

The Exposition of the said Canticle.
1. Now thou do dismiss thy servant, ^ Lord according to thy word in peace.
2. Because mine eyes have seen thy salvation.
3. Which thou have prepared before the face of all peoples.
O Lord I have languished long in restless expectation, longing for that
happy day wherein (trusting in thy promise.) I might solace my heart and
delight mine eyes in beholding mine and the worlds Savior, the only thing
that strengthened my Soul patiently to sustain her wearisome confinement in
the dangerous prison of this body of death: but now I hope thou will not
prolong her enlardgement thy promise being fulfilled; for thou do dismiss
thy servant according to thy word in peace, my desires being amply satisfied.

Because with my corporal and intellectual eyes I have beheld Christ, God and
man, by whom thou have decreed to save all mankind.

Which salvation of thine, thy only begotten Son (who according to his
Divinity is incomprehensible and with thee does in(...) light inaccessible)
thou have maruelously by the operation of the holy Ghost rendered manifest and
visible to men, and disposed fitly to converse and dwell amongst them: he
assuming our humane nature to his Divinity in the unity of his person, that
he might be seen and known both by the Jews and Gentiles, dispensing his
ineffable mercy between them as agreed b^^t with their condition respectively.

A light to the revelation of the Gentiles, who sit in the darkness of
infidelity and shadow of death* ignorant in the saving knowledge of the true
God. A light illuminating them internally by infusion of divine grace, and
externally by word and example.

And the glory of thy people Israel. And the glory of the progeny of Jacob,
the peculiar elect people of God: whom he has honored with that high
prerogative as of their line to take humane flesh; whom he now visits in
person, and for whose redemption he is princip(...) descended, a glory not
granted to any other people of the world; wherein they excel all other how
potent, rich, or magnificent soever.

By what is said in this small treatise it will appear I hope to the
indifferent and courteous Reader, that all things in this office of our blessed
I adie are instituted, ordained, and disposed according to right reason, true
prudence and divine wisdom: which I do heartily wish, and humbly beg may be
used frequently and recited devoutly by all and every one as well to the great
honor and glory of almighty God and of the blessed Virgin, as to the
singular profit and spiritual benefit of themselves.

FINIS.

