ON THE CORONATION OF King James II. and Queen Mary.
April 23. 1685.
Ipse quoque adjuvi publica vota meis. Ovid. Trist.
WHEN first the Model of this World was laid,
Darkness upon the Face of the Earth was spread.
The Elements no decent Order knew;
And all things through the dusky Chaos flew.
Till the bright Sun leapt forth with open Day,
And drove this Universal Shade away,
Making a Glorious PARTNER of his Light
Reflect his Beams too on the gloomy Night:
So, when this LAND, almost in Troubles drowned,
Unquiet as the Sea that girts it round,
Had lost its Light, the Best of Kings and Men,
(Who lest this World, but to be Crowned again;
And found that Mercy he so ost had given:
Too good for us, and now as fit for Heaven.)
It sees a glorious SUN rise on this Day,
And with full Majesty his Beams display,
To drive this general Land Eclipse-away.
A PRINCE, beloved in Peace, and feared in War;
The Joy of Men and Heavens peculiar Care.
For none so many Tempests ever past,
TO arrive in such a quiet Calm at last,
And take Possession of the Imperial Throne,
Which both his Birth and Merit makes his own.
Who for those Subjects which he governs now,
So ost exposed his Life and Interest too.
So ost brought Laurels to adorn that Crown,
From the Red Field, which is become his own.
All Europe, that his Conduct then did fear,
Does tremble now to see him in this Sphere.
In which he shines so full, that he appears
More Bright and Glorious than the Crown he wears;
For all the Virtues, er'e adorned the Throne
Of English Monarchs, meet in Him alone.
As Brave and Valiant as those Sons of War,
The Iron-side, Black Prince, and Edwards were.
Wise as that King, whose NAME he now does grace;
And Pious as his Martyred FATHER was.
Mild and forgiving, as his injured BROTHER;
And wears the Native Sweetness of his MOTHER.
Those blessed Supporters of the Royal Race,
Whose sacred Dust lies in this hallowed Place,
And set where He now rises; wish to be
(TO attend this Day) clothed with Mortality,
That they might see a SON their Loins brought forth,
Inherit both their Royal Crown and Worth,
And hear the general Joys Three Kingdoms give,
With votive Prayers to Heaven, He long may live.
Next this, their wish would be to see' him in part
A Crown to her, from whom he took a Heart.
The Best and Brightest of the Beauteous Train;
Whose Face and Mind are both without a Stain.
And so well knows t'oblige, as she alone
Had found the way to make all Hearts her own.
Her Air so charming, so divine her Mien,
Nature took care to frame her for a Queen;
And what the bold Italian Muse in Thought
Expressed but of her Race, in her she wrought.
Could soaring Plato like his Fame survive
His own Rich Dust, and be this Day alive,
He might enjoy his Wish; who longed to see
Goodness and Truth clothed in Humanity.
If Flesh and Blood, Virtue her self might wear,
And in the Liv'ry of Mankind appear,
She would in Person only come like Her.
If that can never be Copied to its worth,
Who shall the Beauty of her Mind set forth?
Like Him, that undertook to Picture Grief;
Finding it past his Skill to reach the Life:
Drew a Vail over the Face, with leave to guess,
It was not in his power to express;
We undescrib'd must leave the greatest Part,
Which to express, so far excels our Art;
And in a Cloud leave that Rich Scene of Bliss,
To join and give the Nations general Wish.
Blessed Royal Pair, that you may Happy prove,
Within your Thrones, as you are in your Love;
That Heaven, if there be a Joy yet New,
Unprov'd in Empire, may deriv't on You;
And grant your Royal Bed a Son may live,
The most important Blessing Heaven can give;
That Loyal Senates may assist your Hands,
And make you Happy, as you make these Lands.
And when you shall be summoned hence by Fate,
(Too soon for us, but may it still be late:)
That you on Earth may wear these Temporal Crowns
So well, to gain in Heaven Eternal Ones.
By F. B. Gent.
LONDON, Printed for B. Took, at the Ship in S. Paul's Churchyard.


