CHRIST THE Sts ADVANTAGE both IN LIFE AND DEATH.

A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of Ms ELISABETH COKE, Wife to Colonel THO.
COKE of Pebmersh, Esquire.

By Thomas Borough, Preacher of the Gospel at Pebmersh in Essex.

PHILIP. 3.7. But what things were gain to me, these I accounted loss for
Christ.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for John Bellamy at the 3. golden Lions in
Cornhill, 1646.

MAY 2. 1646.
Imprimatur.

JOSEPH CARYL.

To the Worshipful, my truly Honored good friend, Colonel Thomas Coke
Esquire, one of his Majesty's Justices of Peace and Quorum for the County of
Essex.
Sir,
HOw justly I shall incur the censure of indiscretion in giving consent to have
these raw and indigested Meditations (especially in these knowing times) to
pass the Press, I cannot but easily conjecture. This by way of excuse I can
truly say, my conscience bearing me witness, I intended nothing less;
neither desired any thing more, then that they might have been so buried in the
hearts of the Congregation to whom they were preached, that the sound of them
might never have been farther heard. But importunity of friends for the
printing of this poor, plain, unworthy Sermon has not only besieged me, but
also gained so far upon me, that I can keep possession of it no longer: And
being enforced to yield it up, I knew not into whose hands to resign it rather
then into yours, of whose favorable acceptance of my poor, weak labors in
the Ministry I have had so much experience. Your clemency has emboldened me
not only to present it to you, but also to send it abroad in that plain
posture and homely Dress wherein it was delivered, without alteration or
addition. Sufficient to procure from you for it the best welcome, and most
cordial entertainment that can be desired, is the very mentioning of the
occasion, and sending it with this bare Inscription, A Sermon preached at the
Funeral of your Dear, Loving, and Welbeloved Wife. I have read a Spanish
Proverb, He that wipeth the child's nose kisseth the mothers cheek: Sure I am,
he that does but mention the name of your dear Wife, though he renew your
grief, yet in your apprehension he reviveth your heart. For upon my
knowledge, you account your tears shed for her sweet refreshment; and those
solitary places and times seem to you most delightsome, where and when, being
alone, you may (as David once at Ziklag) weep till you can weep no more, 1 Samuel
30.4. I desire that you may imitate David also in the ensuing clause: But David
encouraged himself in the Lord his God, ver. 6.

Sir, You know right well, that whatever comforts we lose in the creature,
they are eminently and transcendently to be found in the blessed Creator: But
the difficulty is in applying these things home to our selves when the Lord
calls us forth to trial. I remember what the Comoedian says, Facile cum
valemus consilium damus aegroto: I know it is far easier in these cases to
tell others what they ought to do, then to practice it our selves. Sir, I
desire to sympathize with you in your grief, as the Lord has made me (in
some measure) a sufferer with you in your loss. You have lost (shall I use
that improper word?) a pious loving Wife; and I and mine a cordial faithful
friend. Let me ingenuously profess, that theserious thoughts how the Lord
has now deprived me of any other way or means to testify my thankful
respects toward her was not the least motive that overpowred my spirit to
displease my self for the pleasuring of others in the printing of this ensuing
Sermon. Truly, Sir, so many have been the favors that I and mine have
received from you, and so real are the engagements wherein I stood bound unto
you and your dear Consort, that I shall far rather choose to be accounted guilty
of folly by others in coming into print, then of the least suspicion of
ingratitude from you: you know that censure that is deservedly past upon
unthankfulness, Si ingratum dixeris, omnia dineris.

It was your self, together with your dear Yoake-fellow, your second self,
who were the chief (if not the only) instruments of bringing me into this
place. When through fear of cruel enemies I was constrained to forsake an
house, that in some regards I might then call mine, and to fly for refuge to
the great and famous City of our Land, you were pleased from thence to bring
me to your own house, and to make your house mine (for my use) and your home,
a home both to my self and my family; which you did for several weeks, not
suffering us to depart thence, until you had provided a convenient house for
us, and furnished us with those necessary accommodations, which by reason of
our flight, we were at that time most destitue of. In which place (through the
good hand of God) I have continued almost three years complete, enjoying much
sweet and heavenly society with your self and your dearest deceased friend,
whom the Lord (to our great grief, though her eternal gain) has now pleased
to take from us: whose zeal to God inflamed her heart with an ardent love to
those that feared God: The Saints were (of all upon earth) the only excellent
ones in her eye, and in their communion she placed much delight.

How conversant she was in reading the works of godly learned men; (to omit
diverse others) I shall instance only in those choice passages which in reading
some of the Labors of that worthily, renowned, and truly reverend Author,
Doctor Freston, she had selected for her own private use. With what an
earnest desire of treasuring up spiritual knowledge she read the blessed word
of God, who-ever shall peruse her Bible will easily perceive. Great was her
care, and no less her industry concerning the education of those sweet
children the Lord was pleased to bestow upon you: 'twas her desire to train
them up in religion, learning and manners. To this end her daily practice was
(upon all occasions) to sharpen instructions to them, according as their young
and tender years were capable; even as Bathshebah used to instruct her son
Solomon, and Eunice taught her son Timothy the holy Scriptures from a child.

Sir, The remembrance of these and many other sweet gracious properties
wherewith she was endowed, although it might deservedly yield you much comford
in this your disconsolate estate and condition; (and I know, in many regards it
does) yet I have often heard you speak of these and such like, as aggravations
of your grief, to consider how many comforts you have lost in one.

It cannot be denied but your loss is exceeding great in the death of such a
Wife, and your childrens in such a Mother. But let me yet tell you seriously,
The loss in her is not only (though most principally and especially) yours:
but the people of God in general may justly claim a part in it. So
affectionately desirous was she of the welfare of the Israel of God, that I am
confident I may speak of her in the Psalmists words, She did desire to
prefer it before her chiefest joy. She had learned how to sacrifice her
dearest delights to the good of the public: Witness her willing not only
yielding you up unto, but also her earnest persuading you to accept of that
call from God to serve your Country and Kingdom in that public military
employment which the unanimous consent of the well-affected had cast upon you:
often professing, that in this cause, she could as freely trust God with you
in a shower of bullets, as of rain; being fully persuaded that the Lord could
as easily protect you in the one, as in the other.

She was a woman of a public spirit, truly sympathizing with the miseries of
these sad times; never thinking it was or could be well with her self or hers,
whilst it was so ill with the deer Saints and people of God, both in the
greatest part of our own Kingdom, and in many places elsewhere.

And as she was exemplary in her life, so was she consolatory in her
sickness and death. With what a contented and thankful frame of spirit she
did bear this her last visitation, as her constant demeanor in general did
evidently declare; so in particular, I may instance in those last expressions
which (according to my best intelligence) she breathed out not long before her
last breath, when one of them that watched with her (laying her ear to hearken
what she spoke) heard these words once and again uttered, What shall I render
to the Lord for all his mercies? What shall I render to the Lord for all his
mercies?

Sir, I could easily herein enlarge my self, without exceeding the bounds of
truth, or intrenching upon the borders of flattery, both which I abhor: But
I conceive it very unseemly to prefix a long Epistle before a short Sermon;
Therefore I shall humbly crave liberty to cease writing to you, engaging my
self (upon all occasions) not to omit praying for you, That the Lord would
please to sanctify this your great loss to your abundant spiritual
advantage. This is and shall be the earnest request (at the Throne of Grace) of
him, who cordiallly subscribeth himself

Sir, Your Worships real friend, (and servant for the good of your soul) THO.
BOROUGH.

CHRIST THE Sts ADVANTAGE both IN LIFE AND DEATH.
We are met to solemnize the memorial of our dear friend, that virtuous
Gentlewoman the Lord has lately taken from us; desiring to improve our best
endeavors to make some spiritual advantage of this our great loss. If ever
there was a time when that sad complaint of the Prophet Isaiah might be taken
up, viz. The righteous are taken away from the evil to come, Isa. 57.1, it is
surely now. If ever the surviving Saints might fear that their dear deceased
Christian friends were taken away from future evils, then surely may we now in
these sad times. May we not fear there is still a storm approaching, when the
Lord houseth his friends? And that a night of trouble and perplexity draws
nigh, when the great God (as I may with reverence so speak) dispatcheth his
children to bed, and thus lays his beloved ones to sleep?

Providence has chosen my Text for me, and I have willingly submitted to it.
When it pleased the Lord to take away this our dear friend, I may truly say,
my wonned sleep (that night immediately ensusuing) departed from mine eyes; and
in the silent time of the night did my fantasy continually present her
speaking unto me with her accustomed lively voice, Christ is to me gain both
in life and death: whereupon I resolved (for this time and occasion) to fix my
thoughts upon that portion of Scripture to which I shall now crave your
attention, as it is upon record,

(The TEXT.)

PHILIP. 1.21. For to me, to live is Christ, and to die is gain:

Or, as the Geneva Translation reads it,

Christ is to me both in life and death advantage.

THe Apostle Paul, when he wrote this Epistle, was prisoner at Rome: which the
Philippians understanding, (having formerly received the Gospel by his
ministry) send Epaphroditus their minister to visit him; and by Epaphroditus
send relief to his necessities. Whereupon Paul takes occasion to write this
Epistle to them. In the beginning whereof (after his salutations) he gives
thanks to God in the behalf of the Philippians, for their communion and
fellowship in the Gospel; confirming them with an assured confidence, that the
same God who had begun that good work in them, would also perfect it unto the
end. And to this purpose he prays for them, that they might increase daily in
the knowledge of God, and abound in the fruits of righteousness. But fearing
lest his present bonds and imprisonments might be an occasion of discouragement
to any of them, he tells them that the cause of his imprisonment was well known
both in Nero's Palace, and to the Citizens of Rome: yea, his sufferings had
been so far from hindering, that they had helped much toward the progress
of the Gospel; for many through his bonds had searched more into the cause of
his sufferings, and were grown more bold and confident in the profession of the
Gospel. And although there were some that preached Christ out of envy and
contention, supposing to add affliction to his bonds; yet he therein rejoiced.
How these thought to add affliction to his bonds, Expositors do not
absolutely resolve us: Some think that they did adulterate and corrupt the
Doctrine of the Gospel, mixing it with diverse erroneous tenants, such as they
conceived might render Paul more odious in the eyes of authority, and so they
thought to add affliction to his bonds. Others are of opinion, that they
observing what high place and esteem Paul had in the hearts and affections of
the godly by preaching Christ: they resolved that they would also preach
Christ, thinking thereby to eclipse and obscure his fame. But whatever was
their intent, in Paul we have a pattern of a truly Heroic and heavenly
spirit: He was willing to be debased that Christ might thereby be exalted.
Christ is preached, says he, and therein I rejoice, v. 20. Knowing that (...)
According to my earncst expectation: an expectation with lifting up the head,
or stretching out the neck, as one that looks for the coming of some special
friend, whose company he much delights in; so much the word imports. Such
an earnest expectation and assured hope had Paul, that Christ should be
magnified by him either by life or death: And upon this persuasion he finds
it difficult to determine whether to make choice of life or death. His life and
abode was better for the Philippians; but for himself it was far better to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ. If I live (says he) I have devoted my life
to Christ; if I die, I am fully persuaded that Christ shall be magnified by my
death. Therefore, Whether I live or die, Christ shall be to me advantage.

The words are a triumphant manifestation of that benefit and comfort which
Paul did assuredly expect to find from Christ both in life and death. Which
words (as I conceive) not needing any further explication, hold forth this
Proposition.

DOCT. That the Lord Jesus Christ is a believers greatest advantage and best
comfort both in life and death.
To me to live is Christ, and to die is gain: Christ is my comfort both in
life and death. If I live, the life that I lead is by faith in Christ: If I
die, Christ shall be to me advantage: yea, it is far better for me to be
with Christ. So affectionately desirous of enjoying still more communion with
Christ was this blessed Apostle, that he tells the Corinthians, I desire to
know nothing among you but Christ, and him crucified: 1 Cor. 2.2. No, not at
Corinth a City of Greece, a famous and learned City: yet he desired (even
among them) to know not a (...), not a tittle of any thing but Christ, and him
crucified. The same Apostle tells the Colossians, that all outward
privileges and excellencies without Christ are nothing, they cannot all make a
man happy, nor render him acceptable in the sight of God: no, it is Christ that
is all in all, Coloss. 3.11. A title, an interest in a Christ can only do
this. We are made accepted in the Beloved, Ephesians. 1.6. Again, if you look
forward into this Epistle written to the Philippians, you shall find the
Apostle disrobing himself of all outward privileges: he was one of a good
Family, excellent parts, one of the strictest Sect of the Pharisees; yet (says
he) I account all these loss in respect of Christ. I account my time lost
that was spent in these things: I account them but (...), offall, garbage, and
filth that is thrown out to dogs. Things they are indeed that may entice the
dogs of the world, but alas, to me (says the Apostle) they are things of no
value. Such sweet comforts have the Saints found in Christ, that Chrysostom
says, The Name of Jesus has a thousand treasures of joy and comfort in it.
And it is used by Paul (as some have reckoned) no less then five hundred
times. Thus Moses, that holy man of God, esteemed reproaches for Christ greater
riches then the treasures of Egypt. But how could those many opprobrious and
contumelious speeches which the Hebrews (at that time in a strange land) were
subject unto, be said to be the reproaches of Christ, or for Christ, when
Christ was not yet born? For answer to this, ye know that Christ was the Lamb
slain from the beginning of the world. He has ever been afflicted from the
beginning of the world. The afflictions of the Church are called the rebukes of
Christ: when the Saints are rebuked and persecuted, Christ is persecuted; and
these Moses accounts greater riches then the treasures of Egypt: Mocks and
taunts, banishment, imprisonment, loss of goods, burning at a stake for the
Name of Christ; these are greater riches then all the treasures in the world
without Christ, and ought to be so esteemed. I reckon, says the Apostle Romans
8.18. or upon just reasoning I conclude, that all the sufferings of this world
are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us:
they are too light to be weighed with that glory. The glory which the Saints
shall have with Christ in the world to come shall abundantly exceed all their
sufferings for Christ here. And as their glory which they shall receive in the
world to come is incomparable, so their joy and consolation which they find in
communion with Christ here is unspeakable: nothing else can satisfy or content
them. Should a Christian send out his soul by way of enquiry, to knock at the
door of all worldly contentments, demanding whether any true soule-satisfying
comfort and gain could be found in any of them; they would all give in a
negative answer: Even as we read concerning Wisdom, Job 28.12, 14. The depth
says, It is not in me, etc. so here of soul-satisfying comfort and gain, it
will be answered, It is not in us.

Inquiry I.
If you should inquire of riches, whether they cannot give such soul-satisfying
content: Alas, the answer is already upon record, Riches avail not in the day
of wrath: but righteousness delivers from death, Pro. 11.4. from the sting
and curse of the first death, and altogether freeth from the second death. It Is
righteousness; but what righteousness? Surely, none other but the
righteousness of God by faith in Christ: That righteousness, which in regard
of working, was the righteousness of Christ, Romans 5.18. and in regard of the
imputing or appropriating of it, is called the righteousness of God, Romans
3.21. Philip. 3.9. Paul durst not stick to a legal and duty-righteousnesse:
this will not stay the soul, nor quiet the conscience in times of deep
distress; but it must be a better, an higher righteousness, even the
righteousness of Christ. This is the righteousness that God will accept, and
that will afford quiet peace unto the soul. This is that righteousness that
will deliver from death.

Inquiry II.
Honors and preferments, cannot you stand the soul in stead in an evil day?
Cannot you step betwixt Gods wrath and a troubled conscience? Alas, these may
carry worth and estimation among men; but they are nothing in reference toward
God. Honor is but the raising of the value and esteem of a man here among
others: And when men have done what they can, there is only one Heraldry that
makes the difference of men; and that is the grace of God.

Summa apud Deum Nobilitas est clarum esse virtutibus, as one says well: It Is
grace that makes men of the blood-royall, partakers of the divine nature. The
best Nobility is the Nobility of faith, and the best genealogy the genealogy
of good works: and they that truly endeavor to honor Christ, them will he
honor. But for worldly honor, when it is once laid in the dust, who can
distinguish betwixt the greatest favorite of Princes here on earth, and the
poorest peasant? These worldly preferments may add much to the aggravation of
men's condemnation in the day of the Lord Jesus: but (without grace to improve
them to the glory of God) they shall never add to their consolation. These
cannot (of themselves) yield any true soule-satisfying comfort in time of
distress.

Inquiry III.
Wife and children (those dear delights of men here upon earth) can you afford
no soule-satisfying comfort in a time of spiritual distress? These, these
indeed, are sweet comforts whilst enjoyed with the favor of God in Christ; as
that blessed Martyr acknowledged, who being asked wh^her did love his Wife and
children (he seeming so willing to leave them to die for the name of Christ;)
Yea, (says he) so deer are my wife and children to me, that (were the whole
world mine) I would give it to live with them, though it were but in prison:
But if either I must forsake them, or deny Christ, were they a thousand times
dearer, I would willingly leave them. Dearest friends, chiefest delights
(coming in competition with Christ) must be disregarded. In this case we must
Patrem calcare, etc. as Jerome speaks; we must trample upon father, and cast
away mother: we must know no relation so as to hinder us from Christ. He that
does not thus hate father and mother, and wife and children, in respect of
Christ, is not worthy of Christ.

Thus you see (upon inquiry) that there is no soule-satisfying comfort to be
found on this side Christ. As every thing moves toward its own proper
center, and is not at rest until it come thither: so the soul of a true
believer inclines and moves toward Christ, and never rests contented
until it come to Christ, and has the fruition of Christ. As Noah's Dove found
no rest until she returned to the Ark; and as the Be finds no rest until
she return to the hive: so the soul that truly desires communion with
Christ, can meet with no true contentation but in Christ: As David sweetly,
Return unto thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with
thee. The reconciled face and favor of God in Christ is the only true rest of
the soul: The soul is restless until it find this rest.

Now, as you have seen that there is no true comfort to be found in any
enjoyment on this side Christ: So we shall endeavor to give in some arguments
to prove, That it is Christ alone in whom this comfort is wrapped up.

That the Lord Jesus Christ is a believers greatest advantage and best comfort
both in life and death.

REAS. 1.
Because Christ only can free the soul from the greatest evil, from the
greatest burden here in this life. What is it that makes the life of many a
poor soul to be as bitter as death it self, that makes them to walk
mournfully, and ( Rachel-like) refuse to be comforted? Is it not sense of
sin, and the weight of remaining corruption? Does not this constrain the
poor wearied soul to cry out, O wretched man that I am, etc.? Now it is Christ
alone that can ease this burden: I thank God through Christ (says the
Apostle.) He has borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows, says the
Prophet, Isai. 53.4. We are naturally dead in sins and trespasses, it is he
that has quickened us. We have (...), an handwriting against us; it is he
alone that has taken it away, and nailed it on his cross. We are subject to
the power of darkness; it is he that has spoiled principalities and powers,
Coloss. 2.15. He has disarmed Satan of all power (finally) to hurt his
elect. It is Christ alone that can free the soul not only from the guilt and
punishment of sin, but also from the power and dominion of sin. He was
made sin for us, (that is, by imputation) that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him; 2 Cor. 5.21.

God in his eternal council appointed Christ to be surety for his elect, and
for his righteousness sake to accept of them, as if they had been perfectly
righteous in themselves. Whom he has set forth (says the Apostle) to be a
propitiation for sin, Romans 3.25. The original word [(...)] shows the
everlasting purpose of God to give his Son for the redemption of his elect.
So the same word is used Romans 8.28. Christ was designed to this work of
propitiation; that is, to bring his elect again into grace and favor with
God: which he performed, By the merit of his death; By the obedience of his
life; And also by the holiness and purity of his birth and conception.

1. By the merit of his death; submitting himself to the whole curse of God
deserved by their sins, and standing in the gappe (as it was said of Moses)
so bearing the brunt of Gods fiery wrath and indignation, and thereby removing
from them whatsoever Wrath or Justice could be offended at.

2. By the obedience of his life; in fulfilling Gods most righteous Law, by
yielding perfect and entire obedience, whereby they are accounted just and
righteous.

And 3. By the holiness and purity of his conception and birth imputed unto
them; whereby they are accounted personally as holy and pure (in the sight of
God) as if they themselves had been conceived and born without spot of sin.
And this holiness and purity of Christ's humane nature is no less reckoned to
believers for healing their defiled nature, then his obedience and suffering
for remission of actual sins, and acquitting them from eternal destruction.
And to this purpose says the Apostle, Christ is made to us of God, Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. CHRIST is made (to
such as believe in him) not only Righteousness in respect of his perfect
fulfilling the Law of GOD for them; but Sanctification also, in respect of his
holiness, innocence, and most perfect purity of his holy and sanctified
nature. Thus there is from CHRIST made over to the true believer, whatever is
needful to his full and perfect justification in the sight of GOD.

First, There is merit and passion upon the Cross, answering for that curse
and torment which he deserved.

Secondly, Integrity and obedidience of life, answering for his disobedience.

Thirdly, Perfect purity of nature, answering for the impurity of his corrupt
nature.

Now, what greater comfort can there be to a believing soul, then to have all
his sins discharged and blotted out, and himself acquitted in the sight of
God, and accounted as holy and pure, as if he had been conceived and born
without sin? And to find all his sins (in CHRIST) not only pardoned, but
also overpowred: and himself daily by degrees changed from one step of
glorious excellency to another, in sins ruin, and graces reviving, by the
Spirit of the LORD? Like as that poor cripple we read of Acts 3. v. 8. when
he was cured, he walked into the Temple, praising GOD, and leaping for joy:
even so the soul that finds it self once thus set free by CHRIST, cannot
but with much more abundant joy triumphantly rejoice in the free grace and
mercy of GOD in CHRIST, which has set it free: yea, with a joy unspeakable and
full of glory, 1 Pet. 1. verse. 8. None knows the joy that such find, but the
soul that has labored under the same burden, and tasted of the like
freedom. A stranger intermedleth not with this joy.

REAS. 2.
Because CHRIST only can confer upon the soul the greatest good. What is
the chiefest good that the soul is capable of here in this life? What is it to
have an heaven upon earth? Is it not to enjoy GOD? to have an intimate
acquaintance with the LORD JESUS CHRIST? to enjoy the sweet manifestations of
his presence, John 14. ver. 21.? Is not this the chiefest good, and the great
request of the soul, To be kissed with the kisses of CHRIST'S mouth, Cant. 1.
v. 1.? The sweet intimations of CHRIST'S love to the soul are good more then
wine: better then whatever else can comfort. For CHRIST to take the soul into
his banqueting house, Cant. 2. v. 4. to communicate unto it largely the rich
graces and treasures of his blessed Spirit; to lead it (as it were by the
hand) into his privy chambers, and let it take a view of those jewels and
precious things laid up for his people: to refresh the soul with those
spiritual consolations which exceed all outward troubles; and to spread his
banner or flagge of defense over the foul; a banner against sin; Satan, and
the world, and this banner to be Love; all this, the love which CHRIST bears
to the foul: This, this so ravisheth the foul, that she is sick of love,
faint and sick with desire of enjoying more communion with CHRIST. As Daniel,
when he had recei ed abundance of revelations, was faint and sick with desire
of more clear knowledge of his visions, and of the Churches deliverance, Dan.
8. v. 27. so the soul that has once thoroughly tasted of these sweet
consolations, is sick after more communion with CHRIST: crying out with the
Spouse, Stay me with flagons, etc. Cant. 2.5. with the flagons of the wine of
grace and spiritual consolations which Christ reaches out to the souls of
his.

REAS. 3.
Because CHRIST only can fit a Christian for all estates and conditions, for
all changes and alterations: CHRIST can teach the soul humility in prosperity,
patience in affliction; yea, not only so, but also to rejoice and glory in
tribulations. To glory is to have a kind of insulting over them, to live above
them, to undervalue them, to set light by them. And not only to triumph over
some light trials; but even (...), in pressing afflictions, in tribulations,
Roman. 5. ver. 3. The presence of CHRIST carries the soul above all the
troubles of the world, and sets it upon that rock that is higher then all
outward discouragements. It Is CHRIST alone that can teach the soul how to rest
content in every condition: I have learned, says Paul (and surely it is a
blessed art) in whatsoever estate I am, therewith to be content, Philipp. 4.11.
But this knowledge he tells us, he obtained from CHRIST; I can do all things
through CHRIST that enableth me.

REAS. 4.
Because CHRIST only can sweeten death, and enable the soul courageously to
encounter that enemy which Aristotle calls (...), The most Terrible of
Terribles; and Bildad (one of Jobs friends) The King of terrors; when Satan
(as usually he does in his last and greatest assault) sends in his
accusations like the waves of the sea, or like Jobs messengers, one in the neck
of the other, seeking to swallow up the soul in the gulf of utter despair;
presenting unto the soul (as it were in one view) the sight of the sins of
her whole life, together with all the aggravating circumstances. Now it is
CHRIST alone that can (and at this time usually does) step in and rescue the
soul, taking away the captive out of the power of the enemy: CHRIST now
smileth upon the soul, letting her feel the sweetness that redoundeth to the
believer by his bitter sufferings. He enableth the foul by faith to cast
anchour in heaven; to stay it self upon the alone and all sufficient merits of
the LORD JESUS. And now the soul dares challenge death, hell, and Devils: Who
can lay any thing to the charge of GOD's Elect! It Is CHRIST that died; yea,
rather that is risen again for their justification.

USE 1.
The first Use we desire to make of this point may be to discover the vanity
of all other comforts. All comforts without CHRIST are but seeming comforts:
they are (at the best) but bitter-sweets; there is far more gall then honey
in the best of them. All other comforts, without CHRIST, are but like a lamp
without oil, or a bone without marrow. Without CHRIST the soul meets with
emptiness in the greatest worldly fullness. It Is CHRIST that fills all in
all. Ephesians. 1.23. He puts fullness of content and satisfaction into all the
things that his servants enjoy: The righteous eats to the satisfying of his
soul, Prove. 13.25. If he have much, he blesses GOD for it, and labors to
improve it to his glory; if little, he is thankful for it, and content with
it. Godliness carries a selfe-sufficiencie along with it: (...), 1 Timoth. 6.
ver. 6.

Other things without CHRIST may carry a show of happiness in them; but indeed
and in truth, there is no true real content and soule-satisfying comfort to be
found in them. The glory of the greatest that want CHRIST, does many times
decay before them; at the utmost it dies with them: when they go from their
house to the grave their glory shall not descend after them.

It is not the quintessence of all things here below, without the fruition of
CHRIST with them, and in them, that can make a man happy. Men do but dream of
a contentedness in them: They are but a mere image and representation: All
worldly pomp is but a fantasy: Agrippa and Bernice came with great pomp,
(...), Acts 25.23. These things are not so excellent as men think them to be.
But truly happy, and assuredly blessed is that soul that enjoys communion
with the LORD JESUS CHRIST; that can truly say with Paul, CHRIST is to me both
in life and death advantage.

USE 2.
Secondly, This may be an Use of Instruction, to teach Christians seriously to
take notice of the happy estate and condition of every soul reconciled to GOD
in CHRIST: The LORD JESUS is all the sweetness that the souls of his can
desire: He is honey in the mouth, music in the ear, and a Jubilee in the
heart (says Bernard).

Look upon one of GOD's reconciled ones in his most afflicted estate, when he
is most estranged from all worldly comforts, yet in the midst of all his
outward wants and sufferings, he is truly happy by enjoying communion with
GOD in CHRIST.

Let a man's outward condition be what it can; yet in enjoying GOD, the soul
enjoys whatever is necessary and conducible to her comfort and happiness.
All comforts are in GOD as in the fountain and spring; all are primarily in
him. That which the Apostle speaks to this purpose (a Corinth. 6. ver. 10.)
is a strange Paradox to a natural man, As having nothing, and yet possessing
all things. In enjoying GOD, the believer enjoys all; even in that GOD who
can not only command, but also create comforts. Although the Lord many times
leads his people into the wilderness, yet even there will he speak
comfortably unto them, Hos. 2. verse. 14. GOD usually gives in most of himself
to his when they are most destitute of outward comforts: The LORD dealing (in
this regard) with his people as Physicians with their Patients; who keep their
choycest cordialls for fainting fits. Thousands (I am confident) of imprisoned
and plundered Saints can experimentally speak to the truth of this. It is but
the fulfilling of that promise of him who is Truth it self; who has engaged
himself to be present with his in their greatest streights, When thou passest
through the waters, I will be with thee, and through the rivers, that they shall
not overflow thee. When thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt,
neither shall the flame kindle upon thee, Isai. 43.2.

Whither will the child fear to go whilst it is in the fathers arms.
Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death (says David) yet will
I fear none evil: for thou art with me, Psalm. 23.4. CHRIST's presence makes
amends for all. He is so eminently and transcendently good, that whatever is
wanting in the creature, is supplied out of his blessed self. If food be
wanting to his to feed them, if clothes to cover and keep them warm; yet he
is equivalently good; yea, better to them then all these, or whatsoever else
they can stand in need of. O stand still then and seriously take notice of the
happy estate of a soul reconciled to GOD in CHRIST; all outward troubles
cannot hinder his joy, nor stop the intercourse of love betwixt CHRIST and
his soul. He lives above all troubles: His life is hid with CHRIST in GOD,
Coloss. 3. verse. 3. He lives where he loves: his conversation is in heaven,
Philip. 3. verse. 20. All the enemies in the world cannot take away his joy: He
may lose house, goods, lands, friends; but still he has his portion: GOD is
the strength of my heart, and my portion for even. Psalm. 73. ver. 26. All the
powers of hell, and all the enemies in the world are not able to take away his
comfort: They may strip him naked of all the comforts of this life; yea, they
may (if the LORD permit) take away life it self: but yet they cannot take away
CHRIST, who is the life of his life, and the joy of his soul. Here is a true
believers conquest; His jewel, his treasure, his best and greatest comfort
both in life and death, cannot be taken away. Enemies may separate betwixt the
body and the soul, but never betwixt the soul and CHRIST.

USE 3.
Thirdly, This may discover unto us the desperate folly of those who are
sollicitously careful after the things of this world, and in the mean time
altogether careless concerning that which they ought principally to labor
after, never truly seeking after communion with GOD in CHRIST. Of such we may
justly take up that complaint, Ye will not come unto me, that ye might have
life, John 5. verse. 40. They will not come to CHRIST, they will not believe in
him, they will not roll themselves upon him for life and salvation: They will
not kiss the Son, they will not have CHRIST to reign over them: To such I
may say (in the words of the holy Spirit), Why is there a price put into the
hands of fools, seeing they have not an heart to it? Why do such lay out their
money for that which is not bread? (Isa. 55. ver. 2.) for that which will not
comfort in time of need? Why is the blessed, free and gracious tender of CHRIST
so slenderly esteemed, and ungratefully refused? This, this will prove The
condemnation, That men love darkness rather then light, John 3. ver. 19. How
shall this muzzle the mouths of all impenitent sinners that have lived in
these Gospel times, who have neglected so great salvation as has been held
forth unto them? How unutterably miserable shall the condition of such be, When
the LORD JESUS shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming
fire, taking vengeance on them that know not GOD, and obey not the Gospel of
our LORD JESUS CHRIST? 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8.

USE 4.
Fourthly, The Use of this in the last place shall be for exhortation, to
exhort every one of us, that as we desire to find any true, solid,
soule-satisfying comfort either in life or death; so to labor now to get a
title and interest in CHRIST. Strive to be found in CHRIST, not having any
righteousness of your own, but that which is through the faith of CHRIST, the
righteousness which is of GOD by faith, Philipp. 3. ver. 9. Endeavor to get
strong evidence to your souls, that you are Christ's, and he yours. Get the
love of CHRIST shed abroad in your hearts, that your souls may be heated with
the reflection of this love. Pray that your souls may be arrested with the
love of CHRIST; with such a love as the Spouse; mentions, Cant. 8. verse. 6. A
love as strong as death, that conquers the greatest giant, and mightiest
Monarch; A zeal for CHRIST as inexorable as the grave, that the coals thereof
may be fiery coals, scorching coals. This love will facilitate the greatest
difficulties, and make the Saints not to love their lives unto death. This has
made the holy Martyrs kiss the stake and joyfully embrace the flames. This
made that blessed Ignatius, when he heard the lions roar, (that were
purposely kept hungry, to the end they might more eagerly devour him) cry out,
O that I were with those beasts that are prepared for me, whom I desire should
soon make an end of me: but if they should refuse to touch my body (as through
fear sometimes they have abstained from some of the Saints) I would provoke
them to fall upon me.

Others have said, Racks, strappadoes, torments, are but a play to us. Flames
of fire have seemed to them no less pleasant then beds of down: Thus have
these blessed souls been warmed, yea, inflamed with love to CHRIST. The heat
and strength of this love has also moved the Saints, lying upon their
deathbeds, (even as it is reported of the Swanne) to sing before their death;
and to allure their souls (as it were) to hasten out of their bodies: with old
Simeon to cry out, LORD, now let thy servant depart in peace, Luke 2. verse. 29.
And with good Hilarian, These seventy years and upwards thou have served the
LORD; therefore now go forth, O my soul with joy.

They know right well that though they die, yet the sting is pulled out, and
death to them is but a passage to a better life. Hence it is that they welcome
death as that blessed harbinger of their souls eternal happiness. This has
made them look upon the day of death as the day of harvest to the husbandman,
as the day of deliverance to the prisoner, as a day of marriage to the Bride.
Upon this day have the Saints looked as a day of exultation and triumph over
sin, death, and hell: O death, Where is thy sting? O grave, Where is thy
victory? 1 Corinthians. 15. ver. 55. It has made them to long to be dissolved, and
to be with CHRIST, which is (...), far, far the better, Philip. 1.23. As a
Reverend Divine that I have read of, who the day before he died, called
earnestly for the Bible, saying, Come, oh come, death approaches, let us
gather some flowers to comfort this hour. Another, Oh what an happy change
shall I make! from night to day, from death to life, from a troublesome world
to an heavenly rest? Thus have many blessed Saints even longed for death, and
rejoiced at the very approaching of it: which they could never have done, had
they not assuredly known that they should be exceeding gainers by their
change, had they not confidently believed, that when these earthly tabernacles
should be dissolved, they should have a building of GOD, not made with hands,
etc. Oh how does it concern us (especially in these cloudy days) to strive for
interest in CHRIST!

Therefore, as ever you desire to find any comfort in these sad times,
especially at the hour of death, when all other comforts shall take their
leave; so labor to get a tirle and interest in CHRIST, that with Paul you may
be able to say, CHRIST is to me both in life and death advantage.

NOw concerning this Gentlewoman, whose death we have all cause to lament,
being one who was in an especial manner isntrumental to the glory of GOD.
Although I have ever hated flattery; yet, where I find much of GOD, I desire
to speak something to his glory.

Many things worthy of imitation have I (being much conversant with her)
observed in her: A brief account of some of them I shall in a word or two hint
unto you:

First, She was very conscientious in observing the Lords day.

Secondly, She was principally careful over the souls of her children and
servants in her husbands absence: A lively character of a truly virtuous wife.
When should the Moon shine bright, but in the absence of the Sun?

Thirdly, The cause of GOD, and the welfare of his people were most deer unto
her.

In a word: Such was her demeanor in her whole conversation, that I could
easily be eloquent in speaking of her; but I must set bounds to my self. God
has taken her from us, I must speak no more to her, neither shall I for the
present speak any more of her. But oh that what I have (or deservedly might
have) spoken of her, might provoke others to emulation: that you would strive
to walk in her paths, that you might hereafter partake of her Crown.

I shall conclude in the words of the Apostle in the same Epistle wherein I
began, Phil. 4.8. Finally brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure,
whatsoever things are of good report: if there be any virtue, if there be any
praise, think on these things.

FINIS.

