THE Arraignment and Condemnation OF Cap. Bridges Bushel; DECLARING The
Occasion and Manner how A SOLDIER Was by him slain, about Nine years since; For
which he was never questioned Till Midsummer last, 1656.

At which time he was apprehended, and upon Examination committed to the White
Lion Prison in Southwark.

And at the Lent-Assizes there, Anno 1657. Received the Sentence of Death;
which was accordingly Executed.

Left behind him in Writing, to the End it might be Printed and Published,

LONDON: Printed for Marmaduke Boat. 1657.

I Bridges Bushel Captain, desire that these Lines may be Published in Print,
for the Satisfaction of some Friends. The which Lines are to declare the
occasion and manner how a Soldier was by me slain about Nine years since; As
also to manifest, That although I have been at my home at Darkin, in the County
of Surrey, several times since the Fact (so called) was done; yet I was never
questioned for it until Midsummer last past. Anno Dom. 1656. I being then a
Soldier in Colonel Ingoldsbies Regiment, in Captain Fox his Company; where by
means of Information given unto Ensign Frances, Ensign to Captain Fox
aforesaid, I was apprehended, and after Examination committed to the White Lion
Prison in Southwark, and at the Lent Assizes, 1657. I was araigned and
condemned to dye.

ABout Nine years since, or more; it was at that time when the late Earl of
Holland raised a party for the late King of England, in the County of Surrey, I
being then a Soldier for that party, and the Headquarters being then at
Rygate, in the County aforesaid. And upon the day that our party was to march
from Rygate to Darkin, a Neighboring Town; I staying behind at Rygate, there
came a Soldier of the Parliaments party, which was a Trooper, into the said
Town, whose Pistols were taken away, but not by me, though I owned that Act;
whereupon the Trooper violently assaulted me with his Sword drawn; and I in my
own defense, answered him as a Public Enemy (as he was) and shot him: For the
which I was never questioned, until the time abovesaid; although I was several
times at my abovesaid home since the death of the said Soldier, as is well
known; yet notwithstanding, when I was brought to my Trial, at the time and
place before mentioned, the chief Evidence that was there and then given in
against me, was by one that was but Ten years old when the above said Trooper
was slain: The Jury then brought in their Verdict that I was guilty of
Manslaughter, who afterward altered their Judgments, and brought me in guilty
of wilful Murder; and thereupon I received the Sentence of Death.

Be pleased to [observe that the abovesaid Evidence was in opposition to truth;
for the said witness swore, That I had never been at home at my own house at
Darkin since the Trooper was slain, though it be known that for five years
together, I came several times, and stayed with my Family so long as my then
present Employments would admit of, I being then a Soldier in the service of
the Commonwealth of England, and was upon many D^signs; as at the taking of the
Islands of Silly and Jersey, and was likewise at the two last Engagements at
Sea against the Hollanders, being Corporal at that time of the Culpepper, under
the command of Capt. Cheney. In all which services, it is well known I behaved
my self faithfully and valiantly.

And now briefly, I shall recite the Injuries that I have suffered, which will
be, I believe, by some lamented.

First, I look upon the Evidence as inconsiderable, in respect of his Nonage.

Secondly, In respect of his Oath, which was in contradiction to the Testimony
of more then Forty persons of credit.

Thirdly, I judge it could not be proved wilful Murder, in respect that the
man slain, was to me a stranger; so that there could be no former grudge: And
also as I before said, he was a professed Enemy.

Much more I could say, as in reference to the unkindness of my nearest
relations; But not willing to cast an odium upon them. I shall be sparing in
publishing their want of Love and Duty: Yet I must speak truth, both Wife and
Children neglected me in my greatest misery; so that I may say of them,
Miserable comforters were they all; yet God was pleased to raise me a Friend,
when all my Relations left me: For in my Imprisonment, a poor Widow (whose
Husband was my dear Friend; yet I had not beheld her face in four years, before
she came and administered unto me) supplied my wants with what she got by her
Labor. So that my maintenance may probably prove her ruin, if not prevented by
some of my Friends; who I hope (though I cannot promise) may requite her;
however, I hope the Lord will requite her.

And least any should think it were for any sinister end, that she should thus
contribute to my extreme necessities, know, It was for no other cause, but that
I and her Husband was familiar Friends; only her compassionate Soul
sympathising with me in my indigent and deplorable estate; which was certainly
by an extraordinary providence. For the which, I desire to ascribe g^ory to God.

Again, for the Public Satisfaction of all, as refering to the Fact, both in
the Manner and Matter of it, as is above declared, I dye Innocently in respect
of the National Law: And because the manner of my death is a shameful death, I
desire all, that they would not in the le^st attribute it to the dishonor of
the Family, from whence I descended.

And now all you that shall peruse these Lines, being the Language of a dying
man, take notice that I freely forgive all such that are concerned in my death,
whether ignorantly, wilfully, or negligently; and my Prayers are, That the
Almighty would not so lay it to their charge, as may redound to their Ruins.

And now be pleased to suffer a few words of advice, Labor to be circumspect in
your Pilgrimage here, and beware of the deceiving vanities of this World; trust
not in the promises of great ones, nor put not thy trust in Princes, whose
breath is in their Nostrils. Go not forth hastily to strive, lest thou know not
what to do in the end, but ponder the paths of thy Feet, and let all thy ways
be established; neither insult over others in their ruins. And let him that
thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall; nor boast not thy self of to
morrow, for thou know not what a day may bring forth.

Upon Captain Bushel.
I Cannot I adorn thy Hearse
With any high Heroic Verse,
Nor blaze thy name beyond desert;
Truth bids me tell but what thou were.
Thy name and place, where known, was good,
And that thou sprang'st from Gentile blood,
Pity it was so hard a Fate,
Should lend thy life no longer date.
BEreft of life, and by so hard a Fate,
Revive his memory, and him antidate.
Imbalm his Name, with odors sweet, though hence
Death snatched him; and if by his offense
The Law he has incurred, and merited his Death,
Envy be silent, let not infectious breath
Send scandals forth against him, because he died
By the hand of Justice; Oh let none deride;
Virtue and Ingenuity, most sure I am,
Shall not insult, nor glory in his shame.
How can the best of men, blessed Ends premise?
Even when there is nothing certain but uncertainties.
Let none then post, but by his end take heed,
Lest whilst you think you stand, you fall indeed.
Upon the Widows Charity.
MUch has been wrote and said in Ancient Days,
Of Women's commendation; would I could praise
This poor, yet much deserving one, whose worth is such,
As is the purest Gold, so proved by touch.
No counterfeit she is, in Stamp nor Oar;
She proved what she appeared, none ere could more.
Therefore her actions speaks her, better then my Quill
Can blaze to the World, yet I Will commend her still;
And what in power is wanting, I desire,
But 'cause I cannot, I will still Admire.
FINIS.

