A BRIEF VIEW OF Mr. Coleman his New-Modell OF CHVRCH GOVERNMENT DELIVERED By
him in a late Sermon, upon JOB 11. 20.

Greg. Naz. In Ecclesiis ordo definvit, ut aliud quidem sit occise, alii vero
pastores; aliud cum imperio praesit, aliud imperio subsit: Aliud manuum, aliud
oculorum: Aliud denique alterius membro corporis vicem sustineat; quae membra
ad aptam totius compositionem ac utilitatem, vel inferiora sunt, vel excellunt,
etc. London, Printed by John Field for Ralph Smith, at the sign of the Bible in
Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange, 1645.

A brief View of Mr. Coleman his new Model of Church Government; delivered by
him in a late SERMON upon Job. 11. 20.
SIR,
LEt it not be offensive unto you; that one (who is not satisfied with what you
have delivered in your late Sermon, upon Job 11. 20.) should, with submission
to better judgments, offer unto you a few things further to be considered by
you; the rather, because you have occasioned not only some scruples to my self
upon the reading thereof, but to others also; and yet I do assure you, I am
neither of the number of them, who (as your Epistle says) approved your pains
above commendation, nor disliked them below detestation: What I conceive is
therein warranted by Divine truth, I willingly approve and assent thereunto:
and where I stick (as questioning the truth) I now crave leave to offer my
doubts to your second thoughts.

You are persuading to unity in the Church now miserably distracted, and you
said that Government is eyed, as the only help to the allaying of that
trouble; and for the effectual furthering of that work, you are pleased to lay
down to the Honorable House several Rules, or Essays; which I think being
weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary, will be found too light, and cannot
be made good by the word of God, the true touchstone of all truth; but how
ever my purpose (God willing) is to examine;

1. Your Rules, and bring them to the Test, that we may try whether they
conduce to the end for which you propound them?

2. We'll consider, whether you have not unjustly fastened upon some eminent
Divines in the Assembly an uneven bya^, which to you seemed to mislead them in
the same.

3. Somewhat shall be added of your unbrotherlike slighting of the Assembly.

In all which I shall endeavor with as much brevity as I can to offer unto you
my thoughts, and crave your resolution.

I confess it may peradventure seem superfluous for me to Mr. Gillespee. Utile
est plures libros a pluribus fieri, diverso stylo, non diversa fide, etiam de
questionibus iisdem, ut ad plurimos res ipsa peacutivat, ad alios sic, ad alios
autem sic. August de Trin. lib. 1. cap. 3.
examine what you have said, after a judicious trial that is already past upon
your Rules by a Reverend and learned Divine: I am of his mind; who thought it
was conducing to the benefit of the Church, that sundry books should be written
by sundry men (differing in style, but agreeing in the same truth) about the
same questions, that the subject insisted on might be made known to many, to
some in one way, to others in another.

The Rules or Essays for unity and agreement produced by you I have perused,
and do not see what clear reason they carry to make them serviceable to that
end for which you offer them; and therefore how they should be either helpful
to the work, or useful to the workmen, as yet I see not: For in your second
Rule you seem to intimate, that there is no strength in your Arguments, of
which according to our light one may conclude different ways: Sure I am, he
that should hold out the contrary to all your Rules, might upon as good ground
call them Essays for agreement and unity; as for instance, he that should say,

1. Establish as much Jure Divino as may be.

2. Do not straighten Institutions to express Scriptures.

3. Let the Ministers of Jesus Christ be invested with the actual exercise of
that power and Government, which Jesus Christ has betrusted them withal.

4. Let the Civil and Ecclesiastical power both of them act in their own
sphere, and not the one encroach upon the other: let it be equal Sacrilege to
rob the Kingdom of Christ of the power of the Civil Magistrate, and for the
Civil Magistrate to ingrosse all the governing power of the Church.

He that should draw forth rules of this nature, should as much further unity
and agreement in the Church, and more, then he that shall adhere to your rules;
therefore they seem to me, not to be conducing to the end, for which they are
brought forth, but to the Rules themselves.

In your first Rule, you insist on two things: First, you would have as few
things established Jure Divino as may be, thereupon you call to hold out the
practice, but not that ground of the practice, two reasons you give hereof: 1.
Because men differently principled may meet in one practice. 2. Because it may
be, will be of a larger extent then it must be. In the second thing you touch
upon in this call, you lay forth the reason, which seemed to you to be the only
cause that hindered union in the Assembly.

The first thing in the Rule you drive at, is, That at few things be
established Iure Divino as can well be: this Rule would have better become a
Politician then a Divine.

Sir, Remember your place: a Divine, his part is to plead for as much as God
has laid down to be his right, reason would require you should either plead
for your Masters right, or quit your station to others, who speak in the
defense of their masters just cause; are his ashamed to plead our cause, take
heed that threatening befall not you, Mar. 8. 38. Or are you afraid to appear
for it? where is the cause of your fear? Authority commands you to search for
it, why should you then shrink to hold it forth unto them, and by them to the
Church? all that I conceive you can plead, is this, It is not clearly held
forth to your light, though others see it: have not these things been debated
before you, and was there no weight in all those debates: I presume, you being
a Member of the Assembly, cannot be ignorant what was there discussed in your
hearing: I cannot think that you did Obturatis auribus, hearken thereunto:
either then give place to their Votes, or in a rational way bring forth your
exceptions against them: Paphnucius indeed dissented from the great Council at
Nice, but he brought for his Warrant of Divine Authority, and laid about him
with the sword of the word; that satisfied the rest, and so they all gave place
unto him whilst he pleaded Scripture for what he maintained; do you so, and
then shall you wi^ your erring Brethren: Hitherto you have* only on the bare
authority of your word, denied that which is maintained by so many learned men
amongst you here, and in famous Churches abroad, with strength of Argument, and
authority of the word; herein you cannot but see you are wanting to the cause
which you would defend.

Why should you be so shy of holding out of Divine right, a^^ we not to
endeavor a Reformation of Religion in Discipline and Government, as well as in
Doctrine and Worship according to the word of God? Why should we then be afraid
of the Jus divinum in the one more then in the other? when I seriously consider
with my self, what may be the reason why you bogle at Ius Divinum in
Government, and would not have it held out, I cannot but wonder; this was not
the practice of Gods* Ministers in former Ages, when the holy Prophets came
either to quicken the people in the ways of God, or to reduce them from
idolatry* the first thing they did, was to hold forth unto them the Divine
Authority, with which they were strengthened to speak, therefore* usually they
begun, Thus says the Lord; and is not this the judg^ment of all Reformed
Churches, that in all matters of controversy, the Church has no determining
power either without, besides, or against the Scripture; whereby its apparent
they conceive as much must be held forth in all controversies Willet. 3.
controv. 4. quest.
in the Church, to be by Divine right established as may be.

Secondly, in this Rule you require, That the practice, but not the ground of
the practice, be held out: Why both these two should not be held out, when they
may clearly be gathered up, I see not: for, will not the knowledge of the
ground always make way for the right settling and ordering of the practice?
Some may look upon this position of yours, as upon a Proposition which comes
near to the verge of Popish Fide^ implicita; because it seems to drive at this,
that men should more depend upon the States or Churches authority then on Gods
word which ought to be the ground of that Authority* for in your sense, if they
have the practice imposed on them, they must rest therein, and never seek for
any warrantable ground of the same, which will yield but small comfort to any
in that practice.

Sir, you know that kind of Demonstration has ever been held in the Schools
to be most Scientificall, in which (...)
men proceed from the Causes to the Effects; and from the essence of the thing
to demonstrate the passions of the same: And why should not that rule hold
here? For when men see the ground upon which the practice is imposed, and from
which it does arise; then will they ever more willingly yield unto the
practice, and better be established in the same. So have the Church formerly
thought, and therefore were ever careful to hold forth to the world the ground
of their practice; when the Orthodox had to do with the Arians in Constantius
his time, and could come to no accord with them, they sent from the Council to
the Emperor twenty of their Opinion, to represent what they held unto him; but
withal, they charged them to confirm the Opinion of the Council by the light
of Soz. 4. 17. Conc. Arimin.
the Scripture. Here both the practice, and the grounds upon which they
proceeded, were held forth together: And why we should not do the like in this
Age, I know not.

The Reasons by which you seem to strengthen your self herein, are two: First,
because Knowledge of that practice alone will gather more: Nay, Secondly, Men
differently principled may meet in one practice: You know who said of old, if
men live exactly accordingly to the principles of their own Religion, though
they agree not in the same truth^, they might be saved. Me thinks in this
phrase of yours, you come near him: I would not have that Haereticall spirit,
long since laid in the dust, and exploded by the Church, raked up again by you.

Secondly, You say it may be, will be of larger extent then it must be: Suppose
that upon prudentiall considerations, the Rule is carried no higher then i^ may
be, yet why should not the ground of this it may be, be held out as well as the
practice? Can there be more Lordly and Domineering power exercised over the
Consciences of men, then to prescribe unto them in matters of the greatest
concernment, the practice of that of which there is no ground; o^ the ground
thereof is not fit to be held out unto the people. In your third Rule, you will
call that a Domineering Power, which has no boundary, do you not in this then
make way for such an Arbitrary power? A practice without a ground, has no
bounds but in the wills of men.

In the closure of this Rule, you lay forth the Reason which to you seemed to
be the cause that hindered Union in the Assembly: This shall be, God willing,
taken into consideration, (when I have viewed all your Rules) in the last place
distinctly by it self: And so I come to your second Rule;

In which you mention many things, which because they have no necessary
dependence one upon another, I Will take them up as they fell from your pen. In
general, I say of this Rule, that you do not hold out any thing distinct from
the former: I take it only for an Explanation of what you meant by jus
Divinum, viz. That which only is contained in express and clear Scriptures.
But more particularly to the Rule, in which the first thing you fall upon, is,
That Institutions should have clear Scriptures: Wherein you drive at this, that
no practice without an institution expressed in clear Scriptures, must be a
Rule to guide the Church by. How this Rule can be useful for Government in the
Church, I see not: But if it should be granted to be good Divinity, it would
not more strongly conclude against the Presbyteriall Government, then it does
for the Anti-Sabbatarians, Anabaptists, and other Sectaries, etc. who call for
institutions expressed in clear Scriptures for many things, which cannot be
brought forth: yet the practice of them is very lawful and agreeable to the
Word, and necessary in the Church. But Sir, Are there not many things of Divine
right, of whose formal institution we read not, where have you any formal
institution or precept expressed in clear Scriptures, for Women's receiving the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, of Administering the Sacrament of Baptism in
water: And yet if the institution of both these may be gathered out of practice
recorded in Scripture, why may it not be admitted? though we read not of the
institution totidem verbis: It Is true, we read of an injunction given by
Christ to his Church to Baptize, but whether in Water, or any other Liquor, it
is not particularly let down: yet because the Administration of all Baptismes
recorded in the Scriptures was by water, it is warrant enough for the Church
now to use water in the Administration of it, and who can justly except against
it? Where does the Scripture say expressly that there shall be particular
Congregations, to one of which every one that receives the Word should have
reference: yet the distinguishing of Congregations gathered from the practice
of the Church in the Apostles times, and appropriating officers to them cannot
be rejected as unwarrantable, but is held necessary by all. According to your
Divinity herein I desire to know of you, why the government of the Church
should belong to the civil Magistrate, (as you plead) seeing I find no where
any precept or institution laid forth in clear Scriptures for it. That which
is warranted in the Scripture, to have bin the common practice of the Church in
the Apostles times, no doubt came from the Apostles. The Apostles ordained
Deacons, Act. 6. so did they Elders in every Church, Act. 14. 23. in whose
ordinations they used imposition of hands; but where do we read of any
express precept in clear Scriptures comcommanding any of these? yet who shall
be so bold as to question the Apostles practice in all these, or the Churches
continuing of them at this day, by virtue of the Apostolical practice that
went before, and gave light unto the Church therein: Did not the Apostles in
all things deliver that to the Church, which they received from the Lord, 1
Cor. 11. 23. and did they not by Christ's command teach men to keep what Christ
commanded them, Mat. 28. 20. upon which ground Tertullian said well* The
Apostles did not choose of their own Apostoli nihil ex suo arbitrio elegcrunt,
quod ind^terent, sed acceptam a Christo disciplinam fidelite nationibus
assignaverunt. Tert. de praescr. adv. harcses.
free will what they should bring in, but they faithfully appointed to the
Nations the Discipline which they received of Christ. And I see no reason why
we should not believe that the holy Apostles were guided by the Divine instinct
of the Spirit, as well in the practice imposed by them on the Churches, as in
the delivering of the Gospel unto them; which gave occasion to the Apostle to
say, If any man think himself to be a Prophet, or spiritual, let him
acknowledge that the things that I write unto you are the Commandments of the
Lord, 1 Cor. 14. 37.

You add further that an occasional practice, or a phrase upon the by, or the
naming of a thing, are too weak grounds to uphold such a building; I say,
examples of the Church^ practice in the Apostles times, and hints from their
writing^ does sufficiently warrant us for the institution of such things for
the practice of the Apostolical Church sets out plainly before us, that there
was an institution of such things as are read in their practice, albeit in
terminis terminantibus we read not of it Ergo, We read of Elders at Jerusalem,
Act. 11. which argues that they were ordained, though we read not how and where
they were ordained: because the Apostles writing after they had called them,
speaks of them occasionally, they that stand precisely upon institutions must
confess what Socinus says, the Apostles practice is not our rule; such must
hold what they did was only for those times, and they grant what they did
then, is lawful now to be done, but not necessary; conclusions of this nature
must necessarily follow upon your premises, and what will follow upon them, I
wis^ you would in time consider.

Then you tell us, that you could never see two coordinate governments exempt
from Superiority and Inferiority; this you look upon as a Monster which cannot
be in one State, neither is it as you think exemplified in Scripture. Sir, for
ought I know here you fight against your own shadow, who says that two
governments which are exempt from superiority and inferiority are in one State:
Indeed two governments are asserted, one for the Commonwealth, the other for
Church affairs, the Ecclesiastical governors have ever judged themselves
inferior to the civil Magistra^^, (to whom they have yielded all due
subjection and obedience, in things proper to his authority to command) nay to
contradict the civil Magistrates commands, they have Atha^as. Ep. ad Imp.
Constantium.
judged it madness, yet in the sphere of their own government they moved
acoording to the pattern they received from the Lord, the civil Magistrate
did not break in op^n them, nor did they ambi^iously seek to exceed the
bounds appointed to them by the Lord.

Again, you say, that in Scripture you find no such thing, I beseech you what
were the governments appointed in Israel, whereof some were appointed for
ordering the King^ affairs, or the chief affairs of the Common wealth, the
other were appointed for matters of the Lord, were not there two distinct
governments, each of them handling what was proper to them; and whether there
were two distinct Courts of judicature, in which each of them took cognizance
of the matters proper to them, but one, (as without any ground from that Text
some conceive?) ye^ sure it is, here were two several officers delegated to
take notice of the several questions that should come before them: so they
were distinct governments, whilst each of them judged or handled what was
proper to his place, and might you not observe so much, and is it not to be
found in that instance recorded, 2 Chronicles. 19. I say no more to you herein,
only I desire you you may remember what was the vote of the Assembly in this
point; Was it not, That Jesus Christ has instituted a government and governors
Ecclesiastical in the Church; This Vote past in the Assembly, Nemine
contradicente, it seems then Mr. Coleman had not a tongue to speak against it.

You go on, and fall upon two places on which Censures of the Church ever has
been grounded; as for one of them, it takes no hold on your conscience, and you
wonder that the other should of any; I have heard (but how true I know not)
that some Soldiers have their bodies shot-free, but that any should have his
Conscience Scripture proof, to me it seems very strange, especially knowing
what is said, Heb. 4. 12. Why may it not then be mighty in operation to you as
well as unto another? But Sir, though you c^st off both these places as not
countenancing Excommunication in the least, yet you cannot be ignorant that the
Assembly has resolved Excommunication, and upon a full debate from Mat. 11.
they have proved it; as for the other place, they did take that for granted,
that it mentioned Excommunication, some debate there was from that place how
far the peoples presence was required in the execution of it; if you assented
not to that debate, why did you not according to the Ordinance by which you sit
in the Assembly, enter your dissent.

As for the places themselves (which you say take no hold of your conscience) I
am sure that which you say against the common received construction of them,
must take less hold on the conscience of the reader: for whatsoever you say
against the received opinion (which is just nothing) eadem facilitate
refellitur, qua asseritur: when you lay down the judgment backed with some
reasons (for I know no man that is bound to submit to your naked affirmation,
unless it were clothed with more truth) it will be time enough to answer them,
hitherto you have added none: only your margent in that place sends us to all
books on this subject written heretofore, or lately; in obedience to your
command I have perused some, and I Will tell you what they say.

The ancients tell us in their books of no suspected credit, 1. That
Excommunication was in use in their time, Tertull. See Cyp. ep. 40. et 39. et
41. et 62, etc. Quod saepe in ecclesiis videmus, peccaverit quodlibet quispiam,
qui praesidet populo et regit ecclesiasti^am disciplinam ejicit eum de
congregatione s^nctoram. Orig. Hom. 11. in Ier.
Ep. ca. 39. the place is clear and evident, setting down how far it extended,
by whom it was exercised, it was an act of judicature which past on such
Members of the Church, ^^ walked not according to the Rule of the Gospel, by
the Presbyters: which was so formidable, that it was accounted pr^ludium futuri
judicij, a giving notice before hand of the last judgment. In Cyprian there
are many places in which he makes mention of this censure: Origin likewise
mentions it in several places, as Hom. 11. in Jere. he says, Which we see
often to fall out in the Churches: if any man offend in any thing, he that
Rules the people and governs Ecclesiastical discipline, casts him out from the
Congregation of the Saints.

Again he shows the use of it, Hom. 10. in Ezekiel. So Hom. 7. in Iesaiam. et
Trat. 6. in Math.

Secondly, as these assert the use of it, so do they also ground that
Ecclesiastical censure upon that place which you admire should take hold of
any man's conscience, Mat. 18. Cyprian forbids communion with heretics either
at talk or conference, and why? sunt illi de ecclesia profugi, quia scriptum
est, si autem et ecclesiam contempserit, sit tibi tanquam Ethnicus et
publicanus: That place tells us that he would have a separation from heretics
who forsake the Church, and this he proves by Mat. 18. whereby it appears he
grounded it on the Text. Ep. 55. and Ep. 76. speaking of the same subject, he
brings forth the same testimony: Origin enquiring after the meaning of the Text
now before us: sit tibi tanquam ethnicus, etc. acknowledges it is a casting out
of the Church. Tract. 6. in Math. and Hom. 7. in Iesaiam, tertio admonitum
jubet ab ecclesiae corpore resecari per ecclesiae praesides: Where he speaks of
a threefold admonition (before the party be cast off) so does that Text, then
he tells us what followed on it: viz. casting out of the Church; lastly he adds
by whom it was done, the Governors of the Church were the men by whom it was
exercised. For latter Divines, I appeal to any that has perused them, whether
may not he that shall see their constant expression of both these Texts, rather
wonder at the singularity of your opinion in striving against the general
stream of all Orthodox interpreters of these places, then you should wonder at
any so expounding them, the books which I have seen gives me warrant to say so
much: All which are so numerous and full for us, that it would require a volume
to recite them all, therefore I pass them over, knowing you cannot deny the
truth of this my objection.

Having pleaded against institutions, you add you see not any one act of
Government in the whole Bible performed: I beseech you what is the meaning of
that place, Tit. 1. 5. I have ever understood ordination of Ministers as a main
act of Government, this was delegated by the Apostle to the Evangelist Titus,
which he faithfully performed, and was not that act of Government performed in
every Church, Act. 14. 23.

Again you ask, how can it be evinced that a ruling Elder is an instituted
officer? a man would have thought that you who plead that the whole work of
Government of the Church, is cast upon the Civil Magistrate, should not have
been so hard hearted toward ruling Officers, as to give them no place in
Church Government: Remember you not what the Vote of the Assembly was in this,
that It is agreeable to, and warranted by the word of God, that some others
beside the Ministers of the word be Church Governors to join with the
Minister in the Government of the Church, which Officers reformed Churches
commonly call Elders: To this Vote you have entered no descent, and yet can at
your pleasure speak against it. I pray you again consider how fairly herein
you deal with the Assembly, in which the several places of Paul were
understood and construed upon long debate for the same Officers, 1 Timothy 5. 17.
(...), Romans 12. (...), 1 Cor. 12. (...): All these were cleare^ up in the
Assembly, to be amongst those, (...) why may not that Text be translated, whom
he has instituted in the Church? 1 Cor. 12. 28. one of these places Romans 12.
tells us of a Ruler distinct from a teacher, that of 1 Cor. 12. speaks of
Governors in the Church, distinct also from other Officers there mentioned by
him, and this was then, when no Civil Magistrate was Christian; the third 1.
Tim. 5. 17. is a mandatory place, commanding the Church how to use them, and
what to do to them; even to give the^ double honor: is not this enough, that
the Scriptures mentions their Office in the phrases and titles, wherein they
speak of them, and then tell us in what account they are to be had. When God
has by his Apostle said, that thus and thus they shall be honored, who shall
question whether God would have such Officers in the Church, or no? and for
mine own part, that of 1 Cor. 12. (...), is to me warrant enough for
institution.

These were Officers called to assist the Minister, in watching over the lives
of the Members of their several flocks; for is it not as needful, that there
should be some whose charge is to see that men live according to the Rule, as
th^^ there should be others to teach the Rule, and others to see that the
necessities of such as were in want, should be supplied* Therefore Christ has
appointed the Pastor to teach, Elde^ to assist in Government, and the Deacon to
sce to the poor.

You quarrel the institution of this Officer; somewhat has been already
spoken of institutions, to which the Reader is to be referred: I only here add
this; We read of many particular Officers of the Church, recorded in the
Scriptures, as Romans 12. 1 Corin. 12. Ephesi. 4. but their institution is not
formally mentioned in them, yet we question not the Officers. Where do we read
of a formal institution of an Evangelist, or a Prophet, of a Pastor or
Teacher? We read of all these among the gifts and administrations given by
Jesus Christ for his Church; why should any startle at a ruling Elder, more
then at these, or call for their institution, more then for the institution of
the other? The Apostle tells us that Christ has appointed Pastors and Teachers,
who can bring forth their institution; why should we seek for the institution
of Elders more then of other Officers, especially when the Apostle speaks of
the respect due unto them, but intends not to speak directly of the Officers
themselves in that place 1 Timothy 5. 17. and elsewhere reckoning up the Officers
of the Church, he names them; is not that sufficient to us?

Sir, were there no other argument to plead for these ruling Officers in the
Church; yet this is of some weight with me, that as I find they are mentioned,
to have been in the Apostolical Church: so have they continued when in
succeeding ages the Church was in puri^ie: here could I bring forth unto you
variety of testimonies; by which it may appear,

1. That in the ancient Church there were such Officers.

2. That they were distinguished from them that taught in the Church.

3. That they were distinguished also from other of the people.

4. That they had a hand in that Government of the Church, all which reverend
Antiquity makes good, but I forbear to weary you with instances; these things
being abundantly of late cleared up in opposition to the Prelates, who
engrossed all Government into their own hands, to which Treatises I refer
the Reader: Only before I pass from hence, I desire it may be taken into
consideration, if we cast out this Officer from the Church, how we shall divide
our selves from other well reformed Churches, to whom we have solemnly vowed to
God to come as near as we can. Now what Church is there among them, that holds
not out these Officers as established by divine authority? If learned Calvin,
acute Beza, solid Za^chi^, famous Junius, etc. were all these or any of them to
read your Sermon; would they not wonder at your judgment, and plead against
you for these Church Officers* I say nothing of the advantage that you give to
Papists on the one side, to the Prelaticall party on the other, all which will
not a little triumph in that singularity of your fancy in this.

And lastly let me (besides all the light both of the ancient and present
Church, given to these Officers) put you in mind what past by the 32. learned
men appointed first by Henry 8. and afterward by that pious Prince Edward 6.
When they drew up a draught of the reformation of Ecclesiastica^^ laws, they
denied not these Officers a place in the Gove^^ment of the Church; but tell us,
when the Sermon and evening De divinis officiis ca. 10.
prayer is ended on the Lord's Day, the Minister shall ^^sult cum senioribus,
with his Elders about such, whos^ m^^ners are reported to be evil, and their
life's found flagitious: First, in a brotherly way of charity according to
Christ's c^^mand in the Gospel they should deal with them, if they herkened to
their admonition, then thanks are to be given to God; if they persisted in
their sin, they were as the Gospel prescribes, to be punished: Here are they
named by their names seniores, (who are distinguished by them from Ecclesiarum
gardiani, or Churchwardens of whom they speak distinctly afterward,)
Secondly, they make mention of their office, which is to assis^ the Minister in
watching over the lives of the flock, and taking order with such as walk
unruly, or not answerable to the Gospel: And what said the Assembly more of
these Officers (against whom you plead) then has been held forth both by the
Holy Scriptures, and Church of God in several ages, all which are slighted by
you; but whether it will be more safe to adhere to Gospel Light, when we are
compassed with such a cloud of witnesses, or to go alone with you, let all the
Church judge: To me it is enough, that the Scriptures mentions these Officers,
the ancient Church acknowledged and received them, and the present best
reformed Churches own them, and may not all this evince to any of a moderate
disposition, that an Elder is an Officer in Christ's Church? In your third Rule,
you desire no more burden of* Government, be laid upon the shoulders of
Ministers, then Christ has laid upon them, and the Holy Ghost has clearly
given them: In the first place I take notice here, that you moderate what you
said in the closure of your former Rule: Where you affirmed, that you see not
any one Act of Government in the whole Bible performed; Here your marginall
note would incuse that, wherein you tell us, you take Government for the
correcting part; but let us try, whether even that part has not lien upon such
as preached the word: Did not the Apostle deli^er up to Satan, Hymeneus, and
Alexander, 1 Timothy 1. 20* (...) which phrase Excommunication i^ constantly
understood; it is true, Tradere Satanae aliquem est illum ex ^cclesia ejicere.
Tert. de pudicitia^ qui ab Ecclesia re^puuntur, qua Christi est corpus, tanquam
peregrini and alieni a Dei corpore dominatui Diaboli traduntur. Hilar. in Psalm.
118.
some (especially of the Greek Fathers) add, that when any were given up to
Satan then some extraordinary judgment followed upon the parties so delivered
up; yet all agree in this, that none but Excommunicated persons were delivered
up to Satan: here then was an act of Government performed by Paul; and who
would not think that Paul was a Minister of the Gospel, yet exercised a
corrective part of Government, and who dare say, that Jesus Christ endued him
not with power to enable him thereunto. Nay, not only did he exercise that
corrective part of Government himself, but he requires the Corinthians to do
the like to the incestuous person, 1 Cor. 5. 5.

But to the words of your Rule; you advise to lay no more burden of Government
upon the shoulders of Ministers, then Christ has laid upon them, and to let
them have no more hand therein, then the holy Ghost clearly gives them; albeit,
you would be thought to express your self warily in this advice, yet I guess
at your meaning by that which follows; you should have spoken out plainly thus,
Let the Ministers have no hand at all in the burden of the Government, for so
you express your self afterward, give us Doctrine, and take you government:
Its true, Ministers have other work enough, this is not denied; and therefore
Christ has added others to them in the work of Government, by whose advice and
furtherance they should be aided therein; shall I once more remember you that
the Assembly Voted, That the Pastor as a Pastor has a ruling power over the
flock: What? have you resolved to be Anti-Synodicall in all your Rules, and yet
sit whilst these Votes pass, and not appear against them in entering your
dissent, and now be^ch out what you please against these Votes? none of which
past without long debates and serious consideration of the question in hand;
assuredly a more favorable construction of the Assembly proceedings would
better have become a Member of the Assembly.

To your Assertion; how plainly and clearly the burden of Government is laid
upon the Ministers, has been before showed to you: I shall only add, that he
that does deny the ruling power of a Minister in his charge (so clearly held
out in Scriptures) had need to bring more convincing grounds, then these
fetched either from his own unfitness for the work, or other men's abuse of
their power by engrossing too much, when ever they had a hand in any, which yet
are the only grounds you* insist upon.

For the former; whilst you plead your own unfitness for the work, me thinks
you express a great deal of pride, when yo^ would make a show of humility:
consider your words again* Might I measure others by my self, and I know not
why I may not; Is not this your meaning? you have reason to think as meanly of
others, as you do of your self; but the Apostle, Phil. 2. 2, 3. exhorting to
Unity, to be of one accord, and one judgment, gives this rule; in lowliness
of mind let each esteem others better then himself: in your Epistle you are
more ingenious, there you speak confidently of some Reverend men who distaste
these passages in your Sermon, that their wisdom and humility may be trusted
with as large a share of Government as themselves desire.

I grant that the work is great, and the burden heavy, and do (...), 2 Cor. 2.
16.
not you call to mind who said it, Who is sufficient for these things? But I
hope you will not thence infer, Therefore let no man meddle with them.

For the latter, viz. the abuse of that power* That power which you cannot
weaken by strength of Argument, your endeavor to disparage, by odious
comparisons of it with Prelacy and Papacy, as being that which plunged the
Christian world into confusion and blood for many hundred years past; all this
you seem to impute rather to the nature of the power, then to the abuse of the
same. You call it a domineering power, a Prelaticall honor, therefore you
would have it bounded, that it might be said, Hitherto shall you come, and here
shall thou stay thy proud ways.

Sir, these Rhetorical flowers (such as they are) might have passed with some
for an ornament to Martine his late Echo; but how harshly they sound in a
Sermon to the Honorable House of Commons at a Monthly Fast by Mr. Coleman, an
applauded Preaches of the Gospel, let the Reader judge; how deeply all this
reflects upon the Government held in all the Reformed Churches, I forbear to
mention. Your Argument is good against the Popes and Prelates sole power in
jurisdiction, which they engrossed to themselves, Lording it not only over the
people, but over their fellowbrethren, divesting them of that right and power
committed equally to all Ministers: this we complain of as much as your self:
but whilst you would make an Argument of this, your inference is as weak, as
your comparison is odious. It is as if you should say, because Diotrephes loved
the pre-eminence among his fellow laborers, abusing the power betrusted to
him, by engrossing it to himself, therefore let not Ministers have a hand in
ruling any more, least they die as Diotrephes did. The Apostle prescribes no
such way of cure, all that he infers upon it, is only this, 3 Ioh. 11. Brethren
follow not that which is evil, but that which is good.

But Sir, I desire in earnest to know of you: Whether it was Church Government,
that brought forth those hideous inconveniences (you have mentioned) or was it
the usurping power of Prelates and Popes sheltered under the name or vizard of
Church Government, that thus imbrued the world in that blood, and raised those
combustions? Had you followed in this question that grave Counsel, given of
old by Irenaeus, you might have learned better; In aliqua questione
disceptaetione suscepta^, in antiquissimas Ecclesias recurrendum; a quibu^ quid
de praesenti questionc judicandum sit, certum and reliquidum esset. Iren. adu.
haer. lib. 3. 4.
His Counsel was, When any disputation about any question did arise, that men
should have recourse to ancient Churches, by whose practice they might be
informed, what to think of the present question: Had you consulted with the
best and purest Churches of old, you might easily have seen your error, in not
distinguishing the power granted by Christ unto the Church, and exercised by
them in the purest times, from that boundless (the true Seminary of all the
troubles mentioned by you) power usurped by Prelates and Popes afterward: the
not observing hereof led you into that error, which now you vent: their
Government was a plant in the Church, which Jesus Christ will never acknowledge
to be planted by his Heavenly Father. Had you consulted with Master Tho:
Coleman on the Covenant, he would have told you, that the Prelaticall
Government was most wicked and Antichristian, that it is not possible it
should be convenient for a State or Kingdom; therefore it is no marvel if it
caused stirs in the world: if you believe the exercise of Ecclesiastical
Censures in the Church to be such^, speak it out plainly, and prove it if you
be able. All the while the Church exercised no other power then what Christ
granted, then was the Church free from the Domineering power you speak of: for
when any question did arise fit to be judged or considered of, it was heard
and debated (...) in the Presbytery; for Omni actu ad me perlato placuit
contrahi presbyterium, etc. Cypr. Ep. 46.
then they thought with Cyprian, that Singulis pastoribus portio gregis est
adscripta, quam unusquisque regat and gubernet, ratio nem sui actus Domino
redditurus; Epist. 55. So went they on, each taking care of their own flock: If
any question did arise which was too hard for them to determine; then they
called in the help of their Sister Churches: The same Author gives the reason
of it.

Therefore are there many Priests cemented with mutual agreement Idcirco
copiosum cst corpus Sacerdotum concordiae mutuae glutino, atque unitatis
vinculo copulaetum, ut se quisquis ex Collegio nostro haeres in facerc, and
gregem Christi sucerare tentaverit, subveniant taeteri, et quasi Pastores
utiler and misericordes, oves Dominicas in gregem colligent. Cypt. Ep. 67.
and the bond of unity, that if any of our College should strive to raise up
an Heresy, or to rend the flock of Christ, the rest should help, and as
profitable and merciful Shepherds, should gather in the Lords sheep into his
flock. The Church then went on in a friendly agreement and sweet amity, no wise
ensnared with ambition, or seeking to domineer one over another; for though the
Churches (as Basil speaks of them that went before him) Were many, yet were
they all guided by one Rule, then were the people united together, and their
Pastors were endued with that mutual love one toward another, that one did use
another as a Master or a guide. All this while their faithful adhering to the
exercise of the power granted to them by Christ, gave them no occasion of
raising tumults, of plunging the Christian world in confusion and blood. But
afterward when by the bounty and liberality of Christian Princes and others,
Churchmen grew great in the world, laying aside their main work (the Preaching
of the Gospel) to which they were called, and gave themselves to affect worldly
greatness, and to wait upon secular affairs; this gave them occasion to strive
to exalt themselves one above another: Thereupon followed divisiors Ep. ad.
Nacocaesar.
in the Church, and all the stirs that troubled the world afterward. Then
came Prelates and Popes to act their part, each of them striving to ingrosse all
power in his own hands; then did they strive to exalt their own Jurisdiction,
deserting the Government established in the Church. These things cannot be
unknown to a man of your parts, which makes me to wonder that you should fasten
these foul consequences upon the true Government of the Church, by which they
never were produced: any Sophister can tell you your fallacy herein, that you
reason a Non causa pro causa, and therefore I cannot excuse you for your injust
insinuations, whereby you seek to fasten no small hatred upon
Church Government, which, with your favor; is your gross mistaking of the
thing in question.

Then you add all that you have said of this exorbitant power of Prelates and
Popes, was authority abused. No Sir, the question now, is not whether they
abused their Authority or not? for no man doubts thereof, but the present
question is, whether that Authority, which they pretended, was that Church
Government we now speak of, and which you oppose? This I deny, and leave it to
you to prove who has mentioned it: Their Authority was usurped, and
inconsistent with that which by Gospel Charter was granted to the Church, as
before has been explained. Again, all the abuse of their Authority, you fancy
to have been in the transcendent greatness, or unsufferable height of it; and
therefore you put this Question, Who shall set bounds to it to prevent the
like? I Answer, Authority devised by man, can hardly be stinted by man, so
ambitious is man in the pursuit thereof: It is said of Romulus, that he would
appoint no bounds to the Fields of the People, that so they might go as far as
ever they could, taking from others and adding to their own, that by this means
they might believe, that whatsoever they could possess themselves of by their
arms, it was their own: Thus men set no bounds to their ambitions designs, but
close with all occasions that may enlarge their own ^urisdiction.

You ask, Who shall bound this Authority to prevent the like? Who shall bound
it, but he who is the Author of it? Was there ever any Court of Judicature
appointed by men, which was not bounded by such as did authorize it at the
first? And can we think that Jesus Christ, the wisdom of his Father, shall
appoint a Government for his house, and not prescribe limits to it beyond which
the Governors of it must not go?

Let me follow you, and add further, it was not Government that bred Enmity
between the Clergy and Laity, (as you suppose) as appears by the Amity and
Concord in the Church amongst all her Members, whilst the right Government
took place: But when they left that, and followed their own devices, usurping
power to themselves, which Christ never granted to them, then came they to be
^^bittered one against another.

Lastly, you come to crave of the Honorable House of Parliament, two things: 1.
That you may have Learning. 2. Competency; and Government you leave to them.
For advancing of Learning, you desire, That Schools of Divinity may be set up,
etc. Is not right Government a means of furthering Learning? When Julian would
have suppressed, not only Church Government, but the Church it Soz. 5. 17.
self; he indeed denied Christians means of Learning for their Children: But
Church Government did never abridge them thereof, but rather sought to
establish it, and encourage them therein: A^ Paul did exhort Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.
13.

As for that you require that we may have in our Classical meetings: Had you
taken notice what is done in these meetings in in other Churches, (where they
are through Gods blessing well settled) then you might have seen all you
mention, there more fully act^^ then here you relate them, and so you might
have forborne what here you seem to desire in this.

I say nothing to the competency which you crave for a comfortable subsistence:
Church Government will be no enemy to that, knowing that such as Preach the
Gospel should live thereon: For who goes a warfare at any time at his own
cost, 1 Cor. 9. 7.

In your fourth Rule you tell us, A Christian Magistrate is a Governor in the
Church; And why, Christ, you say, has placed Governments in the Church, 1 Cor.
12. 28. Nay, You finds no institution of other Governments besides Magistrates.

Concerning the Civil Magistrates power mentioned by you*

First, your expression is ambiguous, when you say, The Christian Magistrate is
a Governor in the Church: if you mean he has a stroke in the Government of
the Church* Its granted, because, as Godwilling, we shall hear by and by, God
has raised up Christian Magistrates to be Nursing Fathers to his Church, which
Isa. 49. 23.
they do when they see that Government exercised, which he has appointed for
the well ordering of his Church, though it be not managed by the Magistrates
immediate hand; and in this respect they ought to manage their office under and
for Christ, as you say* But if you mean that there are none, by whom the
Discipline of the Church is to be exercised, but by the Magistrate, that (as I
conceive) is your mistake. Truly, here I cannot but wonder that you (who stand
to have the Scriptures speak expressly, and to have institutions appear
institutions, that all may bow,) should herein aver what you say, and yet bring
forth no express testimony of Scripture to confirm your judgment: Nor yet
mention any express institution to make good your opinion: The place which you
have wrested to ground it on, shall afterward be tried.

Secondly, You say, A Christian Magistrate is a Governor in the Church: Yet
you are not ignorant how many ages past, before the Church had any Christian
Magistrates members of it; and can it be thought, that God would have his
Church all that while without a Governor, because there was not a Christian
Magistrate to supply that place?

Thirdly, in as much as the Apostle would not have the Church to bring
Questions about their (...) before Heathen Judges; I wonder why any should
think them only fit to Judge and determine 1 Cor. 6.
(...)

But to come nearer to the Question in hand: For the clearing of the Truth
therein, I desire you to consider:

1. What God has expressed in Scripture, to be due to the calling of the
Civil Magistrate.

2. What the Church has ever willingly afforded thereunto.

3. What the Christian Magistrates have done, in and about the Government of
the Church?

The opening of truth in these several branches, will make clear the Question
in hand, that all may see, whether the Magistrate be the sole Governor in the
Church?

For the first, God has taught his Church, that all respect and obedience
(which is consistent with obedience due to himself) is due to the Honorable
calling of the Magistrate: Yea, so exact is the Lord herein, that he will have
no soul ( i. e. no person) exempted from the same: Where Chrysostom says, That
neither Prophet Romans 13. 1, ^.
nor Evangelist is free from that subjection, neither is Religion prejudiced
thereby. 2. The Lord Commands, That Prayers and Supplications 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.
Romans 13. 7.
be offered up for Magistrates. 3. That Tribute, Custom, Honor and Fear be
given to them: There was Bread: that is, maintenance given to the Rulers,
Nehem. 5. 18. 4. As their honor was to be upheld, so their persons and lives
to be secured and defended, 2 Samuel 18. 3. etc. All these things and more, are
by Divine Authority to be given to that Honorable calling of the Magistrate.

Secondly, In the performance hereof, Gods Church, neither Ancient nor Modern,
has ever been wanting. As for the Apostolical Church, what they were to
perform toward the Magistrate may be read in the several instances pressed
upon them by the Apostles, Colimue imperatorem sie, quoniodo and nobis licet,
and expedit, ut hominem a Deo secundum, and quicquid est a Deo consecutum, solo
Deo minorum. Tert. lib. ad scapulam.
already quoted in the former branch: For the succeeding Churches, (before that
hideous Monster of Popish Supremacy started up) let Tertullian speak for all:
Did not the Church in his days freely testify their opinion of that calling,
though then executed by Heathens: Yet did they honor the Emperor so far as
was lawful for them, they acknowledged him, as being next under God the
Supreme Power on Earth.

Amongst Modern Divines, there is a full harmony in their opinion herein with
the Ancient Church; witness their several confessions, in which they mention
the Magistrates office, they confess Religionis curam in^primis pertiner^ ad
Magistratum sa^^^^: They conceive the care of Religion in the first place
belong^ to (...). Withal, they add, how he may discharge that duty; when in
the i Serviunt Reges ^errae Christo eges ferendo pro Christo. August. ep. 48.
fear of God he maintains the public Peace, furthers the publishing of the
Truth, prevents by his Authority the spreading of Error etc. They further tell
us, That Magistrates ought to ^ule their Subjects, that their Commonwealths
may be as Sanctuaries, or safe harbors for the Church.

They have gone farther, (as may be seen in the former Confessions) and set
forth the difference between the Civil and Ecclesiastical Government, wherein
they have adhered to the holy Scriptures. The Magistrate his power is over the
outward man, to keep that within due obedience; to this end, that all may live
peaceably and quietly one with another: But the Church of God is 1 Timothy 2. 1. 2.
all her Government, seeks to maintain a communion amongst her members, in
holiness, that the Doctrine of our Savior may be adorned, and they mutually
build up themselves in their holy Faith.

Secondly, The Civil Government has a principal respect to the outward
estates of men; but the Government of the Church does principally aim at the
right ordering of the inward man, t^ bring that to due obedience unto God.
Whilst Tertullian ^pounds that place, Give. unto Caesar, the things which are
Casari^ Matthew. 22. 21. Ex ea part quae ad hanc vitam pertinet, opertet not
esse subditos potestatibus i. e. hominibus res human as cum aliquo honor
administrantibus: Ex illa vero part, qua credimu^ Deo es in regnum ejus
vocamur, non nor oporiet esse subdit^t cuiquam hominum. August. Prop. 72. in
Romans Heb. 13. 17.
He says, Caesari quidem pecuniam tuam reddas* Deo tem^t ips^^^ alioquin quid
erit Dei, si omnia Caesaris? He would have M^ give their money to Caesar, and
themselves to unto God; otherwise what shall the Lord have, if Caesar have all?
Ecclesiastical Government, does especially respect the right ordering of the
heart, that it may give that obedience unto God, which is due unto him. To this
purpose speaks Augustine: In the things which appertain to this life we must
be subject to powers, that is, to men Honorably admi^^string humane affairs:
But in the things whereby we are taught to believe in God, and whereby we are
called to his Kingdom, we must be in subjection to no man: Thus these holy men
teach us, that the one Government watches over the body, and the bodily
estate; but the other over the soul: And they that manage this Government, must
(according to the Scriptures) so watch, as they that must give account thereof
to God.

Thirdly, They tell us the Magistrate is ber^usted with the Temporal Sword, in
this life to honor and reward such as do well: or to terrify and punish such
as do amiss, either against the first or second Table; but the Sword of Church
Government is Spiritual, Ephesians. 6. 17. which she uses both in the defense of
her Children, and just offense of her Enemies.

Lastly, They tell us, it is not the Civil Magistrates part to exercise the
Government of the Church, but to see that it be fulfilled and exercised aright
by those upon whom God has laid it, as Constantino, Theodosius, Arcadius,
Marcianus, etc. have done.

These Pious Emperors did not with Vzziah adventure upon that to which they
were not called, 2 Chronicles. 26. 16. But they followed the practice of worthy
Ezechiah, who first commanded the Levites and Priests to fulfill the duties of
their places, 2 Chronicles. 29. 5. 27. Then he commanded the People to fulfill what
God required of them, 2 Chronicles. 30. 1. And in so doing, he is said to cleave to
the Lord, and keep his Commandments, 2 King. 18. 6.

Sir, you see what Gods Church in all ages according to the Scriptures, has
held concerning the Civil Magistrate; yet none of them tell us what you hold
out, that the Government of the Church is by God divelved on the Magistrate. If
you can find that either in the Scriptures* or warrantable records of the
Church, I beseech you bring it forth, and let the world see you are not alone
in venting of this new Divinity, to which the Christian world has been a
stranger for so many hundred years.

Lastly, for the full clearing of this truth, to all who are willing to receive
the truth: I desire it may be taken notice of, whether the Christian
Magistrate^ have challenged Church Government, as a work proper unto their
place? If Jesus Christ have divolved it upon that calling, why then should not
Christian Magistrates have owned so much, and challenged their right therein?
which we read not that they did: We read indeed of many pious Emperors, to
whom the welfare of the Church was dear, and whose care of the Government of
the Church appeared many ways; They (...) Eus^b dovit. Constant. 424.
saw that the officers instituted by Christ in the Church, should attend their
places in Governing of the same, yet they never took upon them the work of
Government it self; that famous speech which fell from Constantine the Great,
in the presence of diverse Bishops is well known, v^t quidem intra templum, ego
autem extra templum a Die ^onstitutu^ sum Episcopus^ His meaning was, that God
had appointed him to see them fulfill the work to which God had called them
unto in his Church, his Imperial place bound him to see that done by them; but
not to fulfill it himself* For he clearly distinguishes between the
administration of the affairs ((...)) within and without the Church. (...) was
far from him: He kept himself where he was, (...), where God had set him.

Secondly, we read that when the Church was troubled with Imperatorum manu, ^^
episcoporum confilio beretici reprimebantur. Gr. Naz.
any unruly Member, that would not submit himself to Her Government; such by
the power and authority of the Magistrate were reduced to order: For by the
Imperial power, and Counsels of Bishops, heretick^s have been suppressed: As
Arius was banished by Constant. M.

Thirdly, we find further that when a question has had much debate in the
Church, and yet was brought to no final conclusion, the Emperor heard the
cause debated, and so put an end unto the same, as appears in the case of
Caecilian and his adversaries; which being twice heard in Episcopal Synods
(the paries not resting in their resolutions) at length it was heard and
determined before the Emperor; but what did he therein? only hearing the
cause fully discussed, he made such as were refractory, give way unto the
truth, but he did not determine it himself.

Fourthly, Emperors were so far from challenging any Power in Ecclesiastical
Government, as proper to their places, that when it was exercised upon
themselves by Church Officers, they willingly submitted to it: Let that
memorable instance of Theodosius witness it. It is storied of him, that having
caused in his fury 7000. Thessalonians to be slaughtered, afterward coming to
the Church of Millain^, Ambrose goes forth to meet him, and after T^eod, 5. 17.
a long speech denies to admit him; yea bound him with that heavy sentence of
Excommunication, with which he stood bound for eight months. This godly
Emperor: did not tell Ambrose he had no power to do it, He pleaded not that it
did belong to his Imperial Crown, to determine who should be shut out, or
admitted into the Church nay rather, he acknowledged to R^ssinus (a principal
Officer of his Court) the equity of the sentence, he could tell (...)
him: He kn^w well (that is, Ambrose of whom he is speaking) what was the
Office of Priests, and what was proper unto Kings.

Does it not appear by that memorable passage, that that Christian Emperor was
not of your mind, to think the Government of the Church was his let, as you
suppose? No, he durst not assume that to himself, which you affectionately
strive to lodge in them, who never sought it, but your bolt is soon shot; and
forward you are to grant that to the Magistrate, which Christian Magistrates
never owned, nor challenged as their due: I beseech you if they had a Divine
right unto it, why did they not exercise it? We have heard that what they did
(as the Religious Kings of old, David, J^hosaphat, Ez^kiah, etc.) they were
careful to see Church Government exercised by such as were appointed thereunto
by the Lord; If any were disobedient, they drew forth their authority against
them, to make them stoop unto it, which gave occasion to the Bishops (when
they humbly sued to Arcadius to have John banished) to say, Ecclesiastical and
Civil affairs, or duties, differ. Niceph. 13. 20.
The care of the one, they say, is commended to the Emperor, the administration
of the other to Church Officers.

May not all this now observed from the Scripture, and read in the constant
practice of Christian Magistrates, let you see, that Gods Church has ever
given the Magistrate that wherewith God has honored his place, which was his
due; and that the Magistrate ceast to require more. Their care was to move in
the sphere wherein God had placed them, neither would they go beyond it, in
stretching their authority to do that, whereunto they were not called of the
Lord.

Now to your construction of Governments mentioned, 1 Cor. 12. 28. we will
briefly examine what you say herein, and that is only this, Christ has placed
Governments in his Church, and you find^ no institution of other Governments
besides Magistrates; of Magistrates you do, Romans 13. 1. 2.

Sir, that Christ has placed Governments in his Church, with the Scriptures
affirming it, I fully agree: As also, that there are Civil Magistrates, to
whom obedience is to be yielded by all, I likewise do agree; but that there are
no other Governments in the Church, but the Civil Magistrate, I cannot assent
to that assertion; Nay, I conceive your inference from that Text, 1 Cor. 12.
28. (which Magisterially you lay down, without the least show of proose) where
Governments are mentioned, therefore the Civil Magistrate must be understood;
it is an inconsequence, and to me of no more validity then his was, who said,
that Tenterton steeple was the cause of Goodwin Sands; because these Sands were
first discovered, when the structure of the steeple was first begun.

Its very probable to me, that you do expound this Scripture, just as a Divine
(well known to you) once preaching at the taking of the Covenant, did expound
Cant. 6. 4. where he brings from a Rabbi, a rotten exposition: Which was so
improbable, th^^ himself says of it, he does not deliver it as the true sense
of the place; yet it did not dislike him, because it seemed pretty: Or you do
herein as he did, who when he preached, that Hezechiah was the first man that
ever was sick in the world; and did recover; being asked if he believed that
Jewish tradition, answered, he neither believed, nor questioned it. I believe
that you in your exposition of this Scripture do the like, you do no^ deliver
that which you think is the true sense of the place, only it pleased you, and
you inconsiderately vented it. For who sees not that it is an inconsequence^
Christ has appointed Governments, therefore these Governments must be
understood of the Civil Magistrate, that consequence cannot be inferred on
these premises, the Text duly considered will free it self of that
construction of Governments, which you bring.

That we may clearly see it, set us consider the scope of the p^^ce, 1^ Cor.
12. 28. amongst other disorders which had crept (...) the Church of Corinth,
(all which the Apostle labors to reform) this was one in their public
meetings, the abuse of their gifts, (with which the Church did much abound, 1
Cor. 1. 5.) this ^e labors to remove, by setting before them the author of
these gifts, even the holy Spirit of God, by whom they were disposed to the
several Members of the Church, to edify the Church withal And lastly, he
sets forth of all these gifts which is the most excellent and useful to the
Church; all this he l does, because as some excelled in these gifts, so others
were grieved that came short of their fellow Members in the same; upon this
occasion he informe^ them about these gifts, which he calls spiritual, 1 Cor.
12. 1. Because they were wrought by the spirit: and first, he mentions the
several (...) gifts where with the holy Spirit had blessed that Church; then
he mentions the Officers upon whom these gifts are bestowed, ver. 28. for the
edification of the Church: Several sorts of these Officers are reckoned up,
and here amongst them, Governments are mentioned, which cannot be understood of
Civil Magistrates, because the Apostle is speaking there of such Officers is
were endued with spiritual gifts for the edification of the Church in their
public Assemblies, the abuse of which gifts he is laboring to reform; and
can you upon any warrantable ground affirm, that the Civil Magistrate was to
exercise his Office in their public Assemblies? its true, the Church exercised
the corrective Tert. ap. cap. 39
part of their Government in their public meetings; but what is that to the
Civil Magistrate.

Amongst the several Officers of the Church, in three several places (as we
have touched before) mention is made of some that were interessed in
Government, and are distinguished from Teachers, Romans 12. 8. 1. Cor. 1^. 28. 1 Timothy 5. 17. in the first, (...), A Ruler, in the next (...) Governments; in the
last (...) that rule well, who are distinguished from such as labor in the
word and Doctrine.

Shall I tell you what have been thought of these: One says, Gubernationes
sunt carnis castigationes Greg. Naz. Orat. 7.
they are the chastisemerts of the flesh* And what is that I beseech you, but
the wholesome Government we speak of, and for which we plead? whilst that
prudent men observing the lives of the several Members of the Church, and
finding any to give way to the unruly desires of their flesh, by admonition did
chastise them, or bring them under further Ecclesiastical censure, that they
may ^ame the flesh: This construction is answerable to that of Origin, Lib. 3
contra. Celsum.
who tells us, there were some (...), appointed to enquire after the lives of
such as came under their Government, to keep off such as did not, that which
did beseem them that professed Religion, especially such as walked in
uncleanness: Did not such labor to chastise the flesh, whilst they
endeavored the just restraint of the unfruitful work thereof. Theodoret, he
calls these Governments, Rulers of the Church, which he distinguishes from
Teachers; these Greek Fathers never dreamed of the Civil Magistrate in that
place: Ambrose on the place says, Governments are such as teach men by
spiritual Gubernationes sunt qui spiritalibus retinaculis hominibus documento
sunt.
restraints: All which lets see that in their construction, Governments were
such, as by the rod of Discipline chastised such as waxed wanton, or were
unruly in their lives: which gave occasion to ^rimasius to say, Gubernationes,
qui sciuni singulas gube^^are; these were prudent and grave men, chosen to
assist the Pastor in Primas. in loc.
watching over the lives of the flock; so was that place construed of old to
which late in ^^preters also agree; therefore I say no more but this: I find
that the word (...) is used by the Grecians for one that is wise in Council,
so it is four times used by the Septuagint in the Proverbs, as Prove. 1. 5.
(...), a man of understanding shall attain wisdom, Prove. 11. 14. Prove. 1. 5.
and 11. 14. and 20. 18. and 24. 6.
Where no Counsel is, the people fall, where many Counsels are, there is
health: that which is called (...) in the former part of the proverb in the
latter end is called (...), many counsels, ^^ Prove. 20. 18. and 24. 6. In all
which places the word signifies a prudent or wise way of Governing: Now then
comparing the use of the word in the Language of the Grecians with that of the
Apostle, may we not from thence conclude, that there was in Gods Church a wise
or prudent way of Governing, distinct from the Civil Government, of which
Officers somewhat heretofore has been spoken in your second Rule.

As for the Magistracy mentioned, Romans 13. 1. we agree with you therein; what
you would infer from the three last verses of Ephesians. ^. (which you desire all to
consider) that may make for your purpose I know not; and therefore will stay no
longer upon it: and so much for your Rules or Essays for agreement.

Now I come to speak of that which seemed to you to be the only hinderance of
union in the Assembly, which you mentioned in the latter part of your first
Rule; where you speak of two parties who came byased into the Assembly, the one
with a Congregational ^gagement, the other with a National determination.

Here you only take notice of two parties in the Assembly, and were all the
rest Cyphars? In what rank or number do you place your self? Well, as for the
one party upon whom you hang the byas of a Congregationall Engagement: you
speak much to their Page 27.
commendation; yet it seems to me that you have dashed, in this ^^^sure, all
that praise you gave unto them: Can men worthy of ^o^e for their graces, of
honor for their abilities, be men, whom their bare singular opinion will byas
from the truth? Surely if you believe that they would be so easily carried
aside, notwithstanding their engagement by Solemn Protestation, you cannot
believe (what ever you seem to say) that they are indeed men worthy such
praises: but because they are of age and able to speak for themselves, I leave
it to their wisdom to Apologize for themselves, and return you an Answer to
your unjust challenge of them.

And as for the other party wronged by your Byas, because they are strangers,
and came voluntary to assist the furtherance of the great work now in hand
(whose modesty will not give them leave to speak in their own just defense) I
shall on their behalf add a word.

Sir, You charge the Honorable and Reverend Commissioners of the Church of
Scotland, for coming byased into the Assembly, with a National determination,
being for the jus Divinum of the Presbyteriall Government: This you say was a
hinderance also to union in the Assembly.

That they who have deserved so well, should hear ill, from such as are not
acquainted with their learning or moderation, is neither new nor strange: but
with what face could you a Member of the Assembly, charge this upon them? Who
could not but know how they have always demeaned themselves in the Assembly,
and what Honorable mention the Assembly had upon all occasions made them, and
what Testimony they gave unto them for their usefulnes in the Assembly, and
their moderation in all their debates.

Have you forgotten these expressions in a Letter sent from the Assembly, to
the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland, dated January 6. 1644. For our
better progress herein, ( viz. in finding out a form of Church Government,)
we have with all respect considered the several Papers of your Honorable and
Reverend Commissioners touching this head, and do* with all thankfulness
acknowledge the great zeal, judgment, and wisdom expressed therein, as also
the excellent assistance, and great furtherance of your Reverend Commissioners
in this great work.

Again in the same Letter, the employment of your Reverend Commissioners here,
has been so managed by them, as deserves many thanks, and all Honorable
acknowledgement, not only from us, but from you also. Again in the same
Letter, the long experience we have had of the great sufficiency, integrity and
usefulness of them all, in the great work of Christ, our common Lord and
Master, inforceth us to be earnest suitors for their continuance, for the
perfecting of that work which yet remains. And those expressions in another
Letter to the said General Assembly, dated May 6. 1645. speaking of the said
Commissioners, To whose indefatigable labors, and judicious assistance, not
only the Assembly and the whole Church and Kingdom of England, but yours also,
and the rest of the Churches of God, do owe very much.

Again in the same Letter, taking notice of a passage in a Letter from the
General Assembly. The Assembly says they express so much wisdom,
moderation, and tenderness of affection, in so holding forth their own
judgment, as not to condemn ours, nor to impose upon us in the least degree,
no more then we upon them, these words are added, Herein you have (...)
refreshed us, and honored your selves, thereby putting to silence the
ignorance of foolish men* and shaming the common Enemies of our Reformation and
Peace, who unjustly traduce you, ^^ too tenacious of whatsoever you hold or
practice, and will part with nothing, but rather expect from others a perfect
coming up to you in every particular; which albeit we never found nor
believed, yet we have now by this declaration a further ground whereon to erect
a more public and full vindication of your Christian candor, and moderation
before the whole world, upon all occasions.

These things I have expressed in the Assemblies words, that the world may see
how you deal both with them and the Assembly* And from all these passiages,
what is to be inferred let the Render judge: The Assembly acknowledge their
Zeal, Judgment, wisdom and moderation expressed in their carriage, the great
assistance they had from them, in their indesatigable labors, for which the
whole Church both in England and Scotland owes much unto them: Nay more, says
not the Assembly, that they did not so hold out their own judgments, as to
condemn ours, and they ^ought no more to impose any thing upon us, then we
upon them* All which and more r^^^ndis verbis, is affirmed in the Letters* Now
let the impartial and judicious Reader speak, if a National determination did
by as them in their concurrence with the Assembly: You say it did, and the
Assembly denies it.

Though this might be sufficient to wipe off that unjust aspersion so
unworthily cast upon them by your self, a Member of the said Assembly, present
at all these debates, and assenting to them, or at least not dissenting from
them: Yet to make it further appear* that this your bold and uncharitable
censure, delivered* with so much confidence, is notoriously false, let their
constant carriage in the Assembly speak, and I am content your self in your
second and more advised thoughts shall be the judge.

I appeal unto you, whether they have not often professed their readiness to
Reform themselves ^s well as ^^, according to the Word of God, and according to
the Covenant, not to engage u^ ^o receive their Disciplin^, be^^use determined
already by their Church; but to endeavor the Reformation of Religion in the
Church of England and Ir^land, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government,
according to the Word of God, and the Example of the best Reformed Churches,
and to bring (not us to them) but all the Churches in the three Kingdoms to the
nearest Conjunction and Uniformity.

Besides their frequent expressions this way, let their Paper presented to the
Assembly, November. 10. 1643. speak for them in these words; We be so far from
presuming to propose the Reformation of Religion in the Kirck of Scotland, for
a Rule or pattern of Reformation in Religion in the Kirck of England, that we
are most willing to hear and learn from the Word of God (which is the
infallible, and must be the common Rule to both) what needs to be further
Reformed there; and are very confident that the same with all thankfulness and
obedience would be received and embraced by the general Assembly of that Kirck.

Secondly, you cannot but know, that as the Assembly always waved the Dispute
of the jus Divinum, in those points that are controverted, in most of their
Votes rather determining what may be, then what must be: So none were more
forward in this then the said Commissioners.

Thirdly, I appeal unto you, whether upon all occasions they did not declare
themselves (none more) zealous in the promoting of any thing that might tend to
Peace and accommodation: For the promoting whereof, their grave and prudent
advise, counsel, and their Christian and Brotherly condescension (as occasion
was offered) has made them very useful in the Assembly, and deservedly
honored by them.

Fourthly, You cannot deny, but that the Assembly was engaged both according to
the Covenant, and to several Orders of the Honorable Houses, to have the
Reformed Churches (and surely, the Church of Scotland will be by all, not
byased with a prejudicate opinion against them, acknowledged to be one) in
their eye; And yet, I again appeal to you, whether the Commissioners in all
their debates, did not rather endeavor by their Arguments from Scripture and
Reason, which did take hold on their Consciences to confirm the Propositions in
debate, then to impose any thing upon the Assembly, from the bare Authority of
their Church? Nay, did you ever hear them so much as offer to hold forth the
Authority or Practice of their Church, as an Argument whereby to persuade to
any thing?

These things I thought good to offer to your second thoughts to chew upon: And
if all this be granted (which I am confident you cannot deny) you have good
reason to be sorry (to use your own words in your Epistle) that you should give
offense: Yet I can* not but tell you, it is but a poor amends to complement
with them in your Epistle, and so deeply to charge them in your book* in
hanging your by as on them, who run so fair to the mark*

How you have dealt with the Assembly* comes now in the last place to be
inquired into.

I confess I have heard you say, that you have not in any pass^g^ of your
Sermon, crossed any of the Votes of the Assembly forms past, and sent up unto
the Parliament; but when I did peruse the Votes, and compare them with diverse
passages in your Sermon, I could not but wonder at your confidence in this, and
know not what to infer from thence, but only this: Surely then either* you did
not well understand what your self had written, or else were strangely mistaken
in the sense of the Assembly: but let the Render judge.

If I understand you aright, you deny Church Government performed by Church
Officers, affirming that you see not an institution, nor any one act of
Government in the whole Bible performed, ( viz. by any Church Officer) setting
up the Christian Magistrate as the only Church Governor, and that jure
Divine: And therefore expounding the Governments which Christ has placed in
his Church, 1 Cor. 12. 28. By that of Magistrates, Romans 13. ^^ Then you do not
only deny the Ruling Elder to be an instituted* Officer, but also take away
the power of Ruling from the Minister.

I pray you therefore for my satisfaction, and the satisfaction of many others,
who are much unsatisfied in this particular, Reconcils these your opinions and
the several Votes of the Assembly* wherein the cont^ary to all these
assertions is plainly assur^ed; as may be observed in the several Votes
mentioned before.

You do indeed crave in your Epistle, A latitude for your judgment: It is not
denied unto you; but are you bound in Conscience to hold out your difference of
judgment unto the Parliament? If so, you cannot be ignorant what course was
prescribed to the members of the Assembly, in case of dissent in any point, you
should have entered your dissent and brought in your Reasons: And then I doubt
not but you should have received abundant satisfaction^ What should put you
upon this course I see not, except your undervaluing of the Advice and
judgment of the Assembly* or the overweening conceit of your own sufficiency,
that in a work which your self acknowledge, does require the deepest head, and
the greatest abilities: you should think your self more fit to interpose your
advice then the whole* Assembly.

If your advice had been only additionall of some thing omitted by the
Assembly, or in some things of lesser moment, differing from the advice of the
Assembly, it might have been the better born: But when you shall as much as in
you lies, endeavor to undermine the very foundations, and destroy the whole*
Fabric of all Ecclesiastical Government, by subverting the Pillars of it*
this cannot but by sober men be judged a boldness, that none but your self
would have been guilty of.

Or if your advice had been backed with Reasons that might have been
convincing, we should have thanked you for your light: But when you take
liberty to dissent, not only from the Assembly here, but from all well Reformed
Churches, without producing the least sh^dow of proof; And so oppose your own
private judgment to the Resolutions and Determinations of the Assembly, and
all other Churches both Ancient and Modern: thinking it Confutation enough of
their Scripture proofs to tell the world, that they take not h^ld on your
Conscience: Who can but blame you for your pride herein, as if (...), or ipse
dixit, were sufficient to bear out whatsoever so great a Rabbi says?

Sir, Though the advice of the Assembly did not take hold upon your Conscience;
yet your Covenant should: Which you did not only take your self, but
encouraged others thereunto in your Sermon, Preached and published by Command
of the Honorable House of Commons: You did lift up your hand unto the most high
God and Swear, To endeavor the Reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms of
England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government,
according to the Word of God, and example of the best Reformed Churches, and to
bring the Churches of God in the three Kingdoms to the nearest Conjunction and
Uniformity in Religion, Confession of Faith, Form of Church Government,
Directory for Worship and Catechizing, that we and our Posterity after us, may
as Brethren live in Faith and Love, and the Lord may delight to dwell in the
midst of us, etc. But in this New-Modell of Government of yours, you have
rather endeavored to hinder this blessed work, and to stir up Authority to
suppress it: For according to your advice, Church Government by
Ecclesiastical Officers (as it is generally followed in the best Reformed
Churches) should not be Reformed but abolished.

Did you not covenan^ to endeavor the (...) of Schism yet ^how you will acquit
your self from one of the greater Schisms and rents from ^all the of Christ I
do no^ yet see, when you would ^estroy that Church government, which they do*
all acknowledge and submit unto and would introduce in the room of it another
in the civil Magistrate* which Christ's Church did ever yet acknowledge, nor
did ^ver any Christian Magistrate assume unto himself.

In fine, though you slight our Sister Churches, I dare no^ though you at your
pleasure ^^st off that government which Christ's Church has ^ever embraced, and
fasten all the government thereof* upon the Magistrate: Give me leave with
admiration of (...) boldness, and self confidence, to conclude with the
judgment Quid observabim^s, quid clig^^us? non ^ossumus respuere consuctudinem
quam damnare non possumus, utpote non extraniam, quia non extraneorum, quibus,
scilicet, communicamus jus pacis and nomen frat^r^ita^^s. Tert. de Velandis
Virginil. Calv. in Am* (...);
of two grave Authors: The first is, Tertullian; what shall* w^^ follow, or
what shall we c^use? we cannot reject that custo^e we cannot condemn* it is
not strange, seeing it comes not from strangers, but from them with whom we are
sinked in piece, and to (...) we give the name of Breth^^^: he durst not
condemn the^^ c^stome, to whom he gave the n^me of Brethren, and the hand of
fellowship, yet you dare, I and oppose them: The Author is learned Calvi^,
(whose judgment in the Exposition of Scriptur^^ has ever by judicious men)
who says ^^ey are inconsiderate men who give to the Civil Magistrate the
power of ^ll things.

Now in what rank are you to be placed in, who cut your your self* off from
all the Churches with whom you profess an agreement? Shall I say to you as
Constantine said to Aresiu^ the N^vatian, Provide you a ladd^r by which you may
god to heaven (...): Seeing you have no mind to go hand in hand with your
sister Churche^ in government, but put off all that work to the Civil
Magistrate, may you not be r^n^ed in the ^oule of those ^nconsiderate men, who
distinguish ^o^ between that Civil and Ecc^es^asticall function? yet know at
length, it is good s^pere ad sobri^ta^^m; this I wish to you^ and (...) commit
you* to the Lord.

FINIS.

