BALZAC'S REMAINS, Or, his last LETTERS.

WRITTEN To several Grand and Eminent Persons in FRANCE.

Whereunto are annexed the Familiar Letters of Monsieur de Balzac to his Friend
Monsieur CHAPELAIN.

Never before in English.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring at the George in Fleet Street near St.
Dunstans Church. 1658.

portrait of Monsieur de Balzac Mounseur de BALZAC:
R. Gaywo^d fecit.


THE STATIONER TO THE READERS.
GENTLEMEN,
I Am not ignorant that the Book which now fills your hands, is incapable to
receive either Supplement or Ornament, from any Preface. And, it may be, in
these wild times, there are few can be accused of such a degree of
Conceitednesse, as (...) imagine that Balzac may be Complemented. Let this
letter then be reckoned as a Tax paid to Custom: being sadly sensible that the
labors of greatest merit are like to suffer as abrupt, and rude, except the
Reader be courted and invited in the Dedication: There is one grievance more,
which I earnestly deprecate; You commonly date the worth of the book, from the
Abilities you taste in the Epistle; and if this Humor prevail here, I am
Undone. Besides, you destroy my harmless design, which was to try whether the
Noble conceptions of the Monsieur, would admit of any Advantage, and appear
more orient, as they are foiled by this trifle:

If any shall dispute the Decency of the Title, and ask, How these letters
came to be called choice, since none fell from the same incomparable pen, which
did not challenge the same Denomination; J shall easily yield: but, must crave
leave to affirm; that by persons of high discernment, these have bin gathered
as prime Stars from the other Sporades, and are here presented in one entire
Constellation: There was nothing but Gold in the whole Mine; but here you will
find such as has bin tried and stamped and passed in all places, not only
Current, but Admired.

He is much a stranger to the world, that does not know that the style of
Monsieur Balzac was considered in France, as the Treasure and Test of Elegance:
And he was esteemed the best proficient, in that which they call flos linguae,
the Delicacy, fineness, and Idiom of language, who had attayn'd the nearest
Resemblance of this Author; Observe the vigor and flame of his fancy, the
Cleanness and Roundnesse of his expression, the spirit and brisknesse of his
Notions, the prudence and Insinuation of all his Addresses, and you will judge
him a fit Parallel for any of his Predecessors, that Rome or Athens has most
celebrated.

The Comedian was handsomely, caressed by him that said, If Jupiter would
speak Latin, He might find Apparel for his thoughts in Plautus his
wardrobe; Possibly, if the same Jove had occasion to transmit his pleasure
(those Gods wanting the mystical ways of Communication which we now ascribe
to spirits) he had chosen no other Mercury, but this Frenchman:

I am unwilling to be guilty of so much folly, as to define or distinguish
Letters, and then list them under their several Colors, descanting upon those
perfections, which render them peculiarly grateful to knowing men: lest any
should suspect that this one Letter was not written by my self. Gentlemen, I
shall not blush to acknowledge, that it is much my Interest this volume should
be generally read: For I believe there is Charm enough in it to dissolve the
most covetous Resolutions: And that such revenues of pleasure and improvement
will arise from the perusal of this book, as may prevailingly tempt the
greatest husbands to buy more.

Your humble servant THOMAS DRING.

Books Printed for Thomas Dring, and are to be sold at the George in
Fleet Street, near St. Dunstans Church.
Law Books.
THe Pleader, containing perfect Precedents and Forms of Declararions,
Pleadings, Issues, Judgments, and Proceedings, in all kinds of actions, both
real and personal; by Mr. Brownlow, Mr. Moyle, Mr. Gulston, and Mr. Cony:
published by J. Hern Gent. in Folio.

The Law of Conveyances of all manner of assurances, with directions to sue out
and prosecute all manner of Writs; by John Hern Gent. in Octavo.

The Reports of that reverend and learned Judge, Sir Richard Hutton, in Folio.

The twelfth Part of the Reports of Sir Edward Cook, in Folio.

The Reports of that Learned Judge, Owen, in Folio.

The Reading upon the Statute touching Bankrupts, by John Stone, in Octavo.

An abridgement of the Common Law, with the Cases thereof, drawn out of the old
and new Books of Law, for the benefit of all Practisers and Students; by W. H.
of Graies-Inne, Esquire; in Quarto.

An abridgement of the Acts and Ordinances of Parliament, from 1640. to the
year 1656. by W. H. Esquire; in Quarto.

The Reports of Sergeant Bridgman, in Fol.

The grounds of the Laws of England, extracted out of the fountains of all
Learning, and fitted for all Students and Practitioners, in large Octavo.

A profitable Book of Mr. John Perkins, treating of the Laws of England, in
Octavo.

An exact Abridgement of that excellent Book, called, Doctor and Student, in
Octavo.

The Interpreter, or Book containing the signification of all the words of the
Law, by John Cowell, in Fol.

The Maxims of Reason, or the Rule of the Common Law, by Edmond Wingate Esquire; in
Fol.

An exact Abridgement of all the Statutes in force and use, upon the fourth of
Jan. in the year 1641. 1643. faithfully extracted out of the said Statutes,
from Magna Charta, to the said time, by Edmond Wingate, Esquire;

Romances.
ARtamenes or the Grand Cyrus a Romance Complete in five volumnes in Folio, by
Monsieur de Scudery.

Clelia an excellent Romance in three volumes in Folio, by Monsieur de Scudery.

The Illustrious Bassa, a Complete Romance in Folio, by Monsieur de Scudery.

Astrea, a new excellent and complete Romance in three volumes in Folio,
Translated by a person of honor.

The History of Polindor and Flaetella, a Romance in verse, by J. Harrington
Esquire;

Histories.
THe History and lives of the philosophers with their figures in two volumes,
in Folio, by Thomas Stanly, Esquire;

The History of the wars betwixt Swedeland and Poland with all their policyes;
in Folio, by John Fowler.

An Historical discourse of the City of London with the History of Westminster
with the Courts of Justice, Antiquities, and new buildings thereunto belonging,
by James Howell Esquire; in Folio.

The History of the Goths, Swedes, and Vandalls by the Bishop of Vpsall, in
Folio.

The History of Masiniello, the second part, with a Continuation of that
tumult, and the end of it, by J. H. Esquire;

The natural and experimental History of winds, written by the Lord Bacon,
and translated into English by R. G.

The life and death of Freeman Sands, Esquire; by R. Bereman in quarto.

Divinity.
THings new and old, or a Storehouse of above two thousand Similies,
Sentences, Allegoryes, Apophthegms, Adagies, Apologues, divine and moral,
Political and Historical, with their proper applications; A book that will
furnish the Reader with Rarities for the adornment of his discourse upon any
subject whatsoever;

Anti-Socinianism, or a Confutation of Socinian heresy; with the description of
the lives and deaths of the chief Authors of that sect, and w^^n it was
brought into England: by N. Chewny M. A.

Mr. Crag against To^bes, with a conviction of the Anabaptists, newly printed
with Additions.

A Sermon preached at the assizes at Huntingdon, by J. Gaul.

Mr. Sands paraphrase upon the Psalms, in large Octavo.

Good thoughts for every day in the month, by H. S.

God's house, with the nature and use thereof, as it ought to be understood and
respected by Christians under the Gospel: by Simon Gunton, M. A.

Eight sermons of Mr. Cragge, with a treatise of the Lawfullnesse of tithes,
and the lawfullness of Marriage by the Minister.

An exhortation for desperate sinners; written by the Right Honorable the Lord
Grandison, prisoner in the Isle of Wight.

Sapientia justificata, or an answer to D. Taylor's, Deus justificatus; by J.
Gaul.

The Soloquies of St. Bonaventure; Containing his four mental exercises, and
also his treatise called the Bundle of Myrrh, concerning the passion of our
Savior, with 13 spiritual exercises of the said Bonaventure.

Books of the affairs of State, of Choice Letters, and of Poetry.
A Catalogue of the Lords Knights and Gentlemen that have compounded for their
estates, with the sums that paid their Compositions; in Octavo.

A Panegyric of the Queen of Swedeland in Octavo.

Letters of Affairs, Love, and Courtship, written to several persons of
honor and quality, by the exquisite pen of Monsieur de Voiture a member of the
famous French Academy, established at Paris by Cardinal Richlieu.

A Trance, or Mercurius Acheronticus; by J. Howell Esquire;

Modern policy taken from Machiavell and Borgia by an eye witness; a most
incomparable piece.

The Minister of State; wherein is shown, the true use of Modern policy: by
Monsieur de Silhon; rendered into English, by Sir Henry Herbert Knight, in
Folio.

The Accomplished Courtier; consisting of institutions and examples, by which
Courtiers and officers of estate may square their Transactions prudently, and
in good order and Method, by H.W. Gent.

An Apology for Paris, for rejecting of Juno and giving of Her Golden Ball to
Venus; by R. B.

Pocula Castalia or Castalian Cupps; by R. Baron Gent.

Mirza a Tragedy, really acted in Persia: by R. B. Gent.

Choice Poems, being Amorous, Moral, Lucory, etc. by Edward Sherburne Esquire;

Five new Plays, by Richard Brom, in large Octavo.

Select Poems, by william Hammond, in large Octavo.

Choice Letters of Monsieur de Balzac, to several Grand and Noble Personages
of France; with his Familiar Letters to Monsieur Chapelain.

Wit Restored; being select Poems never before printed.

THE TABLE Of the CHOICE LETTERS.
TO Monsieur de St. Chartres, Counselor to the King in the grand Council. 1
To Monsieur de Bois Robert Metel, Abbot of Chastillon. 3 To Monsieur du Pui,
Counselor and Library Keeper to his Majesty. 4 To Monsieur d'Argenson,
Controller of the Revenue in Poictou, etc. 5 To Monsieur the Abbot de Talan. 6
To Monsieur de la Nauve, Ensign to the Queens Guard. 7 To Monsieur de
Gombervile. 8 To Monsieur de Bellejoy. 9 To Monsieur de Clairville 10 To
Monsieur de Bois Robert Metell, Abbot of Chastillon. 11 12 To Monsieur de
Bonair. 13 14 To Monsieur Charlot, Farmer-Generall of the Taxes. Ib. To my Lord
Bouthilier, Lord Treasurer. 15 16 To Madam de Villesavin. 17 18 To Madam de
Bourdet. 19 To Monsieur de Preizac, of the Kings Privy Council 20 To Monsieur
de -- 21 To my Lord Bishop of Angoulesm, Almoner to the Queen of great Brittan.
22 To Monsieur de Lormu, Counselor and Physician to the King. 23 To Monsieur
de Zuylichem, Counselor and Secretary of State to his Highness the Prince of
Orange. 24 To Monsieur the President de Pontac. 25 26 To Monsieur the Mayor of
Angoulesm. 27 To Monsieur de Villemontee, of the Kings Council, and Controller
of the Revenue in Poictou, Saintonge, Annix, etc. 28 To Monsieur de la
Thibaudiere. 29 To Monsieur de -- 30 To Monsieur L'Hillier, of the Kings
Council, etc. 32 To Monsieur de Bayers. 35 To Monsieur de Villemontee, of the
Kings Council, Controller of the Revenue in Poictou, Saintonge, Aunix, etc. 36
To Monsieur de Lymerac de Mayat, Captain in the Regiment of Conty. 37 To
Monsieur de Priezac, of the Kings Privy Council. 38 To Monsieur de Couvrelles.
Ib. To Monsieur l'Huillier, of the Kings Council, etc. 39 To Madam des Leges.
40 41 To Monsieur de Borstel. 42 To Monsieur Menage. 43 To Monsieur Fermin,
Counselor to the King, Controller of the Kings Revenue in the Generality of
Limoges, etc. 45 To Monsieur the Marquess of Montausier, Governor and
Lieutenant General for the King in Alsatia, etc. 46 To my Lord the Archbishop
of Corinth, Co-adjutour of the Archbishopric of Paris. 47 To Monsieur the
President Maynard, Counselor to the King. 48 To Monsieur Menage. 49 To my
Lord, the Bishop of Lisieux. 50 To Monsieur the Earl of la Motte Fenelon. 51 To
Monsieur de Plassac Maire. 52 To Monsieur Conrart, Counselor and Secretary to
the King. 53 To the reverend Father Hercules, Provincial of the Fathers of the
Christian Doctrine. 54 To Monsieur the Chevalier de Mere. 55 To Monsieur de St.
Chartres, of the Kings high Council. 56 To the reverend Father de Marin, a
Divine of the Society of Jesus. 57 To the reverend Father d'Estrades, a Divine
of the Society of Jesus, Superior of the Cloister in Bourdeaux. 58 To Madam,
the Marchioness of Rambouillet. Ib. To Monsieur Cossar. 61 62 To Monsieur
Menage. 63 To Monsieur de -- 64 To Monsieur Gombauld, a Chanter in the Church
of Saints. 65 To the reverend Father Dalme, a Divine of the Society of Jesus,
professor of Rhetoric. 66 To the reverend Father, Du Creux, a Divine of the
Society of Jesus, Rhetorick-professor. 67 To the reverend Father, Stephen of
Bourges, a Preaching Capuchin. 68 To Monsieur de Mere, Knight. 69 To Monsieur
Colardeau, the Kings Attorney in Fontenay. 70 To the reverend Father Tesseron,
of the Society of Jesus, professor of Rhetoric. Ib. To Monsieur Perrot, of
Ablancourt. 71 To the reverend Father, Adam, a Preacher of the Society, of
Jesus. 72 To my Lord, the Bishop of Grass. 73 To Monsieur the Abbot Talon. 74
To Monsieur the Abbot Bouchard. Ib. To the reverend Father, Josset, a Divine of
the Society of Jesus, professor of Rhetoric. 75 To Monsieur de Marca,
Counselor to the King. 76 To Monsieur de Rampalle. 78 To Monsieur de la
Cambre, Counselor and Physician to the King, and in ordinary to my Lord
Chancellor, etc, Ib. To Monsieur Salmasius. 81 To Monsieur de S^udery. Ib. To
Monsieur Perrot, of Ablancourt. 85 To the reverend Father, d'Estrades, a Divine
of the society of Jesus, Superior of the Confessors Cloister in Bourdeaux. 86
To Monsieur de Borstel. 87 To Madam de Nesmond, Superior of the Vrsulines in
Angoulesm. Ib. To my Lord, the Bishop of Grass. 89 Ib. To Monsieur Maury, Dr.
in Divinity. 90 To Monsieur l'Huillier, Counselor the King, etc. 91 To
Monsieur de Bellejoy. 92 To Monsieur Colardeau, the Kings Atturny in Fontenay.
94 To Monsieur de la Thibaudier. Ib. 95 96 To Monsieur Conrart, Counselor and
Secretary to the King. 97 Ib. To Monsieur the President Mainard. 99 To Monsieur
Girard, Secretary to the late Lord Duke of Espernon. 100 101 To Monsieur de
Bellejoy. 102 To Monsieur Zuilichem, Counselor and Secretary to his Highness
the Prince of Orange. 103 To Monsieur de Campaignole, Lieutenant to the
Regiment of the Kings Guard. 104 To Monsieur Favereau, Counselor to the King
in the Court of Aids. 105 106 To Monsieur de Lavaux St. James, Rectour of the
University of Poictours. Ib. To the reverend Father Andrew, a Preacher of the
Order of St. Dominick. 108 To the reverend Father Hercules, Provincial of the
Fathers of the Christian Doctrine. Ib. To my Lord, the Marquis of Montausier,
Governor and Lieutenant General for the King in Saintonge, Angoumoise. 109 To
Monsieur de Burg, an Advocate in the Parliament. 110 To Monsieur Conrart,
Counselor, and Secretary to the King. 111 To Monsieur l'Huilliard, Councellor
to the King, etc. 112 To Monsieur the Count of Jonzac, the Kings Lieutenant in
Saintonge and Angoumois. Ib. To Monsieur Perrot d'Ablancourt. 113 To the
reverend Father Hercules, Provincial to the Fathers of the Christian Doctrine.
114 To Monsieur de Menage. 115 To Monsieur the Abbot Talon. 116 To Monsieur de
Montrevil, Captain in the Regiment de la Meilleraye. 117 To my Lord, the
Archbishop of Toulouse. 118 To Monsieur the Marquis de la Case. 119 To
Monsieur d'Argenson, Counselor to the King, Comptroller of the Revenue in
Poictou, Saintonge, etc. 121 To Monsieur Esprit. 122 To Monsieur de la
Chetardie. Ib. To my Lord, the Marquis of Montausier, Governor and Lieutenant
General to the King in Saintonge, Angoumois, etc. 123 To Monsieur Conrart,
Counselor and Secretary to the King. 124 To Monsieur Costar. 125 To Madam the
Countess of Brienne. 126 To Madam de Masses. Ib. To Monsieur de Couvrelles.
127 To Monsieur de Borster 128 To my Lord, the Bishop of Grass. 129 To
Monsieur de Bois-Robert Metel, Abbot of Chastillon. 128 To Monsieur de Scudery.
129 To Monsieur de Lorme, Counselor and Physician in ordinary to his Majesty.
132 To Monsieur Girard, Official and Prebend of Angoulesm. 133 To Madam the
Princess. 133 To my Lord the Duke of -- For Monsieur the Colonel de -- 136 To
my Lord Seguier, Chancellor of France. 136 137 140 141 To my Lord, the
Archbishop of Toulouse. 141 Ib. To Monsieur le Grass, Counselor to the
King, and Master of Requests in Ordinary of his household. 145 To Monsieur Remy,
professor of Rhetoric, and Poet Laureat. 151 To Monsieur Daille. 148 To my
Lord the Count d'Avaux, Sur intendant of the Kings Revenue. 149 To Madam the
Duchess of -- 146 To the reverend Father, Vital Thereon, a Divine of the
Society of Jesus. 147 To the reverend Father, de Marin, a Divine of the Society
of Jesus. 152 To the reverend Father, Vital Thereon, a Divine of the Society of
Jesus. Ib. To Monsieur de Souchotte. 158 To Monsieur Perrot d'Ablancourt. Ib.
To Monsieur de Bourdigal Cande. 159 To Monsieur the Count de la Vauguion. 156
To the reverend Father, Stephen de Brurges, a Capuchin Preacher. 157 To my
Lord, the Duke of Espernon, Governor and Lieutenant General for the King in
Guienne, etc. 154 To my Lord, the Duke de la Rochefoucaut, Peer of France. 155
To Monsieur the Count of Cleremont, etc. 160 161 To my Lord, the Duke of
Grammont, Marshal of France. 162 To my Lord, the Duke of Rohan. 163 To Monsieur
de Couppeau ville, Abbot of la Victoire. 164 To Monsieur de Bourzeys, Abbot of
Cores. 166 To Monsieur the Abbot of Lavardin. Ib. To Monsieur Solomon,
Attorney General to the grand Council. 168 To Monsieur Ferret, Secretary to
the late Duke of Weymar. 169 To Monsieur de Blassac Mere. 170 171 To Monsieur
Menage. 173 174 To my Lord, the Marquis of Montausier, Governor and Lieutenant
General for the King in Saintonge, Angoumois, etc. 176 177 To Monsieur de Puy,
Counselor to the King. 178 To Monsieur the President de Nesmond. 179 180 181
To Monsieur de la Nauve, a Member of Parliament in the Court of Enquiries. 182
To Monsieur de Morin, Counselor to the King, in the Court of the Edict of
Guienne. 183 To Monsieur de Monrave, first President of the Parliament of
Toulouse. 184 To Monsieur Huillier, Counselor to the King, etc. 186 To
Monsieur de Gomberville. 187 To Monsieur Arnould, Abbot of St. Nicholas. 188
Ib. To Monsieur Sarran, Counselor to the King in his Court of Parliament. 190
To Monsieur^ the President Maynard, Councellor to the King. 191 192 To the
Chloris of Monsieur Maynard. 194 To Monsieur Costar. 195 To Madam de
Villesavin. 196 To Mademoiselle de Scudery. 197 To Monsieur de Villesavin. 198
Ib. To the reverend Father Pitard, Provincial of the Jesuits in Guienne. 199
To Monsieur de Barreaux. 200 To the reverend Father, d'Estrades, a Divine of
the Society of Jesus, and Superior of the Confessors Cloister in Bourdeaux.
201 To Monsieur de Voiture, Counselor to the King, etc. 202 To Monsieur de
Lyonne Counselor to the King, and Secretary to my Lord the Cardinal Mazarin.
203 To Monsieur Colletet. 204 To Monsieur Conrart, Counselor and Secretary to
the King. 205 To Monsieur de Souchote. 206 To Monsieur de Bois-Robert, Abbot of
Chastillon. 207 208 To Monsieur the Abbot of Beau-regard. 209 To Madam de la
Chetardue. 210 To Monsieur Seen, a Divine of the Church of Saints. 211 To
Monsieur de Morin, Counselor to the King in the Court of the Edict of Guienne.
212 To Monsieur Salmasius. 216 217 To Monsieur John Frederick Gronovius. 218 To
Monsieur Rigault, Counselor, and Master of the Library to his Majesty. 219 To
Monsieur the Abbot of Guyet. 221 To Monsieur Heinsius, the son of the Senior
Heinsius. 222 To Madam the Countess of Brienne. 223 Monsieur Conrart,
Counselor and Secretary to the King. 221 To Monsieur Corneille. 223 To
Monsieur Costar, 225 226 To Monsieur Grandillaud, President in the Presidiall
Court of Angoulesme. 229 To Monsieur d' Argenson, Counselor to the King and
Intendant of Justice in Saintonge. Ib. To Monsieur Colletet. 230 231 To
Monsieur le Prieur Packet. 233 To my Lord Seguier, Chancellor of France Ib.
To Monsieur Menage. 236 To Monsieur de Balzac, from his father. 237 To Monsieur
Maury, Doctor of Divinity, 238 To Monsieur de Flotte. 239 To Monsieur de Silhon
Secretary to my Lord the Cardinal Mazarin. 240 242 To Monsieur John Frederic
Gronovius. Ib To Monsieur de Belleveue Villotreis Counselor to the King. 244
To Monsieur Menage. 245 To Monsieur du Herrier, Canon of the Church of
Beaucarie. 246 To Monsieur, Costar. 247 To Monsieur Girard Commissary and Canon
of Angoulesm. 248 To my Lord the Marquess of Montausieur, Governor and
Lieutenant General for the King in Saintonge, Angoumois, etc. 249 To Monsieur
de Mere. 250 To Monsieur Moricet, an Advocat in the Parliament. 251 To Monsieur
Girard Secretary to the late Duke of Espernon. 252 To Monsieur Conrart
Counselor and Secretary to the King 253 To Monsieur Girard Secretary to the
late Duke of Espernon 254 To Monsieur L' Huillier Counselor to the King. 255
To Monsieur de la Thibaudiere. 256 257 To Monsieur de Bois-Robert Metel, Abbot
of Castillon. 258 259 To Monsieur Conrart, Counselor and Secretary to the
King. Ib.
THE CHOICE LETTERS OF M. de BALZAC,
THE FIRST BOOK.
LETTER I. To Monsieur de St Chartres, Counselor to the King in the grand
Council.
SIR,
I Cannot apprehend upon what inducements you persist so resolutely to love me.
My unsuitable deportment might have extinguished the ardour of your passion; and
I know not any reason that could oblige you to court the amity of the most
unsociable and useless person in the world. Certainly, it is a very strong and
generous inclination, that moves you toward a subject so little attractive,
and brings your Cares even as far as this Desert, wherein they can neither
meet the entertainment they deserve, nor be returned with due acknowledgments.
I am not displeased with the contentment you testify of the Letter, whereof
you make so favorable mention; but it would much provoke my Choler, if having
been written as my last, the success should cross my design, and I should be
again engaged by it into a Chaos of complements, out of which I conceived I
had for ever made an escape. You may reproach the rudeness and austerity of my
humor as long as you please, whilst I continue a perfect hatred to the
profession, that first raised me in the world's opinion. I have discarded all
my Hyperboles and my Antitheses, with the rest of the paint of Rhetoric.
Therefore, notwithstanding my devotion to the person you speak of, it is a
greater violence then I can enforce upon my self, to undertake the Title and
Office of a Wit; and write letters to her, without either matter or occasion.
Since my quiet is not unregarded by you, I beseech your dexterity to divert
such kind of tempests, and that I may receive this courtesy from you in lieu
of that you design in my favor from Monsieur the Commissary. Two years are
past, since I was in the thoughts of his Lord the Treasurer: and if in that
space, I had fed only upon returns from the Exchequer, you may imagine, my
fare would have been extremely slender and Philosophical. I should, now be as
meager and hollow as the Creatures that Pharaoh dreamt of, and the Patriarch
Joseph interpreted. There is an Epigram of Martialls, we have sometime read
together, which might have afforded me comparisons to my dryness: but that I
was willing to give you notice, by the way, of my knowledge in the Hebrew, and
that I could use the Dialect of some Rabbines of my acquaintance: the
pleasantness of this raillery, will assure you, that I am not cast down with
melancholy and discontent. But yet, to declare my self well satisfied, and to
pretend to belong to the Court by my Letters, now I do not so by my Pension;
would be such an absurdity, as might entertain the spleen^, of the Momus's,
and I should have no reason to be offended at their mirth. If I am paid, I
shall be obliged to the Play Master, and yet not malign any person. Though I be
not paid at all, I here find real consolations against afflictions a thousand
times greater: And I should deserve very ill of Philosophy, if having received
more valuable benefits from her, then fortune has denied me, I should in this
condition repine at any thing whatsoever. It Is for your friendship, Sir, that I
acknowledge an engagement to my stars, and I beseech you to believe that I am
and shall ever-be-most passionately,

SIR, Your, etc.
January. 18. 1639.
LETTER II. To Monsieur de Bois-Robert Metel, Abbot of Chastillon.
SIR,
I Cannot approve your scrupulous and excessive modesty, nor esteem it other
then an injury to my affection that you tell me, you are deficient in your
husbandry and improvement of it as you ought. It is too well rooted to need such
curious looking to, and is none of those tender plants that fade immediately,
if they miss one days watering. Things of robust and vigorous natures, do not
require such continual care and vigilancie; and their own firmness secures
them enough, without the solicitous diligence of another. I will not put you to
any trouble to preserve me, leave me to my own fidelity, and you shall never
complain of my loss. It is sufficient that I know you love me, and I
acknowledge I have received such infallible proofs of this truth, that it is
not possible for me to doubt its reality. You may spare all further care then
upon what is essential; words are no longer the marks of intentions. There is
a trafick of smoke driven as well by Letters, as by voice: and the honestest
man that I saw in Italy would not vouchsafe so much as to unseale those that
were delivered to him on the Holydaies of the Carnevall, (you understand the
manner of that Country.) This was indeed to put the just value upon trifles,
and to rate them agreeably to their worth. There could be no greater justice
rendered to Complements, then not to read them when they were received, in
regard they were not intended when they were written. For my part, I do so
little account of those affections in picture, that if the opinion I have of
your generosity were capable of augmentation, it would have been raised to
greater assurance, in that you treat me with less ceremony and talk. It is
certainly very reproachful to have grown old in an absolute conjunction of
fouls, and notwithstanding to be still at Protestations the first rudiments of
Friendship. Let us leave them all to those people that are delighted with
repetitions of the same things, or have to deal with distrustful and stubborn
natures. This office is long since performed betw^xt you and me; and since we
have attained the end, to what purpose should we perplexe our selves about the
means, and never let our Rhetoric be at quiet? Be pleased to believe me, and
we shall do well enough. These common Principles must be laid once for all,
never to be stirred but in case of necessity; The first whereof is, that your
affairs require more then four and twenty hours to the day, and my idleness
is yet desirous of a greater excess. The other, that you are and will be my
friend in your heart, without troublesome oftentation of it by fruitless
civilities; as I likewise am and will be with the same r^ality,

SIR, Your, etc.
23. Aug. 1640.
LETTER III. To Monsieur Du Pui, Counselor and Library Keeper to his Majesty.
SIR,
THe infinite value which I set upon your love, has made me receive the tokens
of it with a sort of ecstasy and triumph: and although as to the essential
part of friendship your generosity does sufficiently assure my possession, yet
it is great contentment to me, that I have that in my Cabinet which
unquestionably confirms my Title. I received together with those dear pledges,
the advantageous testimony you were pleased to bestow upon my Book, which I
intend shall serve me as a buckler against all the insolences of Censure and
the injustice of those perverse judges you speak of. I do not covet the
suffrages of all the world; even the Heroes have come short of universal
approbation. The most just and clear fame has been brought into question and
disputed. I have seen a Gallant, in Euripides Tragedies accuse Hercules for a
pitiful and cowardly Lubber; the moral whereof is this, that there is always
some body in the world that are of contrary opinions to the whole race of
mankind, and whose ^xtravagant singularity is not scrupulous to put the lie
upon the affirmation of all men upon earth. Pro and Con are of equal antiquity
in the world with Meum and Tuum; and Reason is not of longer duration then
opposition and disputes. Sound opinions have never been at peace or free from
the Alarmes of Malice and Ignorance: and even at this day, how many Schisms,
Sects, and Heresies make open war upon poor truth? That part of it which
has the holiness of Religion and her Mysteries for its object, is of much
greater importance, then that which is only interested in the contrivance of a
Comedy, and the purity of language; and yet there were counted a hundred
Atheists and Sectaries for one of a right persuasion. Every thing under Heaven
is contradicted; yea, even what God himself has spoken. We must look for
unity of Tenets somewhere else; here we can find nothing but Diversity and
Medly: for as long as there are heads and passions; there will be contentions
and suits. I esteem my self Victor in all those that concern me, since you do
me the honor to uphold the justness of my cause: and since it is at the house
of Monsieur de Thou and not at that of Monsieur de -- where the true and
lawful Senate is held, whose right it is to judge our Book-affaires. Let the
worst come, I do not so take things to heart as perhaps you imagine; since I
write less to please others then to divert my self, and have need to be
rowsed up that way from my repose, lest it turn into a Lethargy: it suffices
me that your goodness dispences with my Papers as a Course prescribed by my
Physician; and that you do me the favor to believe, It is not necessary to be
perfectly eloquent to be perfectly what I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
October. 20. 1644.
LETTER IV. To Monsieur d'Argenson Controller of the Revenue in Poictou, etc.
SIR,
I Begin to conceive my solitude less obscure since I received the Title of
Illustrious from the hand of one of his Majesty's Officers, and to esteem my
self a more considerable person, in that you have daign'd from amids your high
employments to cast an obliging aspect upon the valleys of my Hermitage. To
represent to you my manner of living, is an enterprise on which I dare not
presume; neither would the Relation be fit the Curiosity of him that
understands the affairs of all Courts and States. Yet I must not dispute my
obedience; and will tell you in a word either what I do or what I do not. My
life, Sir, is a profound and drowzy pensiveness which yet is sometimes
interrupted by not unpleasing visions. Hunting is the delight of my neighbors,
but I affect it not: nor have I skill in matters of Husbandry, the
divertisement of our Monsieur d'Andilly. Our woods do not afford me a Nymph to
entertain the tedousnesse of the time with, as the good man Numa had, and our
honest friend Des Yveteaux. I am no gamester at Hoc, Primero or Tick-t^ck. So
that I am forced to busy my self sometimes upon my books to discuss the
torpor and languishing of idleness. But it is fit you know, that my meditations
are not seldom brought to a perfect birth; I employ paper and a Scribe, and am
continually sending somewhat to my good Lords and friends, wherewith either to
justify my laziness, or request pardon for it. Since you intend to be at
Poictiers the Fifteenth of this month, I have designed a present of this nature
to meet you there. And were not my Coach crippled by the loss of two of my
horses, I should my self be the bearer of my offering, and assure you in
person, that I am with as much ardour as ever,

SIR, Your, etc.
Aug. 1. 1645.
LETTER V. To Monsieur the Abbot de Talan.
SIR,
HAd not Monsieur de -- given me assurance of your facility to pardon, I should
not have presumed to appear before you after a negligence of so many ages. You
may please to judge the proportion of my remorse by the large periods wherewith
I compute the duration of my fault. I should have sinned above forgiveness,
according to the punctual regularity of Complement on the other side the
Mountains, and the Courtship of Italy. But I persuade my self you will allow
somewhat to the French liberty. You have heard, there was once in Italy an
honest man that made a Hymn to the Goddess Sloth, and took it on him as a
piece of honor to be her Priest, My ambition is not depraved yet to such
extravagancie, and I shall not be competitor with him for his function. The
cloudy fumes of my melancholy have not yet so overcast my reason as to make me
in love with nothing but night and sleep. And though I am much affected with
this Recesse of mine, as prohibiting admission to all Letters and News, yet I
cannot but confess that it is destructive to all civil society and commerce,
and of near resemblance to that wild condition of mankind before their union
into Government. I acknowledge my duty, although I wholly fail in the
performance of it. It is true, I am sometimes enchanted for whole years
together, and do no more correspond with my dearest friends, and next
neighbors, then with our Enemies of Spain, or the People that are separated
from us by the maine Ocean. But it is also a truth, that in my profoundest
drowsinesse I delight to be awakened with the remembrance of such persons as I
infinitely honor and esteem, in which number I am proud to reckon you. It is
yet a greater truth, Sir, that I shall ever most constantly observe the
essential part of friendship, and remain with much fervency, though with
little blaze and show,

SIR, Your, etc.
July. 14th. 1640.
LETTER VI. To Monsieur de la Nauve, Ensign to the Queens Guard.
SIR, My dear Cosen.
I Conceive not your purpose in your so wastfull profusion of your Rhetoric,
and heaping such elaborate complements upon me. Certainly, you could not have
employed more, to gain a coy Mistress, or impose upon a credulous Enemy. It Is
a clear evidence you have breathed the Air of Florence, and been scorched
with the Sun of Rome; and that you are but lately arrived from the land of
Eloquence. But though you come from that country, methinks you ought not to
have used their style of Italy, when you are treating with an ancient Gaul.
These caresses which would oblige another man, are in a manner injurious to me;
and you wrong my affection in imagining it to stand in need of your fine
language to feed and maintain it is heat. I can profess of my self, without
vanity; that I am an honest and good man; and on the other side without
flattery, declare you for a person exceeding generous. And these being
undisputable certainties, how can you apprehend any hazard of our friendship by
our silence? does it depend only upon a dozen lines every month? or is it
built upon a foundation of Paper, that is, upon one of the slightest and
weakest things in nature? I am not of this belief; and though I might justly
blame my own pertinacious slothfullnesse, and allege the multiplicity of your
affairs for the discontinuance of our correspondence, yet I had rather refer
it to the confidence of a perfect affection, which giving us an undoubted
assurance each of other, may safely dispense with both; for the observance of
those petty Laws which the world prescribes it self. If the Sluggard, be so
happy as to be visited by the Active and Industrious, he will endeavor to
infuse some of his Maxims into him with his treatment of Muscadine grapes, and
the fare of the village; using that of Virgil in lieu of all complements.

Aude, hospes, contemnere opes -- In September, I expect the performance of
your word, and am ever with all my soul,

SIR, My dear Cosen. Your, etc.
4 June 1641.
LETTER VII. To Monsieur de Gombervile.
SIR,
I Had not a less firm persuasion of the immutablenesse of your affection
before, then I have now upon the receipt of your Letter. Men knew how to love
and to be faithful too, before the art of writing was discovered: And since
that invention they have lied, deceived, and betrayed one another with greater
facility and cunning. Nay, the crafty malice of some has even practiced
poisoning by Letters; and revenge has been Ingenious to turn these marks of
friendship into instruments of destruction. Yet I do not infer from hence,
that we should therefore never trust to a way of communication which may in
possibility prove so dangerous. I only say, we are not to be so precise about
evidences of that dubiousnesse, and which serve oftentimes as well to disguise
and corrupt truth as to declare it. It Is from our hearts that we receive
sincere testimonies and assurances of our mutual passion, though our commerce
has not been managed with the stir and heat of answers and replies, yet
neither has our quiet been cold and lifelesse; nor is silence the same thing
with oblivion. Certainly if silence will not be allowed in the rank of Virtues,
yet it contains innocence in it, and does nothing at all detract from the
purity of engaged fidelity: But which is some thing more, it conserves it in
the memory, by locking and keeping it up in restraint. There is a certain
Author, either ancient or modern, that in favor of this happy silence
pronounces it, The nourishment of the soul and its conceptions. I presume
therefore, that these ten years past, you have had my company with you in
contemplation. My pourtrait, (but far better drawn and by a more masterly hand,
then that which you have of Ferdinand's doing) has never been out of your
sight; and undoubtedly you have meditated of me during all this long
intermission of our converse. You see what justice I do your friendship; and
will not you judge as heartily of mine? And unless I should now assure you
that I resound your name, over all this Province; that I fill this part of the
world with relations of the wonders of your generosity, and of the greatness
of your accomplishments, and that when I would feast my fancy and entertain it
magnificently, I betake my self to the Court of King Polexander, could you
possibly doubt of the certainty of such manifest and historical truth? Since
you know me so perfectly as you do, I conceive there is no necessity of
unripping my breast to you every day: and being also fully persuaded of the
affection I have for you, you cannot in reason doubt, that I am in all
sincerity, or to speak in the style of those that come from Paris, that I am
effectively,

SIR, Your, etc.
13. Feb. 1646.
LETTER VIII. To Monsieur de Bellejoy.
SIR,
HOwever you are of a contrary opinion, your friend has reason to curse his
profession. The stipend of a Partisan is preferable to the reputation of a
Poet, and it is better to lodge in gilded Palaces, then to chante of the Golden
age and lie in an Hospital. The famed Torquato Tasso wore tattered breeches,
and stood in need of charity. There is a Letter of his abroad in the world,
wherein he implores the largess of a crown. And yet there is a certain
Ignorant that I could name, who counts his wealth by Millions, and pities the
indigence of a senator of Venice. He dreams of purchasing Principalities and
Kingdoms, if there were any to be sold; and his high raptures have scarce left
him humility enough to judge himself deserving of less then Crowns and
Scepters. But, I beseech you, what means Monsieur the Kings Advocate to engage
himself into the trouble of writing books? This is such an unseasonable
absurdity as admits of no excuse. Surely it is too much Vacation with him in his
Law-Practice, and there is no great crowding in his apartment at the Palais. I
cannot tell what he would have me say concerning the first race of our Kings,
and his Latin observations upon the Salick Law. If he should send me the
contract of Pharamund's marriage, and an extract of Meroiiee's last will and
Testament; or, to go higher, if he should present me with the original of the
Twelve Tables of the old Roman Laws; with the first draught of those of Solon,
or the Manuscripts of those of Lycurgus, and Charondas; yet all these rarities
would not have power enough to awaken my benumbed curiosity, or tempt me in the
least to a desire of knowing more then I do already. My humor is become so
fastidious of every thing that is Grave or Serious, that my appetite cannot
possibly be restored, but by somewhat that is very delightful and Merry. In
the mood wherein I am at present, I would give both the Goddesses of Equity and
Justice, with all the skill in the Laws, the Ethics, and the Politickes; for
one drinking-song. I am not able to continue the trade any longer. The
expectation of golden Letters from me is too unreasonable for my stock to
furnish. But even now, I was overwhelmed in a great crowd of complements of
diverse languages; so that rather then go about to pay my debts, I am resolved
to break, and make a solemn renunciation to all my Greek, Latin, and French. I
would sooner choose to get my self naturalized in Base Bretagne and buy the
place of a Tax-gatherer in the Town of Quinpercorentin. It Is more then four
nights, since I closed my eyes to sleep. Have pity, Sir, I beseech you, both
you and the kings Advocate, upon

SIR, Your, etc.
19. March. 1640.
LETTER IX. To Monsieur de Clairville.
SIR,
I Had very unquiet apprehensions of the Catarrhe of Monsieur de --, and your
Letter has not delivered me from them, How well complexion'd soever he
appears to your eye, I ever suspected the falsenesse of that scarlet in his
cheeks from the first day I saw him. There are deceitful shows of a firm
constitution, and roses of an ill omen. It Is not Art alone that is guilty of
dawbing and counterfeit; Nature does some times dissemble, and flatter us with
a false Gloss. And hence it is, that I do not always pass my judgment in
favor of florid faces and a good color. Yet I would not have you add
despair to a man who has already received the alarm. Only advise him thus
from me, that he take care to settle his mind in peace, and that I forbid him
studying with as much caution as riot. Since you assure me he has a great
belief in my counsels, I enjoyne him to make no more Prefaces or Paraphrases;
indeed, not to do any thing at all either in Prose or Verse, as an Author or
Translarour. And this upon pain of incurring the displeasure of the dumb Muse
I lately showed, him, which is added by a certain Greek to the other Nine. She
was well satisfied, as she affirmed, with the secrecy of his thoughts, and a
quiet possession of his Soul. O prudent Muse! transcendently more discreet then
all her sisters. Of what incomparable excellency is silence, and how great the
vanity of words and ceremony! We commit sins enough beside this, and there is
nothing admits of a more easy reformation. But we had rather get rheumes and
catarrhes, distill our brains by drops, and become hecticall and consumptive
over our papers, then forbear to make Prefaces and Paraphrases. In expectance
of better news of the health of Monsieur de --, I rest,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jan. 10. 1638.
LETTER X. To Monsieur de Bois Robert Metell, Abbot of Chastillon.
SIR,
With your permission I will begin my Letter as you end all yours, and tell
you that I am overpress'd as well as you, although it be not with so fair a
burden. I profess my self a fugitive from the world and a desertour of civil
society. I proclaim this as much as possibly I can. And yet this world and
this society make semblance not to understand me. They take no notice of a vow,
which I caused to be published in print, that every one might know it. My
silence is molested every day by other men's Eloquence, and in penance for my
sins I am forced to become the mark against which all the complements of France
are levelled. Is it impossible for me to be quit of this trade of a
Letter-maker, which draws persecution upon me from every side? And is there no
way to resign it into the hands of some of our Brethren of the Academy, who
perhaps loves the employment and new acquaintances better then I do? Is it not
extremely ridiculous to have no business, and yet to write as much as a dozen
Bankers; to be idle in perpetual action, and notwithstanding always at
leisure, not to have so much spare time as to pick strawes on Holy days? I
would feign keep my self for a few, and admit comerce only with some select
persons. But what reason is there to expect a punctual answer from me to
Questions that come from Roiergne and Givaudan? or that I should make an
Elogium upon a book sent me from Castelnau d'Arry, and give my approbation to a
piece of Barbary-Latine, or low Brittany French? In which I must delude some
with flattery, and incur the displeasure of others by my freedom? Pardon me,
I beseech you, the untoward humor wherein I am: I did not think it would have
transported me so far. Three great packets have irritated it, and almost made
me forget what I owe to the civility of your friend. I intend to give him
thanks more at large: But it cannot be till the return of the next Post. I
need at least a weeks time to compose my brain, and reduce the acrimony of my
Rhetoric. I am ever most passionately,

SIR, Your, etc.
7. April. 1641.
LETTER XI. To the same.
SIR,
I Do but little trouble my self with the thought of Eloquence, and much less
of Fortune. I am fallen into that extreme degree of languishment, that I have
scarce strength enough to tell you of my deplorable condition, or courage to
desire the health I want. You have done me singular favors, but I am destitute
of taste even of the best things. I am at the same pass with that man of the
Country of Epigrams, who desired thirst of him that offered him wine. It Is not
Sir, that I am become so precisely devoted to sobriety, but because I have lost
my appetite. Fortune which is able to fill the widest desires of ambition is
not able to content the morosity of Melancholy. Even Joy her self would be
hardly put to it, to cheer my dejected spirits; unless perhaps that Holy-Joy
that resides in heaven, and very rarely descends to earth; where it lies hid in
the breasts of the reverend Fathers, and glimmers upon the countenances of
young novices.

Laetitiam, quae Caelicolum per limina semper
Discursat, raroque imas petit hospita terras,
Curarumque expers, lachrymasque exosa virago
Exultat, totoque abigit suspiria Caelo;
Hanc soli hic novere deo gens plena, sodales,
Ignati et Francisce, tui, et quos carcere clausit
Insontes Bruno, Bernardique optima proles,
Innuptum aeternumque omnes genus.
But I must here distinguissi between my self and my melancholy. I do not
cease to acknowledge the civilities that are done me, although I am not
sensible enough to apprehend them with pleasure; and in the Lethargy of my
other faculties; my reason acts strongly enough to keep me from being
ungrateful for the new obligations I have to you. Be pleased to do me the
honor to believe it, and never doubt of my constant fidelity. I will dye, as I
have lived,

SIR, Your, etc.
10. Aug. 1645.
LETTER XII. To Monsieur de Bonair.
SIR,
YOu cannot conceive how much I am displeased with the negotiation of Monsieur
de -- This was not to solicit for his friends Pension, but to make a purse and
desire charity for a lazar. When I imagine the patheticall beseechings to which
he was necessitated to descend for the obtaining of an ordinary answer, I blush
for shame at ten leagues distance, and a month after the thing done. Pardon
my weakness; I am the worst beggar in France, I cannot crave importunately,
or be glad of a favor that is gotten so. Monsieur de -- was too obliging to
debase himself so much in my behalf and to esteem nothing unworthy of his
quality, whereby he might do me a kindness. I shall desire much less from him
another time. I had rather have only his good wishes naked and pure, then his
good turns that come with so much violence, and are rather extorted then
granted. And the case would be equally eligible to me for one to fling bread at
my head, and that that bread were rather made of stone then flower. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Feb. 14. 1639.
LETTER XIII. To the same.
SIR,
IT is not for want of any kind endeavors on your part, that I am not in a
state of congratulating the propitiousnesse of fortune. Were she an enemy that
could be possibly reconciled, you should be the mediator to accommode our
fewd. But without question she will never trust the business to you: and on
the other side I should forward it so coldly, that it would be extremely
difficult to bring your good intentions to effect. Notwithstanding all
adventures, I am already deeply engaged to you; and search no further into the
cause for which you are pleased to lay a new favor upon me. Yet I will not
omit to tender my civilities, to the person you know of, and to testify my
acknowledgments to him in the manner you injoyne me. But a convenient time must
be regarded; and the complement shall nevertheless be sooner at Paris, then
the money can be brought to Angoulesme. In the mean time you may please to
show her the Letter of the late Marshall d'Effiat, which she is so desirous to
see, and you shall receive with this Packet. She will there observe that in
former times men could be pleasant and obliging in those places where now they
deride and destroy; and that the raillery wherewith favors and courtesies were
clothed in those days, was more honest and becoming then this which outbraves
modesty and want. I am with much passion,

SIR, Your, etc.
4. Jan. 1640.
To Monsieur Charlot, Farmer General of the Taxes.
SIR,
I Never, thought it would come to be necessary to recommend the Muses interest
to you, who make profession of generosity. Monsieur de Balzac whose merits have
given him an universal esteem, complains that you refuse him that
contentment which he promised himself from your favor: Although his rare
qualities, besides the justness of his request, may seem to speak enough for
him with a person so noble and intelligent, yet I was willing to write thus
much to you, and assure you that I resent the denial you gave him as an injury
done to me; as that on the contrary I shall also be partaker with him in the
obligation, which your speedy satisfaction of his desires shall lay upon him.
In confidence that you will not fail herein, I rest,

SIR, Your most affectionate servant. d'Effiat.
Paris 14 March. 1629.
LETTER XIIII. To my Lord Bouthilier, Lord Treasurer.
My Lord,
YOu think you have done me but one favor, and I account I have received two.
For in my Arithmetic it is a second benefit, that you did not expect till I
requested for the first; and the favor you have done me is not of much greater
value with me, then what your readiness to anticipate my desires has spared
me. A man that petitions with trembling, and falls back upon the least
refusal; who has all the necessary qualities that go to the making up of an
ill Courtier is very much obliged to you for pardoning him so many fears and
inquietudes as he should have undergone in his addresses to you; and for that
you have not had less regard to his modesty then his wants. These goodnesses
are not after the fashion of our Age, nor even of a better then ours. For
Antiquity has complained before us of a certain art of Difficulty which great
ones practice in the doing of good offices to enhance their price. They would
have not only Petitions and solicitations from their supplicants, but if they
durst, even be propitiated with Hymns and Sacrifices. You act, My Lord, by
principles more humane, and yet withal more noble. The obligation I have
received comes so immediately from your self, that I did not so much as
contribute my desires to it, but you were pleased to prevent them. What I
conceive I am bound to assure you of, in testimony of my grateful resentments,
is this, my Lord; that I receive the obligation with all its circumstances, and
there is no part of it, to which I have not an especial regard. I am not
ignorant, that in these days Philosophers are but little useful to the State;
or to learn what reason persons that are far distant from the verge of the
Court, have to hope for any influences from it. I see that favors are
distributed with much frugality: And the Astrologers have informed me of a
mortal constellation in the Heavens, that hangs over the most deserved
pensions. These considerations made me resolve to have nothing, nor desire
nothing: and I commended the good mannagement of him that did at first refuse
me with scurvy Tickets. But, My Lord, you have corrected the Malignity of the
Aspects, and qualified the Influence of the stars, in my favor. You were
pleased, to exempt me, by the prudence of your Conduct, from being involved in
the calamities of the times, and partaking in the common losses. What shall I
add further? You have either recovered one from death, or raised that which
was already dead. For in effect, I began to reckon my annual allowance in the
number of things past, and to style it, My pension of happy memory. After my
consideration and astonishment at these evenements, all that I can do is to
proclaim the Miracle, to bless the hand that wrought it, and to protest to
you with the zeal and devotion of a soul sensibly obliged, that I eternally am,

My Lord, Your, etc.
May. 12. 1639.
LETTER XV. To the same.
My Lord,
YOur favors are conveyed with so graceful and obliging circumstances, and
your manner of giving is so transcendent above the vulgar, that if I did not
apprehend something in it beyond the advantages of the present, I might be
deservedly esteemed of such gross ignorance, as not to be able to distinguish
betwixt rarities, and ordinary occurrents. I owe you new acknowledgments for a
new favor; for which I should endeavor a retribution, if it were possible for
my gratitude to be as ingenuous, as your goodness; and I had the gift to
embellish fine language, as you have the art of adding value and richness to
gold. It is precious in its own nature, but it receives a higher price, from
the stamp of your civility and coming to me from your own hands, I confess I
discern such attractions in it, as would have been unperceivable, if I had
received it from the payment of an under-Officer. You made choice of this
means to augment your gift, without enlarging the sum, and it is one of your
delusions to multiply four thousand livres to me, even to infinity. For so I
construe the course you were pleased to use in conferring an obligation upon me
beyond the ordinary standart of courtesy. Since there is subtilty and
contrivance in your benefits, they must not be received so negligently and
grossly as if they proceeded from a blind faculty and acting without
understanding. The form of it is worthy of as great esteem as the matter; and
therefore I ought to be, not only in the quality of one obliged for a favor
done me, but as rational and one curious of novelties,

My Lord, Your, etc.
20 Sept. 1639.
LETTER XVI. To Madam de Villesavin.
Madam,
IF you esteem things by their rarity, you ought to set a high rate upon my
Letters. They come not oftener then Anniversary Festivalls; and though you
oblige me every day in the place where you are, yet there needs a whole twelve
months time to send you one bare thanks from hence. It is not that I begin to
be a frugall husband of my words, after a squandring away of whole Volumes; and
that I am grown Covetous of that only Estate I am thought to be rich in: But
Madam, this estate being no more but the figure of sound, proceeding from the
mouth, and the issue of a small emotion of the brain, I am ashamed that I am
not able to present you with that which may properly be called Some thing; and
it vexes me always to employ my zeal, only to let you know it is unprofitable.
To what purpose do we truck with our protestations and drive a trade with our
wishes? And to what end is it to expose to sale that which we want, and to
enhance what we desire to gain? to put our selves in the high strain only to
get a reputation to our poverty, and to guild the front of a Cottage made of
earth and stubble? It is certainly far better to say nothing with silence,
then to say nothing in long harangues and discourses. I am confident Madam, you
have a better opinion of an insolent man in reality, that confesses himself so
without pretenses of sufficiency, then one that rakes up all the fleight false
artifices and points of Rhetoric only to dress up an image of gratitude. I am
not minded to undertake so unacceptable a service, and which I should manage
with so ill success. This would be the way to increase my debt by endeavoring
to get a discharge; and after I had kept a great bustle, I should still find my
self in the same place. I will take a clean contrary course, if you please and
present my self to you once a year, only to declare to you, that I will
never pretend to acquit my self from my engagements, but eternally remain,

Madam, Your, etc.

LETTER XVII. To the same.
Madam,
NEither my self nor my affairs are worth the trouble you take upon you. When
you have an opportunity to oblige me, you think nothing beneath you: And you
who are the most moderate person in the world do herein commit exorbitances.
You break the limits of decorum, even you who so religiously observe them in
all things else. Who was ever so surprised as I, when I understood you had
given a visit to Monsieur de -- and that only in favor of my interests? I
cannot comprehend, Madam, how this person could receive such an honor, without
descending from his high terms, and seeking their pardon by giving me
immediate satisfaction. But there are a sort of souls, whose hardness is
proof against all soft persuasions: there is a Colony of Savages planted about
Paris that understand nothing either Fair or Honest; neither History, Oratory,
the Muses or Apollo. Complements make no impression upon them, and they would
resist even the power of Exorcismes. I conclude not from their barbarousnesse
that you wanted authority, but I gather that virtue does not exercise her
credit, saving in the Civilized World. You can do, Madame, all that you promise
me, to get my business effected another way. Your goodness is ingenious,
ready and powerful to oblige me, but I have already received the greatest
obligation from you that possibly I can. For it is certain giving me money
would have been much less, then contributing of your patience to my affairs,
and receiving a denial in my behalf. I know not, whether in the like case my
stomach would be as good as yours, or whether I could venture so far in your
service, though I am with all my soul,

SIR, Your, etc.
3 July. 1642.
LETTER XVIII. To Madam de Bourdet.
Madam,
LEt the curiosity of people be as diligent and as laborious as they please,
there can never be found odours that may be paralleld to those which you
inspire into your sweet bags. The most subtle essences of Rome have a mixture
of terra damnata and impurity, in comparison. The Spanish perfumes are
sophisticate, and hurt more then they delight. These are all pure and innocent,
quickening and recreating the heart after they have flattered the brain and
revived the spirits. They may be called a Masterpiece of Delicacy and Physic
united. I may say that by your favor there remains no sort of honest and
ingenious pleasure undiscovered: and yet I may proceed further, that if you
were Queen of Arabia the happy, or the fortunate Islands, you could not have
presented me with any thing worthier of those two fair Kingdoms. It is true,
Nature is the first which labors in the production of odours, but it is you
who afterward cultivate her fertility and put her estate to improvement.
Though Amber, Jasmin, and Orange flowers be in themselves excellent, you raise
them into a temper that advances the nobleness of their being. These exquisite
things attain their perfection in your hands; you purge them from all the
defects of their matter, and bestow something on them beyond what they receive
from the Sun. So that though he should come nearer us by I know not how many
degrees, and had the same power at Saints that he has at Memphis, yet he
would ever stand in need of your art. If you did not second him, ^e could not
digest those rich and precious vapors, whose Oeconony and disposure is yours
alone, into their just and requisite temper. But do not think, Madam, that I
commend you for a vulgar Artist, and that thereupon I have a design to reduce
your merits to your fingers ends. I kn^w your value is high, and it is certain
your Province is owner of an ornament in you, that deserves the Envy of the
Court: which shall some other time be discussed more largely and with effect.
You will give me leave to tell you in the mean time, that it is no small
matter to be Associat with the Sun, to guide his productions to their end, to
understand the Art of making flowers durable, to build prisons for the most
subtle and thin spirits that inhabit the air. You confine them after such a
manner, and your structure is so admirable, that they still stream forth, and
notwithstanding remain still locked up in their fountain. This half restraint
hinders them only from being lost in a total liberty, and if they had been
less barred up, it might happily have been, I should only have received the
tidings of their flight, and your civility. Because my good kinswoman procu^ed
it for me, she thinks she has received it as well as I, and desires to
testify the thanks she owes you for it. Be pleased not to disallow that she
comes in to my assistance, and charges her self with the conclusion of my
complement. I resign the hardest task to her as being the most eloquent, and
leave her all the part of returning thanks, to assure you in a single
expression that I am,

Madam, Your, etc.
Jul. 15. 1636.
LETTER XIX. To Monsieur de Preizac, of the Kings Privy Council.
SIR,
THe gentlewoman who presents this Letter to you assures me that I am your
favorite, and promises her self great things from the power I have in you,
upon my recommending of her cause unto you. For my part, I willingly believe
what I extremely desire, and there is no need of much eloquence to persuade me
you do me the honor to love me. If it be so, Sir, I beseech you, let this
poor Oratrix experiense that your friendship is no unprofitable happiness,
and that my recommendation, shall not disadvantage a good cause. She is
persecuted by the most notorious Barreter of our Country, and I do not think
there ever came a more formidable one out of Normandy. His very name makes the
Widows tremble and Orphans run away; there is no parcel of meadow or
vineyard within three leagues of him secure to the possessor. He thinks he is
charitable to the children, when he vouchafes to be contented to take but an
equal dividend of their fathers estate. He dwells in deskes, and other places,
sacred to the exercise of discord; and if you think it fit for me to use the
phrase of our honest Plautus He is oftener seen in the Court then the Pretour.
Shall I conclude his Eulogy in one word. He is Attila in Epitome, that is, the
scourge of God to all his neighborhood and the cruellest persecution that the
world ever suffered or History relates. He is, possibly, proceeded from one of
less tyrannical principles. You will do a meritorious work, or rather an
action of Heroic charity, in contributing somewhat to the chastisement of this
public enemy. You will in one single person oblige a thousand more that are
concerned; But I shall not have a less engagement to you, then if you regarded
only my self, who am your suppliant, and most passionately,

SIR, Your, etc.
Sep. 12. 1640.
LETTER XX. To Monsieur de --
SIR,
IF I were as officious as I have been solicited to be, you had received from
me within this fortnight, a hundred and fifty recommendations complete. Even at
this very hour I have occasion for denyalls, and I should continue in the old
posture of my immovable stubbornness against all sorts of requests: but it is
impossible to stand out against the assaults of friendship, and I have strength
enough to resist the importunate, and come off safe with my modesty clean; but
I am not hard-hearted enough to disoblige good men, or neglect the kind Offices
of Civil life. Sometimes a man must suffer himself to be overcome, and not
obstinately keep the same Guard. Although I am gone out of the world, I willing
re-enter it, when either Honor or Virtue calls me thither. In such a case, a
vow undertaken at the foot of the altars might be dispensed withal. My first
design was not altogether so religious: at present it would be beyond
superstition, and a scandal to all Morality, if it should deter me from
doing that pleasure to Monsieur which he attend^ from me. This gentleman has
been my deer friend, ever since the reign of Henry the Great, and known to be
such by all France that can but read. I beseech you, Sir, let me not be
discouraged, that I should be unserviceable to him by my intercession, for
being able only to wish him success, in a business where he expects greater
effects from my interest in you; It is in your power to grant me his Quietus,
either wholly or in part. One would please me much better then the other, and
since there is scarce any tax but you mitigate without any man's entreaties. I
promise my self the obliging and deciding stroke of your pen, that will
expunge this for my sake, and leave nothing deficient in your benefit: the
Graces are not lame or crippled; they are all lovely Goddesses and fair in
perfection, and having seen them so in Seneca's books, you would not have
misshapen, and out of my knowledge in the favor which I hope from you, who have
all Seneca by heart. The way to interpret him admirably and understand him
better then Liferius who has commented on him, and Malherbe, who has
translated him, is to do what he advises you, and be as beneficent as you are
good. I once more beseech your aid in this affair, and to believe that I am
perfectly,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jan. 3. 1646.
LETTER XXI. To my Lord Bishop of Angoulesme, Almoner to the Queen of great
Britain.
My Lord,
BE pleased to admit my second address either in the way of an acknowledgment
or a further instance in the behalf of the Reverend Father -- It were great
pity that his eloquence should lie idle; and his zeal is so impatient of rest,
that if he preaches not in your Church, he will have much ado to be kept
within his Cell. I conceived you had formerly granted me this favor for him,
and I did already assure him of it. But what I attend from your goodness may be
Christened with what name you please. If you would not have it styled the
confirmation of a benefit formerly received, let it be the conferring a new
one: I am contented to owe it you as long as I live, and as if I received it
every day; and will thank you for it as often as you please, for I think it not
any trouble to return you my respects, and protestations that I am

My Lord, Your, etc.
^ul. 25. 1643.
LETTER XXII. To Monsieur de Lorme, Counselor and Physician to the King.
SIR,
FOr an infinite number of good offices which I have received from Monsieur
Drouet, I have promised to recompense him with your favor; so that you are he
that must pay what I owe him, and this is the only way I have to acquit my
scores with him. I will believe, you will not be backward to supply me with
your assistance herein; you have ever used so unlimited a goodness in my
behalf, that I cannot apprehend any niggardise, or closeness from that very
soul which I have found liberal even to profusion. Do by me Sir, as you are
used to do; and persevere to oblige me in a second person. Love a man whom
undoubtedly you will esteem. The desire he has to but know you, proceeds from
the skill he already has of many rare things; but you are his last and highest
Curiosity. He wishes this happiness, because he thinks to meet with every
thing in you; and that you have enough to latiate his appetite of knowledge:
yet I do not entreat an absolute abandoning of your self; your leisure and
our discretion must regulate the favors we expect from your goodness. I only
tell you that my friend does deserve very particular ones, and that if you do
discover to him the mysteries of the Arabians (for in those of the Grecians he
is p^rfect) he will not receive your instruction like a profane plebeian, or a
mere novice. His name is in great Letters in the Archives of Padua, and he is
newly come from under the tuition of the great Cremoninus, almost as great and
learned as himself. Not that he is a blind Proselyte of his deceased Master, I
can assure you, he is wedded only to his legitimate opinions, and never was any
faithful person more strongly persuaded then he, that the God of Abraham and
Isaac is the God of the living and not of the dead, etc. When you have seen
him, you will finish his Character. I am passionately,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jan. 8. 1641.
LETTER XXIII. To Monsieur de Zuylichem, Counselor and Secretary of State to
his Highness the Prince of Orange.
SIR,
I Have a favor to request of your Court, which your reputation, I conceive,
may procure me. It Is a longer License for Monsieur de --. His merit being so
well known to you, I will not make a rehearsal to you, how he has been
continually in the service above these ten years, and on his body bears
honorable testimonies of his courage, I only assure you thus much, that he
had ere this been on his way toward the Army if I had not detained him fast
with all my strength and employed the utmost power that friendship gives me, to
make him defer his journey. His affairs are so important, and of necessity
require his presence, that it would be the utter loss of them to abandon them
in the condition they now are in; Neve^thelesse this would not be enough to
stay him, and being more sensible of the least interest of Honor then of the
most considerable businesses he has: were it not for this violence that I
exercise upon him, he would break all other chains that bind him, to arrive at
his Charge, yet before the fifteenth of March. So that if any prejudice befall
him for this stay whereof I am the Author, you see clearly whom he has reason
to complain of, and how little I shall be satisfied with my counsel, if it be
of the nature of those medicines that corrupt the Liver, when they comfort the
stomach; and if I could not propound him the conservation of one thing without
the ruin of another. Wherefore, Sir, it is as well for the honor of my own
judgment, which is engaged in the advice I have given him, as for contenting a
person whom I love no less then my self, that I importune you not only for
your favor, and your good offices (which I know are very prevalent with his
Highness the Prince of Orange) but your expedients, and contrivances, which I
am confident, are most dextrous and effectual in all kind of affairs now.
Besides that the rigor of the Law does in some cases admit mitigation, and
justice does not exclude mercy, there is nothing impossible for a prompt and
intelligent head (as yours is) that can profitably employ industry, when it is
fitting to be sparing of Authority; and rescue that by some By-way, which would
be otherwise lost at Common Law. Monsieur de -- when he presents you this
Letter, will confer with you more particularly upon this subject: and offer
you his opinion what wheels are to be set on work, to make his friends
business feazible. I beseech you once more to undertake it for my sake, and if
you conceive my name of any power in your mouth, or that it were known enough
to be alleged to his Highness, I durst engage he should not have cause to
repent of granting me a favor, which I should trumpet out so loud, and send so
far, that, it may be, Posterity would thank him for it. It is a great while
since I have had a high Veneration, of that Prince as one of the demigods of
my Cabinet. But if he desires I should bear a more tender and ardent passion
toward him; if he would be the object of my love, as he is of my Estimation;
how delightful would it be to me to term him my Benefactour, and receive
something from a person, whom I should not cease to admire, though he should
take away all I have. I wish him Lawrells always green and fresh; and if the
War must end, a long and peaceable enjoyment of the purest fame that ever
was; and a Glory that even the Enemy shall acknowledge, with general accord by
the very Histories of Spain. In expectation of some news from you, I rest,

SIR, Your, etc.
Feb. 1. 1640.
LETTER XXIIII. To Monsieur the President de Pontae.
SIR,
MY first design is altered by the arrival of Monsieur de --. I was about to
have made a request to you, and he informed me that I owed you a thanks. I
understood from him, that he had found you so disposed to oblige me, that all
his Rhetoric lay on his hands. He told me too, that even Monsieur de Thou's
great name was used to you unnecessarily. In fine, Sir, I knew, that I needed
only to have employed my self, to do my self any good offices with you. I am
very fortunate to be so much considered in a place, where I thought I was
scarce known, and to find my self all at once in your good opinion where you
ought not to have afforded me a room until after a long trial of my service.
But I see clearly from whence all this proceeds. Rigorous justice is seldom
coupled with perfect Generosity: this last, which is properly their own, is
more impatient to produce her effects and less regular in observing
formalities. She would not be, as now she is, the honor of your own Province,
nor celebrated in all others, did she so scrupulously attend desert: she will
oftentimes prevent it, and I am one of the examples of this happy
unworthiness: you have rewarded my good intention, and answered my very
thoughts, as Heaven answers the religious silence of people upon earth. You
promised me that which I had not so much as asked for; but yet having promised
it to me after so handsome a manner, you give me courage to request it of you
more vigourously though my whole library should reproach me for it. I will not
stick to say, that my Niece became obliged to you for the conservation of her
just right, I shall also be obliged to you for that which was only wanting to
the tranquillity of my life. Though Philosophy promised me it, yet she alone is
not able to present me with it, nor appease my disquiets; but by stripping me
of my dearest affections, that would be too high an act of cruelty. Lay hold
therefore on this advantage which you have over her, that I may owe you my
repose for protecting the affections she had deserted; and that my contentment
proceed from your courtesy, and not from the strength of my imagination. I
hope all good success by all the fair prefages you have given my friend; and
if the destiny of a cause may be read in the eyes of a judge, he does not any
whit doubt the event of this he counsels me. Therefore to end, as he
prescribed me to begin, and since I am already in your chains; since I am
already fastened to you by this obligation, I will, for the future, only
continue to style my self,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jan. 6. 1641.
LETTER XXV. To the same.
SIR,
YOur facility has attracted a persecution on you, and you will be importuned
afresh, since you have laid a bait for an importunate man. It is dangerous to
give such persons admission, and not dispute their first approaches. There is
another sort of people, Sir, who take civilities for Deeds sealed before a
notary, and pretend they should be warranted even to the utmost of their
wishes. I am not altogether one of those unjust pretenders, who exact favors
as peremptorily as Creditours do their Debts. My solicitations too are
somewhat less violent, then those resolute suppliants, who part with their
modesty to gain their boon. But, in truth, not being able to doubt either of
the solidity of what you say, or extent of what you are able to do, I cannot
deny but I build upon the aid that you have promised us, and expect from your
protection all the good fortune of our cause. Heretofore the Gods and Cato,
were of a contrary opinion in the most important difference that ever was. I
hope in this, that is not of so much concernment, they will agree together for
my sake. I mean, Sir; A Cato, more mild and gentle then that Cato who rayled
at fortune, can wind her about to our side in this occasion, and bring good
luck to the business he undertakes. Pardon me the liberty of this last word,
for it is your easiness and goodness that suggested it to me; and I take
heart besides that, from the violent passion, wherewith I am, and ever will be,

SIR, Your, etc.
Dec. 15. 1641.
LETTER XXVI. To Monsieur the Mayor of Angoulesme.
SIR,
I Promise my self, you will condescend to the request this bearer will make
to you from me: it concerns the publ^que as well as my particular interest;
and I know you are so exact in the functions of your Charge, that to discover
an enormity to you, is almost to redress it. At the entrance into the Suburb
Loumeau, there is a way, not to be complained of in ordinary expressions: it is
more intricate and perplexing then a Labyrinth, it would teach a man to swear
that can say nothing but Verily, it would change all the meekness of a father
of the Oratory into choler. It does not fortify Angoulesme, though it makes
people dread to approach it on that side. I had like, the other day, to have
been cast away there, and wrackt in the mire. If it had been in the maine
Ocean, in a scurvy shallop, and by the impetuousnesse of a tempest, it had been
but an ordinary adventure: but upon the continent, in a Coach, and the serenity
of the fairest weather, nay and in your Mayoralty, it is a mischief cannot be
comprehended; there is no comfort for it. Three words of an Order, which I
entreat you for, will reduce things to a better pass, and oblige all the
Country round. Join, then, the benedictions of them without the City, to those
which you receive within it, and suffer not the face of your Corporation, in
the embellishing whereof you are industrious in other places, to be disfigured
by so foul a spot in this. But after you have considered the Public, would
not you value me at something, and bestow a favor on a person who is known not
to be ungrateful for the courtesies he receives? There are some in the world
will tell you more, and assure you, you have an opportunity to extend your
reputation beyond the limits of your own Province, and make the year of your
Mayoralty last long. I shall know, at the return of this Bearer, whether those
men speak truth or not, and whether you so highly esteem the thanks I shall pay
you, after the request I have made to you: whereunto I have nothing further to
add, but the assurance I give to be sincerely,

SIR, Your, etc.
Ju. 4. 1638.
LETTER XXVII. To Monsieur de Villemontee, of the Kings Council, and
Controller of the Revenue, in Poitou, Saintonge, Aunix, etc.
SIR,
I Will not relate to you the adventures of that person who spoke to you, whose
conditions are as deformed as his body. I will only tell you, that I do not
conceive his testimony fitter to be received then mine: and though I give it in
an affair that concerns my self, you have so good an opinion of my honesty,
and discretion, as to think I would not recommend to you any unjust interest,
or make you any uncivil request. I beseech you, Sir, then be pleased to
consider, that this place which has so great a reputation, yields but a very
small revenew. Vlysses's Ithaca was very renowned, and yet it was but a nest
hung upon a rock; mine, as you may imagine, is somewhat less. It is,
peradventure, a handsome desert, but not a rich Parish. The ways in it are
very fair but the fields very barren, and so consequently this Country more
agreeable for the secesse and meditation of a Philosophe^, then fit to fill the
stores of a Housekeeper. Hitherto the Soldiery have only looked on us, not
meddled with us: now, I beg you for a protection from unarmed enemies. With
their wandes, and bits of paper they make themselves more formidable then the
C^oates. Their way of writing has no affinity to mine; and the language they
speak, is unknown to me. But on the other side, they understand neither
Humanity nor Reason; neither Schools nor the Morality taught in them. If you
please, Sir, let them learn what distributive justice is from you, since they
have not been at leisure to learn it from Aristotle; for I am confident you
will reform all things according to reason. Besides proportioning the burden
according to the feebleness of him who is to bear it, it will be a sensible
obligation to me of the greatest adherents to your virtue; a man that extolls
you with all his power. and that is with all his soul,

SIR, Your, etc.
Aug. 20. 1642.
LETTER XXVIII. To Monsieur de la Thibaudiere.
SIR,
I Just now heard tidings that you were within six leagues of this place; and
you, it may be, will be so good as to let me hear from you by your self; but
in the mean time, if the Storm of your troops should approach our villages,
and that of my residence be threatened, you know very well what I have title to
exact of you on such an occasion. I entreat all that your favor with Monsieur
d'Aumont can procure, and injoyne you to make my interest your own: friendship
is imperious, and her terms are absolute. You have read the confident requests
written by Cicero, Lucian, and other our honest friends of Ancient time. I
pretend to be loved by you after that handsome manner, though it be not to be
met withal any where but in History; and though I know, common fame is not in
that particular favorable to your virtue. That accuses you for being little
sensible of other men's griefs, and being cured of an infirmity, whereof it is
seemly to be sick: but grant, it did not accuse you falsely, and that you were
more Stoicall then Chrysippus and Cleanthes, I am confident, I should give you
back again the passions that Philosophy had bereaved you of; and make the
first breach in your heart. But public fa^ie is a liar, and Report
calumniates you; that heart has long since been softened for me, and it is
certain, I am no less your dear and well loved friend, then,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jan. 15. 1642.
THE SECOND BOOK. To Monsieur de --
LETTER I.
SIR,
YOur Letter of June was delivered me in the middle of August, and I answer it
in a Condition more capable to move pity, then confer comfort. My old
diseases have of late assailed me, increased by a Meagrim which does so torment
me, that it would be a wonder, if a grief so neighboring to the brain should
leave the faculties of it at liberty. I am confident your goodness will pardon
my weakness, and I hope you will not take it ill that in this general
dissipation of my most reasonable thoughts, I cannot make you equal returns,
but am forced to send you dross for gold, and things of no esteem, for things
most excellent. It is sufficient Sir that I am able highly to value (as I do)
the most eloquent and handsome dress you are pleased to put on your sadness:
Yet I must needs tell you, if it should still continue, though accompanied with
all sorts of Arguments, and Colors of Rhetorique, I would take upon me not to
allow your perseverance therein. I would know willingly what you mean by that
magnificent aggravation of your misfortune, by that Art, and those Ornaments
you make use of in the setting forth your loss? Instead of letting it wax old,
and dye with time, it seems you seek to renew it, and feast your self with it
every day; and whereas it is expected you should by little and little blot it out
of your mind, you would preserve it fresh and ever new, that (if possible) by
the most lively and lasting'st Colors it might be kept to eternity. But how
can an eternity be look for from the frailty of a picture, since we cannot
meet with it in the strength of marble? Years spoil and consume it, it glitters
finely, and then moulders into dust, and returns to its first nothing. It is
from hence Sir, I find my greatest advantage to assail you, and summon you to
yield up to Reason. We have in our Friend lost a most worthy Senator, I
confess it. But the Senate it self shall be destroyed, and one day there
shall be no more Counselors of Paris, then Conscript fathers of Rome, or
Areopagites of Athens. We have in the same friend been deprived of a
Mathematician, an Orator, and a Poet: I confess this too; but do not you
sufficiently know, man lives only among casualties and walks only upon
ruins? How long is it, I beseech you, Since Mathematicians, Orators, Poets
died? We should accustom our selves to such like accidents as these; they are
as ancient as the world, and yet we look on them as strange things, and
novelties of to day. These are no Prodigies, they are very vulgar and ordinary;
and he who said There was none but the first death, and none but the first
night that deserved astonishment and sadness, spoke a truth whereon we ought
to reflect more then we do. Every thing without exception is condemned to the
same punishment; and not only Parliaments and Judges are things not immortal,
but learning shall perish as well as the learned; and the height of Astrology
shall be no more privileged, then the lowness of Grammar. God who will
dissolve the Heavens to build more beautiful ones, will not protect Globes and
Astrolabes in the destruction of their object. He will not leave us any notion
of our small acquaintance here, in the happy future he prepares for us, because
we shall have no leisure there to enjoy them: our felicity shall be altogether
serious. He will abolish both Prose and Verse; he will put down Prayers and
Hymns, and all other imperfect forms of speaking to him, and make way for a
more noble and excellent manner of praising him. I cannot, then, think it
strange, whatsoever your exclamations say, that Artists and their works have an
end, since the Arts themselves as well as their instruments must find a period.
But grant it were not so, yet me thinks Sir, this End is no such horrible
thing. I am so little at Amity with the world that I do not much deplore any
whomsoever, for being no more in it. These five and thirty years I have been
tired with it, and every thing in it displeases me: so that I murmur and
exclaim against it. My friends are the only objects in it, that are not
distastefull to me; and I hope you take it not ill, that I put you in that
Role, since with passion I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Aug. 19. 1638.
LETTER II. To Monsieur L' Huillier, of the kings Council, etc.
SIR,
I Am always concerned in some trifling employment or other, so that I have
neither business nor leisure. My unhappy fate has imposed this voluntary
servitude upon me which most commonly takes me up in frivolous affairs, and
prevents me in the discharge of my more necessary duties. This is the only
thing in my opinion, that can justify my silence to you, and oblige you to
pity, instead of Condemning me; I have owed you a Letter a great while, and
the news of Monsieur de Peiresk's death would require something more of me, if
I should take counsel of my first suggestions, and act according to the usual
Custom. But all good offices are not to be done to all kind of persons. It
would be an affront to Philosophy and a doubting the profession you make of it,
to treat you like vulgar men. I remember Seneca sometimes comforted women and a
servant, but I do not observe that any body undertook ever to comfort Seneca. I
assent to you concerning whatsoever they speak most highly and magnificently of
your friend? and if you will allow me to make use in French, of a sentence
borrowed from Greece, I add that we have lost in that rare person, a piece of
the wracks of Antiquity, and a relic of the Golden Age. All the virtues of
Heroic times were retired into this lovely soul. The universal corruption had
no power over the goodness of his Temper; and the evil that touched him,
could not defile him. His generosity was not bounded by the sea, nor confined
to this side the Alps. He sowed his favors and civilities on all sides; and
had remerciments sent him from the remotest corners of Syria and the top of
Mount Libanus. In an indifferent fortune he had the thoughts of a great Lord,
and never ceased to be a Mecaenas, although not supported by the amity of
Augustus. So that in this regard I shall not scruple to aver that he
maintained the primitive splendor of gallantry in France, and the good esteem
that foreign nations do yet retain of her. I am of as certain belief as you
Sir, that he will be lamented of what ever is great and illustrious, reasonable
and intelligent, both within and without the Kingdom. I am confident Italy
will celebrate his memory in all her learned assemblies, and that in the Ages
of the Princes Barberini. Rome cannot be indifferent to the memory of one so
dear to the Muses; and I make no question but the Holy Fa^^er who va^ewed him
so highly, cannot forbear to bewail him; for in the midst of that serenity,
which, above us; environnes him, this cloud of sadness reaches his height. But
concerning all these things which you write to me, far more eloquently then I
am able to repeat, your discretion without doubt can afford your self greater
Consolation then what you seem to desire from your friends. If your loss were
not common to you with the noble Multitude, if both sovereigns and people were
not interested in your grief, it might be thought almost insupportable; but
since there is no body but bears his part with you, certainly there is a great
deal of sweetness in an affliction that makes all the world on your side; nay
should you esteem your self unhappy in this respect, it could not but be with
some kind of Contentation. There is, in earnest, I know not what that pleases
in the very wounds of this nature: when Princes are equally concerned with
private persons, and Paris joins with the Country in the same fellowship of
sadness, why should we nitty or lament? It is a funeral, little less
splendid then a Triumph the praises and acclamations abroad take away all the
bitterness of domestique Complaints; and methinks, the possession of that
Glory, which cannot be ascertained but by death is very well worth three or
four scurvy years that might have been annexed to old age. To this glory if I
could contribute any thing I should esteem my self happy, and toward this I
offer you my hands and labor, though I cannot erect either Colossus'es or
Pyramides? yet, Sir, without offense to those who have a larger, and more
sublime fancy, who would set whole Forests and Mountains on work. I have heard
that some Artists have wrought in little, with much commendation; It is
possible to be famous for ones Art, and not be prodigal of the Materials: a
great deal of matter may be comprehended in a few words, which by a long
discourse is enervated. There are bad Preachers and scurvy funeral Orations
enough in the world already. I beseech you let not me increase the number, and
be one of those officious enemies, who thus with a good intention injure the
patience of the Living, and memory of the dead. I have too great an Ambition of
pleasing you, to give my self the trouble or run the hazard of disturbing
your quiet. And if you were indisposed, I do not set so high a rate on my
medicines to make experiments on such a soul as yours. Take it not ill then I
beseech you, that I obey you after another fashion then you commanded me; and
that I go whither you desire me, but by a way that to my self seems most
convenient. Procure Messieurs de P^i to approve of it too: for in my judgment
they are no less inveterate enemies then my self to these ridiculous Alasses
and tiresome lamentations: for, if I be not deceived, they prefer the
shor^est Eulogy in Livy, before the great volume of discourses printed after
the death of the late King: though Legitimate Apoth^osies are not made any
where but in their studies, and that from thence credit and esteem are
dispensed, and men are declared Illustrious. I will not omit, since they will
have it so, to do my devotions apart, nor will I scrupulously refuse room in my
Works to a virtue, which they have already listed up to Heaven. The
Contentment of my friends shall ever be dearer to me then my own reputation.
The least beck from you shall have a greater power over me, then that Lethargy
of Spirit, you so handsomely reproach me with. And therefore though I should
spoil the business that you Imagine I shall give luster to, doubt not but I
am very glad to evince to you on this opportunity that I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Aug. 15. 1640. MEntion is made of this Letter, in the life of Monsieur de
Peiresk, at the end of the sixth Book: and not to speak any thing concerning
the excellency of it, let it suffice to know, it was desired in Rome before it
was written in France; as appears by a Latin Epistle of the Abbot Bouchard
printed at Venice, after the funeral Oration spoken in the Academy of
Humorists, Here are subjoined the two places of the History, and the Epistle.

Alias etiam praetereo, quibus amici eruditique, in quorum pectoribus Candor et
Gratitudo inhabitat; ut dolorem testati sunt, sic consolationem mutuam
adhibuerunt, Pervenere ad me complures, sed principem locum eae tenent, quibus
Jo. Ludovicus Guezius Balzacius, celebris ille scilicet, cui nemo non Gallice
modo, sed Latin etiam scribentium, elegantiae palmam non facile cedat,
singulariter parentavit, Lib. 6. de vita Peireskii per Petrum Gassendum

Tu vero interea Nicolai Claudii Fabricii Peirescii (...) memoriam, qua soles
pietate, colere perge; et Petrum Gassendum etiam atque etiam urge, ut suos de
ejus vita Commentarios, quam maxim copiosos ocyus dimittat; sed in primis a
Rigaltio et Balzacio, hominibus in literis quibus dediti sunt, summis atque
perfectis, omni studio contend, ut aeternis elegantissimorum scriptorum suorum
monumentis, Heroem nostrum velint ad Inmortalitatem consecrare, vale. Romae
Kalendis Januariis A. C.N.M.D CXXVIII Ex Epistola Johannis Jacobi Buccardi ad
Franciscum Olearium, Regiarum Rationum Lutetiae Magistrum.



LETTER III. To Monsieur de Bayers.
SIR,
IF I had known of your loss earlier, I should sooner have shown you what a
part I bear in your grief. I just now understood the cause of it in the
Gazette, and make no question, how strong and how fortified soever you be with
Constancy, but that you are sensible of the blow your family has received, and
which will be felt all over our Province. Without injury to nature, reason
cannot rank such like Accidents in the number of things Indifferent.
Tenderness of heart is not incompatible with greatness of spirit; for those
who have undauntedly seen their own blood trickle down, yet have with tears
bewailed their kindred and friends in that Condition. Well, Sir, we must not
think to make war, upon other terms: There was ever mourning and tears, even
on the side of victory. Let us hope to recall him home who gives us occasion to
speak so often of it, and let us not ambition the Empire of the World, at the
rate of so dear a life as his. You must in this life a^me your self with
comfort against all sorts of death; and that great kinsman of yours should
countervaile all the former misfortunes of your life. It is a perpetual reason
of Content and cause of satisfaction, that there is no color why you should
grieve for any one; or any lament you. Yet, I do it, Sir, in obedience to
custom; knowing withal that that part of the soul, which suffers, is stricken
sooner, then that which Reason has warded off the blow. I thought it was
necessary for me to enter into the same thoughts with you, but that it was as
necessary too, to get out of them; and by a way which without doubt your self
had made choice of. I will hope that hereafter you will possess all your joys
pure, and serene; and that Heaven, who loves you, reserves successes for you,
wherein your Moderation shall be more requisite, then your Constancy: at least.
I wish them you withal my heart, being without Complement,

SIR, Your, etc.
June 5. 1642.
LETTER IV. To Monsieur de Villemontee of the Kings Council, Controller of the
Revenew in Poitou, Saintonge, Aunix, etc.
SIR,
YOu will say, it may be, my zeal renders me impatient; but though you could
justly tax it of indiscretion, yet I must send this bea^er to you, to know at
his return what I cannot be ignorant of without disquiet. When I parted from
you, I left you in the best plight, the study of wisdom could settle a mind
perfectly reasonable; and the Letter you did me the honor to write to me,
informs me of nothing that should not continue you in this good temper.
Nevertheless, I confess that sentence of sadness among the rest runs in my
mind. And in truth it would trouble me if so drowzy and effeminate a passion as
that is, should encroach upon your vigilance and fortitude. I remember the sage
discourse you held me in, when your wound was yet green; sure you have not
forgotten the great Precedent you then propounded, and what was so ready in
your memory at the day of our separation. They who bequeathed us those high
examples, concerning which we held so long a conference; were not happy or
unlucky but in the good or bad fortune of the Commonwealth. They bare so great
a love to their Country, that they left none for themselves. They knew no
dysasters b^t wicked actions and the blame that attends on them; they dreaded
faults, but despised every thing else. And unless you mightily dissembled, you
are of the same mind: these are your principles as well as theirs; and
consequently Sir, while you do the King service with courage and understanding,
and your Gown saves him the expense of an army on this side the Loire: while
you maintain your self in repute at the Court, without losing the affection of
the people, and while by your dexte^ity the bitterness of your medicines make
not the Physician distastefull; I cannot think you have any need of
consolation; nor that the Melancholy and clouds of an afflicted soul can
retain their mists before the splendour and light of so unblemished a life. He
whom I have sent to you will, without doubt, bring me the confirmation of all
this, and the meaning of a sentence which I shall be very glad rightly to
understand; my passion is wittily resolved to perplexe me, but your goodness,
me thinks is obliged, to draw me out of it: for I am not an ill interpreter of
your words, but because it is with affection, (which is never without alarmes),
that I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jul. 1. 1641.
LETTER V. To Monsieur de Lymerac de Mayat, Captain in the Regiment of Conty.
SIR,
I Have no great inclinations to serve you in your request. I know not how to
bewail a man who has gotten so much honor as you. You are more fit for Brave
men's envy, then Philosophers compassion: and your laurells are much more
delicate, then your chains: a stubborn Imprisonment is not so great an evil
as you imagine it: it gives ill influences leisure to pass over you: it
reserves a man to a happier season; and, it may be, we should have lost you, if
our enemies had not preserved you. As concerning the Brimmers of Germany, of
which you spoke to me with such grief, as if they were Turkish bastinadoes;
methinks, your sobriety is there a thought too superstitious. You must (as
they that talk proverbs say) when you are at Rome, do as they do at Rome, and
not to allege to you great Commanders. Do not you know that wise Ambassadors
have heretofore been fudled for the good of the Kings affairs, and sacrificed
all their wisdom and gravity to the necessity of the times, and the custom
of the countries in which they resided. I do not advise you to debauchery, that
is prohibited: but I do not think there is any harm in drowning your cares,
now and then, in Rhenish wine, and to make use of that pretty trick of
contracting the time, which seems tediously long to prisoners. Your father all
this while labors hard to procure your liberty, and you must think he does not
forget his cares and usual activenesse in a business that is nearer his heart
then all his other. For my part, being able to contribute only my good wishes,
I can assure you, they are most ardent and passionate, for I am as much as it
is possible to be,

SIR, Your, etc.
Dec. 15. 1645.
LETTER VI. To Monsieur de Prizac, of the Kings Privy Council.
SIR,
IT is better to be sick in your company, then well in your absence. The
delight I now take, comes not near the comfort you gave me; and your society
is so good, that it makes even diseases pleasant. If it cannot be had at a
lower price, then lamenesse, I renounce the use of my legs; and beg God to
give me my infirmity again, on condition he send back my comforter. That is to
say, I am not my self without you. Lately I held you in esteem only for your
virtue, which I looked upon then as being unconcerned; and as on a good, I had
no title to. Now I am in love with your person, which gives me a propriety in
you, and a right to call you my own: This rowzes and awakes me in the night:
this makes me jealous of Monsieur d'Espesses, the Lord Abbot of Cerisy, our
dear Monsieur de la Chamber, etc. I say nothing to you about your most learned
and eloquent discourses, Monsieur Caplain will show you what I write to him
concerning them, in the ecstasy you left me; to which I can only annexe this
little labell of my admiration. O how prevalent is truth when you dispense it!
and how much have good causes, need of you, to be as strong as they are just! I
am with all my soul,

SIR, Your, etc.
Apr. 3. 1639.
LETTER VII. To Monsieur de Couvrelles.
SIR,
AFter I have told you that, honoring you perfectly as I do, I cannot be
moderately touched with your loss, I have no mind to engage my self in the
Common place of Consolations. I preach not steadfastness to a man who has kept
himself upright more then once in the public ruins, and has afforded us
examples. You are he that I would be; and Monsieur Huggens's Constanter (which
he took for his Motto because his name was Constantine) belongs to you much
more justly, then if you had only a title to it by virtue of an allusion to
your name. Well, in earnest I am too much obliged to that honest Gallo-Belgick
for his remembrance of me; and that fine language he write you to show me. But
since he is afraid to trouble me with unnecessary Letters, me thinks, I ought
to have as great a respect to his business, as he has indulgence to my
sloth; and then I shall do discreetly, by not putting my self to trouble nor
him. About five or six months since, he sent me the Plat-forme of a Palace that
he has builded, and write me word that he was providing me an apartment there.
Since I am so unfortunate that I am not able to crawle so far as to Saint
Bris to tender my respects to you, sure, I shall hardly get over sea to take
possession of the lodging prepared for me. But knowing, Sir, that you have an
exquisite skill in the curiosity of Arts, and that you are taken with handsome
figures, I thought it would not displease you to look upon this, and that a
house so learned within and without, whose weather-cocks are Spheres, would
deserve to entertain a guest of as brave a spirit as your self. I beseech
you, then accept this picture, for you are a better judge of it then I: and
take it kindly that in this present penury of my own village, I treat you with
what is sent me out of a foreign Country. I am ever, with passion,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jul. 2. 1641.
LETTER VIII. To Monsieur l'Huillier of the King Council, etc.
SIR,
I Believe more then you have written to me. I doubt not but the Mourning has
been general in the place where you are; that you have made the Parliament,
the Garrison, and the people weep; your eloquence makes your grief contagious^
and what ice, I mean not of Lorraine, but of Norway or Muscovia, would not
thaw at the warmth of your lovely tears? what Barbarous man could forbear to
become gentle, and share in your woes, hearing you lament in terms so
pathe^icall, and which are so easily conveyed from one heart to another? For my
part, I who believe I have lost a friend in Monsiour d'Aligre, as well as you;
need neither example nor persuasion, to be excited to pay him my sad tribute;
for before I received your Letters, -- Crudeles Superos atque Astra vocabam.

If you desire any thing more, and that I can contribute ought to the
consecration of a memory already sacred to me, you know your desires are
commands to me, and I promise you not to be sparing upon this occasion. I shall
be very glad to do an act of obedience in an act of piety: and now immediately
I invoke our Goddesses to dictate lines to me that may last, while the vanity
of man carves out marble, that shall decay, etc. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jan. 18. 1642.
LETTER IX. To Madam des Loges.
Madam,
I Received your Letter upon the taking the anniversary journey of --. Since
you are so good as to give him audience, whenever he appears before you, I
will only deliver you the matter in gross of which he shall give you a more
particular account at Oradour. He will make you, Madam, a most lamen^able
relation; you will understand from him that my miseries are everlasting, and
the comforts I had, begin to slack. My mind grows obstinate in Melancholy,
and abandons it self to a faintness that makes it incapable of all the noble
functions you speak of. The only sustenance that was not unpleasant to it, it
now disrelishes like the rest, and my books are no more my comforters. How can
cheerful thoughts be conversant with such fatal objects as environ us on the
right, and left hand? or how can we quietly enjoy the Present which is not
good, on the Eve of a Future, which must be worse; and which threatens all men
with famine and poverty? I protest, I never attained to so high a pitch of
Philosophy. Monsieur de -- himself says, it would be such a grand
equivocation as would make all Philosophers counted ridiculous. He says,
nothing must be read but the lamentations of Jeremy, nor any thing written but
Wills. I am reduced almost to such a condition, and am not valiant enough to
resume the employment I have discontinued; did not, Madam, your commands
interpose, and you imagine you had occasion of my language. I have sent you
what you enjoined me, and it is drawn from the bottom of my heart. Possibly,
it may want the graces and ornaments of a Rhetorician, but I conceive that for
that reason it will not be of less valid evidence, that he who writ it, is
perfectly,

MADAM, Your, etc.
May 12. 1640.
LETTER X. To the same.
Madam,
I Understood from a friend of mine newly come out of Holland, of the loss you
lately received before Breda, but judging of your grief according to my
acquaintance with your disposition, and not doubting but it is much greater
then ordinary, I dare not presume to apply any thing to it. These are maladyes
to which foreign medecines are not to be applied, since they commonly prove
but ineffectuall. It is possible a man may not weep with you; but it is
impossible to condemn your tears. The austerest Philosophers do here suspend
the severity of their Decrees: and Zeno would be worse then Phalaris, if amidst
the tyranny he exercises over humane passions, he were not indulgent to
natural piety. So that, Madam, none has any title to comfort you but your
self: you alone are capable to do that good office to your self, and manage
that affliction which I look upon with amazement. I am confident, you will be
successful in it: for knowing very well that there is as much fortitude as
tenderness in your soul, I do not believe that, contrary to the course of
things, you would have fortitude submit, and the weaker get the mastery of the
stronger. Heretofore I have heard you value life so little, that by your own
principles it were no great misfortune to do dead. And though you may have
renounced this opinion, yet you will grant that the absence which seperates
those who live, from those who live no more, is too short a thing to merit any
long bemoaning. The cause of obstinate griefs cannot be justified but by
presupposing an eternity in this life, or a despair of that which is to come.
But the very example of the persons we bewail confutes the first supposition,
and the last is inconsistent with the promises of the son of God. So that,
Madam, I should not only forget the common Fundamentalls of our Faith, if I
should comply with the persistance of your sadness: but on the other side
should forget that I deal with a Lady, who is able to read excellent lectures
of wisdom to Men; and with a Mother who gives not precedence in point of
courage and Magnanimity to all the Matrons of Lacedemon? I will only therefore
represent to you, to banish vulgar thoughts out of your head, that it is not in
vain, we call you Heroine, and besides to give satisfaction to truth and my
affection, that it is impossible but I must be sick of all your griefs, being,
as I am, withal my soul,

MADAM, Your, etc.
Dec. 16. 1638.
LETTER XI. To Monsieur de Borstel.
SIR,
THere are words to bewail other afflictions, there is none to express this:
for I confess I know not what are become of my wits, since the loss we
received. I am as planet-strucken as if the Sun had tumbled out of the
firmament; and instead of blending my tears with yours, or taking heart from
your example, I abide here without motion and action, as stiff, as heavy, and
insensible as one of the rocks of my Hermitage. A foul interdicted by grief
cannot make any use of her reason. My Stoicall resolutions are reversed: Zeno
and Chrysippus has given me the slip. Hic me, and Philosophia, and eloquentia,
and loquentia ipsa deficit. What shall I do? what shall I fay in the affrights
of an Eclipse so mortal to all that profess virtue; in the mourning, in the
desolation of our Pernassus? Every thing is blind, every thing is deaf, every
thing is dumb amongst the Muses. I have nothing else to say, then, unless
once again, that I have lost the use of my speech, except for those three or
four words, which will assure you that such as I am, I will be all my life,

SIR, Your, etc.
Sep. 1. 1641.
LETTER XII. To Monsieur Menage.
SIR,
SInce you have heard talk of Alcimedon, and have a mind to see him, your
longing shall be satisfied. But I tell you, this is not a counterfeit
Alcimedon, as you have been informed, nor do I by a Roman Gentleman personate a
French Lord. No man is concealed under this picture. He is a native and true
Roman: of the race of the Fabricii, the Fabii, or the Scipioes, choose which you
please. He died of a sickness at Rome the day before the City was taken by the
duke of Bourbon, who commanded the Emperor Charle's army. It is true, History
does not mention this last of the Romans, but tradition has discovered him to
me, and you know I have had several conferences with Marquess Pompeo.
Frangipane, who was a treasury of the rarities of his Country. I am lately in a
scurvy humor, withal that I do, and my most darling compositions do not like
me a whole day together; yet I must needs tell you, this has not yet distasted
me, and I am still constant to Alcimedon. I shall know from you whether my
inclination judges rightly, and if my Love be lawful.

Rivalisque utinam noster dignum Alcimedonta
Igne tuo credas, Licini; tunc se omnibus unum
Romulidis, meliorque etiam quos protulit Hellas,
Praeferat Alcimedon.
I am, SIR, Your, etc.
Sep. 15. 1643.
LETTER XIII. To the same.
SIR,
A Whimsey has come into my Doctour's crown to make a collection of funeral
verses, and to add them to Alcimedon: it was not his fault that you had not
Arguments to every one of them, nor that the margents of every Copy were not
fringed with Annotations. I gave him thanks for his good will, and thought I
had no occasion to use a Grammarian. Yet it will not be amiss to inform you
what the subject was, which occasioned those Ridiculous tears which you will
find in the end of the book. It was the death of an old university-post, famous
for his ill favored, looks, and ^atter'd breeches; a disciple of Jack
Puddings, and near of kin to Amadis Jamin; a profound writer of Madrigalls,
Ballades, and Catches. These thirty years past, he has come down but once
from St Hillaryes, Mount over the bridges; he was a more religious observer of
St. John Portelatins feast, then of that of Easter. He never called Jupiter any
thing but the Thunder-thumper; nor Heaven by any other name but the Choice of
the Universe. He made Chimney always rhyme to Polyhymne, he would not change
the ilke for the same, though the measure of the Verse would have allowed him;
he stood up stiff for Whilome, Mickle, and howbeit, against all the adverbes,
that were, as he said, younger and more effeminate. The first tidings of his
death coming to me, by a Pedant his admirer, with this perpetual ingemination
O what a thousand pitties it is! made me at that instant laugh very heartily:
but next morning, as you shall see, I droled like a Philosopher, and plunged my
self deep in the Cosi va discorrendo. The Morality is somewhat long, yet
possibly not tedious: and if you take notice of the latter part of it (it is
called here the funeral Oration of Cardinal Perron) you will confess that
your Amint^s is no ill imitatour of your Lucretia if after all this time you do
not know Urania, that Nymph whom I have so extolled, and for whom I now weep so
bitterly, I inform you that it is my late good friend Madam des Loges who in
her life time was, more then once, styled, by an Academick, the Celestial, the
Divine, the tenth Muse, etc. and was esteemed both within and without the
Kingdom by crowned heads, by the Demy-Gods of our Age, by my Lord Duke of
Orleans, the King of Sweden, the Duke of Weymar, etc. I am of an opinion that
the verses which celebrate her memory (I mean eloquent Vrania's) are worth at
least as much as those that one Antipater a Sidonian wrote on the death of the
learned Sapho. You shall be the absolute and Sovereign judge of them and to
this purpose, I send you the Greek Original of the Post of Sidon, with the
Latin version of Doctor -- concerning which you must also pronounce the
unrepealable sentence. I am withal my soul,

SIR, Your, etc.
Aug. 9. 1644.
LETTER XIIII. To Monsieur Fermin, Counselor to the King, Controller of the
Kings revenew in the Generality of Limoges, etc.
SIR,
YOur leaving this country has left a sting in my heart, that continually
goades me with a longing for your return. Our last conversation when I was
your perpetual auditour, imprinted in my brain such lasting and acceptable
Ideas, that I have since done nothing else but bless the hour wherein you
gave them me, and envy my dear friends -- who engrosse you to themselves whole
days together: they are happy, if they can but be sensible of their good
fortune; if they do but know that a Commissioners place, is the least gain
they can make by you. I understand very well the advantages of such a
neighborhood: and though I love nothing like quiet; and all kind of noise be
troublesome to me, yet I protest, the sound of your words, had, with much
delight, weaned me from the love of silence and solitude. Since you do not
despise the fruits that grow in this wildernosse, I send you by Monsieur --
what i^ has brought forth in this season of drought. It may be, the noveltie
may please you; and because you love Tacitus, and do not hate my Lord Cardinal
de la Vallette I thought it would not be distastefull to you to peruse a
manuscript; that would put you in mind, both of the one and the other. My new
way of consolation, and the Method I use to practice on the sick Grandees, to
qualify grief by soothing it, has been received at Paris with approbations.
But although it had all the success I could wish; and passed for an original,
after the making so many Consolations in the world, yet since Men are still
mortal; and under the laws of Fortune, you may judge of it, if you please,
Sir, without respect to any preceding sentence upon it. You shall moreover
decree soveraignly in the contest I had in Holland some years since, the
Pleadings whereof Monsieur -- now brings you. My Scribe has added to them, the
Letter written on the Kid which is yet, in debate, and referres to that famous
Cause that divided all the Court-Wits into faction. If the Kings service remand
you to Angoulesme, I would seek out some other recreations for you among my
papers. But if you should chance to travel the road of St. John d'Angely, and
be within fifty steps of Balzac, I will be confident you will not offer me a
second affront, by refusing me a visit, where you may confer so great favor,
on a Landlord that can give very diligent attention to you. It is impossible
but you must feel some remorse for using me so hardly; and with out question,
you will sometime or other take the pains to come down the hill into the
Valley; and wade over a little rivulet for my sake, who would cross an Arm of
the Sea: nay, would not be afraid of the maine Ocean, to give you a testimony
that I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
July. 15. 1636.
LETTER XV. To Monsieur the Marquess of Montausier, Governor and Lieutenant
General for the King in Alsatia, etc.
SIR,
YOu will know by Monsieur Chaplain, with what respect I received the honor you
did me, by retaining me in your remembrance. But you must understand from my
self how great an obligation I resent in the handsome way, whereby you were
pleased to express it. You comfort me Sir, and that most gloriously, for all
the time and paper which hitherto I thought lost: For now though I have taken
pains only for an ungrateful Court, and insensible Grande's, yet since you
prize my pains at so high a rate, I look for nothing from any body: you have
paid me what others did apparently owe me. Can it be, that I not only take up
your spare hours, but cure your sadness; and that such trifles as were only
the pastime of the idle, are become remedies for the afflicted? Since you find
them so savory, I had rather for your sake call them the nutriment of wise men;
and if they were able to deserve that name, I would beg of God (but still for
your sake) the fertility of that good Prelate, who has strowed France with
books, and who lately counted the seaventy-fifth of his volumes. It should be,
that you might be supplied with whole convoyes of them from time to time, and
to quicken up those by my example who make the KINGS troops languish, that they
might not suffer you to lack money and ammunition, as I could be careful to
furn^sh you with Histories and discourses. The great consideration is this:
Sir, you would afford the subject to these Histories and discourses, if they
would but give you wherewithal to undertake and act, The share you had in that
miraculous year of the Duke of Weymar, will not give you leave to suspect, but
that as you were one of the Companions of his actions, you shall be one of the
inheritours of his thoughts: they would be too big to be confined in breasts
of an ordinary capacity, and would stifle common souls with their weight: But
Sir, what opinion do you think we have of the elevation of yours? And what do
you conceive Monsieur Chaplain and I promise our selves from your destiny:
things so high and extraordinary, that, not to say more, they dant his verse
and my prose, and drive me almost to the shift and of a bare protestation,
which I make in this place, that I am

SIR, Your, etc.
Nov. 25. 1638.
LETTER XVI. To my Lord the Archbishop of Corinth Coadintour of the
Archbishopric of Paris.
My Lord,
IT was enough that you accepted the small present I sent you, too much to
thank me for such inconsiderable trifle. I expected not this second favor,
and believed the good fortune of my book had attained its higest at the
courteous reception you gave it. But you have done more; you have with speeches
of commendation consecrated a homage that was paid you before with thoughts of
distrust and fear. Who could not seriously fear such subtle and penetrating
eyes as yours, who pry out the most concealed defects, and are offended at the
sleightest stains? who would not tremble, my Lord, in the behalf of
compositions so deformed as mine; so unadorned with the Art of the Court;
almost as irregular as the buildings in our Village? I do not doubt but they
will become better improved had I but the honor to be near you, and one of
those happy ones that hear you, when teaching how to live well, you exhibit a
pattern of excellent speaking. I count the want of those wholesome and
delightful lessons, those golden torrents that issue from your mouth, with
which you enrich your people, amongst the least tolerable calamities of my
exile. It cannot but be a tormenting misfortune to be none of the world in a
season, when the world is so lovely a prospect: and it is no little act of
moderation to be contented with the silence of an Hermitage, now when there is
another Son of Thunder in the Church, now you handle all divine things,
withal the vigor and dignity humane Eloquence is capable of. At least, my
Lord, if I may not be permitted to enjoy it, I am not prohibited to love and
long after it. I shall with delight behold the progress of your Renown in the
Letters I expect from Monsieur Chaplain: I will devour the story of your
Advent and Lent, that is the acclamations and applauses of Paris in the
Relations I desire from Monsieur de Menage. It may be, he may have so much
charity as to allow me a larger share of his happiness, and, to cheer up my
solitude, send me some short notes of those good and lovely things his memory
will lay up; so I shall not be altogether absent, or at least I shall not lose
all that is gotten in my absence. With this thought I will endeavor to moderate
the great discontent, in that I cannot be your most devout, and attentive
auditour, as I am,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Dec. 1. 1644.
LETTER XVII. To Monsieur the President Maynard, Counselor to the King.
SIR,
THe man so much spoken of to me is in this country, and we have already met
three or four times. I have set upon him withal my might: I have labored as
much as is possible to blot out his unsound opinions, but I protest his
resistance is greater then my strength, and you may tell our friends of
Thoulouze that I have lost my pains and my argumentations. There is no way to
make him approve of Lent, as well because of the preaching in it as the
fasting. He judges all Preachers by two or three Hedge-Priests that he has
heard, and fancies that all sermons begin either with The valiant Captain
Agesilaus, or The learned Philosopher Socrates, or, Pliny in his natural
History, or Pausanias in Arcadicis: he urges to me continually the Buon per la
Predica, and the Riservate questo per la Predica of the Cardinal Hippolitus of
Este, when any merry fellow of his familiars spoke impertinently before him. He
does not forget the Mortalium ineptissimus, excepto uno Panigarola. He
paraphrases and comments upon these precepts that an old Doctor gave a young
Batchelour; Percute Cathedram fortiter; respice crucifixum torvis oculis, et
nihil dic ad propositum, et been praedicabis. I answer him, that it is not just
to consider things in that corruption they were once plunged into, since now
they are re-estated in their primitive purity: and reformation has succeeded
disorder. I lay before him when it comes to my turn, the merit of our
Chrysostomes, and Basils: but he replies to me again, that according to my
usual custom I am liberal even to Prodigality, and that I bestow great words
and illustrious titles on every day in the year. He maintains that those good
Fathers, are dead long since without issue. If he could, he would introduce the
Greek custom into the Latin Church: he would have ancient Homilyes read to the
people, and a prohibition to make new ones for them. If he durst, he would do
all his devotions in his Study, and be auditour to none but his books. What is
to be done with this petulant morose fellow, this head strong opinative man,
this ignorant pretender to reason? It comes in my head to show him that
admirable Extract which you sent me, and I do not think it will be any hard
matter to put that off to him for a translation of a Greek Father which was
preached at St. John en Greve; yea for a Father of the first Classis in both
Churches. There needs nothing for this but to put Antioch in stead of Paris:
and translate (...) and (...) into French. I see no other course to draw him
into a better conceit of our Ecclesiastical Rhetorique. He must be cheated for
his own good and without doubt he will admire that as a Homily, which he would
not abide if he were told it were a Sermon --. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jun. 5. 1645.
LETTER XVIII. To Monsieur Menage.
SIR,
I Am not afraid to lose brave Gomez savor for my Epigramme of the hoarse
Nightingale. He is not backward in taking offense, for he is only ambitious of
military virtue, and remembers the taunt of Philip to Alexander, Art thou not
ashamed to sing so well? If he does not make exceeding good verses, not only
Cicero and other Roman Consulls, but Dionysius, the tyrant, and some other
tyrants too whom I will not nominate, had the same fate. You may tell him, if
it please you, that as I have quoted him in an Epigramme for a scurvy Poet, I
will hold him forth for a great soldier, when I write his Encomium in Pro^^
and speak in good earnest. Especially, Sir, I will not forget his Prowess on
the other side the Alps; and above all that famous combat at Mantua (I had the
story from his own mouth) when he laid the dreadful Captain Brancaleon,
sprawling on the ground. The Ladies who saw him fight, out at their windows
(which I had from him too) called him a hundred times the honor of France, and
hope of Italy: they cried out two hundred times Long live Gomes; after his
victory, they flung him so many buckets of Jassamine and Orange flower water,
with such a storm of perfumed eggs, that they had like to have smothered him.
Is not here enough to comfort him abundantly against some trivial disgraces
befalne him at the gate of Monsieur the Cardinal? But he finds elsewhere more
solid consolations: are all the lawrells of your Parnassus, and your Pindus
worth that he crowns himself with, when he gathers it from the Westphalia
Hamme, and relates his adventures in a Tavern? If you see him, put him in
hopes of the Elogy I am studying, and relish the Epigramme I send you, as he
should do. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Dec. 20. 1645.
LETTER XIX. To my Lord, the Bishop of Lisieux.
SIR,
I Have done what you commanded me. You will receive by Monsieur your Secretary
the papers of that gentleman, that writes so excellently, and yet cannot spell;
that so happily makes use of the highest figures of Rhetorique, and yet never
learnt so much as the Elements of Grammar. He is ignorant of the use of comma's
and points, yet never fails to make most ceven and just periods. He
familiarily puts a great Letter down where there should be a little one, and
never knew the difference between Kit and Chitte. If he write to his mistress in
the City concerning Hearts or Hairs, you would take him for a woodman; for you
shall see nothing but Hearts and Hares. Had he gotten his learning at the
University by the usual ways, he would be no greater a scholar then other
men are: he might be sought for among the crowd of those Sir Dominies, whereof
there are legions in every province of this Kingdom. But you will grant me
that he is remarkable by his singularity, and that his defect of Latin, and
scarcity of such like foreign goods do more illustrate the grandeur and riches
of his birth: being the first of his kind, he deserves a crown, by Aristotle's
rule. And for the present now the Palatinate is in controversy, and three or
four dispute for it; a philosopher of my acquaintance is of opinion he should
put in his claim too, by virtue of that excellent and commendable quality of
Pa-latinity. I shall within a short time, know whither you will give him your
voice, and whether your opinion jumpe with either of the Philosophers. In the
mean time, I rest

My Lord, Your, etc.
Sep. 13. 1640.
LETTER XX. To Monsieur the Earl of la Motte Fenelon.
SIR,
SYlvia is a very pretty wench, I confess; she may make an honest woman, I
confess that too. As her wit has nothing of artifice, so her carriage has
nothing of fondness: She can answer, I and No reasonable well, and sometimes
ventures further, with success too: when she is at a play, she does not
entreat the company to instruct her when she should laugh; nor can she be said
to be ugly of her age, since in the judgment of Madam the Marchioness of --
's, the Devil was handsome when he was young. But here is a story would add
calamity to the most dismal place on Earth, you make your self pleasant with
both Sylvia and Amyntas. She has none but ordinary endowments, and he not any
tolerable qualities: for there is a less esteem to be set upon his melancholy
person, then all the tattered parcells of his groaning mansion: he is a
petulant fellow, whose pensiveness sullyes the serenity of the most sun-shiny
day, and disturbs the jollity of the most sacred holy days. He sleeps ill
a-nights, and then every morning falls foul upon the whole world; and curses
nature in general. He is oftimes so retired into himself, that he would not
go out to meet a Legate a Latere; and if Good fortune should come in person to
visit him, she might light upon a day in the week, that the gate should be
barred against her; although she should tell her name, to gain admittance. You
must confess a man of this humor is to be beloved, but in the way of
Christianity. That is the utmost of obedience which can be allowed to the
Commandments of God, and the authority of Religion. I conclude then, Sir, that
you commit an act of too grand a charity, to desire so ill company. For though
it is possible I may deserve good men's pity, yet I cannot their curiosity. You
are wealthy in the gifts of Heaven, and the true riches of mankind; how comes
it to pass that being such a Magazine of wit and virtue, you look after any
without your self, especially where there is so little? why ^re you so
persuaded with my apparent desert? why will you take a journey for the love of
me, who cannot be sociable with you half an hour, though I resolve to be
during my whole life,

SIR, Your, etc.
April. 12. 1638.
LETTER XXI. To Monsieur de Plassac Maire.
SIR,
What would you do with me at Paris? Is it a design to show me at St.
Germans Fair, like a beast come out of the Indies? or if this seem too
ignoble a similitude, would you use me instead of a Jugle^, and tell me, what a
Gallant man once said to me I have promised you to day to such a Monsieur, and
to morrow to such a Lady? I am afraid I should often make you forfeit your
promise. But grant that I were a man easy to be led; and that you brought me
into Great Meetings: why even there both you and I should lose our reputation.
The Miracles you had promised, would not have power enough to work upon the
credulity of old wives; and if you were not called Mountebank in drown right
terms, these expressions would come to you wrapped up in a little cleaner
tiffany. You would be upbraided for putting your judgment to a venture, for
misapplication of your eloquence, and making an Elogium of a Quartan Ague. I
have nothing fit to please the nice world you tell me of, nothing to dazzle the
eyes of curious people: and if in my early youth, I had in me something less
cloudy, and dark, do you imagine so faint a luster could so long contest
against the rustinesse of the Country, and the contagion of ill examples? This
is now the tenth year of my exile: in a shorter time then this, an Athenian
would have become a Barbarian, and the son of Roman parents would have lost
all the rights and immunities of his birth. I am not then in the mind, with
your favor, to display at Court the imperfections I have acquired in the
Country. Give me leave not to carry thither the coorse evidences of a long
absence, and not to say worse, a Forrainer's comportment which I have got, and
should hardly be rid of. It will be sufficient, and it may be too much, if I
hold any kind of correspondence with that Nation, and if from time to time some
of my papers fly thither. But is it possible that excellent Lady has set so
high a value upon such an inconsiderable thing? That virgin who has not yet
met with any thing worthy of her, who has rejected the sacrifices of
Demy-g^ds, who does not so much as vouchsafe a look upon the Coronets of Dukes
and Peers, when a lover prostrates them at her feet? how my joy swells with
these excellent tidings, and how in this place am I at a stand for Rhetorique
and exclamations! but they will be stronger and more persuasive from a
personal delivery: therefore you shall disburse a complement for me at the
Louvre, and I promise to repay it when you shall have an occasion to use
another in the university. I am passionately,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jan. 1. 1644.
LETTER XXII. To Monsieur Conrart, Counselor and Secretary to the King.
SIR,
IT appears then you endure my absence with grief, and out of your tender
heart complain of my cruelty? You think I might find a Room for me at Paris,
and wish for me as a piece wanting to the finishing up of that little world.
Your handsome chidings, and obliging wishes have great influence upon me: so
that if a vow had confined me to the desert, and I were as zealous as I am
humorous, I confess you have written things able to tempt my devotion. But all
things well considered, Sir, it is better to conceal imperfections here; then
expose them where you are, that is in the most public and remarkable place
of the world, what should I get by carrying my disquiets, and my Fever so
far? the troublesome removal would encumber me, and afford no delight to
you. I should bring along with me a face either to fright you, or move
compassion in you; besides, since those productions which you esteem, are the
most tolerable part of my self, me thinks you might take it well that I have
chosen you, to send them to; and you are bound to commend the discretion of a
sick man, that will converse with none but only you at his good hours. I shall
believe them such, when they have accommodated you with any pleasing
recreation, and shall never reckon my self totally unhappy if you ever do me
the favor to love me well, and believe that I am perfectly,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jul. 24. 1645.
LETTER XXIII. To the Reverend Father Hercules, Provincial of the fathers of
the Christian Doctrine.
Reverend Father,
I Praise God that your race is finished and that you are come safe home into a
place of rest. This good news found me in so ill a condition, that you see I
have been necessitated these two months to defer my congratulations of it. I
had Winter and all her Clouds in my head. I had neither a distinguishable
voice, nor an articulate sound. I was only able to grumble and murmur --. Now,
the inundation is abated, and I begin to descry some appearance and probability
of Serenity.

Aut video, aut vidisse puto per nubila Solemn. But on the other side the
vapors of my melancholy make it always night in my soul, and the smallest
ray of hope cannot shine into it. You perceive from what I would my self: but
there is no way for me to effect that which, you say, is the pleasure of Heaven.

If the power you have there, were great enough to change December into May, to
strew all the way betwixt this and Paris with roses for me, I do not think I
could remove out of this desert. After the season were changed, you must
metamorphoseme too, and so consequently work a second Miracle: you must
dissolve that charm that confines me to this little scantling of ground, Atque
affigit humo divinae particulam aurae.

Your eloquence is very forceable, and your considerations very prevalent to
draw me to you, you have written me such words as would have persuaded Saint
Anthony, and Saint Hilary the Hermit; and such as I cannot oppose with other
words. I only say, that those good fathers were in the desert, and you are to
reckon me among the immoveables of that Walk you saw,

Vt memora, ut colles, viridisque immora Carentae Prata mei. What will you say
to the extravagancy of this Jargon? It is far from the regularity and
cevennesse of your style. Well, some other time my French may be less
Latinized, and my prof less versifyed: but I am so weary with talking
over-gravely of late, that I was forced to alter my custom, to try whether I
could recover my self. You will see the marks of this forced and set gravity
in some writings which my Nephew will deliver you. He has especial Order from
all the family you love, to assure you, you are perfectly honored there: For
my part, I so reverence your virtue, that if I might be permitted, I would
willingly swear by Hercules; and say, Me Hercule as well as Cardinal Bembo,
or Cardinal Sadolet: but my Hercules is not like theirs, a Son of Jupiter
and Alcmena: nor is he; Hercules the furious.

Ni furor ille, sacros agitat qui numine vates,
Sit furor ille tuus.
Accept of my devotion, I beseech you, and do me the honor to believe, that I
am, even with all my soul,

Reverend Father. Your, etc.
Dec 15. 1643.
LETTER XXIIII. To Monsieur the Chevalier de Mere.
SIR,
SOlitude is, in truth, a fine thing; but there would be a delight in it were
there but sometimes a friend of your goodness, to whom it might be told so.
Idleness, is called the food of the gods, and of men like them, but it is when
Scipio and Laelius taste it together. If I were your neighbor, how deeply
should we be engaged in matters of moment? What learned walks we should make!
How rich should I be, possessing the Original of those good things you write
to me? I would not envy the Court for her Delicacies of wit, her sincerity of
judgment the Graces and the Flourishings your Letter mentions: But if you do,
not buy a House in Angoulmois, these are but wishes which vanish upon the
paper; and considering the state I am in, Foitiers is as far from me as
Constantinople. You give me no hopes of this: I am afraid I am condemned to
languish for ever in this little corner of the world. I shall be ever abandoned
to my evil Angel, and my sad thoughts: there is neither remedy, mitigation,
nor compassion taken on my miseries. Indeed, they are very great, I am an
Hypocrite, whenever I would be thought good company. However, such as I am,
there is none more then I,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jun. 6. 1646.
LETTER XXV. To Monsieur de St. Chartres, of the Kings high Council.
SIR,
THe business of the Bishopric may succeed, and the means you propound are
not very difficult: but your friend is resolved not to make use of the easiest.
He too well understands his own unworthiness, to entertain that high conceit
you would put in his head: and he has read Saint Chrysostom's books of the
Priesthood with too much attention, not to be afraid of a burden, formidable
even to the strength of Angels: he dares not say to his shoulders, as Saint
Bernard did. Yet it is a burden that even the weakest desire to carry: there is
no Pedant but wishes to be laden hard with it. This is the drift of so many
Preachers, and that which so many sermons aim at. But let them run, and let
us be at rest. Let us not set the Gospel, nor Saint Paul on work to solicit
our promotion: they are worthy of a better employment. Do not let us, instead
of serving God, make use of Him. It is better to be a Catechumenist all ones
lifetime, and die at the Church door, then enter into the Sanctuary at a
breach made by Ambition; How I like the Country and retirement! how I pity the
distempers and the fevers of Competitours! Had I no other disease but that, I
should be the soundest man in the world, and though your good will obliges me
in this present offer, I beseech you, believe, that I am without hopes or
interest,

SIR, Your, etc.
Aug. 4. 1639.
LETTER XXVI. To the Reverend Father de Marin, a Divine of the Society of Jesus.
Reverend father,
YOu carried away my good days with you. Since your departure, I have not
passed any one without grief or pain. Even the good intervalles of my disease
have been appropriated to others, not my self: and the weakness of people on
the mending hand, which is privileged every where else, has not been able to
get me dispensed with, for several labors which require a perfect health. At
length, after all, I am at leisure, and have overtaken the April-sunne, who
bestows strength on me as he receives it himself. Blessed be this Visible
son of the invisible Father, you know it has been called so heretofore. He
has already put me in possesson of my walks: he will shortly digest and
purify the waters that are prescribed to you: he himself will make ready your
bathes, and cure you by luxurious medicines: when it is so, will you not be a
man of your word, and come near our Desert? will you not come and contribute
to my amendment, by the vicinity of your virtue, and the presence of your good
examples? I only beg you one day in a week. But I speak in earnest, rather
then not obtain this favor, I will set all my friends on work at Rome, to the
great Mutio Vitelleschi. He would not deny you to the Savages if they had need
of you: Shall I be less favorably dealt withal then the people of Canada?
and do you run more hastily to an unknown harvest then a chosen one? You see
whither my desire of not being far from you, and of sometimes enjoying your
holy and learned conversation, transports me. Limit your ambition for my sake.
Be not jealous of the honor of your Companions: ruminate not on their famous
conquests, nor propound to your self the conversion of Kingdoms and Kings:
fix your self to this little corner of the world, and out of humility be an
Apostle to your friend.

Sic erit; et voti facies, Marine, potentem
Balzacium, exanguemque dabis pinguescere terram;
Cum propior largos Caelo demiseris imbres.
I conjure you to this, from the bottom of my heart, and am passionately,

Reverend father, Your, etc.
Ap. 27. 1644.
LETTER XXVII. To the Reverend father Destrades a Divine of the Society of
Jesus, Superior of the Cloister in Bourdeaux.
Reverend Father,
When you do a good deed you think you receive one, and you are officious
with such alacrity, that the way wherewith you oblige, is commonly a second
obligation. But I leave the Chapter concerning the business in recommendation,
to Madam Capaignol, to give you thanks in my own words for your
perfumed-Rosary. I esteem it much higher for coming to me from you, then for
coming from Peru to you: for I know your staple traffic is in heaven, from
whence grace distills upon devotion. Questionless, it will be auspicious to me:
it will do much more then you say: for it will impart zeal to me which I want,
and make it acceptable after the conferring it upon me: So this sweet odor
that makes the sacrifices agreeable, will not be wanting to that of my prayer,
Et per te, mi optime and dulcissime pater, etiam in Christo deliciabor. In the
mean time, I must tell you, here is strange talk of your passion against
Spain; or, to speak more properly, against Castile. Are you certain Saint
Ignatius and Saint Xavier will not take it ill at your hands that you declare
so openly for the King of Portugal? do you know what their opinions are in so
nice a business, and upon a Question so problematicall? however, Reverend
Father, you cannot be blamed for being a loyal Frenchman: there is no danger
to be feared, nor hazard to be run in opinions of State: remember ever that
verse in Homer that says, To serve ones Country is to protect her Temples and
to do an act of Religion. Once more I thank you for my Rosarie: but I must
acquaint you with all that I repose more confidence in your prayers, then my
own; do not forget me then, if you please, when you recommend your well
bebeloved to our Lord. and I am from the bottom of my soul,

Reverend father, Your, etc.
Mar. 12. 1641.
LETTER XXVIII. To Madam, The Marchioness of Rambouillet.
Madam,
I Have not yet received the present you were pleased to honor me withal; but
the news of it being brought me by Monsieur Chaplain, I was not able any
longer to suppress within mymind the acknowledgements I owe you for it: and yet
they are such Madam, that it is not easy to draw them out of the thought into
the expression, without losing somewhat in the conveyance. To cloathe them in
ordinary words were too great an abasement of them: and in conscience I never
had more need of that officious figure which aides our good intentions, which
discharges the poor man's debts, and, not content to describe things to their
just value, does inhaunce them infinitely above themselves. You are acquainted
with it, Madam, under the famous name of Hyperbole; and I must confess to you
I have poorly abandoned it almost eighteen years ago, out of a cowardly fear
which the reproaches and calumnies of my enemies created in me, without
Question very much to my disadvantage: for I easily foresee, that wanting its
succor to thank you magnificently, as I desired, I must be constrained to
serve my self of the simplicity of my mother tongue, and only to tell you, as
another mortal would, that I am highly obliged to you for your Present: yet I
will add, Madam, but in the extremest rigor and severity of truth, That the
only news of this Present, has entirely changed the face of my fortune, and
seems to have placed abundance where before was poverty. If you please, I
shall take the Liberty to expound my meaning, and render you an account of the
present estate of my affairs: It Is most certain, the wrath of Heaven is this
year fallen upon our Country; and that for my own particular, I have not been
more favorably treated then my neighbors. But though the unseasonable hail
and frost in the month of May, have saved us the labor of gathering our
Vintage in September, and left us nothing but the sad remainders of their prey;
though the promising ears of corn have deceived our expectation, and yielded
an inconsiderable harvest, (I demand your pardon Madam for these village
expressions) though on the other side, all the Avenues of the Exchequer are
most strictly guarded and justest gratifications escape not from it but with
difficulty; yet for my own part I am nothing sensible of all these bad
consequences; they are misfortunes that concern not me; and you, madam, are
alone the cause that I complain not either of the inclemency of heavens, the
barrenness of the earth, or the covetousness of the State. By means of you,
never year was more plentiful, nor more happy to me then this: for having lost
somewhat in ignoble and common things, may I not be more justly thought a
gainer, since your hand makes me so bountiful a recompense, in things of
rarity and value? in Essences of Jasmin, flower of Orange, musk and Amber
grease. But Madam, what will the preciser sort of people say to this? and what
answer shall I make to the generation of severe sages, who will think it
strange that a man making profession of frugality should bring into his desert
the delights and luxury of the Court? that a solitary person should have his
boxes full of Frangipane glo^es; he, I say, who in reason, should be content
with a pair of mittens every winter? I shall not here endeavor to make his
apology, or to justify that by reason which may be defended by authority, and
by the example of one who had credit enough to found a Sect. It will not become
me, Madam, to be better, or more wise then Aristippus, who knew so well the art
of mixing pleasure and temperance together: he did not at all condemn the use
of innocent pleasures; he could make a difference betwixt stinks and perfumes,
and was nothing inclined to believe, that aromaticall odours were infectious.
One day above the rest he decla^'d himself more openly upon this subject: an
impertinent asker of questions, fell upon him in a great assembly, and having
held some discourse with him, concerning the austerity to be observed in the
lives of Philosophers, upon the sudden, thinking to put him to the blush,
captiously inquired, who it was in the company that smelt so strong of
perfumes, it is I, answered Aristippus, and another wretch more unhappy then my
self, known by the name of the King of Persia. Shall I take the boldness,
Madam, to rank my self as the third sinner of that order, and dare to intrude
into so noble a society? Yes Madam, for once I shall renture to march by the
side of this King and Philosopher who perfumed themselves; and have some reason
to believe, I possess advantages above them both, because in their time, they
had neither a Madam, nor a Madamoyselle de Rambouillet, to select, and present
them with those perfumes. The Latin Poesy makes its vaunt of certain Essences
which Venus and the loves her children made present of to a Roman Lady; but
those Essences, Madam, which I expect, are sent me by a nobler hand, then of
that Common Venus and her Cupids; it is the true Venus Urania, and her adorable
daughter; it is virtue it self embodied, and become visible to the eyes of
mortals; it is perfection descended from its heavenly habitation, which does me
this day the honor to regale me. I make my public boast of it: I look upon
all the riches and possessions of the earth as things below me, but as there is
no glory in the world which equals mine, I must also beg your belief there
are no acknowledgments can vye with mine; though yet the greatest part of them
remain within my heart, and cannot make any outward appearance but imperfectly
in the protestation which I make, to be always with respect and veneration,

MADAM, Your, etc.

LETTER XXIX. To Monsieur Costar.
SIR,
I Have received your Pastills, your Powder, and your Cushionets of Odours. But
what do you expect I should say of them? They are no mortal things, nor are
they to be commended in humane terms. Flora, the spring, the sun, and
Marshall never produced so fair a fruit of their united labors, or made any
thing so excellent as these perfumes. Our Doctor swears they are better then
those of Venus when she appeared to her son Aeneas upon the bank of a River in
Lybia. Yet Virgil who is not so prodigal of Divinity as the Poets his
successors, gives them the appellation of divine.

Ambrosiaeque comae divinum vertice odorem
Spiravere --.
For your Table books I look on them, and consider, but dare not adventure to
use them. I make a conscience of touching so fair things, with such coorse
hands as mine. The plates, guilding, and lively colors have been bestowed on
them without parsimony. They would have been fit Registers for the private
Cabinet of Caesar and Cleopatra. I do not think, when the Conquering God read a
lecture to the Muses his scholars, they had such handsome Note-books as these,
wherein they diligently writ after him.

Bacchum in remotis carmina rupibus
Vidi docentem, Nymphasque discentes, etc.
You know the rest in Latin, but not in Italian, for I just now received these
verses from Florence, where they were made the last month.

Jo vidi (il giuro, et se mia lingua mente
Con furia procellosa
Schiantin le viti mie grandini ac^rbe)
Vidi il Padre Lieo steso fra^ l'erbe,
su cetra armonioso
Trattar d'avorio d'or plettro lucente
Vidi le Ninfe intent
S^arfene al canto and a le voci argute
I satiri chinar l'orecchie argute.
You see here I put the change upon you, and deviate as much from my subject as
I can. The reason is because I do not intend to slubber over a thanks to you
for exquisite presents. I must prepare my self a whole month for it. I think
of consulting all my Muses and to look over all my common places: nay I have a
mind to take a potion for that purpose, and be let blood; that my spirits may
be clearer and all my faculties more free and active. I most humbly kiss your
hands and am with passion,

SIR, Your, etc.
Sept. and 1644.
LETTER XXX. To the same.
SIR,
I Know not how I dare undertake to write to you: for in the condition I am, I
can with truth assure you, that I do not see my Letter.

In me tota ruens Hyems
Arcton deseruit
If ruens Hyems grate your ear, it does more mischief to my Eyes. But then I
have an other way to express my self, Me nebula turpi, multo me Jupiter imbre
Atque omni premit Aeolio. Da mitior alma
Luce frui, Pater, et formosum read serenum.


I do not beg Jupiter for the drying up my Rheum, and use of my Nose; but
merely that I may be in a condition to enjoy your kindness, or, if you will
have any more in the language of the immortal Gods, Vt saltem Ambrosio Florae
immortalis odore
Muneribusque tuis fruar, o vel Regibus aequis
Par Arabum, Costarde, animo.


In earnest, Sir, your perfumes are admirable, they are even better then those
of the last year; and if my Rhetoric about this subject were not quite
exhausted, they should be attended with as ample thanks as the divine Artenice
-- I am without reserve,

SIR, Your, etc.

THE THIRD BOOK.
LETTER I. To Monsieur Menage.
SIR,
TO obey you, I have read the Spanish Philosopher's Book a second time. The
title always pleased me exceedingly; but I cannot say any more of the rest,
then what I told a Gentleman of my familiarity, who first mentioned it to me.
I could not find what I sought in it, and in my opinion the Art of the Will
required all the sufficiencies of our Gassendus to be displayed answerably to
its merit. The Spaniard is in many places enervate and feeble, in others too
subtle and abstractive; and repeates the same matter so often, that his six
Books might be reduced to less then the half of that number without any
injury to his subject. A modern Orator termed this kind of Tautologie, The
dancing the Canaries in a Bushel. And a Poet of antiquity said it was, Vnum
ponere ferculis tot assem.

Which may be expressed in ordinary speech, The serving up of one joint in a
dozen or two of dishes. But I beseech you Sir, what sinister advice, what
vision or extravagance moved this John Eusebius to cite almost perpetually,
such authors as have no authority; and were scarce ever heard of? This is
giving people for sureties, for whose credit certificates and pledges, yea
pawns and engagements of bodies, might be required in their particular
affairs. I cannot tell what rank a Bernardus Sylvester, a Barlaamus
Giracensis, or an Odo Cluniacensis, should hold among the genuine and
legitimate Fathers of the Church. His treatise bears the Character of the same
judgment throughout. All the way he strains his wits in quest of ridiculous
novelties both in things and words, that he may seem to renounce the dialect of
the Schools, and to speak like a man of another Country, he compounds such a
gibberish of his own as far exceeds the obscurity and canting of the Doctors,
and is likewise no less savage and remote from the Roman purity. He himself
is the Planter of his barbarism and raises a new rebellion of his own head
against Cicero. And this with how much endeavor and violence? His care and
pains are perspicuous in the defects of his style. He designs to fall, where
other men slip unwittingly. He does not utter his Galamaufry unawares, but it is
his aim to plunge himself into it. In a word, intending to speak elegantly, he
speaks absurdly with curiosity, and makes choice of all his bad expressions.
Could it possibly be, that this man had the liking of Messieurs Du-Puy. I do
not believe he is of any great credit with the Jesuits; I mean, the Jesuits of
Paris, who have a better pallat then those of Madrid. I am confident, that in
this particular at lest the dreadful Petavius is of the same opinion with the
redoubtable Salmasius. Instead of him I read the life of your Mamurra without
weariness. It seems to me more lovely and new, at the tenth reading then at the
first. How heartily it would have provoked the laughter of the Cardinal of
Perron? How will it please the Cardinal Bentivoglio, and with what esteem will
the father Strada regard the salt and delicate sawces in it. He who sometimes
smiles after a Roman manner, and is as exquisite at ingenious raillery as your
self: But if you would see the Elogium of his Life all at length, you may
please to see what I have written of it to the father Socrates, and ask of
him, if I commend the other Latin Satyrs he sent me with the same Language.

Hae, licet ingentis Pansae, Hirtiadaeque superbi,
Nomina clara ferant.
I am ever affectionately,

SIR, Your, etc.
Nov. 4. 1643.
LETTER II. To Monsieur de --.
SIR,
I Have lately received news that gives me very sensible apprehensions of
discontent. Monsieur Costar was an Eyewitness of my trouble: and it is most
certain, that if a Spanish Philosopher made me lose your favor, I should not
easily be reconciled with Spain, not even after the pacification of Munster.
When I writ you my opinion, I did not imagine it would have been injurious to
your judgment, for I conceived Sir, you had told me, that some men cried up
this Modern Doctor, but not that you had any affection for him your self. Had I
thought the least of any such thing, I am not so bad a Courtier, a^ to have
willingly contradicted you, in a business of so little importance, and my
particular conceits shall always be less dear to me then the contentation of
my friends. Therefore be pleased to impute the mistake that is fallen out,
either to the dullness of my hearing at the time you spoke to me of the
Treatise, or to the defect of my understanding when I ^ead it. And do me the
favor to believe that though I am not a professed sider with Johannes Eusebius
Nierenbergius e societate Jesu, yet I am not less really,

SIR, Your, etc.
July. 5. 1644.
LETTER III. To Monsieur Gombauld, a Chanter in the Church of Saints.
SIR,
THe Dialogue you did me the favor to send me was taken away from me the same
day I received it, and since that time has passed through so many hands, that I
co^ld never be master of it till this day. I have newly read it with such a
likeing and relish as I shall retain a long while in my fancy, and I confess
that such kind of Dialogues if we had any in our Language, would bring me out
of Love with those of Plato. This little tract, since you would know my opinion
of it, is a Library in Epitome, a magazine in a packet, and a Daedalus-shop
where all the utensils move of themselves, and all the materials are alive. It
deserves this last attribute upon a particular account, being not only the
juice and quintessence of the ancient Sages, but more, the Life and Soul of
their wisdom: he is so dextrous in reduceing speculation to use, and study
unto action. But this He, Sir, is it not Monsieur de la Hoguette? and what are
his intentions of his closeness and concealment? If he will not own a Child so
worthy of him, though it want a father, it shall not be destitute of
protection. Heroes were never exposed to the mercy of their fates, but Heaven
took care of them; and dubious births have almost ever been the entrance to
illustrious lives. I send you the present which Monsieur Chaplain bestows upon
you, and being not able to thank you sufficiently for that I lately received
from you, I must be contented to assure you that I am with much gratitude,

SIR, Your, etc.

LETTER X. To the Reverend Father Dalme, a Divine of the society of Jesus,
Professor of Rhetoric.
Reverend father,
EIther it was my fault to express my self ill, or your friend's to
miss-appprehend my intention. However it be, I am very sensible of the trouble
he has drawn upon you. It is unquestionably a great crime to abuse that happy
fruitfulness, which Heaven has conferred upon your Muse. She must not be
harrass'd out every day, but deserves to be kept for grand Holy days; and you
your self are an ill Husband, to make so many excell^nt Verses at a venture,
and proceed so far to leave your mark behind you: One thing that pleases me
in this thankless labor that you have taken, is, that it has given you an
occasion to write me a Letter sincerely Latin, and worthy of the purity of
Antiquity. I read it often with delight; and had it not been for my vexatious
business, and my want of health you should immediately have seen in the same
language how highly I value your exquisite knowledge in it. All that I can say,
being oppressed with business, and drowned in Rheum, is, that I was much
comforted to behold this Ray of the Age of Eloquence, at a time when one would
think the Goths were newly risen again to sack Aquitaine, and replant their
gibberish: but I concluded, when I read your Latin, that they were not yet
Masters of the place where you were, since you held out still for old Rome, and
their savage style had not gained you to be an abettor of it. Continue, I
beseech you, this la^dable design: oppose your self, stoutly against the
vicious imitation of some young Doctors, who labor with might and maine for
the re-establishment of Barbarism. Their phrases are either foreign or
poetical; and their Periods, Rhimes and Antitheses. If scurvy books afford any
word, either rotten with age, or monstrous by the newness of it; a bolder
metaphor then usual; or an insolent and rash expression; they rake up this
dung with care, and bedeck themselves with it with much curiosity. They believe
themselves much more handsome, after taking in those ornaments, then they were
before. This is a strange malady, and a filthy love? I cannot tell what their
brains are made of, to contemn the force, the vigor, and the luster of Rome,
to become enamoured only on her diseases and her carcass; on her sepulcher,
and her ashes. Or if there be any excess in the last words; what do they think
they do, when they prefer before Senators and Consulls of the
Commonwealth, all magnificent and glittering in their purple, such poor
tattered slaves, the remainders of war and persecution, who after the ruin
of the same Republique are come to beg, and wear their rags in the
Provinces? You easily discern that in these two different Parties, on our side
we have our Livy, our Salust, our Cicero: and on the other side they have their
Cassiodore their Symmachus, and their Apuleius, coeteraque id genus, ut meus
ait Damon, dehonestamenta Latinitatis. I wish them better and sounder fancies:
and would very feign see an end of their rebellion against the true and lawful
Nephews of Remus. I beg of you, reverend father, the good examples you can
bestow upon us: but especially I entreat your good opinion, and beseech you to
believe me, as truly I am,

Reverend father, Your, etc.
Ap. 3. 1643.
LETTER V. To the reverend Father, du Creux, a Divine of the society of Jesus,
Rhetorick-Professour.
Reverend father,
I Had a sight of five or six leaves, the other day, which I admired; and
without question you saw them before me, since they came from your father
Sirmond: he is an admirable father, I have told you often; but he is admirable
in diverse respects, and is not to be looked on only one way, he is provided to
instruct the learned, and to delight meaner capacities, he has both the solid
and the subtle part of learning: and not to speak of the riches of a choice
knowledge managed by a Magisteriall judgment, the dispenser, and regulatour of
it, I observe yet in his fourscore, all the fire, all the brave blood, all the
gallantry of Spirit, that can be discovered in the very youth of the Demy-Gods.
If your Christian severity will not, cannot digest that word, let me say at
least in the youth of such men as are more happily born then the rest. I
beseech you, contrive it so that your young people set before them this man,
who is an honor both to his Age and Country, as a copy how to write by; and
not some raw Latinists who would breed Schisms and Heresies in Eloquence: who
are crueller enemies of ancient Rome, then ever Hannibal, Iugurtha,
Mithridates, etc. They write iron and stones, as they confess themselves, if
not mudde and smoke, as some upbraid them for.

Quis furor ille novus postponere casta profanis,
Impurasque sequi neglecto font lacunas,
Et tenebras sordesque tuo praeferre nitori?
Quis Romam violare luto, quod Barbara vexit
Tempestas olim in Latium, nisi natus iniquo
Sydere, nunc velit, and Romani nominis hostis?
You see, an enthusiasm ever possesses me when I discourse with you. I sigh
after next Thursday's conversation, and rest,

Reverend father, Your, etc.
Aug. 30. 1640.
LETTER VI. To the Reverend father, Stephen of Bourges, a Preaching Capuchin.
Reverend father,
I Send you back the Manifesto and expect the Exhortations, you did me the
favor to promise me. It is not so much curiosity to look on them as fine
things, as an intention to be benefited by them as saving things that obliges
me once more to desire them of you: and you well remember the old Roman saying,
Medecines do no good, unless they stay by it: Which words cannot, for they
pass by without any stopping, since your Latin-Country-friend will be our
Nymph's Poet, advise him to lay down the Character of Virgil in his Eclogues
for his Idea. I meet not with any Venice-glasse more polished or clear then
that. Ovid's sweetness, and facility, likes me exceedingly, under favor of
the Critic Victorius, and the Hypercritick --. As for Lucan, Statius, and
Claudian, they rant too high, and make too loud a noise in a sick man's
chamber. They are Bells, Drums, and Timbrels which we admit not into our
Music. I write this to you in a huddle, and have but this moment, to tell you,
I am,

Reverend father, Your, etc.
Ap. 3. 1645.
LETTER VII. To Monsieur de Mere, Knight.
SIR,
YOur judgment is true; the productions of these fine wits are neither free nor
natural. A straining and forcednesse is discernable every where: and aiming to
become admirable, they happen to be prodigious. They do not consider that
Monsters are produced by excess, as well as deficiency, and that Giants no
more then dwarfs can be said to be of a handsome stature. But shall we put
those you speak of, in the Catalogue, who talked so highly to you of the Roman
Majesty; and the nobleness of their style? have a care, Sir, how you condemn
them; I beg their pardon of you, for a more considerable interest then their
own. For, in earnest, if they are culpable; Virgil cannot be innocent: if in
their Poems Caesar forgets his modesty, what I beseech you does the Head of
Caesar's race in the Aeneids do, when being asked his name, he answers.

Sum pius Aeneas, fama super aethera notus. When he proposes himself as a
pattern and Idea of true virtue, Disce puer virtutem ex me, etc.

When he styles himself the great Aeneas, and believes a man does not repine
to dye, because it was he that killed him.

Hoc tamen infelix miseram solabere mortem
Aeneae magni dextra cadis, etc?
We will examine these three passages at our first interview, though you do not
give me hopes of any such thing, nor your Letter promise me your company. I am
with all my soul.

SIR, Your, etc.
Oct. 4. 1646.
LETTER VIII To Monsieur Colardeau, the Kings Attorney in Fontenay.
SIR,
I Applaud the design you do me the favor to impart to me, and it will be
approved all the world over, if you please to produce as fine things as you are
able to express them elegantly. The ancient Latinism bears a high price
amidst the barbarism of these latter ages; but where it is quite dried up (as
in some places in which it is maintained merely by the dint of talking) it is
to write only for two or three in a kingdom, whose palates are capable of
gusting any thing of sound and sincere antiquity. The curiosity of the major
part must be contented with something notorious and remarkable, that may stick
in the memory, and not be blown away with the sound of the words. And herein
the Italian writer of Characters, is much more divertising and instructive,
then he of France, though he is inferior to him in Latin and Politenesse. For
example; is there not a great deal of delight in understanding the true manner
of Politian's death, which Cardinal Bembo has so disguised in the Epitaph he
made upon him? the whimsey of Naugerius, in making an annual sacrifice of
Martiall's Epigrammes to the muse of Catullus; and the proud morosities of
another Poet of the same times? etc. I advise you to excite the Readers
attentiveness by such like particularities in the lives of your worthies. Use
your utmost to interweave the curiosity of History with the purity of language,
and do not forget to sprinkle Paulus Jovius salt, in the same feasts where you
use St. Martha's sugar. If you do thus, you will compose a work that shall
live; and will not deserve meanly of your own Age, by obliging Posterity. I
send you what Madam Des Loges lately sent to me, and beseech you to own me for
what I am with passion,

SIR, Your, etc.
Sep. 21. 1646.
LETTER IX. To the Reverend father Tesseron, of the society of Jesus,
Professor of Rhetoric.
Reverend father,
I Do a little understand the language of Heaven, but cannot judge of the
merits of them who speak it: for the Peerage of Poets ought to be exempted from
the Jurisdiction of Grammarians. It is sufficient for me then, to bestow these
commendations on your fine verses, and thank you for the delight they gave me.
For to engage my self into that strict examination you seem to desire of me,
would be not only to introduce an inquisition into a free Country, and violate
the enfranchisments of Parnassus, but an acception of your words too literally,
and the grounding a Prerogative upon a Complement. I intend not any such thing,
nor will so abuse the arbitrament you commit to me. I must not take advantage
on the civilities of a man that teaches Rhetoric, and consequently does not
make profession of rigid truth. Whatsoever you do, you cannot debase your self
into a vulgar person, or humble your self so low by your modesty, as you are
elevated in your Genius and conceptions. Reverend Father, Sevine will tell you
in what terms I expressed my self to him concerning the subject of those
frequent towrings, and what I said of your Muses daring flight; you know he is
an eager and patheticall Orator: But I have no need either of his vehemence or
his figures, I only desire his bare testimony to persuade you that I am,

Reverend Father, Your, etc.
Apr. 25. 1645.
LETTER X. To Monsieur Perrot of Ablancourt.
SIR,
YOu will receive by this bearer the discourses I promised you yesterday, they
will not teach you any new thing, (for what is it you are now to learn?) but
they will call to memory your excellent knowledge and revive your fading Ideas.
The last time I saw him that made them, I left him in a design to fall on
studying French, as if he had been a German: you see here how it has
succeeded; and you your self, Sir, you who were born on the banks of Seine,
cannot choose but confess to me that our deserts begin to be civilized, and the
savages to grow tame; at least, they purge their tongues by little and l^ttle
from the faults of their Country, and speak more like men then formerly: from
swaggerers and lawles in matter of Eloquence they are reclaimed to discreet
Lovers, and become persons of Reason: this gentleman sticks but too close to
the method and precepts of Art. He is so fearful of failing or being
misapprehended that sometimes he writes rather like a Gramarian then an
Orator: and because he leaps from licentiousness to scruple, in his style; it
may be, that so exquisite strictness of his, will not seem very natural to
you. You remember him that was taken for a forraigner for being too Attick, for
he discovered himself by his disguise. The Provincial Oratour's way of
speaking is remarkable for the same care, and shows something pumpt and
strained for. For the matters he treates of, though often times they slide into
Common-places, yet they are pretty lucky falls; and me thinks, his Preaching is
not tiresome: but I will not comment in a Tickquet, nor forestall the sentence
I ought to wait for. I shall receive it from your sovereign Criticism, the next
time I have the Honor to see you. I most humbly kiss your Hands, and am ever
with passion,

SIR, Your, etc.
Paris: Mar 7. 1635.
LETTER XI. To the Reverend Father Adam, a Preacher of the society of Jesus.
Reverend Father,
YOu have extremely obliged me in not failing of your word and sending me your
fifteen Sermons: they might deserve of the Ears of the Court: they are high
proof against all my little craft in the way of words; and they have little
less power on paper, then when you animated them with the eloquence of your
delivery, and left in our minds so many agitations and emotions, behind them.
Proceed to advance your fame yet higher in this noble race, wherein you have
already acquired a great stock of reputation: your beginnings were very
glorious and splendid, your continuation yet more; and I make no doubt but if
you fortify your sacred School learning by the serious study of the fathers,
and the solid knowledge of the ecclesiastical History, you will not be left
behind those that run most vigorously after honor: and this you will do
without forfiture of your humility too. Hitherto I answer you with delight, but
what mean you, I beseech you, after the sending fifteen Sermons? what do those
taunts of a Rhetorician, those ambiguous and figurative terms, those subtle
and delicate complaints in your Letter signify? you are mistaken, Reverend
Father, if you imagine your interests are not dear to me, or that I have been
cold in an occasion where I ought to show my Ardour. Certainly, you are
missinformed in the particulars and circumstances of the thing, and to use the
terms of the Founder of the French Academy, some Petulant Aggravatour has
enlarged this business of nothing, to disturb the quiet of your mind. The
Reverend Father Gombauld knows how much I am concerned in any thing that
relates to you, and at what price I rate your virtue. He shall justify my
proceedings to you, and I will only assure you at the present, that I am most
faithfully,

Reverend Father, Your, etc.
Jan. 15. 1643.
LETTER XII. To my Lord, the Bishop of Grass.
My Lord,
IF you resolve, as you say you do, to write without any Ornament, it is a
design will puzzel you hard, and you will scarce be able to bring it about:
besides, your not following Saint Basil's counsel herein, you deviate from the
example of him and the whole Church of his time, who made no scruple to speak
handsomely. I beseech you shake off this untoward humor, do not be incensed
against the Graces, those good and innocent. Damsels, who have already won
you so many Adherents, and so many Readers of your works; bear some respect to
the advantages of nature, I mean the gifts of God; and if you are not an Enemy
to the harmless delights of our Country, do not do, like that extravagant
Chaste one, who mangled his face, because his beauty pleased those Eyes too
well that looked upon it. Eloquence has nothing to be dreaded in it, when she
is in the service of Piety. A Grecian is not to turn Barbarian, when he is
converted Christian. They who are afraid the riches of Language should corrupt
the simplicity of Christianity, would have driven the wise men from Jesus
Christ's stable where they came to offer Gold. There cannot be too much
curiosity either on the Altars, or in your works; and you ought not to
apprehend that the name of Chrysostom should make you loose that of Saint --.
I am,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Ap. 12. 1639.
LETTER XIII. To Monsieur the Abbot Talon.
SIR,
SInce you relish well the last things I writ, and your palate so exceedingly
accurate and discerning; I cannot count them utterly ill: it is no small matter
to have pleased you, and Monsieur the Attorney General Talon, for who dares,
in point of Eloquence, contradict a mouth that has so long while, swayed the
ablest and justest Council in the world. I willingly submit my dead words,
dropped upon my paper, to that lively and animated virtue residing on his lips,
that produces decrees in the breasts of the judges. I should be contented not
to be wholly slighted; but I should be very proud, if it were true, that he had
any esteem for me, and that in that Sun he fights in, he cast pleased aspects
upon that shade wherein I am obscured. I cannot choose but apprehend much
delight, that my retirement is approved by the most active and best-acting
person in the world. Oblige me to tell him this on my part, and to believe me
passionately,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jan. 4. 1645.
LETTER XIIII. To Monsieur the Abbot Bouchard.
SIR,
I Make no question of Monsieur Holstenius, his great riches; I only complain
of his thriftiness. Of what use is abundance without liberality, unless to
change the nature of Good, and lock up that which would be communicated? He
should either possess less, or impart more: for though I know he hoards up
for Posterity, and will enrich our grandchildren, yet me thinks, he should not
in the mean time disinherit us, nor reserve the best part of his fame for a
Future that he shall never see. Be our solicitour, then, to his learned
worship, and tell him in the name of all the Grecians and Latins of this
kingdom, that we lay claim to his papers, and that he is more obliged to
instruct his own Age then another. He is none of those barren ones that
continually sit in Libraries, but never hatch any thing. It is expected he
should bring forth something Eminent from his long conversation with the
Vatican. I received what you did me the favor to send me from him. I confess,
it is purple, and cloth of Tissue: but it is only a pattern, and there is
scarce enough to make a suit for a baby. I would have enough to hang a room
with, and I beg whole Pieces, etc. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Mar. 14. 1640.
LETTER XV. To the Reverend father Josset, a Divine of the society of Jesus,
Professor of Rhetoric.
Reverend father,
I Think, I need not spend much time in justification of my silence, I may
rather commend my tears to you, and tell you that common report having killed
you, I have with true grief bewailed your imagined death. I must confess, you
confuted this falsity after an excellent fashion; for as you were deceased in
my thoughts, so you are newly risen again to my eyes, more gloriously; for so
I call the pomp wherein you appeared to me; and that luster in the work you
did me the fa^our to send me. Never was so bright a diffusion seen. The
fertility of things rare, is only in you; and though there are mothers that
people the world with cripples and crook'd-backs, your abundance cannot be said
to resemble that unfortunate fecundity. You get only perfect children, Omnes
Coelicolas, omnes supera alta tenentes.

May I dare to hazard a fancy, just now fallen into my head? You so highly sing
the triumphs of the Church, and Holy days of the State, the death of Martyrs
and the birth of Princes, that your verses seem to accumulate glory to that of
Heaven, and ornaments to those of the Lovure: the Saints seem to receive a new
happiness from you, and Monsieur the Dolphin a second nobility. But you are
not only a great Poet, you are a j^lly man also; for I confess, that what you
say there, concerning the war with Spain, and the Queens lying in, made me
laugh in the height of my Melancholy. According to your opinion, the good
fortune of the King was so busily employed at Saint Germans that she could
not be at Fontaraby. So Diana suffered her temple at Ephesus to be burnt, that
night in which Alexander was brought into the world, while she served as a
Midwife to his Mother Olimpias. Plutarch derides this saying of Timeus the
Historian, and Cicero admires it in his books of the nature of the Gods. Which
of these two are in the right, and to whom shall we judge the prize? or if
neither of them must be condemned, what way of accommodation shall we contrive
to reconcile them? we will determine this business of consequence at our next
interview. In the mean time, I have a thing that more concerns me to speak to
you, since you ever love me, Be always mindful of me in your sacrifices of
Love, and Charity: allow me some little share in those excesses and inundations
of virtue I have been told of: at least let those overflowings water my
barrenness: I want only the sight of you to grow better. Come reverend father,
come and with your presence manure the stones and sands of our desert. I
conjure you to it from the bottom of my heart, and am passionately,

Dec. 5. 1638. Your, etc.

LETTER XVI. To Monsieur de Marca, Counselor to the King.
SIR,
AFter I have told you, I was very sensible of the honor you did me, I must
now add, that I have a share in that honor you have done to our Age; and that
I should have been unwilling to dye without seeing your labors in their utmost
perfection. This work, Sir, will be no vain show of Science nor mere Ornament
of Libraries: this will be a piece necessary to the order of things, for want
of which the Glory of France was defective: it will at once both beautify the
public, and strengthen the State. Our Kings shall reckon it among their
Demeanes, or put it into the number of their Treasures: and if with your
profound Learning you had not a large portion of humility you would give me
leave to prefer it before Bucklers fallen from Heaven, Images esteemed fatal,
and other sacred Gages of the Grandeur and Duration of Empires; but you would
not have men fly so high, for your sake; and you do not affect to show your
self in so much pomp. The Title you have given to your excellent Book is less
proud and figurative: it does not menace the world with an insolent Metaphor,
though its modesty (notwithstanding) promise that which none but a perfect
understanding can perform. You undertake, Sir, the difficultest accommodation
that ever was heard spoken of, since there were any quarrels on Earth: and
though Priesthood and Royalty are two powers naturally friends, nay two
daughters of the same Father, yet they are ofttimes so embroyled against one
another by the interest of their relatives, that it will be hard for Equity her
self to succeed in the reconciliation of them. To this is required a moderation
the hotheaded French are not very inclinable to, and the haughty Roman, less:
here must be neither the spirit of a Slave, nor an Enemy: here must be a soul
full of light, and emty of passion; the King's power must be acknowledged, and
the Pope's authority bowed to: but truth, who is Superior both to Pope and
King, and is the strongest thing in the world must be absolutely depended on.
What a Renoune will it be to you, when it is believed, that your design was
merely to oblige her; and it shall be said you defended her rights, as if you
had received pay from her, or were by her commanded to write books! What a
brave thing it will one day be, to be styled the Champion of truth? I do not
see any thing in your writings that may prejudice your hopes, or so noble a
pretention. If you had any such when you writ it, there is nothing of the
degenerate or rebel in it, and though as yet I have only considered the
outside of the building, and three or four pieces of the Portal, I omit not to
comprehend the merit of the whole pile together. I saw at the first glance that
your knowledge is wise, your Liberty discreet, and your zeal not blind: the
most part of books are notorious by such imperfections, and the greatest part
of Readers will easily be cured of them, if they meet with no more books to
foment them: for my part, I seek after nothing else, since my gray Hairs
admonished me to look after what is solid and serious: but especially, Sir, I
highly esteem that learned wisdom, without which I should not value all
Baronius Latin though he had mountains of it, nor all Casaubon's Greek, though
he were more Atticke then Athens it self; nor all Scaliger's Hebrew and
Arabic, though he understood it better then the Rabbis, and the Mufty. With
this bait of sound sense and reason, you take my mind, after you had conquered
my heart by another charm, and I am not in this particular less your abettor,
than elsewhere I am obliged to be,

SIR, Your, etc.
Aug. 6. 1641.
LETTER XVII. To Monsieur de Rampalle.
SIR,
I Prized you, before I knew you loved me; and though such good tidings should
have been concealed from me for ever, yet should I have spoke of your verses
with passion, because indeed they put me into one: there is fire in them, that
creepes into my veins; for I confess to my shame, my age was a little warmed
again with them. I cannot dissemble it, they tickled my heart, and I appeared
less severe that day I received them, then I was the day before: you touch the
soul so to the quick, that he must have none, who feels not those
smart-stroakes: your Art is a second Nature, and your picture's rather the
perfection of things then the representation. It is true, the Stories you set
down, are such as lead to error, and forfeited Bishopprickes in the rigor of
the Primitive Church, for who can tell but your Metamorphosis may beget others,
nay may make more then one -- in Diana's retinue, may change chaste Ladies into
amorous ones, and the pleasure of reading into a temptation of sinning? but I
have neither virtue, nor authority suffificient to prescribe you spiritual
counsel: it is enough for me to commit destiny holy matters to you; and to tell
you concerning the subject of those that are not so, and that are such
dangerous weapons in your hands, what an old woman in Rome said when she was
reading the tales of Bocace, Would to God this were saying ones prayers! You
see by the carelessness of this Letter that I have put off my trade of
Declaimer; I have absolutely renounced the Genus demonstrarivum, and deal no
more in Eloquence: but I have great doings with truth, and you may believe me
when I protest I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
May. 21. 1640.
LETTER XVIII. To Monsieur de la Chamber, Counselor and Physician to the
King, and in ordinary to my Lord Chancellor, etc.
SIR,
YOur humility does you injustice and me a favor: It exalts me, by
undervalewing you; but yet I cannot therefore esteem my self taller, or reckon
you lesser. I understand the style of the place where you are: such submissions
are part of your mirth, and at Court you play with those words, which we use in
earnest in the Country. It must necessarily be so; else is it possible that you
who are ignorant of nothing should not know what your self were worth? Would
you have excepted your self out of the universal knowledge you have acquired,
and at once both obeyed and disobeyed the Oracle of Apollo? In earnest, after I
had considered, examined, and studied your book a whole fortnight, I concluded
that never any knew the worth of a man so perfectly as your self. Never was the
God of Delphos more nobly, more punctually obeyed: No, not by him of whose
absolute wisdom he gave testimony, nor him that was heretofore called The
understanding: nor that other who to this day is called The Genius of nature.
This Genius, it is true, has peeped into the soul, but he stopped at the
door. He has only made the way open to you; and if I were bold enough, I
would say, he is but of the outer Court, you of the Cabinet-councell. There is
no recesse nor cranny of the humane soul, but you have penetrated; there is
nothing how nimble, swift or secret soever, that passes through it, can escape
the perspicacity of your sight, and of which you cannot give a most faithful
and certain account. Our greatest Philosophers are only Pupills and Grammar
Scholars of Aristotle, as Eustathius was of Homer, and Servius of Virgil. Our
best modern books are only repetitions and transcriptions of ancient ones, or
at most, but Glosses and Paraphrases on them. I should wrong yours, if I should
say the same of it. I should injure the highest and sovereign Reason, which is
interessed in this work, if I should attribute it to the lessons you had
learned, or the common places you had collected. You are nothing less then
Commentatour or transcriber; and to put you in among the number of wits of the
second rank would be to degrade you. It may be said then, and that without
extravagancy, that you are Philosopher in chief: that your writings are
Originalls that you have made a great progress into Truth; that you have there
discovered unknown regions, which must bear your name, and the strait of
Magellan not more famous, then certain places you have passed through. There
is no question but you are the first that traveled them, and therefore the
glory of discovery is due to you. There are things in your book, for the
invention of which a Grecian would have thanked his Gods with a Hecatombe. And
not to particularize so many, (and those so rare) things; That single discourse
of the knowledge of Animals is a novelty would have given birth to a Sect at
Athens, and have ranked you among the Founders of Philosophical Orders. If
Aristotle himself were returned to the world, so excellent a Novelty would
stir up Jealousy in his breast; it would vex him as much as it would inform
him; for being so ambitious as he was, he would have been inconsolable for not
being the author of it. But in what unknown quarter of the World have you found
that loveliness and light (which are wanting in his works) which invite,
solicit, and arrest all eyes to yours. Beauty is there inseparably united
with goodness. By your pains it is become broad day in Philosophy, after a
night of many Ages; and your words are so clear and pure, so powerful and
efficacious, that far from obscuring things from quickest sighted, me thinks
they might even illuminate the blind; as they display the objects, they
strengthen and cherish the sight, They delight both the severe and the sad: and
the pleasure of them is such that I make no Question but an expression so
flourishing and attractive even in the Thorniest and Roughest matters, would
quickly discredit Rome and make France loath Comedies and Entertainments, and
such other kind of allurements as voluptuous spirits are taken with. This being
so, if I am not the most deceiveed man in the world, and having written nothing
but what proceeds from my very heart, and a full persuasion, I may yet come in
earnest to answer either, the Drollery or civilities of your Letter. In
conclusion I say this, if you have lost any thing by my absence (as you pretend
in complement) they are innumerable applauses, loud and frequent acclamations,
sometimes interrupted with a silent pause of admiration: they are postures and
gestures of a man transported, and such kind of things as Posts and Messengers
are not laden with all: these, it may be, you have lost; and in truth, I
believe if I had been at Paris when your book came forth, the representation of
the Characters you are to treat of in your Chapter of Ecstasy might all have
been seen acted by me, though I have not the gift to express them, as you have
in paper: in which let it suffice to assure you, that I am passionately,

SIR, Your, etc.
Sep. 15. 1645.
LETTER XIX. To Monsieur Salmasius.
SIR,
IT is enough, that I hear you have done me the honor to take cognizance of my
cause. After this, I do not expect till you have pronounced judgment, to give
you thanks for the justice you have done me. Favorable or contrary, I call it
good because, being yours it cannot be bad. And if I were afraid of the
extremest rigor, as I hope something more mild, yet I am too well persuaded
of the integrity and sufficiency of my judge, not to approve my condemnation, if
coming out of his mouth. In such affairs, I will never appeal from you to any
other. Neither the People, nor Posterity, are names great enough to be set in
the scale against Salmasius; and if I should say that in the Commonwealth of
Letters he holds the same dignity that formerly Queen Zenobias Confident did,
who was acknowledged the Oracle of his own Age, and the Treasure of past
Centuries, I should speak nothing but what all the sound part of that
Republique would aver after me. Do you then Soveraignly decide, Sir, all the
matters in contest? Your opinion ought to be the absolute Rule of our
differences. Against so legitimate an authority, there is no protection among
the Rabbis; no Sanctuary in the East, nor Recruit in the Country of the
Hellenists: and how small an inclination soever my Adversary shows to an
arbitrament like mine, yet we are each of us obliged to tell you, Tibi summum
rerum judicium Dii dedere, nobis obsequii gloria relicta est. I shall conserve
this glory with respect, and continue passionately, whilst I live,

SIR, Your, etc.

LETTER XX. To Monsieur de Scudery.
SIR,
YOu have not followed the advice of the Secretary of Florence, in the
distribution of your favors. He would have counseled you to distill them drop
by drop, to the end they might hold out the longer. But that Grandeur of
courage of which you make profession is above those frugall Maxims it
conferres its graces with a full and open hand; and you are of opinion you have
given nothing, where you have not enriched. I have found in the same packet,
your Letter, your Request, your Tragedy, and your Observations upon the Kid.
What an Ocean of favors pour d out at once! which had they been well
husbanded, had returned you the incom^ of four several acknowledgments. But I
question not; you were very willing to be quit of three bad Complements, and
will receive this only in your own defense. And yet, Sir, I dare not pretend by
it to be discharged of my debt: it shall serve to bear witness against me how
much I owe you, and let you know the desert has not yet rendered me so savage,
but that I have some sense left me of those rarities which are brought me from
the civilized world. It Is in that number I place the presents you have made me,
and you know well I do not now begin to prize your works. I was one amongst the
first who ado^'d your infant Muses, and clapped my hands at the recital of your
first Essay: since that time my esteem has grown proportionably with your
forces; and having given its applauds to your fair hopes and expectations
cannot now refuse its voice to your more ripe and vigorous productions. Few, if
any, are ignorant of the merit of your verse; and your prose has ravished some
who were not acquainted withal your perfections, which as it may boast an
infinity of graces besides those of novelty, so it has found in the world a
vast number of partisans, and adorers, amongst whom I am not the least
passionate. Yet it will nothing become me to take cognizance of the difference
betwixt you and Monsieur Corneille, since for my own particular I am oftener a
starter of doubts then a resolver of questions. However I must needs say, you
seem to me to have attacqued him with address and force; and that, for the
most part, your objections are lined with strong sense, with subtilty and
gallantry it self. For all this you may please Sir, to consider that all
France is entered into the cause with him; and that there is not one of those
judges whom it is reported you have assembled, who has not praised that, you
desire he should condemn; insomuch that should your Arguments prove invinc^ble
and your adversary himself acknowledge them for such, he had yet wherewithal
gloriously to be comforted for the loss of his caus^, and might avouch boldly
that to have pleased an whole k^ngdome, imports somewhat more of excellent and
grand, then to have composed a piece exactly regular. There is not an Architect
in Italy, who has not some fault to find, in the structure of Fontaine bleau,
who does not call it a Monster of stone, and yet this Monster is the fair
habitation of our kings, and the Court is there commodiously lodged. There are
many perfect beauties eclipsed, by others whose features carry in them less of
perfection but more of attract and charm. And since acquired parts are not so
noble as the natural, nor the industry of men to be equally esteemed with the
gifts of heaven, I may further add that to understand the art of pleasing is
not so much to be vallued as to understand how without Art to please. Aristotle
blames the Flower of Agathon, yet confesses it agreeable, and his Oedipus was
not perhaps agreeable, though Aristotle approved it. If it then be true, that
the satisfaction of the spectators is the end which the Theater proposes to
its self; and that the Professors of that art have sometimes appealed from
Caesar to the people; the Kid of the French Poet having pleased as well as the
Flower of the Grecian, it must be granted he has obtained the scope of his
representation, and that he has already reached the goal, though he made not
to it by the way of Aristotle, nor by the addresses of his Poesy. But you will
say, he has cast a Mist before the eyes of the world, and will accuse him of
Magique and enchantment. I know many people that would have the vanity to be
proud of such an accusation; and you your self will confess to me that
Magique were an excellent thing, if a thing that were lawful. Would it not be
admirable (think you) to be the Author of innocent Prodigies? to make the
sun appear at midnight, to prepare a feast without meat or Caterers; to
change oak leaves into Gold, and glass into Diamonds? This is that with which
you reproach the Author of the Kid, who acknowledging himself to have
violated the rules of art does oblige you at the same time to avow he has a
secret which has thriven better with him then the Art it self; and not
denying but he has deceived all the Court and all the People, leaves you
nothing to conclude but that he is more subtle then all the Court and all the
People, and that a finesse put upon so great a number of Persons is more a
conquest then a fraud. This being so, Sir, I doubt not but the Messieurs of the
Academy will find themselves in the briars about the deciding of your cause;
and that on the one side, your Arguments will shake them; as on the other the
public approbation will confirm them. Were I of their number, I should have
been in the like pain, had I not by good fortune lighted on your sentence in
the Register of Antiquity. It was pronounced fifteen hundred years ago by a
Philosopher of the Stoique Tribe, but such a Philosopher who had a soul not
insensible of pleasures. The Satyrs and Tragedies fallen from whose hand, we
have yet amongst us; one who flourished in the reign of an Emperor that was
both a Poet and Comedian, in the Age of Verses and of Music. See here the
express terms of this authentic j^dgment which I leave you to interpret to
your Ladies, for whose sake you have undertaken a longer and more difficult
translation.

Illud mulium est primo aspectu oculos
Occupasse, etiamsi contemplatio diligens
Inventura est quod arguat: si me interrogas,
Major ille est qui judicium abstulit,
Quam qui meruit.
Your adversary gains his ends in the favorable word of Major est; and you
also have compassed all you can desire, not coveting any more (as I conceive)
then to prove that judicium abstulit. So that you will carry it in the Cabinet,
as he has already done upon the stage. If the Kid be guilty, it is of a crime
for which he has been honored: if he must needs be punished, it will yet be,
after he has triumphed. If Plato banish him his Commonwealth, he will first
Crown him with flowers and not treat him worse then he formerly treated Homer.
If Aristotle find ought wanting in the conduct and management of his plot, he
will yet suffer him quietly to enjoy his good fortune and not altogether
condemn a design which its success has justified. You have too much goodness
to wish more, you know there is an allay found out for the Law it self in many
cases, and that a Court of Equity conserves that which the strictness of
Justice would have ruined. Do not then insist upon that rigorous Letter of the
Law: nor bind up your self in so severe chains to the dictates of sovereign
reason. He who designs to satisfy that wholly, and to follow it exactly
through all its niceties, would be obliged to contrive a fairer fabrique of a
World, then that we live in; he must invent a new nature of things, and search
for Idea's above the Heavens. I speak for my own interest; if you are of that
belief, you will find nothing to be loved, and by consequence I shall run
the hazard of losing your favor, though it be extremely dear to me, and that
I am passionately,

SIR, Your, etc.
Aug. 27. 1637.
LETTER XXI. To Monsieur Perrot, of Ablancourt.
SIR,
THis little note threatens you with a large pair of Manuscripts, and I am now
making ready for I know not what long harangve upon the subject of Tiberius
and his honest successors. Yet it troubles me to foregoe Liberty for Tyranny,
and my Livy for your Tacitus. But Tacitus being become yours, my ill humor
against him cannot last. I cannot hate a person whom you love; and to tell you
the truth, methinks he is grown more gentle and less thorny, since he passed
through your hands. The reason is, you contract no soil from the impurity of
the matters which you handle; and amidst the corruptions of Policy your
morality is preserved pure and unconcerned. A Stoicall Philosopher of this
latter Age, as you will grant Justus Lipsius to be, had the same passion as
your self: A great Commander, as questionless was the Marquess Spinola, has
translated the same thing, into his own language; though it never was yet
published; and I reveal this secret to you from the mouth of one of his
greatest Confidents. So that you are neither singularly gentleman, or the only
wise man that has pleased to make observation upon ill times, and carefully
studied the History of a corrupted Empire, with a soul worthy the Repubique in
her perfect Glory. You cannot think how I prize your work; the beauty and the
chastity of your style; both that which nature bestowed largely upon you, and
your own acquisitions. But this is a subject for another pair of manuscripts,
I conclude with a sincere protestation to continue with all my soul,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jun. 4. 1643.
LETTER XXII. To the Reverend Father d'Estrades, a Divine of the Society of
Jesus, Superior of the confessors Cloister in Bourdeaux.
Reverend father,
At last my New Years gift are come.

I Have received the controverted discourses you did me the favor to send me,
and you were just to call them the Weapons. I add fatal and invincible, and I
think, I speak yet too modestly of them; For, in earnest, who can esteem those
Weapons high enough which Monsieur the Grand Prior forged, and you have
polished; on which he bestowed the temper and the strength; you the fashion and
ornaments? Your Minister is too happy, for dying so fair a death. Certainly Du
Moulin and Mestrezat will envy him for it. But for our particular, what should
we do: It becomes us to joy as in our Muses behalf at the honor don them by a
man of so high quality, who has had so great and so illustrious employments,
is at present Governor of a Province, and one day may be sovereign to a
Nation made up all of Gentlemen. I confess freely to you, my profession begins
not to dislike me so much as it did, I begin to love it a little more, since as
well as I, that Gallant Knight is of the same, and we are both Authors in one
Language. But I beseech you Reverend father repent not of that good Office you
lately did him, and do not conceive that action, though it seem inferior, is
unworthy of you. There is more Glory in Copying out Oracles, then dictating
ones own inventions. The Sybills and Prophets did nothing but repeat as well
as you. They were but interpreters and messengers; or, not to run so far
back, Posterity shall not be less beholding to you for preserving a piece of
Divinity of Monsieur the Grand Priour, than we are now obliged to Arrian for
saving us the relics of Epictetu^'s Philosophy. Doubt not then, to proceed in
the Noble Collection of the reasons and arguments of an other: Nevertheless,
since in point of Learning you are not less rich by birth, then fortune and
industry has rendered you; send us something immediately from your own hand, to
let your Minister know, you are able to beat him with your unborrow'd forces:
this will effectually dispatch him; and not leave him, in the distress you have
put him, so much as this small sentence of comfort with which he may possibly
flatter his despair, Is it possible not to yield to the Uncle of a man who
has command of Legions? I shall expect this second present for my next new
years gift, and in the mean time remain withal my soul,

Reverend father, Your, etc.
Jan. 15. 1640.
LETTER XXIII. To Monsieur de Borstel.
SIR,
THe gentleman who delivered me your Letter, brings you the Sermons you would
needs have me read, and of which you desired my opinion. I have read them with
a great deal of delight, and I may say with much edification: for, in earnest,
they do not deviate, methinks, from the Orthodox Doctrine; and were it not for
two or three little marks, which denote them of the contrary party, and some
slight offers at our Outside, which we do not much care to defend, they might
be preached with applause in our Ladies Church at Paris. I met with beauty in
most places, and vigor almost in all; especially in that of our dear Monsieur
Daille. He is none of those Orators, Seneca's Apes, whose perpetual
Antithesies only touch upon the superficies of the soul. As he uses better
weapons then they, so he strikes deeper wounds. He leaves true compunction in
the heart, and not false allarmes in the ear. He has seen the Idea of that
Sovereign Rhetoric, whose pourtrait I drew lately, and Monsieur Costar calls,
Queen of the Free States: He has studied her among the ablest masters; and
though by a certain scrupulositie entayled on his profession, he dare not
display her in her full extent; though he conceales more then he discloses; yet
it is easily visible, he does possess what he does not make show of; and that
he is rich and powerful, though he be modest and thristy -- etc. In a word, I
am with passion,

SIR, Your, etc.
Feb. 4. 1639.
LETTER XXIIII. To Madam de Nesmond, Superior of the Ursulines in Angoulesme.
Madam, my Dear Cosen,
IT is now wednesday morning, and you may keep Monsieur Godeau's book till
Friday Evening: but I declare to you, I cannot resolve to endure a longer
absence. Do you know how much I do in this for your sake? I separate my self
from a friend at all hours of the day; I deprive my self of a companion that
makes my solitude happy; I let go a guest that pays me in Rubies and Diamonds.
It is true, he will return speedily: but in the mean time, what a Patience
must I practice to be without him to day, to morrow, and the next day? When you
have surveyed the wonders I speak of, you will accuse my words of undervalewing
and poorness: you will deride the meandness of my Metaphors, though I draw
them from the most precious things Magnificence can be employed in, and make
them of Rubies and Diamonds. You will tell me, that in this inferior world,
and amongst all the glories of nature that are visible, no comparison is to be
found worthy of my friend: that he is an Angel in a Poets disguise; that he is
descended to Earth to teach men the language and Music of Heaven: at least let
us say, and that with a perfect consent and wonder, that before him our Muses
were Courtesans, and debauched wenches, and he has reclaimed them from that
scandalous life, to make them Saints and Religious, like you: let us say, he
has reduced Verse to its primitive and Legitimate use: that he has cleansed
Parnassus, when it was filled with all the defilements of humane wit, with the
mudde and the corruption of all ages. But what should not I say in a Preface of
my making, before the book I send you, since I have made a Ticket speak so much
already? One word more in answer to your Letter. Pardon me, Madam my dearest
Colen, if I cannot do what you entreat me. I do not think I shall quit St. John
Chrysostom, nor St. Leo the Pope, who are the Chaplains of my Desert, for your
Preacher, to whose Sermons you invite me. And unless your self were to preach
in your own Chapel, it would be a very difficult task to entice me out of my
Hermitage as long as this fair season lasts. Do not think I am in jest when I
speak of your Preaching: you want nothing to do it but a privilege, which by
misfortune has not been granted to your sex: and you would have eloquence to
spare, if the Church would suffer you to make use of it. I wish you a good day,
and am with all my soul,

Madam, my Dear Cosen, Your, etc.
May. 7. 1634.
LETTER XXV. To My Lord, the Bishop of Grass.
My Lord,
I Received your Paraphrase on the Canonical Epistes: But you are more
liberal then you conceive you are, or else you give more then you speak of.
The Letter you did me the honor to write me, promises me only four Apostles,
and I find five in the book I received from your favor. Was it for want of
memory that you made no mention of the fifth, or an excess of humility that
you reckoned it for none? This it self is one of the marks of Apostleship; and
the same God who exalts those of your order in the same rank with Angels, by
the power he has given them, inclines them to debase themselves beneath men,
by the example he has left them. But I am not obliged ever to assent to your
Humility, and believe a perfect man that preaches his imperfection. For not to
put any dissension between the Saints that triumph above, and those who fight
below, I believe I may say, the same spirit that animates you, is no other but
that which inspired them, and that you speak with as much vigor as our Fathers
did when the blood of our Savior boiled yet in the Churches veins. I observe
in your works the language of those Heroic times, and the courage of those
Heroes. Though I am all ice, I kindle at the reading of them; and I should find
no difference between the Epistle you have made, and those you have expounded,
but that you call them Gentlemen whom the Apostles style Brethren. But it is
not through affectation of certain terms out of use, that we are to imitate
the primitive Christians. There is no great harm in complying with the age we
are of, in things of so small consequence; and without letting slack the
ancient austerity, some little toleration may be yielded to custom. I am,

My Lord, Your, etc.
April. 12. 1639.
LETTER XXVI. To the same.
My Lord,
SEek some other then me that may do what you order. You require a thing of me
that is not in my power; and your works being my Mistrisses, how can I possibly
look on them with the eyes of an enemy? To do this, I must be as Barbarous as
the ancient Goths who made war on all excellent things; or of as ill a nature
as that modern Italian, who commented on Aristotle only to find fault with
him. I am neither a Goth, nor Castelvetro. I am your constant and perpetual
Admirer; your Verses, your Prose, your inventions, your imitations, your lutes,
your flutes, and your trumpets please me absolutely, and without any condition.
Every thing that comes from you does so charm me, that there is no means to
make me censure uprightly of it; unless passion and ecstasy are competent
judges. You shall have nothing else from me, besides that true protestation.
But what would you more? what can I say of your last compositions, unless that
the multitude of The beauteous and The good takes away my free election of any
one; and that, As one, who to some flowery garden walks
Designed in wreaths to unite the severed stalks,
Nature's enamell there the more he spies
The more the choice distracts his wondering eyes.


I am without reserve,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Jan. 22. 1644.
LETTER XXVII. To Monsieur Maury, Dr. in Divinity.
SIR,
YOur papers have taught me an infinity of good things, both serious and
delightful, strong and subtle, Attick and Roman in an equal degree: but this
shall be our Sundays conversation, and I will not dilate my self on it till I
am with you in attending that desired day. I must tell you news, that Monsieur
de -- who was so much your friend, is become your accuser: In earnest, he
impeached you yesterday for a Magician, and he still averres that there is
something supernatural in your more then Ovidian smoothness. He swears that
that of the Prophets and other inspired persons, nay that of Apollo himself
their inspirer, was never comparable. For my part, I dare not go so high: I
only say, that when you speak in Prose, you are more puzzelled to avoid
measures, and number, then we are to find them when we write Verses. I believe
it would be no hard task for you to turn all into rhyme, that ever was written
in the world, and set all the Sciences in music: that hereafter, Philosophy
and Divinity, yea the Law, and Physic too, might be all sung of your
composing. There is no Author so constant and stiff in his way, but alters in
your hands; none so serious and sad but you make him dance as often as you
please. There is no mortal in Print, but you in an instant teach him the
Language of the Gods, by an extemporary Paraphrase. You have already written a
Rhetoric in Verse; but that is nothing, you will make Cicero a Poet when you
please; his Orations and Epistles shall be transformed into Woods and
Epigrames, if you resolve it.

O latices numerorum! O verba fluentia cursu
Aeterno! Talis Rhodanus, vesterque Garumna,
Hybernis fluit auctus aquis. Nec verba, sed illas
Res, O Maure, illas, sed vastum ac fine carentem
Miramur rerum Oceanum, quas fundis ab ore;
Formosam que is Burdigalam ditare benignus,
Pictonicumque solum voluisti, and littora late,
Santonica, insignemque suis sine moenibus urbem.
Que is nostras, mi Maure, beasti sepius aures.
I most humbly kiss your hands, and am with all my soul,

SIR, Your, etc.
Aug. 30. 1640.
LETTER XXVIII. To Monsieur L'Huillier, Counselor to the KING etc.
SIR,
I Felicitate you for having Monsieur De Roncieres for your Governor, Monsieur
Rigault for your Colleague, and Mademoiselle Calista for your Mistress or your
disciple. If the word felicitate is not yet a French Denizen, it shall be next
year, and Monsieur de Vaugelas has promised not to oppose it. I congratulate
your good fortune in Lorraine, and confess you have cause to slight the three
Cities you speak of; though Venice be Queen of the Sea, Rome Metropolis of the
earth, and Madrid be accused of aspiring to the Universal Monarchy. If the man
of Bilbilis said formerly to a Calista of less merit then yours, Romam tu mihi
sola facis, what would he not have said, if besides his mistress he had enjoyed
two such friends as you do? what contempt had he not put on the
fathers-Conscript, and the Order of Knights on the Palace, and the Palatine
Militia; every thing is to be found in three persons differently excellent. A
little World so complete would please me much better then the great one so
spoiled. In reality, I count you happier for the converse of that venerable Old
Man, then if you were in ordinary with Jupiter, then if that Father of the Gods
and King of men should carry you with him to his banquets in the Ocean, though
Nectar be poured out there in buckets, and the Muses say Grace to him. Your
Letter promises me his Minutius which I have not yet seen (I mean the Minutius
of Monsieur your Landlord): but to tell you truth, I had rather see some of
his own natural productions then all the works of other men he has new
dressed up: especially, Sir, I long for the Character of the ancient Christian,
which he put me in some hopes of, the last time I had the honor to entertain
him. How filtly would such a work come out at the beginning of a civil War,
kindled between the Orthodoxe Churchmen; and how the representation of the
spirit and mildness of our forefathers, would be effectual to persuade their
quarrelsome Children to peace; both Jesuits and Jansenists!

Exoriare liber priscae virtutis Imago,
Et dubiae tandem propere succurrito Romae.
Love me ever, I beseech you, since your friendship is one of the sweetest
consolations of my melancholy Life, and since I am more then any person in the
world,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jan. 18. 1642.
LETTER XXIX. To Monsieur de Bellejoy.
SIR,
Why do you take it so ill that the late King of Sweden, and the Duke of
Weymar are named in a drinking Song? I am not so great a Scholar as you, I
want above half of it: yet I know that long since Harmodius and Aristogiton
were sung, in the most memorable debauches; and has not your own Athaeneus
taught you a Song concerning Harmodius, that begins thus, Most dear Harmodius,
thou art not yet dead; the report is that thou yet live in the fortunate
Islands, with active Achilles and brave Diomedes. Upon this song of Harmodius
the Loyolist who would have converted you, when you were both in my Chamber,
has brought me a passage out of Aristophanes, and another of one of his
commentatours which confirm that of Atheneus: here they are both, (...),
(...).
Aristophanes Achernensibus: Ad quem locum Scholiastes.

(...)
(...),
(...).
You are admirable in searching out all kind of drinking Songs for me, which
you call Bacchanall Odes. Certainly, it is because I writ to you last year,
that I had need of an appetite, that I was nauseated with serious matters, and
that I never hear more talk of Morality nor Politics. I am not always in that
scurvy humor. We dispute, we discourse, and sometimes declaime in our village,
the affairs of the Roman Commonwealth are there treated on; Caesar and Pompey
are both arraigned there, you may find controverses and Suasories, with
counsels given to Consuls and Dictatours, and if you please to have me tell you
after a more Noble manner.

Hic soceri causa, and generi, censente Catone,
Et longa imperia, et nimii damnantur honores.
Hic bona Libertas, tranquilla obscuraque vita,
Praefertur regno Italiae, ac victricibus armis;
Consiliumque damus Syllae, privatus ut altum
Dormiat, and numeret salsos in littore fluctus,
Aequoreasque legate conchas.
This good counsel that is given to Sylla to sleep soundly, puts me in mind it
is time to go to bed, and take leave of your learned Lordship. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Apr. 20. 1641.
LETTER XXX. To Monsieur Colardeau, the Kings Attorney in Fontenay.
SIR,
I Maintain it openly that your Verse has no whit advantage of your Prose: or
if you would not have me speak like the People, I tell all that will hear me,
you are not less valiant on foot, then on Horseback. The Panegyricke to our
Monsieur d'Argenson, and the vote for our Monsieur de Villemonte are worthy
your Art, and their Virtue. I equally esteem the materials and the
workmanship, the richness of the stuff and raritie of the embrodery. In how
agreeable a dress you have embellished the objects of my love! you represent
them to me, if it be possible, more amiable then they seemed before. It is
true, there is a neighboring Vicar, to whom I showed both the Pieces, and he
produced me the story of the two Parrots that were taught to speak at Rome
during the War at Actium; one of which the Jugler had instructed to cry AVE
VICTOR CAESAR, and the other AVE VICTOR ANTONI: But I stoutly defended the
honor of your Muses against his allegation: I answered him, that here was no
War, no Enemy; and that to commend the Predecessor and the Successor was one
and the same thing? it is only to praise the Kings Creature, the Queens choice,
and their Councill's judgment. Let not therefore an assault that I have
repelled already for you, give you any disquiet; and enjoy peaceably the glory
you have deserved by laboring to celebrate that of others; I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Aug. 10. 1646.
LETTER XXXI. To Monsieur de la Thibaudier.
SIR,
I Had sent to morrow into Poictou, if I had not this day heard you were at
Paris. Your Steward amazed me with the news, and has taken me off the hopes I
had to feast you here within four or five days. The Learned Peyrarede is to be
here within that time, if he be a man of his word. He brings along with him his
observations upon Plautus and Martial, to mingle with our Melons, and our
Mushromes: with all which, and a great deal of salt and pepper, we shall make
no contemptible olives. But what shall we do in the mean time for your
incomparable way of discourse; your facetious Eloquence, your constant and
perpetual mirth? where will that picture of a young Pope be, in whose company
no melancholy is able to keep countenance? his mere Idea infuses delighting
conceits into me, in the midst of my sadness: On a day too, wherein I take
Physic, when I do not so much as write to Titus Pomponius Atticus, you provide
me this happy instant, to offer my self to you both in Latin and French
against Monsieur the Priour and Monsieur the judge. They have either of them
made a match to assault you in his own Language as soon as ever you come into
the Country. But what honor do I foresee for you! how bright a day will this
be, and what new rays it will add to your splendor! I am now making ready to
clappe my hands and cry out Vivat and Sophos, to the great Monsieur de la
Thibaudier. If your steward is to be believed, you are already so great that
you can beget nothing that is little: He has told us miracles of that little
Gallant of your own mould, that is not yet five years and a half old. Is it
true, that he had rather go out at the windows then at the doors; that he
runs upon the brink of precipices; that he goes to go to snatch the thing he
loves, out of the middle of the fire? These are the rudiments of a Hero, whose
History shall one day be written by some Gomberville. I speak in earnest;
Aeneas did not do more for his father, then your son has already done for
roasted apples. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Oct. 16. 1643.
LETTER XXXII. To the same.
SIR,
I Know you do not care much to be put to charges, but I know besides you will
not let good customs be antiquated. I therefore thought fit (out of my
natural liberality) to send you you Lenten provision for this year. Among
other things you will receive a Satin ^hesis dedicated to me by the
Philosophers of Angoulesme, of which you may make that learned Mask, you once
showed me the plot of. It is true, Crasset is no longer of this world, and
Monmor is a little too far from Chisay: but what do you take Monsieur -- for,
who is within a spit and a stride of you, and who of late is become all Form,
all Matter, all Genus, all Species, all Categorie, and Predicament? Your
mummery could not be carried to a better house then his. He has at least two
thousand ready Syllogisms in stock lying by him, and not one but is
over-weight, as I am told by a Gentleman of his acquaintance that cannot read.
I would very feign make one at so merry a meeting, but I must wait from Paris
for my convoy to la Thibaudier, Tantae molis erat, lecticam condere nostram!

I am, Sir, but in earnest, and out of the terms of our figure,

SIR, Your, etc.
Nov. 3. 1642.
LETTER XXXIII. To the same.
SIR,
FOr an answer to all your eloquent Letters, I give you notice that I am
resolved to make a collection of them and present them to the Public with a
Preface of my own. I ought to be doubtful that the success of this design
might prove disadvantagious to me: but my affection is incapable of jealousy.
It surpasses all considerations of self-love, and private interest: With a
ready heart I resign to you the Crown, Monsieur de Bois-Robert bestowed on me,
when he inaugurated me king of the Wits, and am content to lose the esteem I
held of a Doctor at the Letter-style, provided you succeed me in the chair.
Questionless, you would be voted to it, if you had never writ any thing
besides the last Letter I received from you, for I protest the luster of your
writings is so bright and strong, that I am yet dazzeled with them. Isocrates
his Helena shows deformed to me incomparison of that Lady whose pourtrait you
drew to me. All that is left us of the wracks of Antiquity, and the hands of
the most eminent Masters comes not near this exquisite picture. Even he that
infused a soul and life intocolours, should be but one of your apprentices: we
should find he has but slubbered over the Goddess of beauty, if his
work-manship were set against your --. I am withal my soul,

SIR, Your, etc.
Dec. 28. 1643.
LETTER XXXIIII. To Monsieur Conrart, Counselor and Secretary to the King.
SIR,
IT is necessary that I be very firmly persuaded that your goodness is
infinite: for if I could suppose it had any limits, with what forehead durst I
appear before you? Yet I do it, and that with a strange confidence: not only
to ask you pardon for doing amiss, but also to beg leave to continue in my
fault. Never was such a boldness heard of: never did offender less dissemble
his inclination to evil, nor treated more familiarly with his judge. All that
can be said in my justification, is, that I sin out of infirmity, and that my
offenses are neither malicious nor voluntary. I languish here at the end of the
world without action or motion. I am a burden to my self, and of no use to any
body else. I am, if you would have me speak in a higher strain, a paralytick
limb of Common society; I have only left, Sir, some principle of life, which I
reserve for you, and my heart is still sound enough to honor you as I ought.
That As I ought is as unlimited as your goodness: and though you were not an
extraordinary person, and one of the things of the world which I admire (who am
no very great Admirer) yet you have obliged me to be more then any man in the
world,

SIR, Your, etc.
Oct. 24. 1639.
LETTER XXXV. To the same.
SIR,
YOur Doctor is not Orthodox; at least he has been ill informed, for I have
not so much as dreamt (as he told you) of putting any thing to the press. I am
so nauseated with all things that are called books, that in the mind I now am,
I would more willingly blot out all that ever I writ then resolve to write them
fair. Be pleased then to assure the intelligencer, that he received a false
alarm. I do with all my heart forgive the memory of Don Roderigo, and bury all
my injuries and my resentments of them in his grave: I am not addicted to
disturb the quiet of Churchyards, to fence with my pen against Ghosts, to
violate the Franchises and sanctuary of death. It is true, Sir, my dear
Menander has in his hands two Apologies of mine, which I made long since, and
he may dispose of, as he pleases. But it is as true withal, that I defend my
self there without encountering with any person in it: and my equity, my
modesty, and my civilities are such, that my friends of Quercy and Perigor'd
have styled them Abjectnesse and Cowardice. I left a copy of these two
Apologies at Paris, which N. N. has a command to present to you from me, with
some other compositions Moral and Political. You may please to send me your
opinion of them at your leisure, and do me always the favor to believe that
none can be more passionately then I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Apr. 7. 1639.
THE FOURTH BOOK.
LETTER I. To Monsieur the President Mainard.
SIR,
We are now in the beginning of October, and your last Letter promised me
your Company here in August, if you were alive. I pray Heaven you be rather
false then dead, and that you break your word, yet for many years to come. I
know that, in Poetry, Jupiter laughs at the perjuries of Lovers, But remember
your promise was made in prose, and that it is allowed you to be always
fabulous. Yet if there be no means to drive you from your fictions, nor reduce
your style to the simplicity of truth, it shall not hinder me from enjoying my
desires by another way. I have decreed to see you, though I enforce my way
through all the Mountains that separate us, and vanquish all the Barbary
betwixt you and me. For this effect, I have in my fancy designed my self a
litter, becoming the Equipage of a Spanish Ambassador; and I am now sending
to the most noted faires of Poitou to provide a couple of Mules, as black and
sleeke as those your Predecessors assigned to draw the Coach of the Moon. When
this is done, I set forth for the upper Auvergne, and bring you with the ice^
and infirmities of my age, the most lively and ardent passion that a heart of
five and twenty can be sensible of, Nec segnis mihi flamma placet. Male novit
amare,
Qui patiens, qui lentus amat.


SIR, Your etc.
Octo. 5. 1641.
LETTER II. To Monsieur Girard, Secretary to the late Lord Duke of Espernon.
SIR,
YOu must needs be a person of much resolution that have undertaken a journey
to Paris with the Posse of Bourdeaux. I am jealous of the success of your
temerity: for unless you be defended with a Parasol as broad as Aiaxe's
buckler, I fear you will have cause to complain of the too great brightness of
the month of July.

Vos Aurae, Aoniis placidae de Montibus Aurae,
Aestum illi lenite, gravem lenite laborem.
A more tender wish cannot be made for a Mistress. But to summon the cool
gales so far, and to make them come from Graece into France, I cannot tell
how it should be effected without one of Apolles miracles, who does not always
grant me the supplications I address to him. However, accept the good
intention of your friend, and do not take it ill that I wish you at the head of
the River Loire, and on the plains of Beausse; the same gentle air I suck in
on an Evening on the bank of our Charante. I say the Evening; for after that,
there is no gentleness for me, I lie ever on Thorns; and have continually
unquiet nights. Yet since I have begun to be pleasant with you, I am resolved
to go through so. It is better to make you a sharer in my comforts, then tire
you with my Lamentations. I am he, in effect, that daily wake Aurora; that am a
constant waiter on the hours, when they open their Portalls of Heaven; that
ever gather that first flower of the day, the Poets speak such fine things of.
Nay, I may credibly say, that this very morning, I saw the Rocks that surround
the prospect of my Chamber, turned into Porphyry, and that I am a perpetual
witness of the Suns actions, When a more mild not full expanded ray;
Upon our Hills begins to kindle day.


-- The Magi of Persia, and the Indian Gymnosophist could not say more. Thus we
talk magnificently of our miseries. Such diseases must be gently palliated as
admit of no cure, to try whether Quacking may have better success then
Physic. Since I cannot be happy by a slumber, I endeavor to take all the
delight my watchings will allow me, Sic vigilo Comes Astrorum, falloque dolores
Ipse meos, mihi sic noster dat ludere Phoebus.


At least he furnishes me to write you a Letter without matter. For if I had
been so minded, I could have made an end of it at the beginning, as well as
that Grand Personage heretofore began at the end. I could have told you
immediately and have forgot nothing I had to say, that I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jul. 30. 1642.
LETTER III. To the same.
SIR,
YOu are a notorious deluder, or a deluder notorious. I speak both ways to
satisfy two Grammarians of my acquaintance, who are at variance about the
precedence of the adjective. But, to treat you more fairly, I say you have not
performed all you promised me; and I have expected, to no purpose, almost four
months. Yet I do not deny to admit your justifications, and believe it is only
the necessity of your business that has made you forfeit your word. I beseech
you therefore dispatch that business speedily, and come triumph at Balzac for
the victories you go to obtain at Paris. The throats of all these Law suits
must be cut, and of all that looks like them. The brood must be stifled in the
Cradle. For my part I have such a Natural enmity against them, that I am so
far from becoming a solicitour either of the Council, the Parliament, or
the Exchequer, etc. that I cannot so much as request any thing from the
Sovereign of all these Sovereign Courts, Nec tanti sunt res humanae, ut
Balzacius (why not he as well as Scaliger?) vel ulli Monarchae suplex fit. I am
confident you will not return unedified from the conferences you will have
with that Sage person to whose acquaintance I recommend you: and you will
confess to me that his virtue, though high and Sovereign, has nothing in it
strange or Stoicall, Quod pace Zenonis, Chrysippi, Cleanthis, and nostri --
dictum sit. Is enim, si nescis, purum putum Stoicismum, etiam cum ad Silviam
aut ad Phillidem scribit, multa cum gravitate profitetur, etc. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
May. 12. 1643.
LETTER IIII. To Monsieur de Bellejoy.
Sir,
I Would not have been so lazy, had I believed you so diligent. I conceived
that you having never been at Paris would have taken some time to learn the
Map of that little world. So that according to my computation, after you had
worn out one month in recovering your self of your journey, you would have
spent another in finding out the Climate where Monsieur Chaplain lives. I have
just now given him that testimony I promised you, in the most advantageous
language I could devise. He will inform you of it at your first conference, and
shall ^ustifie my affection, in case you accuse it. He is a person of an
eminent virtue, all Understanding and all Reason; of whom it may be said, as
well as of that other That he dippes his pen in sense. If you are a man that
will take counsel, his are more infallible then the oracles of Pythia; but you
must attend him with docility and submission: you must know, The greatest
Clerks, are not the wisest men.

Instead of the Panegyric you intend, I would advise you to undertake the
translation of a Greek piece of some Christian Author. There are excellent in
that kind, as you know, of St. Chrysostom, St. Gregory Nazianzen, Theodoret,
etc. You may make choice of such as best please you, and teach them to speak
good French, now you are perfectly Vn-Gasconated. A preface of your making
would be far better then those Paranymphes, and Panegyricks which you have
under your hands, --. When the translation is finished we shall consult upon
the subject of the preface, if you come back hither this Autumn, where I
attend you with more questions then Tiberius made to a Grammarian newlanded in
his Isle of Capreae. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Apri. 4. 1639.
LETTER V. To Monsieur Zuilichem, Counselor and Secretary to his Highness the
Prince of Orange.
SIR,
I Received your Letter as if it had dropped down from Heaven, and brought me
back my good fortune. I speak thus, in regard I thought you were not willing I
should be happy any longer, and because I grow distrustful of all the good
things of this world. The obstinacy of your silence made me fear something
worse then the discontinuation of our correspondence. When I had a mind to
flatter my self, I fancied you had forgot me without hating me, and that your
friendship had expired of a natural death. I have cried aloud but my voice was
not heard: I writ Letters and had no answer. For it is most true; I could
retort all the complaints you urge upon me. I could call you cruel, or at
least disdainefull, but that I had rather find out some extrinsecall cause of
this default and lay the blame upon the Posts, or the Seasons; Fortune, and
Destiny, and any thing else, then you. At last I understood, there was a packet
for me at Paris, and the virtuous Madam -- sent me the happy tidings of it.
But, would you believe, Sir, that this packet has grown old at the
Poste-house, and that after its arrival at Paris, I was constrained to expect
its coming hither above four months? Certainly there must be some Damon
envious of my happiness whose only employment is to put barricadoes between
you and me, and way-layes all the presents that come to me out of Holland.
Sometimes he intercepts your Letters; sometimes he is contented to retard them,
and not being able to make me lose your affection, he crosses me all he is
able, in the enjoyment of your favors. Nevertheless, in despite of this
evil Spirit and all his malice, your presents are here put into the port,
after a voyage of six months; and with your elegant Letter, I have received the
platform of your fair House. To judge of the excellency of such a complete
piece, requires more skillful eyes then mine and such as are better purged of
earthly vapors, and the Barbarism of the Country. A man must be of Rome to do
it, and not of this village, where nature indeed, has some graces and
allurements; but art is violated on all sides, and has received infinite
outrages by Artificers. Instead of your Ideas of perfection, and your
Masterpieces of Wit and Hand, you can see nothing here but confused rubbidge;
but Monsters and Prodigies of stone that will trouble you to behold them. There
is not one part in its right place, not one place but has an incongruity in
Architecture, and offends the Eyes of such as look upon it knowingly. So that
if you would do me the same honor you desire I should receive at your house, I
should be forced (out of fear of bringing you into a Chaos of disorder and
irregularity) to pitch a Tent on the bank of my River, having first found o^t a
charm to make my house invisible. The painting of yours, does not please me a
whit less then the two descriptions which the younger Pliny have left of his.
You cannot choose but be extremely satisfied with it, and I confess you cannot
speak too highly of it. But when it shall be attended with the Distertation you
make me hope for; then indeed, you may say, you have built for Eternity, and
more justly sing then the Poets our dear friends Jamque opus exegi, quod nec
Jovis ira, nec ignes, etc.

I am very impatient for the sight of this second work, the pure work of your
mind. But when shall I be able to go take possession of the Apartment you offer
me in so obliging terms, and assure you, not by figures and paper, but by my
own self, and by the mouth of the true Balzac, that I am perfectly,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jan. 25. 1640.
LETTER VI. To Monsieur de Campaignole, Lieutenant to the Regiment of the Kings
Guard.
Sir, My Dear Nephew,
I Wish sickness be none of the causes of your silence! Be as sloathfull as
sloth it self, rather then indisposed in the least measure. It is an
interessed person that speaks to you; and I beseech you, preserve your health
for my sake. All that can be called disease in your person, would so suddenly
communicate it self to mine, and distract me in such a strange manner, that I
should become the mansion of pain, and you only the thorough fare. But it is
too much to call to mind the fright you put me in, last year, and your fits of
five and thirty hours continuance; Let us leave this subject: And if my last
Letter be lost, this shall let you know, that I am extremely satisfied with
your negotiation; I admire that capacity in one and twenty, and such dexterity
without experience: It deserves a better employment then I have given it, and
you wrong your self with the term of my Little Agent, who may one day be a
great Ambassador, and convey words from King to King: You want nothing but
favor to do it, for in the School you are, you will quickly acquire the civil
virtues, as you were borne with the military, etc. -- We are merry together
according to our wont, yet one may jest and speak truth to, and do not conceive
that I esteem you a less brave man then that other Gallant of your name, who
is called in the History of Flanders, Il Signior di Campagnola, Soldato di
stima grande. I am with love, and tenderness,

SIR, My dear Nephew, Your, etc.
Aug. 10. 1644.
LETTER VII. To Monsieur Favereau, Counselor to the King in the Court of
Aids.
SIR,
BE pleased to admit from me the same excuses which you make to me, and do not
judge of my affection by my complements. I am sometimes so backwards in writing
that a journey of fifty leagues would not put me to so much trouble as a Letter
of five and twenty lines, and as weak and feeble as I am, I had rather take
Post to go visit my friends then take my Pen in hand to send them news of me.
It is no small matter, to talk and have nothing to say; to want matter and
fill up a sheet of paper with words. In truth, I am ashamed to fall so often
into repetitions of the same thing, and to be always reduced to --. You may
please therefore only to understand, that you have made Mademoiselle
Campaignole the proudest of Virgins, but this pride of hers is but reasonable:
the tokens of your remembrance which she has received are so agreeable that
there is no confessor so severe but will indulge her the vanity she takes in
them; for my part I have a concernment in them; for, me thinks, after so
glorious an approbation, it is more honor to be her Uncle then before --. I am
ever with passion,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jul. 20. 1638.
LETTER VIII. To the same.
SIR,
I Am, for this day, secretary to that Novice at Tic-tacke whom you taught last
year, and who expects, as she says, to learn the perfection of that game from
you. She is not so uncomely that she will be a dishonor to her Master, and
there will be no cause to repent you of the pains you take with a person whom
the Gods have not neglected. I feel your Muses coming upon me and making me
speak already in the language of a Poet: I remember you sometimes told me, that
you saw Love hover about her, and flutter with his wings. This word Love is
enough to make her angry. But your vision must be cautiously interpreted, and
she must be persuaded you did not mean that wanton Love, Son of the
Terestiall Venus, but the wise Love, Son of Venus Urania. I go beyond my
commission, and yet have not performed it: for I have express command from the
Scholar who would receive your instructions to assure you, she honors you
perfectly. As for me, you are not ignorant that I am the most in the World,

SIR, Your, etc.
Sep. 3. 1639.
LETTER IX. To Monsieur de Lavaux Saint James, Rectour of the University of
Poitiers.
SIR,
I Have owed you a thanks a great while: but you have so much chariry as not to
exact the forfeiture of your debr; and more forward to commiserate my
infirmities, then to blame my neglects. Sometimes I attend six months for one
good hour: and all my Learned neighbors have had opportunity to read your
excellent Manuscripts before my turn came to receive that contentment. At
length I have surveyed your agreeable work. How enammelled and florid is your
style, and yet withal how strong and vigorous! you have persuaded me in your
paper, as powerfully as you could have done in the Pulpit: your Orations in the
silent and quiet manner of reading do yet warm me, even after the heat and
motion of your action has left them. You strike fire out of every line of them
--. You perceive by this I am none of those who think the bride too handsome,
or accuse the Gascons for being too valiant; in this kind, I like too much
better then too little. I know magnificence borders nearer upon prodigality
then its other extreme of thrift; and magnanimity has more affinity with rash
hardness then with fear: therefore if you exceed the ordinary bounds whether in
the adornments of your style, or height of your fancy, my Civility must ever
conclude, in favor of your Rhetoric, that the Prodigal is better then
Niggard, and excess more commendable then defect. It may so fall out that the
disciples of the Bemboes and Manucioes will not assent to this conclusion.
Possibly, they will say, you are less Latin then their Ancestors, and you are
not of the Sect of Cicero: But were there no honest men of the party of Mark
Anthonyes? Is there but one way to go to Rome --? Provided you do not straggle,
I do not advise you to go out of your tracke. Where there is good and good;
use the liberty of election. Fly up to Heaven, since your wings are strong; and
do not fetter so Noble a Genius as yours. It is better to resemble the Ancients
in their courage and wit, then their Physiognomy, or garb of clothes. The
Ancients themselves have said that speaking well, does not proceed from the
mouth so much as the breast. Sweetness, and purity, deserves to be commended:
But strength and Grandeur are above all praises; and if we delight to behold
the gliding of Rivulets, we look upon Tempests at Sea with admiration and
astonishment --. The Reverend Father Adam, when he delivers you this Letter
will give you a further testimony of the esteem I have of your merit, and the
passion with which I will continue as long as I live,

SIR, Your, etc.
March. 15. 1646.
LETTER X. To the Reverend Father Andrew, a Preacher of the Order of St.
Dominick.
Reverend Father,
I Am not a subject worthy to be preached by you, and yet what do you not say
of me in the two Letters you did me the honor to write? I perceive by them you
cannot fly but high, and that you abuse good Language, when you do not employ
it lawfully. Reduce it I beseech you, to its primitive and legitimate use. Lay
out your Rhetoric only toward our salvation, and return to delight us by
instructing us. Since my Morality and Politics have neither made me a better
nor happier man. I expect that from the Gospel and from you, which Plato and
Aristotle, could not give me. As there is an efficacy of Error of which the
Apostle speeks, so there is a power of truth that animates the Spirits of
Apostolical men; and makes it self visible in their discourses. This sacred
violence is not wanting in you, and I am deceived or I have more then once seen
it issue out of your mouth with Thunder and Lightning to work upon the souls
of your Auditors. Mine may be yielded without resistance: She will gain by
suffering her self to be conquered. But besides my interest, civility obliges
me to it: I must needs owe you the reformation of my Life, that our friendship
may not be dishonorable to your virtue, and that I may not be less one of
your creatures in our Lord, then I am,

Reverend Father, Your, etc.
Feb. 18. 1646.
LETTER XI. To the Reverend Father Hercules, Provincial of the fathers of the
Christian Doctrine.
Reverend Father,
YOu have discovered a Saint to me whose Holy day I promise you to keep: and
from this time forward I declare I have not more devotion for our Saint Martha
of Poictou then for your Saint Genies of Provence. But let us leave this
tropicall language, lest we plunge our selves into Canting or Gibberish, to
which it is so near a neighbor: Let us say in the vulgar tongue, in clear and
intelligible terms, that the Euterpe you have sent me, is one of the finest
things that has arrived amongst us from the Country Latin, a long time. The
greatest part of the Modernes, sing, and mean nothing; and they who can speak
to the purpose, are so unfortunate they cannot sing at all. Your friend is a
Poet in all respects. Besides his Art and Rhetoric, which is neither strained
nor obsolete, he has wit and courage; which is ordinarily wanting to the most
exact ve^sifying, and the purest style of Latin. These are no trifles in
music, no words empty and void of things; as his Horace calls them: He happily
expresses what he thinks, and thinks nothing but what is excellent. He does
imitate in such a manner that he himself is even an Original. He is one of
the Children, not one of the Apes of Antiquity; and had I seen nothing of his
but his Articles of Treaty with the Muses, I should have concluded, he must
necessarily be no less a gallant man then a great Scholar; no less of the
Court of Augustus, then of the Age of Virgil. I find this Capitulation so
pleasant, that I am vexed it was not mine. Me thinks none but I should have been
the author of it, and I protest, that this very part of the Poem would have
bred envy in me; if the Hendecasyllables before, had not given me an Antidote
of Love. He does me too much honor to --. My dear Cosen Madam de Nesmond is
the confident of my heart; and to all the relations she shall make from me, I
entreat you, give credit as to my self, who am most of all men living,

Reverend father, Your, and.
Jul. 14. 1646.
LETTER XII. To my Lord the Marquess of Montausier, Governor and Lieutenant
General for the King in Saintonge, Angoumoise.
My Lord,
IF not to be thankful enough be ingratitude, I have reason to complain of
your generosity; which drives me into that involuntary crime, by reducing me to
an invincible disability. This is the third time your excesses make me
apprehensive, and sensible of my poverty. When you do me favors, you deprive
me of the means, to thank you for them; and the Language you use is so lively,
so sprightly, and full of fire, that I find mine, no more but ice in comparison
of it. You leave me nothing to say, so that I must for my own honor entrench
my self within my thoughts; and being destitute of Language to maintain my
credit, in some proportion with you, I can only produce an interior act to
justify me to my conscience; and comfort me with this, that I cannot do what I
would. But what is it My Lord I would not do, for your service; and your glory?
could you see the bottom of my soul, what desires, what resentments would you
not behold there? Never had any soul more passionate desires, or an higher
adoration; for though Wealth should shower upon your house, and Crowns upon
your head; (this shower of Crowns is one of Cardinal Perron's wishes), though
Fortune should every day bribe you; and fame do nothing else but commend you,
I say (though but a part of what I think) that they would do but justice to
your virtue. You enjoy already more then all this, for he that possesses Julia
with the allowance and consent of Artenice; ought not to consider the Grandeurs
of the world, but as accessories to his happiness. I am too much obliged to
those two divine persons for their goodness in remembering me, for I cannot
discern any thing in my self worthy that honor; unless it be that I am your
Adorer. Be pleased to conceive, I use those latter words in the full extent of
their signification; it being impossible for any to be more then I am,

My Lord, Your, etc
Feb. 15. 1645.
LETTER XIII. To Monsieur de Burg, an Advocate in the Parliament.
SIR,
TO what end do you wast your labor and your colors, to delude a man that
knows himself? The excellency of your Art does not correct the defects of my
person; you may disguise me, but can never give me a new shape. I should be
worth infinitely more then I am, were I but like the original you have drawn.
What should not I be, were I but the man your Letter speaks of? But since you
design to make me a Hero, you make your Letter a Romance. I find my self a
feigned person in all the things you tell of me. I am only the unformed matter
of a work whose whole beauty is derived from you; and after I have considered
it with delight, I cannot look upon my self without discontent. The actions
you commend me for, reproach me that I have hitherto employed my self merely
about words. You make me remember with remorse the vain occasions of my life
past. Or, it may be, you subtly intimate, that it is time for me to think on
something better and more solid. The attribute of Wise, that you in courtesy
bestow on me, is doubtless a wish which you make for me; but you should offer
it after a more noble and obliging manner. I must labor to acquire the good I
want to make your wish effectual, that I may become worthy of your praises and
our friend's testimony. Yet his evidence is to be suspected: I am his error
and his disease; And though he be Cato in all other causes, he is in mine the
most passionate and corrupt of all judges; do not expect any truth, therefore
from him when he is Commenting on the Chapter of my virtue: Believe him only
when he assures you what a high rate I set upon your merit, and of the serious
profession I make, to be as much as any man in the world,

SIR, Your, etc.
Feb. 3. 1641.
LETTER XIIII. To Monsieur Conrart, Counselor and Secretary to the King.
SIR,
YOu have writ me a Letter perfectly eloquent, whose Rhetoric lifts me up to
Heaven. At least it raises me much above my own condition, and I should
heretofore have termed it the Theater of my glory: the mischief is, that all
this is but representation and picture. Now I have read out your discourse, and
my part is played, I cease to be Achilles or Agamemnon. This borrowed greatness
deserts me, and my old poverty remains upon me. I lately saw at another man's
house the compleatest person of all mankind, and I find my self at home the
infirmest of all Creatures. If you love me better for dressing me in your own
garb, and if I please you more in the ornaments you have bestowed on me, I can
safely protest to you, that you are one of those I most desire to please and of
whose esteem I make highest account. But yet toward the consolation of my sad
life, your esteem is nothing comparable with your friendship. There are some
years since, I have not been sensible but in that part, and I now scarce ever
resent any thing of my commendations, or else I sleep when I do read them. One
loving word from you does me more good then a whole pile of superlatives and
great words of which the wits are so prodigal, and whole Gardens of flowers,
with which adulterating Rhetoric crowns base ambition. So I call the common
places of the Declamers we know; who adore, who consecrate, and deifie every
thing; as well the gourd of Claudius, as the head of Augustus. The rest at
another time. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Feb. 24. 1645.
LETTER XV. To Monsieur l'Huilliard, Counselor to the KING, etc.
SIR,
I Advertise you that you are a great fomenter of Quarrels, and that you have
stirred up abundance of trouble and jealousy among my papers. That discourse
of the Comicall style cannot endure you should lay it a side to take up that of
Grand Eloquence. The Roman takes it ill that you side with the Hollander to his
disadvantage: Mecaenas the Glory, the Antiquity, of Religion, and all the rest,
find fault with the pre-eminence adjudged to some; in a word, there being none
of them but thinks it self as much worth as his Companion, they are every one
discontented with your choice. It is a difficult matter to appease such a
seditious people as these are, who have all the pride and ambition of Old Rome
in their heads. It may be, Monsieur C^aplain would be a fit instrument to
manage so nice a Treaty: for my part, I will not meddle with it; besides, I am
more partial to your opinions, then I am passionate for the Roman or Mecaenas,
and shall be all my Life time on your side against all whomsoever, yea, against
my own off spring, being, without reserve,

SIR, Your, etc.
Nov. 30. 1644.
LETTER XVI. To Monsieur the Count of Jonzac, the Kings Lieutetenant in
Saintonge and Angoumois.
SIR,
I Wish our Grapes were worthy of their great reputation, and the excellent
language of your Letter. It is true, they are originally of Languedoc, and
Languedoc is the Italy of France. But I cannot tell whether the climate of
Balzac has not altered their natural goodness, or my name have not made them
unfortunate. However it be, Sir, you have all kind of power in this little
place; and I have commission from the Master of the house, where I am but a
guest, to tell you, he expects the month of March with impatience to satisfy
your desire. He pretends he will not keep any in his Nursery, but what you
please to leave him, although he esteems them incomparably much more then he
did, since you gave them the precedence, when the Grape of Coignac was in
place, which is universally esteemed. For my part Sir, I find my self so
obliged to your eloquent civilities, that there is no Galernian nor Formian
race in books (for these are the only places where I think I possess any
thing) but I would my self carry into your Quarter, if there were any way to
make a present of it to you. But this can be no more then a wish, and that a
Poetical one too: and for the least I can offer you in the name of the Muses,
after the honor you have done them in my person. I shall ever receive your
favors with the acknowledgements they deserve, and continue all my life, with
due respect,

SIR, Your, etc:
Jan. 22. 1645.
LETTER. XVII. To Monsieur Perrot d'Ablancourt.
SIR,
THe news you send me has not much surprised me. I know the person who is
Relater, is an Enemy to Heresy: but withal, I know he loves virtue in what
place soever he finds it, were it in Luthers or Calvin's. Your name does not
fright little Children, as theirs do. It is none of those names that are odious
to the Catholic Church: and on the otherside, I do not think but the strongest
Romanisme would suffer its self to be mollified by so honest a Hugenot as you
are. His Holiness himself, did he but hear you, would have much difficulty to
condemn you in your process; he would at least, allow you an Interim: He
would awhile hold his hand, and not discharge an Anathema but upon extremity:
But should you be so lig^ed to your opinions, as not to accept his grace, and
he not able to exempt you out of the Bull In Coena Domini; I conceive when he
darted his thunder upon your head, it would not be with all his force, Mollius
and dubia jaculari fulmina dextra,
Tarpeia de rupe, Jovem, te propter, etc.


As your Reporter has done you justice, you do it to the Jesuit my friend: His
verses are worthy of your applause, and in my op^nion he might have deserved no
less from Buchanan, and possibly too from Virgil, Laudalusque foret Romae, vel
judice Tarpa,
Vitalis meus, and nostro censente Marone.


But you must know that this terse and lofty Poet is the oldest of that
profession in France. Threescore and sixteen Winters that have snowed upon his
head, cannot extinguish his fire. No nor so much as diminish it, as you will
perceive by the collection of his other Poems, which I send you. When you have
compared them together, you may please to give me your judgment of them. I am,
even to the Altars,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jun. 26. 1640.
LETTER XVIII. To the Reverend father Hercules, Provincial to the Fathers of
the Christian Doctrine.
Reverend Father,
IF I am esteemed at Rome, it is upon your account; and if Father Strada love
me, it is because you have infected him with your passion. I will suppose too,
you have not forgot to assure him of mine, and to do me those civil offices to
him, which I may justly expect from your goodness. Questionless, you have
magnified the zeal of an Ultramontane, one inamored of his virtue, and almost
an Idolatour of those of his Ancestors, qui et pridem comiter observat
Maiestatem Populi Romani, and in Provincia Gallia, Romana quandoque verba non
infeliciter conatur. You cannot believe what an advantage I reap by the
friendship of so excellent a person, and the longing I had to be one of his
familiars as well as your. Since Cardinal Bentivoglio is no more in Italy, and
consequently my affection there is free, it goes all directly and i^ gross to
that great Jesuit; and you will oblige me by presenting him this Complement
from me, in the vulgar Language of the Country-Muses of his Country.

Non per veder il successor di Piero
Regger col cenno il Mondo in Vaticano,
Ne le reliquie del superbo impero,
Vetrei veloce al dolce aer Romano:
Ma sol por honorar voi spirto altero,
D' ogni basso pensier schivo e lontano.
Since you will needs show him some of my verses, I send you some that speak of
Rome and him, atque utinam ex utriusque dignitate -- You remember you promised
me something -- it is a thing I value above all the most reverend and most
Illustrious Titles and Lordships, than all the Green and Purple, I had almost
said, than all the Scarlet in the place where you are. How desirous am I of
being good, and how much do I need your help toward it! Be mindful therefore
of the work you have undertaken, and begin with a Mass which I beg of you at
Santa Maria Major; In illo loco quem Deus optimus Maximus tam manifestus ac
praesens, quam Coelum ac fidera insedit. What will the severe Litterals say
concerning this entreaty, and the gentle wits to this Gibberish? The first will
judge me to have the fancy and conceits of an old woman; and the others will
say, I have the Genius and style of Mamurra: They, will reproach my weakness;
and these, my barbarism. Let them call me by what name they please, and think
of me what they list. But it suffices me that you know I glory to be your
Penitent and Votay, as I am withal my soul,

Reverend father, Your, etc.
Jul. 3. 1645.
LETTER XIX. To Monsieur de Menage.
Sir,
I Writ to your friend what opinion I had of your excellent Verses; and now I
tell you, I have learnt them by heart and sing them. Your Gondiades is termed
nothing else in our village, but.

Francigenum sublime decus, spes magna Senatus
Purpurei.
But when shall we see the accomplishment of our hopes, that the sacred Senate
may be a full House; and not want one of the noblest members of it? Almost
thirty years are fled since the decease of Cardinal Perron, me thinks it is
high time to fill up his room; which is yet vacant after so many numerous
promotions. There needs no more words to one of so quick an apprehension as you
are. Let us come to the person you have celebrated in your Hendecasyllables,
whom I love and honor with all my soul. Now he is in the Center of debauchery,
or to speak more favorably in the Country of good-fellowship; oblige him by
your persuasions, sometimes to defend himself against temptations; especially
at the fatal hour of supper, Nec juvenes imitetur, eum nec Gallicus ardor
In medias coenarum acies, in Bacchica ducat
Praelia, longaevo nimium metuenda Poetae.


Put him in mind that our Plato reckons good cheer twice a day in the number
of Prodigies, and that against Birkes and Ragousts, caeteraque id genus
ingeniosa gulae irritamenta non satis cauta mortalitas est. I give this
counsel to my self as well as to him, for though I am not at Paris; yet we
find our selves here often in hot service. They are Expeditions, (take this
from me, you that know all things) wherein a Constable and a Marshall of France
ended their days: Illos siquidem ut Medici asseverarunt, gula occidit non
gladius. Here is a strange kind of Gibberish and Medley, that would fright our
brethren of the Academy. Yet Cicero made use of such a jargon-intermixture of
several Languages in his commerce with M. Pomponio Attico, who, as you know,
was none of the least honest fellows of those times. I bid you good night, and
sleep at the period of this line,

SIR, Your, etc.
Sep. 4. 1646.
LETTER XX. To Monsieur the Abbot Talon.
SIR,
YOu command me no hard task, nor impose any thing that weighs me down; when
you desire new marks of my love, to a memory that is exceeding dear to me. It
will be easy for me to obey you, since it is to follow my own inclination; and
yield my self to the propensity of my affections. There is so much sweetness
in the remembrance of our good Cardinal, that I may say; he takes rests upon
this subject, that is tired with any other. The Genus Demonstrativum was almost
grown obsolete in the world, but you have restored it to a new youth and
strength. But let us have a right understanding betwixt us, if you please; for
f you desire verses from me, I know not whether I shall be able to content that
desire. I have but a small Talent of Poetry and my vein distills very weakly,
drop by drop; it will scarce supply above a Stanza of four in four days. An
Epigramme draines it quite dry. It Is Monsieur the Bishop of Grass, Monsieur
Guyet and Monsieur Voiture who are capable of high and long inspirations of
true and just Poems: They are the men of whom you must require Lapidaries,
Hymns, and Apotheoses: and I persuade my self they have not kept silence till
now, but only to speak with more preparation. It shall be my glory that I
opened the Lists for them, and promised such excellent Combatants to the people
who expect them. But my comfort is this, that I have already discharged my
duty, and by the same means given content to a person whom I perfectly esteem.
It is not necessary to explain to you who that person is, and you do not doubt
the absolute reality of my being

SIR, Your, etc.
Sep. 25. 1644.
LETTER XXI. To Monsieur de Montrevil, Captain in the Regiment de la
Meilleraye.
SIR,
THe relation you have given me of the first successes of your Army, and the
Protection you obtained from Monsieur the Grand Master for my sisters house,
are tokens of remembrance that have something more essential in them then
ordinary civilities. I knew well enough that you were exceeding good and
obliging, but that you were so exact and punctual, was, to tell you truth,
more then I expected from a afriend of two and twenty; who having every where
lawful occasion of distraction, does much more then he is bound to do, when he
is a good solliciter. My sister conceives her self deeply obliged to your
goodness, and has entreated me to testify her acknowledgments; to which, if
you please, I will annexe my own; and tell you besides, that valewing you at
the rate I do, I was glad to be confirmed in my opinion by your Letter, and to
see there how intelligently you can speak of the affairs of war. I wish it
may be as successful, Sir, to you, as it is probable it will be glorious to
Monsieur your General, unless Fortune forsake his side and join with the
Enemy, and so he fail to accomplish those designs he has so well attempted.
You will have a share, I am confident in those great exploits; and there will
be honor for you to be attained. But, if it be possible, I pray let that
honor be pure and without the expense of your blood; and bring back your
Laurels to your Winter Quarters. You deserve to live a pleasant life, and
appear at banquets, after you have showed your self so often in battles. I say
the same to our dearest Monsieur de la Guette, and am to both of you
passionately,

A most humble, etc.
Aug. 3. 1639.
LETTER XXII. To my Lord, the Archbishop of Toulouse.
My Lord,
THe Letter you did me the honor to write, revives my grief, but withal
brings me a lenitive. I cannot read the name of that friend we have lost, but I
in some sort seem to lose him again. But on the otherside, since God preserves
you for the consolation of our losses, and the glory of our age, I cannot
welcome such good tidings with a displeased countenance and this very thought
sweetens all the bitternesses of my soul. It is no small content to me to
understand, your return had somewhat of triumph in it, and that you manage the
affairs of your Charge amidst the acclamations of your people. The passion I
have for you, gives me an interest of all these happy successes and making me
look upon them at first as my own, and yours in the second place. I could have
wished my self a witness of them, and have come to reverence you in a Chair,
which you render more illustrious then Thrones publishing from thence the
mysteries of the Son of God, which are far better and more saving than Arrests
and Edicts. But I am not fortunate enough for this; and I assure my self, you
will be so merciful in the pursuance of your Rights, and indulgent to my
weakness, that you will dispense with a vow for me which I am not able to
perform. Instead of the journey to Toulouse which I promised you, I beseech
you admit of that to Saint Amant, which I will begin the next day after your
arrival thither. -- I expect that time with impatience, and am after my Old
manner preparing many Questions for you to decide, and difficulties to resolve:
in the mean time, since you desire to know the success of the enterprise of
honest Monsieur Lirieux (who was resolved to have made me a great Lord) I will
tell you, that for my own particular, I am very well satisfied with it. It is
true, he did not bring me what he sought after, but my Lord -- sent me so civil
and hansome a refusal, that I esteem it much more then that which was
requested of him in my favor. He would without Question have granted the
thing, if he had not had a design to oblige me higher by not doing it. The
manner with which he shifted off his liberality was so magnificent, and he took
such especial care to enrich it with many fine words and fair hopes, that I
ought to reckon it one of the greatest favors that possibly I could receive
from his goodness. He that can ruin us with a word, obliges us infinitely,
when he bestows two dozen of lines to delude us. I am,

My Lord, Your, etc.
May. 25. 1636.
LETTER XXIII. To Monsieur the Marquess de la Case.
SIR,
SInce my diseases have forced me to a divorce from my muses, and a
renunciation, for three entire months, of all things printed and written, my
silence has a much more lawful excuse then I could wish it, and I do not
conceive but instead of reproaching with my laziness, you will take compassion
on my hard fortune. It was in earnest, a very dysastrous hap to have a
treasure so long in ones custody, and not dare touch it; to have the possession
of one of the finest things in the world without the possible power of
enjoyment. This fine thing, Sir, is the Genealogy you were pleased to
communicate to me; and if I tell you, the multitude of those illustrious names
dazelled me, and that confluence of stars which makes the milky way in heaven,
does not cast such a splendor, nor enclose so many Demy-gods, I shall possibly
speak like a Poet, yet offer no violence to the purity of truth. You have that
which Kings cannot confer upon their favorites; that which was wanting to
Augustus Son in Law to the brave and magnanimous Agrippa. And who knows not
that his obscure extraction and the blemishes of his family could not be
cleansed with many consulships and the supreme command of the Roman Armies:
There was ever some bold spirit or other that, upbraided him of the newness of
his Grandeur; and the defect of those riches, wherewith you abound. If it were
possible to drive a trade with such a stock so much desired, you would have a
surplusage, after you had supplied a number of great Commanders, who are
unprovided of it. John de Were would be one of your Merchants General; Beck
would give you a competent portion of what he has pillaged in the wars for
three or four of your illustrious names. There would be thronging to the door
of your Cabinet, and such Sons of Earth and Night, would come thither to seek
Parents and Luster. But the great consideration is, that the present does not
degenerate from the glory of the past, and that your Virtue is worthy its
Original. In the conversation of an afternoon which I had once the honor to
spend with you, you manifested such a pure and natural generosity, that should
your Heroes return to see the world again, I make no doubt but they would own
you by that very mark, and immediately say This is our true blood. For the
excellency of your soul, either I know not what capacity is, or yours is the
clearest and most delicate in the discerning and choice of things. I have
admired the rare productions of it, and should I go no further than your
mysterious Grotto, yet you would be one of my best Authors, Sir, and whom I
would most readily allege. Is it true, that among an infinite generation of
ravenous Birds that unroof houses, suck humane blood, depopulate Cities and
Countries, you have caused one to be drawn beyond comparison bigger then the
rest, that tears the Globe of the world with his pounces, and pulls in Pieces
what God had so well composed. And is it possible this Caprichio is originally
Saintonge? comes it not from Rome or Florence? or at least from Paris? If the
glory of the invention be due to you, I congratulate you for the giving birth
to so handsome a Fable; although I am sorry that I knew it not, nor received
your Pedigree, in those days when I could have written gay letters. I should
not then have contented my self with such slight dress and ornaments, as this
appears in, nor the naked protestation I now make you, not being able to
embellish it with my ancient colors, of being with all my soul,

SIR, Your, etc.
Feb. 7. 1646.
LETTER XXIIII. To Monsieur d'Argenson, Counselor to the King, Comptroller of
the Revenue in Poitou, Saintonge, etc.
SIR,
I Just now received the Letter you did me the honor to write me. It is indeed
properly a commentary on my discourse of Glory, but such a one as corrects and
reformes the Text, and instructs and Catechises the Author. I yield up my
opinions, to your, and you have absolutely convinced me; so that if I knew my
self as capable of the employment you design me, as I acknowledge it is
better then that which hitherto has taken up my care, you should in a short
time have a Treatise of Christian Humility of my making, to cause you to lose
the unsavory relish which that of worldly Glory has left behind it. I made it
formerly on an occasion that obliged me to it; and my design in it was rather
to condemn Avarice then plead for Vanity. But Sir, I must now let you see, that
Secular Authors are not always profane ones, and we sometimes confine upon
matters of piety. Here is something concerning Apostolical and Religious Rome,
that you may not think I am inseperably addicted to consular and triumphing
Rome. The work is Christian, and composed in the Language of the Church; and
Monsieur the Cardinal Bentivoglio has approved it --. Yet I beseech you
expect nothing regular or dogmaticall in it. I have not argued in mode and
figure: nor sliced out my matter into Sections and Paragraphs. I have chosen
the style of the ancient Prophets, rather then that of the modern Doctors;
and though I am not so good a Divine as Becanus, I would very feign be as good
as Orpheus, if it be too much to say, as David. I shall know your opinion of my
Divinity, and my verses, when I have the honor to see you. This cannot be so
soon as I wish it, for I am impatient to be with you, and protest to you by
word of mouth, that none is more truly then my self,

SIR, Your, etc.
Oct. 8. 1645.
LETTER XXV. To Monsieur Esprit.
SIR,
HEre lately passed a Nymph this way, whose elegancy and promptness of tongue
is admirable. She informed me of an infinite number of things that I was
ignorant of before. And though she has not so many mouths, as that other lying
Nymph who presides over Panegyrickes and funeral Orations; yet she has one
extremely eloquent, which does not mar good subjects, as it embellishes only
such as are true; I perceive I exercise your patience, and you expect the name
of this Nymph. Not to make you Languish any longer; She is called in the
Language of men, Mademoiselle de Newfoic. But it concerns you to know, she is
your votary, though her self adored by me and others. You may please to know,
that she sings you in what place soever she can find Auditors or Echoes. She
has strewed our Hillocks, our Plains, and Valleys with your praises --.
Among other things, she affirms, you better perform the duties of Amity then
the illustrious friends mentioned in Lucians Toxaris. She is, in a word, a very
magnificent and generous publisher of all your merits. But, to tell you the
truth, this last has made most impression on me, and is the reason why I write
this Letter to you, with as little ceremony as if, these six years silence, I
had written to you by every post. Nor is this all, I intend something more
then a Letter, and I recommend a Suite and a solicitour to you: I entreat your
credit and care for him to obtain what he desires, and beseech you to oblige me
effectually in his person, with your interest in our common Lord --. I promise
my self this good office from your friendship, and rest with passion,

SIR, Your, etc.
Oct. 15. 1643.
LETTER XXVI. To Monsieur de la Chetardie.
Sir, My dear Cosen,
I Secure my self to the utmost of my power from the persecution of
complements; and for that purpose I have sought out a desert, more out of the
way and less known then my own. At present I inhabit an enchaunted Island,
where few guests are admitted, and all sort of Letters are not read. Yours
indeed deserve a privilege, not one of them arrives here, is fraughted but
with some good tidings or other, or attended with some excellent rarity, and
presents me sometimes with temporal goods, sometimes with spiritual, not
seldom with both. These last have feasted me with double magnificence, and are
so far from disturbing my repose, that I assure you they make a part of my
pleasures. Who can be so much his own enemy, or an inhabitant of the Earth in
despite of Heaven, as to complain of his happiness, I mean the favors of
Madam de la Chetardio, and the civilities of Monsieur the Count of Crem^il? Who
can possibly be so distempered (or it is too little to call him delicate) as to
taste such exquisite meats, without making exclamations as he tastes them?
without lifting up his eyes? without crying out, upon the first morsel, that
the Nectar and Ambrosia which Jove receives from the hand of Ganymede are
neither sweet nor divine incomparison.

But Madam my Cosen will some little time dispense with the thanks which is
due to her, since all the gratitude I have at present, and all my words this
day must be for Monsieur our Count; and you will not take it ill, that I go to
finish those Commentations I have begun, in satisfaction on his questions. I
beg the continuance of your good offices to the excellent Chevalier, and
beseech you to believe, that I am ever passionately,

Sir, my Dear Cosen, Your, etc.
Mar. 6. 1645.
LETTER XXVII. To my Lord the Marquess of Montausier, Governor and Lieutenant
General to the King in Saintonge, Angoumois, etc.
My Lord,
HAnnibal laughed at a Scholar that discoursed of war before him: This
example has been an impediment in the design I had to write to you in favor
of Monsieur des Ardillers; And in truth, I know not what you will conceive of
me, or what you will take me for, if I venture to give an officer of your
Troops a Certificate, there being so little affinity betwxit his profession
and mine. If it be possible, I will not do any thing that shall be ridiculous;
I will restrain my judgment within the confines of my art, I do not meddle
with setting prices upon things which I do not understand. I only conceive, my
Lord, you will not disapprove a passion I bear to a person, whose discourse to
me is nothing but your History, and who comforts himself for many miseries he
has suffered, with the honor only he had to serve under you. These ten months
we have been upon this subject, and I find in him so intelligent an admiration
of your virtue, so much ardour and zeal to your glory, that though he be not
run through and through, and cannot show his wounds in Germany, nor his hurts
in Catalonia, I cannot have a mean esteem of him since he has so perfect an
understanding of your worth. This is at least the testimony I owe him, and the
acknowledgment he has deserved from me, for the pleasant hours he has made
me in the rehearsal of your brave actions. I wish I could be as serviceable to
him as he was acceptable to me. But I have no power in the world, and can only
make vows in the desert. Yet I am sure of one thing; never man, my Lord, knew
better then I, how to own the courtesies done to my friends. This gentleman
has no great reason to be contented with his fortune; and for my part, since I
am able only to wish him a better, if you judge him worthy of any of your
favors, I shall willingly bear a part in the obligation, and not be less,
then if I received them my self,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Jan. 21. 1647.
LETTER XXVIII. To Monsieur Conrart, Counselor and Secretary to the King.
SIR,
MY indisposednesse having hitherto retarded my good designs, I could not
possibly perform this duty to you sooner, nor give you notice since May, that I
received Monsieur Dailles Sermons, and Monsieur des Carts discourses. Both of
them have written me so many obliging caresses, and commended me with such
excess, that there is nothing in their excellent Letters which belongs to me,
besides my name. I know my self in it only by that; and without doubt, the
high opinion these two great persons have conceived of me, will one day be
reproached to them by their adversaries it will be one of the errors of your
excellent Heretic, and one of the over-sights of my admirable maker of
Spectacles. I have no mind, whatsoever you please to enjoin me, to give you my
judgment of the last man for I know he sees nothing but Heaven above his
reason, and Soveraignety has no judge. Since he tells me, that if I desired
it, he would make a Ghost for me in four and twenty hours only by the operation
of his innocent Science, and without employing any evil spirits: from that time
forwards I took his soul not to be of the same order with mine, and that he was
a Hero, because I knew he was not a Mountebank. But shall we bestow that
scurvy name on our --? I dare not pronounce any thing concerning him neither.
Only I fear, he has less authority then zeal, and that the parties do
attribute too much to him to empower him with the Arbitrament of their good
wills, and without entreaty of any person. I am without reserve,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jan. 14. 1640.
LETTER XXIX. To Monsieur Costar.
SIR,
I Have employed Seneca and Boethius, father Adam the Jesuit and father Stephen
the Capuchine to comfort me for your absence; but I have s^t them on work to no
end. It is your self that must put me into a condition of enduring to be some
time without you; and find me out a remedy for the affliction you put me into,
by leaving me. You have lately done me that good office in an admirable manner.
For after I had received your elegant Letter, I was so far from being
miserable, that I could not contain my joy from becoming insolent, it is an
extreme infelicity to be separated from you, but it is a Sovereign blessing to
have so great an interest in your soul and affection; and these glorious
tidings do so ravish me that I do not less need moderation now, then I did
constancy three days ago. If Monsieur de la Thihaudiere were not the bearer
of these truths, I would stretch them out longer, and dress them up with more
Ornament. But he will do me that service, and I have more confidence in his
Rhetoric than my own. I believe neither of them is necessary to persuade you
that I am perfectly,

SIR, Your, etc.
Octo. 1. 1643.
LETTER XXX. To Madam, the Countess of Brienne.
Madam,
There is no place so remote whither the reputation of your virtue has not
extended; the public voice has entertained me with it in the desert, and all
France is in this the Echo of Paris: the whole World calls you the good and
generous Lady of the Court, and you are not less known by these amiable names,
then the illustrious Title you bear. This is that which deterres me, Madam,
from using any Art, or indevouring by a long train of words, to beg of you
what you cannot refuse me. Your protection is sure, not only to desert, but to
any thing that is like it; and you have confessed to monsieur the Abbot of
Saint Nicolas that there is something that either pleases you, or deludes you
in my writings. Those which my friend will present you from me, have already
been in the place where you are, but so diseased and tattered that I am told it
would move pity in me to see them in that condition. I fear they have offended
the eyes of Madam the Princess, if they have appeared before her with those
defects and deformities; and I am desirous she might see them in a better and
more decent equipage. You may please to do me this good office by communicating
to her the Copy I send you. I most humbly beseech you, do me this favor, and
believe me,

Madam, Your, etc.
Dec. 14. 1644.
LETTER XXXI. To Madam de Masses.
Madam,
I Perceive you will not be in debt; the present I sent you was paid for above
its value by the thanks I received for it, and it is not you that are obliged;
it is I, that am become insolvent. In earnest, what can I repay you for all the
goodnesses in your Letter: for such a deal of rarity, excellency, and
perfection as you bestow upon me? If I had spoken Pearls, (as we may say among
us,) you had over-bought them by praising my words with such excess. It will
not be your fault, if rusticity and plaineness of my works be not preferred
before the polite and courtly style of others: The compositions of a
Provincial, shall be set upon the shelves of Kings, and kept up among their
treasures, if your opinion be asked. If you may be credited, I shall be annexed
to Plutarchs Lives. I am illustrious enough, Madam, by your estimation of me;
my works are too happy in being lodged in your Closet, and be sometimes taken
into your hands. Would to God, it could divert you to your content! but what
wishes would I not make to serve you in some occasions of importance, and
evidence to you by my respects and obedience, that I am,

Madam, Your, etc.
Aug. 17. 1644.
LETTER XXXII. To Monsieur de Couvrelles.
SIR,
To live in your remembrance is an eminent vindication from being as a dead
person to all the world; it is to live gloriously to be commended in Madam
Desloges Closet by you and M. Borstel. There is no virtue so ambitious that
dares desire more, or that would choose for its Coronation day, any other place
or persons. I perceive manifestly I was treated with a great deal more grace
then justice; and I find my recompense so far above the meanness of my merit,
that I confess, I owe you all that you think you have given me. Yet it is not
this, for which I am most obliged to you. What honor soever I have received
from so eloquent a mouth as yours, your words delight me much more when they
cure, than when they commend; and I thank you more heartily for the recovery of
our excellent sick Lady, then for my Paneygrick. Since I am so thoroughly
conscious of your power, I cannot in the least doubt the truth of the miracle,
and I know long ago by experience that you are able to accomplish things
beyond the ordinary reach. I was almost harrass'd to death in the way to
Poictiers, when you fortunately appeared to my succor: and me thinks, it was
not less to unweary me in an instant, and to afford me delicacies in a scurvy
Inn, then driving away a settled fever, and giving consolation to an afflicted
Lady. After this, why do you talk of the strength of my style and the virtue
of my writings, you who act with so much efficacy in your most familiar
conversation, and each of whose words is a remedy? Is it possible you can
relish such Latin, as is produced amidst the barbarism of our village, eight
days journey from Monsieur de Thou's gallery, and eighteen ages after Cicero's
death? I know not whether I am a Goth or a Roman, or whether it be gibberish,
or language that I send abroad: But I am sure you are perfectly obliging, and
you prize even the good meaning of such as do ill. I have nothing to say of
this particular, but only that you shall never applaud an ill Actour that
honors you more then I, nor that can be with more passion then I am,

Sir, Your, etc.
Aug. 10. 1638.
LETTER XXXIII. To Monsieur de Borstell.
Sir,
MY two years silence has been the effect of several unlucky causes:
melancholy and grief have done their parts and there has been a little
concurrence of debauchery with a great deal of laziness and some business.
Any person besides you, would think strange that I put business into the number
of evils, but since you fly from it to the further end of the world, and the
leisure of the desert seems more agreeable to you then the most eminent
employments at Court I may not fear to disclose my inclination to you which
your example has justified. You have obliged me, Sir, by the care you have
taken to let me understand the truth of that which I knew only by hearsay. Let
Rouliers Son be of as mean extraction as he can, he is an illustrious Rascal,
and I look upon him as the Ventidius of our age. That Ventidius that beat the
Parthians in several battles, and revenged the affronts the Romans had
received, climbed up from slavery to command, by the same steps, that this man
has done, and this Libel was sung of him all about Rome, Concurrite omnes
augures, Haruspices,
Portentum inusitatum conflatum est recens;
Nam mulos qui fricabat, consul factus est.


I must confess you dive very deep into the truth of things: I admire the
relations you have sent me. And who would have thought ten years since, that
Limosin would become as polite and as politic as Tuscany, O fertile Deserts,
etc.

Continue to make me partaker of the fruits that grow in those dry sands you
have so well manured. Think on my poverty among your riches; but never doubt I
beseech you, that I always am with many acknowledgments,

SIR, Your, etc.
Dec. 28. 1639.
LETTER XXXIV. To my Lord the Bishop of Grass.
My Lord,
I Am no longer in the number of profane Poets. The Christian Collection is
perfected, and, it may be, you will not be displeased to see your self there
under the name of Gratius; If you had rather it should be Daphnis, there is
nothing easier then to alter it, for it will not be any prejudice to the
measure, Nulla huc Syllaba contumax repugnat.

My verses are not otherwise interressed in any thing. And when I commend you,
it is not out of a traffic that I drive with Complements. I do not barter
with praises for others: nor is it act of gratitude I pay after the favors I
have received. These favors in truth do sensibly oblige me, and the thought
you had to travel a hundred leagues, on a visit to me, fills all my desert
with Glory. But though you had condemned the Author, of whose Paneygrick you
have made an Eulogy and should chase me from your approaches with Thunder
instead of giving me a visit; yet I am so convinced of your virtue, that I
should ever perfectly esteem it; for otherwise, I must do violence to my own
inclination, and commit a greater outrage upon my self then any mischief you
could do me, not to be during life, withal my soul,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Apr. 12. 1639.
LETTER XXXV. To Monsieur de Bois-Robert Metel, Abbot of Chastillon.
SIR,
ALl things dye, and are subject to corruption; it is an universal Law. But
you have affections that are privileged: They know no declination; they hold
out against old age: having never been more vigorous and ardent. It was an
infin^te pleasure to me to understand this truth in the Letter you did me the
honor to write me, and to behold in it that I am still your favorite, after I
have held the place five and twenty years. Questionless, we shall one day be
proposed for examples, and added to the Fables and Histories. But how fine a
thing it would be, Sir, could the other parts of our selves be preserved in the
same vigor that our friendship is, and the snow that appears upon our heads
did not signify, there is ice in our veins? See how dear two virtues cost
us, which we could very well spare, Experience and Gravity. In this world we
must lose when we get: we cannot be respected, till we come to be pitied: and
the Epithete Venerable is most perpetually attended with that of Infirm. For
my part, I am sensible of this infirmity as often as ^ver I have any need of my
strength; I do not mean, for running or combatting in the lists, but for
walking softly, and taking a few turns in our Garden. All my fire is retreated
to the center of my soul, where, it may be, I can tell you, it is yet quick
enough to kindle some thoughts of mirth, and make me a Poet in my old days.
You speak concerning my Prose much more advantagiously then it deserves: but
you take no notice of the new discovery I have made in my own brain. The
father Bourbon, and the Ambassadors of Sweden liked it well, and encouraged me
to travel further into the Country. You shall shortly have your share of such
rarities as grow there, which I have brought over from thence lately: but your
whole part shall not be hudled with that of the publicks, I promise you yet
more then that. There shall be no parcel of my Latin, but Metellus shall
gather his custom from, and you shall find him at Balzac in as large
Characters as in Horace, where you have read more then once.

Motum ex Metello Consule Civicum. The Prelate is very well worth the Consul:
and is there any thing which I owe not to an affection so constant and pure as
yours? I am,

SIR, Your, and.
Dec. 26. 1644.
LETTER XXXVI. To Monsieur de Scudery.
SIR,
EVery thing that comes out of your hands, every thing that bears your name, is
precious. Your remembrance is very obliging in all manners. In a little note,
written to another in the simplicity of a sudden thought, raised only by
chance, it had been exceeding dear to me. I leave you to imagine with what joy
I received it, being embellished, with infinite riches and ornaments, and
accompanied with an eloquent Preface, which I found followed by an excellent
Poem. If this Poem be the last present you intend to the Theater, as you put us
in fear; you cannot take your leave of the people, with an Adieu more
remarkable then that, or that will make your departure more regretted. I
subcribe in general to what is said of it in the Preface, and further add
this, Sir; That Arminius is not only your Masterpiece, but the Masterpiece of
the Art; that he will bring honor to our Muses, and put a jealousy into those
of our neighbors. I proceed still, that it is a child which speaks the place
of his extraction, and the courage of his father. Mere imitation and the
borrowed greatness of matter, fly not so high: There is something here
natural and your own; and it was not enough to be a learned and ingenious
person but Magnanimity and Gallantry were required to make Germanicus and
Arminius speak so nobly. An author who lived in their time has given this
testimony of the latter. Juvenis genere nobilis, manu fortis, sensu cele^,
ultra barbarum promptus ingenio, nomine Arminius, Segemiri Principis gentis
ejus filius, ardorem animi vultu oculisque praeferens, assiduus militiae
nostrae prioris comes, et jam Civitatis Romanae jus equestremque consequutus
gradum, segnitia Ducis in occasionem sceleris usus est, haud imprudenter
speculatus neminem celerius opprimi quam qui nihil timeret, et frequentissimum
initium esse calamitatis securitatem. In this passage, Arminius is the son of
Segemirus; and if it be so, might not some scrupulous Grammarian demand how you
come to make the father of Arminius to be his sister in law? but besides the
community of names to either sex as Hippolite, Anne, etc. You have without
question some historical ground to oppose against this slight objection. It
was made to me by one who nevertheless valewes you perfectly and I send it you
without any examination. I will ever be of your opinion, and withal my soul,

SIR, Your, etc.
Apr. 16. 1643.
LETTER XXXVII. To Monsieur de Lorme Counselor and Physician in ordinary to
his Majesty.
SIR,
I Am extremely taken with the silver Medall, in which you revive Hippolytus
with these three words Diis geniti potuere: but I maintain besides, that the
name of Demy-god cannot be disputed against you, but only by such as are
ignorant of your fathers merit and the nobleness of your profession. The good
Lord, you speak of, does not know that besides Apollo and Aesculapius, his
son, there was in Greece one Hercules a Physician, Peter Mommor calls him in
French of Alexica, and he is yet to be seen in the Tapistry of Clement
Alexandrinus, but that honest Lord uses no Hangings but of Flanders or those of
the Fairies, and knows no other Hercules but he that carries a Club and a
Lions skin. This Demy-god Physician we treat of, had an infallible receipt to
cure pale complexions and yellowness in less then four and twenty hours. He
was not contented only to bestow health and good plight upon the Ladies, but he
inspired youth and beauty into them. It was he that cured the Queen Alceste of
a disease which the faculty of Montpellier had judged incurable; and I mention
to you particularly what he did for women, because I know you are readiest to
give succor to that sex which is most delicate and infirm as well as he. But
Hercules has made me forget Hippolytus and I have filled that fragment of
paper in which I intended to have thanked you, with a comment upon your Medall.
I have no more room left, Sir, but as much as to assure you that I am ever
perfectly,

SIR, Your, etc.
Aug. 12. 1639.
LETTER XXXVIII. To Monsieur Girard, Official and Prebend of Angoulesme.
SIR,
IT must be acknowledged that Mademoiselle de Schurman is an admirable Virgin,
and her verses are not the least of her wonders. I do not think that the
Sulpitia, whom Martial has so highly extolled, ever made better, or more
elegant in her native Latin: But what modesty and virtue there is among the
Graces, and beauties of her Verses! how the goodness of her soul is agreeably
interwoven with the productions of her wit! I am very much obliged to you for
the knowledge of this admirable Lady, and for sending me with her Epigrams the
eloquent Letter of Monsieur Naude. I return you them all again by my Servant,
who should have set forth yesterday had it not been for an accident that befell
me, to restore more then I had received. In the midst of this Epistle a new
book was brought me, and casting my Eye upon the preface, I found these lines.

Habemus in urbe, unius diei itinere hinc dissita, virginem nobilem, haud minus
quam Hippian, numerosa art multisciam, and tanto magis eo nomine mirandam,
quod in hunc sexum raro cadit tanta ingenii foecunditas, tanta artium copia,
cum omnes calleat; tot virtutum conjunctio, cum nulla careat. Quaecunque manu
confici ^t mente concipi possunt, tenet una; sic pingit ut nemo melius,
sculpit, fingit ex aere, ex cera, ex ligno, fimiliter in Phrygionica art, and
in omnibus quae muliebrium sunt curarum et operum: omnes antiquas et hodiernas
provocat ac vincit mulieres: tot vero doctrinarum dotibus instructa est, ut
nescias in qua magis antestet: tot linguarum donis ornata est, ut non contenta
Europaeis, in orientem usque, studio and industria pervolarit, comparatura ibi
Hebraicas, and Arbaicas, Syriacasque, quas adjungeret jam quaesitis. Latin ita
scribit, ut virorum qui tota vita hanc elegantiam affectaverunt, nemo politius.
Gallicas Epistolas tales concinnat, ut vix meliores Balzacius. Cateris in
Europa usitatis linguis aeque been utitur ac illi quibus sunt vernacula. Cum
Iudaeis Hebraice, cum Saracenis Arabice potest commercium habere: literarum
etiam viris arduas and spinosas sententias ita tractat, Philosophiam nempe
Scholasticam et Theolog^am, ut omnes flupeant: quia prodigio similis res est,
nemo aemuletur, quia nemo potest imitari; nullus etiam invideat, quia supra
invidiam ipsa est.

If Monsieur Salmasius be author of this book and the preface, as I am written
word, when he puts out a second Edition I shall entreat him instead of Gallicas
Epistolas tales concinnat, ut vix meliores Balzacius, thus he will please to
change it; multo minus bon^s and minus Gallicas Balzacius. I shall think my
self yet too much honored by this allay and moderation to my honor. There is
no glory in being near so excellent a person, in what manner soever it be, and
in such a similitude, disadvantage it self is obliging. I attend by my servant
the inscriptions of Gruterus, and the Chrysostom of the Father Fronton. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
May. 15. 1646.
THE SECOND PART
THE FIRST BOOK.
LETTER I. To Madam the Princess.
Madam,
IT is not for glory to approach the obscurity of a defart, nor was its
splendor ordained for Recesses and Solitude. Your Highness has bestowed that
on me which I am not capable of receiving, and I acknowledge in the midst of a
great amazement that I cannot in conscience esteem my self deserving the least
word of that favorable Message, which my Nephew delivered me. Nevertheless I
can safely protest an infinite zeal to the Service of your Highness; and this
most assured truth gives me encouragement to believe that I do not merit to be
wholly unregarded, I know not whether it was not first fitting to learn that my
devotion is not displeasing to you, to the end I might with greater confidence
perform my duty at certain altars I have raised to this effect, and whose
design was not unpleasing to me in the conception. Without this evidence of
your goodness, Madam, I had never dared any further then to erect Altars, and
offer Sacrifices in my breast. I could not have presumed more then to have made
a part of the people, on the feastivalls of France, and joined my voice to the
public acclamations, which at this day are the music of the Hostel of Conde,
and so agreeably disturb the quiet of the most contented of all mothers. This
Title belongs to your Highness; who by the birth of one Prince have obliged
the whole World. It Is to your happy fruitfulness that our Age owes all its
ornament honor and luster: and you the person that have astonished all Nations
with the late miracles they have seen. If the Kings Sovereignty has grown
beyond the extent of his own Kingdom; If his Kingdom have no frontiers after
so many conquests and triumphs, these are in truth, the achievements of a
Princes hands who has not reckoned above two and twenty years in the world.
But they proceed, Madam, from that flower and perfection of the blood of
Bourbon and Montmorency which is derived from you. Is there any of the French
nation who is not an Enemy to his Country, that restraines his vows for the
perpetuity of your contentment? And ought we not to wish your Highness, a long
and peaceable possession of a good in which we are rich as well as you? For my
part, I beseech Heaven, Madam, that he may never be ravished from you; not even
by the violent passion of some foreign Nation enamored with his heroicke
virtue, or by the Ambassadors of some elective Crown, who may once more come
to desire a King from France. These misfortunes, Madam, are those that attend
of a too great felicity. They threaten the heads of few Princes, and all
Princesses are not in a condition to fear them. But I may confidently presage
that never more any Calamity or dysaster shall betide your Family, if my
prayers be successful, and I be as propitiously heard by Heaven as I am
passionately,

Madam, Your Highnesses most humble, etc.
Feb. 1. 1645.
LETTER II. To my Lord the Duke of --. For Monsieur the Colonel de --.
My Lord,
THE Letter which your Highness has honored me with writing, has calmed the
disquiet of my mind. I perceive manifestly, My LORD, that I was but alarmed,
and some were pleased to make an experiment of my passion. But the ill opinion
I have conceived against the World made me not unapt to believe ill news.
Since I know there is no Saint in Heaven but has been traduced on Earth, I did
not imagine that the fate of naked and common innocente could escape better then
that of triumphant and sovereign virtue. Yet this world is not so universally
corrupted, but that there is some found part of it: There is some place of
safety from the persecution of the wicked, and honest men find sanctuary in
your Lordships protection. All your inclinations tend to Greatness, not any
deflects to Tyranny, so that he that is not preserved in your Highnesses love
must needs have a design to lose himself there. God keep me, my Lord, from so
dangerous a thought. Since Calumny can prevail nothing in your Court, I cannot
fear any injury in this Country; and my conscience bears me witness of the
passion wherewith I have ever been, and desire to be eternally,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Aug. 15. 1632.
LETTER III. To my Lord Seguier Chancellor of France.
My Lord,
I Do not stay for your favors to testify my gratitude. The only intention
you had to favor me has already extremely obliged me. Though it should still
remain in your thoughts without producing its effect, yet it would at least be
a very fair Idea; it would draw a man out of oblivion of whom the world has
no longer Remembrance: it would do me no injury in representing me in the
chief dispencer of justice, better and more deserving then I am. It would be,
My Lord, an interior action of Liberty and Choice, which not being conveyed to
any second subject, would terminate in it self, and without appearance,
retain its merit in its own reality. The vulgar call nothing benefits but what
they handle, and falls under their sense. They measure them only by success,
which is within the jurisdiction of Fortune. Speculative men ascend higher:
They meet courtesies in the Rudiments of the imagination, as pure acts and
separate from matter: and defer not their gratitude until the event, which
would in that case be involved in chance and hazard. That which is not now,
possibly may never be, and the most faithful promises are exposed to all the
uncertainty of the future and the changes of humane things; yet they cease not
to be esteemed faithful. Thus My Lord, I have received from you the favor
which may properly be called yours, though I am yet in expectance of the
benefit of it, from the king. And I maintain against all those who are not of
my opinion; that you have given it me in your promise. It may possibly fall out
that I shall receive nothing of it, by reason of the ill fortune that attends
me: but it is beyond the reach of Fate to destroy the obligation, I have to
your Lordship, according to the maxims I have learnt. Your good will having
satisfied my ambition, my necessity does not press me so hard; as to I account
it in the first place. Esteem is somewhat more noble then payment, and the
Honest shall ever comfort me for the loss of the Profitable. But in the mean
time, that I may not seem to deliberate upon the reality of my obligation to
you, after the assurances I received in the Letters of Monsieur de Bois-Robert.
I will not defer till to morrow the protestation which I make, to be
perfectly,

My Lord, Your most humble, most obedient, and most obliged servant. Balzac.
Feb. 20. 1638.
LETTER IIII. To the same.
My Lord,
YOur favors justify my solitude, and the benefit I have received upon your
recommendation makes me eminent in the world, though I am no longer of it. It
declares to such as throng and run, that there is an idleness which the
Commonwealth rewards, and a rest that you esteem. All the hands that serve the
State, are not employed in killing men, nor removing Engines: some there are
which are lifted up to Heaven to second those that fight, and pray to God for
the victory: Some of them make dispatches and Commissions: Some draw Redoubts
and Battaglias; and score out on paper, what is to be executed in the field:
and some without noise labor for the glory of their Prince, and the
edification of his subjects. I will not say, My Lord, that mine have been so
nobly employed, nor pretend to that glory which was bestowed on Phidias; of
having made the image of a God which added much devotion to what was paid him
before: I only say, that if to be an honest man and a good Citizen is the first
part of the definition of a good Orator, the half of that excellent quality
cannot in reason be disputed with me; that in the greatest severity the
superaboundance of passion deserves pardon for the defects of Art. But I am
well assured of the extent of your indulgence, and there is not so slender a
mediocrity in the profession of good Letters; but you take delight to exalt it
by your Patronage. You love honest conversations because you have discovered
their most secret, and peculiar beauties: and carefully oppose the return of
ignorance, because you very well understand that if the French should relapse
to Barbarism, your virtue would be but coorsely commended by Barbarian Orators
and Poets. So that your protection upon the interest of your virtue will
cherish and encourage the Literati of our age; yea even polish and civilize our
rudness and villages. It will cause a lovely spring of new Excellencies on
every side, and make all France learned. They are your benefits, my Lord, which
shall restore to honor such degraded persons as were once termed holy, though
in these days are accounted unprofitable pieces of the State. But
notwithstanding your Lordship has obliged me with a new favor, advantage and
gettings are not the principal importances that have rendered me your
suppliant. A few things content a soul, that has been initiated in the study
of Wisdom; and being not in distress for necessaryes, I can desire nothing of
another, but such as I can well be without, and which in the strictness of
Philosophy is esteemed superfluous. I speak of Fortunes favors and bounties;
for, as to your Lordships affection, and esteem, they are happinesses which I
do not rank in this Catalogue. They are essential parts of that bliss I seek
in this world. I have absolute need of them for the content of my life; and it
is certain I should not be my own friend if I were not your Lordship's
favourit; being with all my soul,

My Lord, Your most humble, etc.
Sep. 6. 1636.
LETTER V. To my Lord Seguier, Chancellor of France.
My Lord,
YOur goodness is the sole inducement I have to hope in it: and in my
addresses to you, I support my self on this Title, which I conceive you will
not implead of falsity. I do not represent any returns of my services, but
favors received and many ancient courresies, as arguments to obtain a new. I
would willingly, My Lord, compile the history of your good deeds, to put you in
remembrance of the place whither they were accustomed to flow, and of the
pleasure you took to send Manna to the desert. But particular stories must not
be drawn into example, nor the gifts of Heaven abused. I do not always beseech
your mighty miracles, though I perpetually expect your ordinary protection: Be
pleased therefore to permit me, with all the respect which I owe you, and all
the acknowledgments I am capable of, to obtain it at this time in favor of a
person who is very near to me by the strait tie of blood, but his interests
much more precious to me, by the sacred knot of friendship. Himself will
declare to you the merits of his cause, if you please to do him the honor of
your attention. If his own deserts may receive any advantage from my testimony,
I can assure you that he is an Officer who has grown old in his Command with a
reputation of Understanding and Honesty, and this no more then might be
confirmed by the public voice of our Province. I dare promise my self, My
Lord, you will regard my words with some belief that I shall be neither an
unprofitable witness or intercessour with you. And though when I have
intentions of approaching your person, the Majesty of state that environs it
with all its rays, might amaze and blind me, who am not accustomed to so much
light, yet your goodness, which is the temper and allay of your power, and
upon which I immediately cast my eyes, does yet encourage me to such an
hazardous enterprise. I will believe that on this present occasion, I have
successefully addressed my requests to you, since their favors have heretofore
been more forward then my desires; and that it is by your own pure and free
choice that I am,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Sept. 4. 1641. I conceived my Lord, the sight of my last compositions would
not be unpleasing to you, and to this purpose I have sent Monsieur the
President de Marca, a Christian Poem, sufficiently long-winded, and two
Epigrammes upon the occasion of some late occurrences: Futura tibi,
Illustrissime virorum, Monumenta qualiacunque, meae in Deum and in Rempublicam
pietatis.



LETTER VI. To the same.
My Lord,
IF the Kings affairs will allow you any intervall of relaxation for the
walks of Chaillot, Monsieur de -- will present you half an hours
divertisement; and you will find in one of my Muses Prophesies, the sound
advice they gave to him, who has made so bad use of it. You will observe, My
Lord, how they forewarned this poor Mortal of his approaching ruin, when he
was so rash as to lose the reverence he owed to the Gods --. Laws have
heretofore been delivered in Rythmne, or at least in measure. Anacharsis and
Solon made verses, and we have a whole volume left us by Monsieur the
Chancellor de l'Hospitall. It is not to be doubted, but if the burden of the
State, which weighes heavier now then ever it did, would at this day permit you
to breathe so sweetly, you would give us Master-peices of our Art in the fruits
of your leisure. You understand it in perfection as you do all other things
that are worthy knowing: and this complete knowledge, My Lord, makes you here
as else where, our last and sovereign judge. The Academies as well as the
Parliaments esteem it an honor to have you for their. Head. All sorts of
Tribunalls are subalternate to yours. If Athens were not now Barbarian, and
Rome were still Latin, they would acknowledge your Authority. And what
insolent Poet of the Low Countries is he, that would scruple submission to so
intelligent a Supremacy? and laying aside his doubts, and suspicions refuse to
acquiesce in Oracles of such certainty and which comes so immediately from
Heaven --? We do not look upon you only as our Protector, but also as our
example; and for this double reason, our Verse, our Prose, our Prayers, and our
Homages are due to you. But in expectance to address mine with more solemnity,
be pleased to do me the honor to remember, that there is a Hermit in the
desert, who is your Courtier in his heart: who blesses you incessantly,
although he writes to you but seldom; and who, should he perform that duty
every day, would not cease to be all his life, more in truth then show, and
with greater zeal then interest,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Aug. 18. 1642.
LETTER VII. To the same.
My Lord,
YOu may lay new engagements upon my liberty at your pleasure, it is not in my
power to be more perfectly yours then I have been long since. You may always
have more favors to bestow on me, but I had only one heart to give you, the
propriety of which I offered to you eighteen years ago, and you had gained it
sometime before. It is true, the present was but trivial: I am ashamed to put
you in mind now, that great hearts are so necessary in great enterprises, and
unless you reckon a great deal of passion and zeal for something, I should not
in time of War have mentioned a toy of so little use as that. Yet my Lord, is
there no place for a violent passion, in your service? Cannot a zealous spirit
produce some thoughts courageous enough to venture beyond the prospect of our
present age, and more Noble then to injure the glory of your great Name? There
are some persons over-credulons in my favor, as to imagine so, and I were very
happy, if their persuasions were not upon bad grounds. As it is the most
ambitious of all my designs, so it is also the most ardent of all my desires.
But herein I must confess, I can but little satisfy my self: For, what ever
indulgent friends say, I have little encouragement to believe from the view of
my sufficiencies. I discover neither a Mine nor a Bank in my brain to suffice
for the recompense of supreme virtue, for requital of heroicke actions, and
for the price of that which is inestimable. On the other side, I want that
other faculty, which descends from above, and is called Enthusiasme. The muses
do not answer me at all times when I call them, and I have often times begun
Poems that ended at the Invocation. It is possible I shall be better inspired
for the future; The excellencies of invention may at length be infused into me
from Heaven, and I may have my part of those illuminations it sends down to our
brethren of the Academy. I attend this happy hour of inspiration with
impatience, that I may employ it well: and I cannot live contented, till I have
testified by some eminent act of gratitude (pardon that eminent upon this
occasion) that I am as I ought to be,

My LORD. Your, etc.
Feb. 25. 1645.
LETTER VIII. To my Lord the Archbishop of Thoulose.
My Lord,
THE successes, of which I received information from your Letter, redoun'd so
much to your glory, that Honoring you perfectly as I do, I could not receive
them with a moderate joy. You have had justice at length of the Senate, but it
was the same Senate that did it you. You do not only receive the just Honors
that are due to you, but even with the consent of them who disputed them with
you; and by one and the same victory you have gained both your cause and your
adversaries affection. So though the conquest be desirable, but the peace far
better, nothing should be wanting to your satisfaction who have obtained at
once both the Good and the Better. It remains now, my Lord, that you enjoy
this fair calm, and these days of Serenity you have made such: that is,
employ them all in that harvest that respects you, and in the conduct of that
flock which Jesus CHRIST has entrusted to your care. If you would, you might
have climbed to Glory by other steps; But all things being considered, this is
the surest and shortest for him that aims at nothing but Heaven. Could you
exceed Cardinal Baronio in the solidity of your learning, yet it is better to
follow Cardinal Borromeo, in the Sanctity of your Life, and be the subject of
others writings, then the Historian of their actions. How happy do I esteem the
meanest laborers that you use in your great work! and I cannot express how it
troubles me to be perpetually desirous of being with you, and yet to stick fast
here, and to be able to profess to you only with wishes and idle passions, I
know not when, that I am more then any person in the World,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Jul. 25. 1633.
LETTER IX. To the same.
My Lord,
I Perceive there is no possibility, for me to execute my grand enterprise, or
to effect what I have had in design these ten years. My journey to Languedoc,
is likely to become the exercise of a man that stirs not, or the dream of one
awake. If Heaven will have it so, I shall at least have this happiness, nothing
can hinder me the enjoying in my mind, the contentment which I fancy. My
imagination, that has power to bring me near to places where I desire to be,
walks me continually round about this distant happiness, and puts me into
possession of one of the apartments of your Palace, and soon after lodges me
even in your Library. O how I contemn the Jasper and guildings of the
Escuriall, when I am in that Cabinet? This indeed is to inhabit a more Noble
and stately Court, to be the guest of an infinite number of rare souls, and
blessed intelligences; where after a repast of Tanzies and Mellons, the
entertainment might be with light and truth. I do not seek out high words to
abuse them, I employ them in their proper and natural signification: for what
is there, My Lord, which the desire of knowledge and ambition of learning can
imagine exquisite and rare, but is to be found either in your books, or
conversation? those three or four hours I had the honor to pass with you,
presented to me the riches of ages, and antiquity! you taught me things which
not only the commonalty of the learned are ignorant of, but such as, it may be,
the Princes of the Schools understand not. The several manuscripts your
goodness daign'd to show me, left so fair an impression of Christianity upon
my soul, that immediately I divorced my self from my old Loves, and bad adieu
to all the muses that are not holy. Since that time I speak nothing but of the
Primitive Church and the Oecumenicall Counsels: and you have so alienated me
from Pagan-Rome, that in those places of History where I meet with Aquilae, I
am sometimes ready to change it into Labarum. A communication of such advantage
deserves to be sought, though it were at the end of the World; and a thousand
leagues are nothing to be traveled for it. To confess freely: the voyages of
the Grecian Philosophers into Egypt, do very much reproach my immobilitie. It
is necessary that I rouse up this Lethargy, or to speak more humanely, that I
prop up this weakness and provide redress to this infirmity: and since it is
impossible it should endure a Coach, unless in a Down or a Meadow, I am at
this instant going to purchase a Litter, to make it more capable of the
journey, and transport me without disturbance, to the feet of a greater Master
then Gamaliel. The ambition of a spirit cured of the Court, may well be
terminated there, where I shall receive your answers to my Questions, after I
have rendered you my respects and sworn to you in the presence of Eusebius
Theodoret and such like kind of witnesses, that I am ever perfectly,

My Lord, Your, etc.
March. 4. 1641.
LETTER X. To Monsieur le Grass, Counselor to the King, and Master of
Requests in Ordinary of his Household.
SIR,
MY passion is not satisfied with what I have already done, it still requires
more from me and having employed the language of the Gods to extol your great
honesty, your profound judgment, sense, and excellent knowledge, I am l^ft to
tell you in the terms of mortals, that I more esteem the friend then the
judge, and the Generous then the Intelligent. You have so heart^ly desired for
me what you could not give me, that I conceive I owe it you though I have not
received it. The intention is something more obliging, and more ours then the
success: and since you have had that entire, to establish me in the enjoyment
of the courtesy that was granted to me, there is no part of your favor lost,
though fortune came short in the accomplishment of the rest. This rest, Sir,
which the people calls the whole, is but the gross material part of the
obligation; and this fortune who takes delight in sporting with events, and
destroying hopes, cannot reach the principle of well doing which resides in the
mind. You have therefore been beneficent in despite of her, and I will be
grateful in the same manner: For, whatever misfortune she has blown upon the
Kings gift so that it could not pass the Seal, yet she could not hinder me from
finding a great treasure in the loss of a business of 3 thousand livres: I mean
Sir, the assurance you have in your actions, with which I dare not call my self
unhappy, and am at least satisfied with the negotiation of my friend. He has
upon this occasion, writ me truths so welcome to my belief, and so much to my
advantage, that I cannot doubt being rich by the gain I have made, though it be
not in my pu^^e, and though I thank you for nothing but what was denied for me.
The reason is, for that I understand how to separate the spiritual from the
terrestrial. I can esteem, where others tell out: and being contented with the
thing, without the perplexity of an account, I am, Sir, in the most pure and
noble manner,

Your, etc.
Jun. 4. 1645.
LETTER XI. To Madam the Duchess of --.
Madam,
TEn years are fled since you heard tidings of me, and yet I have received a
Letter from you this day exceeding civil, obliging, and very worthy of your
perfect generosity. I consider this honor, as a Favor from Heaven, arrived to
a man that never says his prayers. He offers up neither vows nor sacrifices,
and yet his indevotion fails not to be happy; and receives the rewards of
Piety. You are stored with these goodnesses of Heaven, amidst the wickednesses
of the Earth; and you seek after those savadges, Madam, that endeavor to avoid
you --. Yet it is not requisite for me to take this pains to bring my self
into a bad reputation, or decry my self with so much diligence and care.
Questionless, Madam, you more regard the inside of things then the surface and
outward appearance. You have the gift to behold the actings of immateriall
souls, and so consequently you perceive there, that the private motions of my
heart clear me of all the ill conjectures that might condemn me. That is a
place I always reserve for you, though I never give you an account of it: Al
there is full of zeal, and reverence to your virtue, and if external acts were
not of the essence of true worship, I would challenge the most diligent of your
Courtiers, for the glory of being more yours, then he conceives himself to be.
This being granted, Madam, I beseech you, not to conceive it possible for me to
deliberate on any proposition that regards your service or contentment: or that
I need quickening and excitation to endeavor the advancing my interests into
your affections. I could wish they were less just then they are, that my
obedience might be purer, then it will be, and that you might see I can perform
your will without examining your commands. The Gentleman that delivered me your
Letter, will confirm what I say, and make his report of the things he has
seen already. I had begun them, before I understood your desire. The end shall
soon follow the beginning: and if you do me the honor to cast your eye upon my
pains, I assure my self you will accept my devotion. Which has not ceased to
be, though it did to appear; and I have constantly been as I shall continue my
whole life with all my soul,

Madam, Your, etc.
Mar. 14. 1643.
LETTER XII. To the Reverend father Vital Thereon, a Divine of the society of
Jesus.
Reverend father,
IS it possible that I am the person of whom you have sung such excellent
things? it is almost beyond my belief, and though my friend assures me of it,
and I read my name in your verses, I am in doubt whether there be not another
Balzac, more worthy of that Honor. Perhaps I am not the true one, and I owe my
good fortune to an Equivocall name. Yet I remember, I have heard it reported
for one of Jupiters pastimes, to enrich poverty, and exalt meandness. In which
regard I am not longer in wonder, that the Muses should be of their Fathers
humor, and that they love the same divertisement with him. You have therefore
with your pen ennobled a vision which appeared to you for my advantage; you
have lifted me from Earth to Heaven: you have celebrated the Apotheosis of a
man yet alive: of a man that has no Legions, who is not clad in purple, nor
has founded you a College: yet you have brought more pomp and more ornaments
to this uninteressed Canonization, then is to be found in that which is left us
by Antiquity, and Herodian has so magnificently described. It is too
superlative an excess, Reverend father, and though I had the virtue of
moderation and equanimity yet my happiness is extravagant, and irregular; so
that I justly apprehend the jealousy of that Goddess, whom the Language of
your verse calls The terrible Nemesis, she punishes the prosperous as well as
the proud, and does not willingly let festivalls pass without troubling their
serenity with some dysaster But is it not possible to get her, in lieu of her
interest, and for the tempering of my great fortune, to be satisfied with a
douzen fits of a fever, and five and thirty ounces of blood, which are already
drawn from my veins by sentence of the Physician? If I could escape on these
terms I should take my disease for a remedy, and believe I had made a good
purchase of your praises. Is it a good that can be bought too dearly, to be
commended by father Thereon? Should it not be the ambition of Kings, and the
desire of them that possess all things? The fabric of Glory that is raised by
their hands, has nothing of frail or mortal. That which you have bestowed on
me, shall not perish with my name, which yet may be contagious. It will
preserve both it self and that too, by your excellent industry. Posterity
shall receive it as pure and undecayed, as I did out of your packet; and Marble
shall be dust, when your works shall be yet entire --. For a Future so
glorious, for so many Ages of fair Reputation, and for the Eternity you have
made me sure of, it is very reasonable that I be perfectly all my life,

Reverend father, Your, etc.
Mar. 20. 1643.
LETTER XIII. To Monsieur Daille.
SIR,
THough I am ordinarily but little satisfied with my self, yet I dare not
question the merit of a piece which your approbation has made good. Your
praises give a second luster to my writings which will last longer then that of
the impression, and makes me esteem them more beauteous and pleasing then they
were. It is very difficult to contain within the limits of modesty after so
favorable a sentence from so authentic place. I am resolved, at least not to
be so compliant with those which do not treat me equitably. So that though I
abandon my own interests, I am obliged to maintain your opinions, and defend
my self for your sake. Whoever, then, shall contradict you, let him not think
to persuade me; I except neither the Courtiers, nor Scholars. If the Court it
self fancy some taint in my French of the Provinces on this side Loire; or the
University disrellish my Latin, since you have declared for both, I will say
the Court is troubled with Rheum, and the Universitie's palate is out of
taste. I acknowledge you, Sir, a Legal judge of both the times: I mean
venerable Antiquity, and our fine Barbarism; of the Language of the Sovereign
and victorious people, and of the change introduced in the declination of the
Empire, by the conquered nations. You have extracted from good books the
splendor and Majesty of the dead Tongue, and from good use the politenesse and
excellency of the living. You are rich both by birth and acquisition, and have
Title to keep the same rank in old Rome that you hold among the Eloquent of
Paris. What an advantage is it to be able to say, I have that person on my
side! There is no pretender but would pass upon so considerable an
attestation; no Litigious person, but dreads so intelligent a justice; nor any
enemy, that dares assail a place which you defend. One would think it
sufficient that you did defend it, but you embellish it with so much care of
ornament, that I who made it, can scarce know it, Whatsoever you are pleased to
say, they are your flowers and not mine that make the avenues so pleasant: and
that your Letter at the beginning of my book, would look no further for the
Spring or Chaplets which you promise. I keep this Letter as one of the most
precious jewels in my treasury: and will produce it in time and place against
the oppositions of Grammarians and Sophisters. I am not the child of so
perverse a Mother; but she will give me the liberty to do it, and allow me to
esteem a stranger, whom she would be very glad to adopt, and make her own. It
is with her consent, doubt not, and without deviating from her Maxims, that I
profess to honor you, and am perfectly,

SIR, Your, etc.
Dec. 24. 1649.
LETTER XIIII. To my Lord the Count d'Avaux, Sur intendant of the Kings Revenue.
SIR,
YOur favors are ^o novelties to me, and the civility you have lately done me,
is an action of which you attained the habit long since. In the greatest heat
of the war kindled against me, you sheltred my innocence: You were stronger
then Calumny; and if the Senators and Cardinals are now partisans for me, it
is because you were my Protector at Venice and at Rome, you did after the same
manner endeare me in Germany, and in Courts the most distant from our world.
Your judgment has regulated that of Potentates: and the Letters I receive,
dated from the shoares of the Baltic sea, are effects of the curiosity you
have infused into the nations of the North, of knowing a person which you love.
But shall I conceal the bravest part of my Adventures? Is it not to you I owe
that illustrious sentence that the king of Denmark pronounced in my favor? and
did he not take you for his assistant, nay for his whole Council, when the
Lutheran Bishop that contested with me lost his cause in an Audience composed
of Princes and Princesses? Since you remembered me at Capenhagen, there was no
fear you should forget me at Paris; and that which I have understood of the
new obligations I have to you did so little surprise me, that though I am
sensibly affected with them, yet there being no novelty to amaze me, I could
not testify any great ecstasy or emotion. I apprehended much joy at the
constancy of your goodness but this joy has not excited any extraordinary
agitation in my heart: it did not discover it self outwardly by the
discomposing of my countenance: nor transport me to undecent exclamation. My
acknowledgement was ever pure and without disturbance, and be pleased to excuse
at present the nakedness and simplicity of its address. At least suffer a
Grammarian to speak properly, and do no longer proh^bit me, to call you My
Lord, you are certainly such by so many Titles, that I neither pretend to, nor
will ever accept of dispensation and liberty. If a person whom you have gained,
whom you have preserved, and conferred honor on, and procured favors to,
should not call himself yours, I do not know with all my Grammars and
Dictionaries, what name to find out for such a man. But there are yet some
further concernments, and I have received advantages of another nature. Were I
not the subject you have painted and beautified, yet you are Master of that Art
that furnishes us with colors, and ornaments: I have nothing for my part but
what you have distributed to me; and how often have I protested in full and
glorious Academy that I had less profited by Quintilian's precepts then by
your examples; and that I had more enriched my self with what I had received
from your mouth, then what I had romaged from the Treasuries of Antiquity. It
is that eloquent mouth that has oftentimes been more serviceable to a good
cause, then both the wings of an army: It is by that, the King speaks so high,
and so effectually to forrainers, that he makes himself so many friends and
servants; I mean Sovereign and independent servants. If it were lawful for
me, I would say, you have gained me with the same power, and you possess me by
the same title, that I am one of your first conquered, and your first subjects,
that I yielded my self upon your approach, and that I met my felicity in my
surrender. Upon these considerations shall I not be benefitted to call you MY
LORD? Shall not you be my Patron in Italian, and one of my Heroes in all
languages whatsoever? Shall your modesty arrest my gratitude on my Lips, or
desire it out of my writings? Such a violence is not in your power. You may
dispense with me as long as you please, for what I owe to the Quality you hold
in the world, but you cannot hinder me from acknowledging the superiority which
virtue exercises in the Rational Word. You cannot give away her interest with
your own. Extraordinary persons must be treated with respects beyond the vulgar
addresses. And seeing you are so elivated above humane things by the sublimity
of your soul, I am afraid I should make too long a conclusion, and not express
in telling you only that I am with a kind of Religion,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Jul. 2. 1643.
LETTER XV. To Monsieur Remy, Professor of Rhetoric, and Poet Laureat.
SIR,
THis is not the first day of my knowledge, and esteem of Muses: it is fifteen
years complete since I was first obliged to them; when they undertook my
protection against Don Roderigo. In all this intervall, it has been my design
to testify my gratitude to you, and from thence forward my Pros^ ever did
homage to your Verse in presence of our friend of the Tournelle. I brought him
to confess that curious arguments were not spoiled by my hand, that I had good
fortune in composing the Characters of illustrious men. If this poor deceas^d
should rise again, he would confirm this to you in five or six languages,
(for he spoke so many) and would assure you in Poetical expressions, but those
affirmative ones (for he would also swear sometimes,) that I honored you three
complete Olympiads, and had not the courage to tell you so had this
backwardness continued longer, it might have been called Cowardice, if not by
a worser name. There is no means to contain so much estimation and passion in
my breast: they will force their way out by some short and authenticke
declaration, and give you to know that that ancient Client of your Muses, that
Orator who heretofore made your Paneygrick in the Cabinet of Monsieur
Favereau, that Hermit whom you have newly banquetted with your excellent
verses, has read them more then once with admiration, and concluded the
Metamorphosis is worthy of antiquity, and the other pieces of the
Metamorphosis. I beg the continuation of your favor and am with passion,

Sir, Your, etc.
Jan. 4. 1643.
LETTER XVI. To the Reverend Father de Marin, a Divine of the Society of Jesus.
Reverend Father,
MOnsieur de Marin has broke his Word with us, and has passed over at St.
Cybardeau without coming to Balzac. I entreat you reprove him for it, when you
see him, and tell him from me, that the affairs of Catalonia might very well
have permitted him to turn a League out of his way, and bestow half a day on
me. Shall we never walk all three together in the plain that he thought not
unpleasant, at the bottom of the green mountain, upon the banks of the silver
River, near the baths of Diana, and over against her Miroir? I expect you
there, and him too, to make him relate his own History, and offer him that
Historian of whom you have so high an opinion. The Father Marin prefers him
before Salust and Livy: but it may be, some less obliging father will place him
beneath Ammonius the Monk, and Paul the Deacon --. I am,

Reverend father, Your, etc.
May. 12. 1639.
LETTER XVII. To the Reverend Father Vital Thereon, a Divine of the Society of
Jesus.
Reverend Father,
YOu make complaints against your old age, and I am resolved to write the
Elogium of it. I will extol it publicly and in genere Demonstrativo; that
age which is privileged and cherished by Heaven, free and exempted from all
the oppressive tribute, that other men pay nature, and purposes as an example
by our goddesses, to excite ambition and courage in our young men. The winters
of Naples, me thinks, have some resemblance with it, those clear and serene
Winters that are gilded with light, and crowned with roses; that of Masinissa
was less green and vigourous, and the child which he begot at fourscore was a
production not comparable to your Poem at threescore and fifteen. The reason
is, that the fire which descends from Heaven by way of inspiration, is not
extinguished by the diminution of natural heat: and if Art have found out the
invention of unextinguishable lamps, the Master of Art may very well preserve
in its full force the igneous part of our mind, and make the ardour and
vivacity of its operations durable. Are there not some sensible representations
of this happy duration? who knows not that gold is refined by waxing old, and
that the Sun its father, is as bright in one thousand six hundred and forty
two, as he was the very day of his creation? I must therefore disclaim that
erroneous sentence which I have formerly so much cried up as a proposition of
eternal truth, That there was never seen a handsome old woman. Pardon me that
rash expression, I was not then acquainted with your Muse, which gives my
proposition the lie, and decryes a Proverb, to which I thought to have given
eternity. Her age does not cause the declining of her beauty, but is the
confirmation of it by the very suffrage of Time, by approbation of the Present,
as well as the Past: it is not a mark of the victory of years over her, but a
trophy of her resistance and strength against time. I speak as I am really
persuaded; but were I as courageous as the Authors of your Country, I should
express much more: I should say at least of this admirable old Lady, that at
the age of Hecuba she had as many Lovers, as Helena in the flower of her youth.
I could allege an infinite numbers as well of those that burn at Paris, as
that sigh on this side the Loire: But it suffices me to speak for my self, who
am the most passionate of them all, and as much as any person in the world,

Reverend father, Your, etc.
Marh. 4. 1642.
LETTER XVIII. To my Lord the Duke of Espernon, Governor and Lieutenant
General for the King in Guienne, etc.
My Lord,
THe obligations I have to you, affect me in such a sensible manner, that I am
much unsatisfied with my self, that I am able only to testify to you vulgar
resentments and acknowledgments for them. Perhaps it were a safer crime to
present you with none at all. The silence of meditation is somewhat more devout
then the Music of Hymns and Songs. There is no Sermon so eloquent as an
Ecstasy, and study may have flattery and dissembling, when the distraction of
the soul discovers the bottom and secrets. It Is with confusion of my thought,
My Lord, and a discomposed spirit, that I thank you for your favors. It was
with transport, and the loss of speech, that I received them lately: and I
should yet continue in the same condition; were I not afraid to breed ill
example among those that receive favors. My trance must not ever continue so
drowzy as to hinder me from turning my eyes sometimes toward that side from
whence my good fortune shines. If I be dumb with admiration, I will at least
make signs, that I am not ungrateful on purpose: and when I shall taste those
pleasant days at Plassac which you invite me to seek, I will say, at least in
my heart, that you and the Sun bestow them on me, or make use of a verse in
Virgil, It is a God that does indulge this leisure.

The gods, my Lord, (I speak in the Language of Virgil) can not make a richer
present to mankind: nay, they have not reserved a better for themselves: for it
was affirmed by one that leisure was their business, and by another that it
was their proper possession. I hid my self in the village for the better
pursuance of this business of Heaven, and to enjoy a happy idleness: to
satiety but my fruition has been disturbed, and I could not escape discovery.
Though this little corner of the world be unknown both to the ancient and
modern Geography, and Mercator speaks no more of it then Ptolomy, my ill fate
has pleased to bring it into reputation since my coming to it; and it is now
deprived of that sweet and peaceable obscurity, wherein things unknown do rest.
All the Prose and Verse in Christendom have learnt the way thither:
Paraphrases and Comments, Orations and Panegyricks, flock to it from all parts:
but especially Letters, which claim a right to be admitted from the farthest
Countries of the earth, and do verily believe they come to their own home,
because I have written volumes of them. They do me much honor; I confess it:
This persecution is too glorious for me: But yet it is still a persecution to a
spirit overcharged, and that is no longer able --. I fret and repine here in
vain against this glory: there is no way to acquit me from it but by escaping
into some place of freedom; where there is not only a porter to tell them, I
am not within, but a Captain to speak it with authority, and repel curiosity
from searching after me. You do me the favor, my Lord, to offer me this place
of refuge, wherein I may hope to be in security: and I know well enough that
without need either of Captain or Soldiers, you have no house but your Name
alone fortifies. It is the safeguard of other men's, and War respects it, even
upon the door of a cottage. How can I fear my quiet then, when so powerful an
authority assures it to me, and your goodness vouchsafes to own me, of whom I
am and will ever be passionately all my life,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Janua. 5. 1645.
LETTER XIX. To my Lord the Duke, de la Roche-foucaut, Peer of France.
My Lord,
IT is a great reproach to me to be so near a neighbor to you and make so
little improvement of that advantage. But it would be a kind of lesser treason
to live in your territories, and repose my self under your protection without
expressing one thought of gratitude for it. It troubles me I am not able to say
an action of it, and I heartily wish it were possible for me to venture so far.
But my repose being grown to an incapacity of motion, I am constrained, my
Lord, to render you my duty in my mind, and be of the Court of Vertevill in the
same manner, I am of the Academy of Paris, that is, without stirring from hence
to either. My indisposition sowes thorns for me every where: it meets with
precipices in the eevenest ways, and the infirmities of age do already so
over-press me, that if they increase never so little more, I shall not dare to
go out of my Chamber till I have made my will. In this pitious estate, you
preceive clearly, my Lord, my faults are rather from necessity then choice, and
that I am not guilty of my unhappiness. I lose so much in the want of your
commerce, and your person has so many Qualities to render it desirable,
abstracted from those of your condition, that were I naturally an Enemy of
greatness, I should not be so much my own foe, as to keep at distance from my
good when it were in my power to approach it. There needs not more for this,
but common sense, and self-love, and as in some men's judgment, I have some of
this love to spare, so in my own opinion, I do not altogether fail in the
rational part. You may please to permit me, this little act of vain glory
upon this occasion. I will receive it as a favor from you: But on the
otherside, you will do me justice in this honorable belief of me, that there
is no person more truly in his heart then my self,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Apr. 12. 1639.
LETTER XX. To Monsieur the Count de la Vauguion.
SIR,
THe day you had the goodness to come and visit me, my spirits were so
enfeebled with a restless night, and I was so incapable of all reasonable
Society, that if you went not away with a very low opinion of me, you did an
act of very high charity. Since that time the disgrace of that unlucky half
hour has lain upon my heart, and I have often fancied what you might conceive
of the testimonies and approbation of the public. Questionless, Sir, you
accused the people either of simplicity or imposture: you judged that they had
suffered themselves to be deluded by a very unable man, or else they would
deceive others for his sake; had I but an indifferent esteem of you, I should
comfort my self up against all you could speak thereupon: but I knowing your
valor great as your value, I must confess, Sir, I have doubtful apprehensions
of my reputation, for I am afraid I have either utterly lost it with you, or
extremely endangered it. To piece my self up again some way or other, and try
to show my self to you at a more advantageous light then you saw me, I have
just now resolved to send you the discourse I was obliged to make Of the
conversation of the Romans. You will find there what you sought in mine: at
least you cannot be ill entertained in a place where Consuls and Dictatours
make up the honor of the house. I shall think my labor happy if it please you
better then I have done: but I should esteem my self much happyer then my
labor, and believe I had repaired my detriment with advantage, could I but
evidence to you with what respect, I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Mar. 28. 1640.
LETTER XXI. To the Reverend Father Stephen de Bourges, a Capuchin Preacher.
Reverend Father,
YOu ought to commiserate me, instead of complaining of me. You know well on
whom the unhappiness of your separation falls, or at least who loses most by
it, since you will be so good as to take a share in the mishap. For my
justification, be pleased to consider only the present estate of things. You
are the distributer of the favors of heaven at the distance of a league and
half from hence: The treasures of the Church flow in torrents from your Lips:
You deal out your largesses every morning; while I am tormented that these good
things are done in my absence, and am so out of favor that no one drop of
these inundations reaches me. The people receive the benefits, and I only hear
the news of them. I who presumed my self your confident, who would and am not
able to be near you. This is to tell you, Reverend father, that there is a
superior force against which we are too feeble, and inevitable mischiefs,
which meet us when we would fly them. Your divinity shall pardon me this
error if you please. I now acknowledge, that fatal necessity in my own person
too, I feel the violences and chains of destiny, which captive the most
arbitrary and independent --. The world is so importunate, it does not allow a
man leisure to say his prayers, and its importunity proceeds so far, and
sometimes to that curiosity that it is troublesome even in the bosom of the
desert. It seeks out men in a place, where it is written over the door, that
there is no body within; that it is the Mansion of silence, the Sanctuary of
sloth. At our first meeting I shall expound this last article, and lay open my
moanes to you to receive your comforts. I am with passion,

Reverend father, Your, etc.
Mar. 4. 1646.
LETTER XXII. To Monsieur de Souchotte.
SIR,
Whatsoever opinion you have of the Barbarism of our climate, we are not so
contemptible at Rome, but her largesses arrive to us; nor so little curious of
rarity, as not to obtain a Jubilee as well as you. Your Letter having found me
in this good mind, had no great difficulty to persuade me to that good work you
request of me. I shall be very glad to please you, in my obedience to the
Church, and do an act of Religion that may either acquire or recover me a
friend to the merits of Monsieur de Saint Germain. It is not possible for me to
hate him, being as I am a member of the body of the Faithful: and if I had not
esteemed him, I should not be in the Catalogue of the reasonable. Oblige me
therefore by assuring him of my affection and respects, after you have told him
that I have sent you my injuries and my resentments to be laid upon the altar
whereon he makes his vows and sacrifices; that is, the Altar of Peace and
Love, he must offer on it both for himself and me, all our froward passions,
and all the sowreness and bitterness of our spirits. I am resolved not to
contribute to the continuance of disorder, or nourish my self with the
quintessence of gall, nor grow old in a bad constance. You may add as many
civilities as you please to this Christian protestation. I make this universal
profession to you, that I am without reserve,

SIR, Your, etc.
Ap. 25. 1645.
LETTER XXIII. To Monsieur Perrot d'Ablancourt.
SIR,
YOu will perceive by the Copy of what you requested of me, in what manner I
determine our compliance to the present state of affairs, and what has ever
been my opinion del tempo and della signoria. The Letter is of an ancient date,
as you know already; it was written to a man who had need of the like advice,
but made very ill use of what I gave him: for some few years afterward, being
engaged in the revolt of Rochell, he died in a Sea Fight, wherein he commanded
a vessel against the King. It might be said of him that he Renowned himself
in his destruction, and that he showed miracles of courage, had he not done them
in a bad cause, and had not his valor been his crime.

Ah quanta Virtute scelus defendis, Amice!
Quam fortis reus, atque invito qualia Mart
Neptuno mirante geris?
But when shall we peruse your History, in the condition you will suffer it to
be seen? I expect it impatiently, that we may have a French Alexander, as
stout, as brave, and as courageous in his words, as the Macedonian was in his
actions. You know what was said of the pourtraiture of this, that of the two
Alexanders, the son of Philip was invincible, and that of Apelles inimitable.
You may make the application your self to your excellent work: For my part, I
shall not less esteem Alexander the book, then Alexander the Captain, and be
all my life with passion,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jun. 5. 1645.
LETTER XXIIII. To Monsieur de Bourdigal Cande.
SIR,
IS not a defluxion of these six weeks continuance, which has made a fountain
of my head; and a Chollick that succeeded it, to rend my entrails, with a
thousand troublesome businesses besides, that have overburden'd me at the same
time, sufficient in your opinion to excuse my silence? Less then all this
could not have made me break my word; and had I been capable of society, you
should have known at the beginning of October, not only that I admire the
Eloquence of your Letters, but I have communicated my admiration to all the
wits within ten Leagues of me. I am not able to say more to you of it, and I
beseech you Sir, do not take it ill that I send you not my Comments on the
Relation of your friend, I am in a house where Policy medles not with any other
affairs but those of Camillus, Fabricius and Scipio: By the orders of our
Landlord, it is confined within the decades of Livy: nay the neighboring
History of Augustus is prohibited, it is not lawful to descend so low as the
quarrels of Sylla and Marius, or of Pompey and Caesar. The Trium-virate must
not so much as be glanced upon, so great a fear there is of approaching nearer,
and becoming curious in comparing Ages, and Countries. I confess this is a
very nice restraint and in a manner turning of us into another world, but you
must also confess that your friend is very inquisitive after great secrets,
and sick of Intrigues and news. What account would he have me give him of that
which is done above me, of the hurly burly and tempests of humane affairs? I
look upon the troubled Air and raging Sea, without murmuring at Juno, and
execrations against Thetis: I am a witness, and not a judge of the life of
Princes: and though I did not approve their conduct, which is distasted where
you are, I would at least stick fast to that old oracle, Bona tempora voto
expetere, qualiacunque tolerare; and to that more modern, but not less true,
though translated by Apollo into Kitchen Latin, Been loqui de superiore, Facere
officium suum taliter qualiter, and sinere ire res quomodo vadunt: had I any
hours free from pain, I would hold you longer, but I have only moments of
relaxation, and I must make use of this, to assure you that I am ever really,

SIR, Your, etc.
Oct. 30. 1617.
LETTER XXV. To Monsieur the Count of Cleremont, etc.
SIR,
I Have received an infinite number of favors from your goodness, and I have
an infinite gratitude for them. But the mischief is, there is none that knows
it besides my self. I have been so far from ostentation of my good fortune,
that I have enjoyed it as a thing gotten by theft, and it seems have taken a
course to possess it without witnesses, that I might keep it without envy. You
may call it either covetousness, or modesty, seeking security, or avoiding
Spectators: I am sure, Sir, I have kept silence with as much Religion as if you
had Confessed to me all the civilities you have written: and I cannot deny,
that unless you have the gift of reading thoughts, you must needs be very
dissatisfied with the care you have taken to oblige a man that does not speak.
Yet I must, at length, justify my self, and help you to divine the true cause
of this silence. It is most certain, my resentments had not been imprisoned
thus long in my breast, but because I knew not whither to address them to you:
for you have so many Houses, in so many several Provinces, that nothing was
more easy then to miss you when you are aimed at, and mistake the Earldom for
the Marquisate. Now you are fixed, Sir, and are to be found in the Castle which
the Fairies built for your Ancestors on the banks of the Dordoigne, I beseech
you, gently admit these lines to present my respects to you, and assure you of
a fidelity as pure and sincere --. I could with I had my self been the bearer
of these assurances, to have passed with you the happy days which my affection
promised me there. But this cannot be accomplished only with desires and
passions, though Monsieur Desportes formerly called them the feet of the soul.
I must move more materially, and with more strength: if God do not take
compassion of my weakeness, I am afraid I shall take no more journies, but in
the Map. I expect, therefore, by Monsieur -- a faithful relation of the
pleasures which I should have tasted, had I been capable to receive them. I
will comfort my self by his assistance, with that harvest of Orange flowers
and Jassamine, which is gathered in my absence. I will read the Diary of that
war, we should have both been at in a Coach, and I shall know the number of
the slain, whose Epitaphs we should have made after dinner: I mean your
Hearts, your wild Boares, and your Salmons, which are taken in such abundance,
as I am told, that there is no day in the year but you might feast Mark
Anthony, and his Mistress --. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Sep. 2. 1639.
LETTER XXVI. To the same.
SIR,
IS it possible that our friend has lost his l^berty? and can that countenance
of Fabritius that represents to our age the severity of the ancient Republique,
demit it self sometimes, to delight the eyes of some young Phillis? I have
much ado to b^lieve so strange a story. What probability is there, that having
joined to the behavior of old Rome, the Chaplets and Medalls of the new, and
that having treated face to face with Pope Urban and drawn blessings from their
source, he should return not confirmed in grace by those Apostolical
Conferences, and refuse to drink at that Fountain of Holiness? There is no
appearance he would lose so fair an opportunity of advance to greater
perfection, and you do very well to color your accusation with all that may
make it look like truth: for by the same reason I proclaim you to be an
Eloquent Detractour, I maintain my friend an honest man calumniated. Though I
had seen him enter into those houses that are afraid of Beadles and Constables,
I should not conceive a worse opinion of him then of that Holy Marchioness who
resorts the same places to gain souls to our Lord; and I should cry out to any
one that judged rashly, Do not mistake him, he is a Physician visiting his
patients. When he comes hither, we will see if for matter of chastity, your
actions may receive any such favorable interpretations, and if there be no
means of revenge for the ill same you have aspersed him with; yet be
confident, Sir, all this shall be done with the respect which is due to you:
and, if it be not possible to make an Elogium of your countenance, without
writing a Romanza more fabulous then the Rules of Poetry will permit, I promise
you Panegyricks from me, and Odes from him, in commendation of your other
virtues that are not controverted, and of which I am no less a believer then
truly,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jun. 25. 1640.
LETTER XXVII. To My Lord the Duke of Grammont, Marshall of France.
My Lord,
YOur goodness to my Nephew, is a peculiar obligation to my self; and I resent
it with all the apprehensions of gratitude that can enter into the soul of an
honest man: but to return you the thanks you merit, is that which I dare not
undertake: and I should have need of better words then my own, to do it as I
would. In time past, those trifling words have been happy enough not to
displease you, and you have done me the honor to declare, they sometimes spent
your spare hours with delight: But, my Lord, as that was a good fortune I was
little worthy of, and so I have little title to promise my self the continuance
of it. You are not obliged for my sake, to employ the acuteness of your wit
always sparingly, and use your strength by halfes. Courtesies are not to be
exacted like debts, and if you did me a favor when you made any account of me,
you now do but justice, if you do so no longer. An obscured man, as I am, of no
use in the world, should not aspire to the highest ambition of those that
appear and act in it, I mean to your esteem, my Lord, and having only prayers
to offer up, for the happy success of your great enterprises, it ought to
suffice me, if you but pity my feeble passion, and suffer me to style my self
as long as I live, withal kind of respect,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Jan. 14. 1645.
LETTER XXVIII. To my Lord the Duke of Rohan.
My Lord,
YOu could not send your Decree to a person better persuaded of your cause then
my self, nor more passionate to your service. I was much rejoiced at the report
that ran of it: but you were pleased to give me a more peculiar relation of
it that my second joy might have something in it more sensible and noble then
my first. In doing me the honor hereby of seperating me from the people, you
desire I should see that though I am not one of your judges, I am one of those
of whose voice you account, and whose opinion you do not contemn. At first, my
Lord, and without deliberation my vote was for you. I judged you worthy of your
good fortune before it befell you, and seeming a very just man from the first
time I observed you, I did not think it any miracle that you should become
fortunate, or that the choice of a goddess has crowned the Graces of Heaven.
All that has been attempted to trouble the success of this envied election,
has done nothing but bred occasion for you to triumph over envy; and you draw
this advantage from your pains, and contests, that in a possession, which was
too peaceable for so desired a good, there is now near as much splendour as
sweetness, and something that resembles conquest, after your victory in
Parliament. It was such a one, my Lord, that it will seem to some, that the
envy which assailed you, held correspondence with you; since she only made the
onset that she might yield, and set up an Incognito in competition with you, to
give you occasion to interess in your cause, and discover in your Race and
Alliances, more Heroes and great Lords, than came out of the Trojan Horse. When
I consider that brave throng of Illustrious names, that Triumph rather then
that Audience, that day of your glory after those of your good fortune, so much
Grandeur and luster at an hundred leagues distance from me; I confess I am
somewhat ashamed of my solitude and obscurity. But I must tell you further, and
Monsieur Gautier shall pardon me, if he please, that I have a little season of
jealousy against him and his Eloquence, and I wish if it had been possible for
me, to have been your advocate that day, being to that degree as I am,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Apr. 17. 1646.
LETTER XXIX. To Monsieur de Couppeau ville, Abbot of La Victoire.
SIR,
THat you may know your reputation has no limits, and that you are esteemed
both within and without the World; I advertise you, that Monsieur de la -- is
to come to preach you in our desert, and that in a weeks conversation we have
had together, he has told me more things of you then a dozen mistresses that
he left at Paris. The charms of your tongue are sufficiently known, and you
have made great experiments of them: but be assured they never wrought more
powerfully ^hen on the spirit of this Gentleman, you never spoke with more
success then when he heard you, and never dismissed an auditour better edified.
Salust was his first beloved. Quintilian ^ath since taken Salusts place, and
you have succeeded Quintilian. I saw the beginning of a book he is writing of
your ^pophthegms; he has learnt you by heart, and understands you thoroughly:
so that if by any mischance you should be lost, you might be retriv'd in his
^emory. I leave you Sir, to imagine, the pleasure he did me, to concur so
exactly with my resentments, and choose my inclinations for the subject of his
discourse. It lies upon him to give you a further account, when he sees you,
and inform you of the first motions your name excited in a languishing soul,
and the continuance of my joy in the sequel of his relations. He told me
nothing concerning you, but I desired him to repeat it; and mentioned nothing
of vows but what deserved this complement of the Academy Italian, Di gratia
Signor un altra Volta: But particularly the description of the feast, you made
Monsieur Chavigny, was acted over more then once at my most humble
supplication. I found in it I know not what of learned Antiquity. But on your
conscience, Sir, was that Terence which was served in for one of your
sweetmeats, so stuck with perfumes and covered with flowers, absolutely of
your own invention? Is it not an Original of Maecenos, or at least that
gallant man of the following Century, qui deliciarum arbiter, and cujus
eruditus luxus a nostro Cornelio celebratur? How ever it be, we never heard of
such cates before, and you wanted nothing that day, but Dionysius Lambinus for
cook, and Adrian Turnebus for Steward. The piece is thoroughly ingenious, and
much more humane and rational then the desire of that Barbarous Grecian, who
at Alexanders table wished for a Satrapa's head in a dish. This was a
resemblance of the haughtiness of Turkey, before there were any Turks in the
world: and it is an example only fit for Machiavell's imitation, if he had
invited Caesar Borgia to dinner. But you are to deal with a man, who has the
palate of Roman Consuls, and not Asian Princes: and you have accordingly treated
him after the Roman fashion; for it must be confessed, that the appetite of his
mind could not be better represented, by an emblem more spiritual, nor more
gallant then that you had devised. When if you make him a second Entertainment
I have entreated our friends to give you a present from me, and deliver you
some Latin verses, of the last inspiration of my Muses; they are neither the
Ragousts of Scipio, nor the delicacies of Mecaenas: yet they are fruits
transplanted from the nursery of those happy Ages; and I have inserted my
grafts upon their Stocks. You may please to judge of them when you have tasted
them: and continue ever to love me a little, since I will never cease to be
infinitely,

SIR, Your, etc.
Sep. 3. 1642.
LETTER XXX. To Monsieur de Bourzeys, Abbot of Cores.
SIR,
IF I did not know that Generosity takes delight in speaking improperly, and
thinks it owes that which it gives, I should not understand the intentions of
Monsieur your brother. His conversation has dispelled the clouds of my
melancholy: his quittance has melted the stubbornness of my soul: he has
been my intercessour to the Commissary; he has showed me one of your Sermons:
and after all this, he thanks me for all the good turns he has done me, and
will not make me happy without being obliged to me for it. And yet more, Sir,
he would have this conceit of obligation extend even to you, and disturb you
in the middle of your conflicts, that I might receive a complement from that
hand which strikes dead Heresy. Here is enough to satisfy the most ambitious
spirit in the world. One grain of your incense is worth a mass of another,
and nothing is so sweet, even in the sense of wise Antiquity, as the praises
that come from a person that is universally commended. They that contemn the
acclamations of the people, should yet be sensible of these; which cannot be
indifferent to any, but such as honor their sullen humor with the Title of
Stoic Philosophy. For my part, Sir, I declare my self to be none of that
sect, every kind of allurement would not be apt to tempt me: but how is it
possible to abstain from a meat which you have dressed, or resist a passion,
that works its effect by your Language? So that I must needs tell you freely,
I never received more joy then when I received your Letter. Monsieur de la
Thibaudiere was a witness of my trance: Monsieur Chaplain had notice of my
good news: if it were possible I would have divulged it to all the Earth, and
have printed it in all Languages, that all such as can read might know, I am
most passionately,

SIR, Your, etc.
Mar. 3. 1639.
LETTER XXXI. To Monsieur the Abbot of Lavardin.
SIR,
SHall I dare to tell you that I write these lines to you, over-tired with
watchings and melancholy? that I draw them from a brain yet unsettled from
yesterdayes tempest; that I now expect a fifth Fit? It would be injurious to the
worth of the excellentest Letter in the world, and to intimate to you, that it
has not absolutely cured me, or that it leaves any work behind for Physic or
time: it would be too ungrateful a treating me of your favors, so rare and
exquisite, and which have so sensibly obliged me, yet I must allege the
disturbance of my head, to justify the little premeditation I am capable of,
and the negligence of this scrowle. It will assure you, Sir, that there is no
body so possessed with the Devil of a Tertian ague; but the sound of your
words bring him some ease: there are no eyes so greedy of sleep, but love your
Letters better then their rest. I never saw so much beauty, so many ornaments,
and so much riches in one place: and yet in the middle of this fair
abundance, you complain of being poor. Ask God pardon for that sinful word.
It cannot proceed from any thing but either an extreme ambition or an
insatiable avarice: and you put me in mind of him who reckoned the treasuries
of Darius nothing, who slighted the tributes of the Indies and Asia, who did
not think he had enough when he had all. You ought not Sir, to bewail your
poverty: you should reform your excess and profuseness. For my particular you
give me so much, that I have not room enough to receive your benefits: and
they are so unfit for me that I dare not touch them with profane hands. I make
a conscience of appropriating things so high and disproportionable to my
meandness. I have no right to receive them, unless you have power to force me
to it, unless you compel my humility as the Pope did that of father Lugo, who
would not have accepted the Purple but only to avoid excommunication. What ever
it be, Sir, and whatsoever accident menaces good fortunes, I hope to preserve
the Principle of mine, I mean your favor. And for this, I shall be deficient
neither in passion nor respect; and if Time undeceive you in that counterfeit
Grandee whom you esteem so highly in my person, you shall find at least, an
honest man in the place of him, whom time can never change, and whom
doubtless, you will ever love, since he will eternally be with all his soul,

SIR, Your, etc.
Oct. 8. 1644.
LETTER XXXII. To Monsieur Solomon, Attorney General to the Grand Council.
SIR,
YOu will not be offended, that I value the accessory higher then the
principal, and your Letter then your present. You have sent me a book I do not
much admite, but you have written I know not what that charms me. Pardon the
curiosity of a man, on whom you have made trial of your enchantments; I desire
of you seriously, Where is this innocent and handsome Magic taught? or, if you
please, that subtle and new kind of Rhetoric. In that Country, from whence the
Genus Demonstrativum comes to us, and in the shapes of Cardinal Bentivoglic,
and the father Strada: there is not any mystery taught to attract the soul more
gently, and by more delicate engines. Your civilities are perfumed with an
incense so exquisite and precious, that that which is retailed at Court, is but
a sophisticate Gum in respect of it. In a word, Sir, to express my self
literally, without making use of the figures and Rhetoric I have learned from
you; you employ so much of your own Eloquence in praising mine, that you seem
rather to defy that, then make a complement to me. I have no mind, either to
contest in this, or any thing else with you: I bear too much reverence both to
the Kings servant, and his Tongue, and am too sensible of the advantage he has
over me; who the last year persuaded what he would, and whom I hearkened to
with delight, when he gave his answers upon two hundred questions that were
proposed him. I am resolved to hear and applaud as long as I live, to give
place and yield to you as much as you please: for it were better, I should
pass for one of your Paradoxes, than, with words so unequal to yours, attempt
to confute you to my own confusion. Why should I perplexe my self to resist a
strength which is nothing but gentleness, and can do nothing but good? I must
patiently endure my happiness. In Egypt they do not cast up banks against
that beneficial violence, which breaks in to enrich the Country that receives
it: Be pleas d therefore to continue your pleasing excesses, and over-presse me
with an infinity of favors. I shall be glorious in those precious ruins:
write excellent things to me still whilst I only return an answer to them in
the bare protestation, which I shall make you, to be ever passionately,

SIR, Your, etc.
Apr. 18. 1645.
LETTER XXXIII. To Monsieur Ferret, Secretary to the late Duke of Weymar.
SIR,
I Have been slow in answering your eloquent Letter, but the reason is because
I have ruminated and meditated upon its Eloquence a long time. There are
enchanted papers as well as Castles, and if I have forgot my self amongst your
excellent things, do not esteem it sloth, but rather an ecstasy and
ravishment. That which you have written to me, does honor to the memory of
your Prince, and extolls his judgment after his death. I perceive by that, he
understood how to choose heads and distinguish of men: that he was as knowing
in pens as swords; that his Secretaries did not second him less gallantly in
his Closet, then his Colonells in the field. But do not think you shall be
rid of me so, in showing me you were worthy to be the Duke of Weymar's
Secretary: you promised me more, that you would be his Historiographer for my
sake, and I expect the Memoires I requested of you. In the mean time, Sir, I
thank you for the Sermons you have taken the pains to send me, and beseech you
to assure the honest Heretic that preached them, that I always extremely
honor and esteem him. There is more then one Right Reverend, and one Regent
Master amongst us, that I should be very glad our Church could truck for so
deserving an enemy. Not that we want famous persons, but I could wish there
were none famous in the world but who were ours; and it troubles me, I am
forced to commend a valor that makes war upon us. It is most certain, I
cannot withhold from praising that Monsieur Daille, yea in the presence of the
Jesuits my spiritual fathers, and the Capuchins my dear friends. I every day
envy him your Party, and sometimes I tell him, though he can hardly hear me
where he is, Cum talis fis, utinam noster esses? Will you be so faithful as to
carry him this amorous sigh from me? it makes its addresses also to you who
very well merit our desires; and I beseech you, receive it with my protestation
to be always in sincerity,

SIR, Your, etc.
Aug. 8. 1644.
LETTER XXXIV. To Monsieur de Blassac Mere.
SIR,
YOu are too good in pitying my solitude, and awaking me out of my drouziness
by a name so dear to me as yours. I was ravished to find it at the end of those
curious lines that preceded it: curious, indeed, if ever I read any; for
without any design to irritate the goddess of flowers, or the god of light, I
maintain there can be nothing more gloriously enamelled nor more radiant then
what you write. But from whence do you gather all these riches? You make but
few journyes into the Latin Country, and very rarely in to Greece? Without
doubt you take all these rich materials of the Universal Idea of things: your
soul is naturally instructed and disciplined, and you become learned in the
same manner as the first Inventours of Arts and Sciences. I am confident, that
excellent man you tell me of, is of my opinion, and that nights conversation
you two had togerher in the walls of Saint Germans, showed him, that common
understanding well-managed can outstrip Philosophy, and that there was just
occasion for a Dialogue, where it may be, he had provided a Lecture. I
exceedingly approve the eloquent homages you do him in your Letter to him? I
admire the high things, you speak concerning the superiority of his wit: and
that silver Collar which you promise to wear as the badge of your servitude,
is a rare piece in my conceit. I very much esteem, Sir, the good Counsels you
have given to our Monsieut de la -- if he resolve to follow them, no heart can
escape him, and we shall see as many Chlorises and Phillises as he can catch in
his nets. O the gallant Inamorato, and youthful Doctor of Love? When shall I
make up the third in your society? It cannot be till you both come hither; for
in the consideration I am, good fortune must come seek me, and cast her self
into my arms. In the mean time, I beseech you continue your hearty love to me,
if you will have me live with any comfortably in expectation of you, and
believe me ever, I beseech you,

SIR, Your, etc.
Oct. 1. 1643.
LETTER XXXV. To the same.
SIR,
YOu did not allow me time to expect the good which I desired. Almost at the
same instant that I wished for manna from Sedan, I saw it rain in my desert:
and the cloud broke upon the banks of Charante, when I thought the vapor began
but to exhale from the streams of Meuse. Yet so rare a present is not the
principal part of the benefit I have received: the spirit with which you
animated it, is something, more exquisite then the gift: I do less value your
nonesuch then your eloquence: and contrary to the ordinary course, words are
here of more worth then things. Give me leave therefore Sir, to renew my old
Questions to you and to demand, What God has inspired you with these eloquent
words; who has revealed Rhetoric to you? on what hill have you slept, and
what laurel have you eaten? Or have you lighted upon the thoughts of those
Philosophers, and Orators, whose books you never read? Certainly your souls
have seen and discoursed with one another in the other world, before yours came
into this. You must have conferred together in the Closet, from whence
celestial originalls, and the first forms of things do issue, for your
acquaintance with them must come from a farther place then mine. If it be so,
me thinks you have lately put your self to a superfluou^ expense. What will you
do with that perpetual whistler, that chatters out Porphyries five
Predicables, and that Hackney Grammarian, who betrays Cicero every time he
goes about to translate him to him? Retrench your retinew of those two
unprofitable mouths, and continue to search narrowly within your self, where I
promise you, you will find excellent things. It is betetr to be rich by birth,
then cease to be a beggar by labor: and I esteem an admirable ignorant as you
are, before an ordinary Doctor, such as I know store. But the matter in
Question, has been too long and too often handled. Let us therefore conclude
it with that fair picture, which you have drawn in your Letter: and do you
fancy that young Lady who dispenses good and ill days at her pleasure, and who
without stirring from her mothers house, scatters fire over all France: fancy
her, I say, either coming out of her bed, or from bathing, without a co^^^,
without a nightgown, without lawne, nay without her smock, if you be but
valiant enough to endure such an apparition, and see her as naked as when she
came into the world. On the other side, imagine to your self that Lady who has
the prodigious memory, who is the inventory of several Kingdoms, who groans
under the burden of fashions and gugewes, who has all Medaeaes receipts for
pastes, oils, and essences. To which of these two, think you, would the
inclination of a soul that knew how to choose, run first? before which would a
man of a sound judgment, and good eyes most willingly prostrate himself? There
would be no great scruple in the choice, Sir, and by the same sentence, your
divine cosen and your self have carried your cause: but I am not of opinion
to venture my self any further, though you would lead me. I am extremely
apprehensive of ridiculous designs and adventures; and my gray hairs drive me
from that banquet your good nature invites me to. I leave you then, the
Phoenix, the eighth wonder of the World, the utmost achievement of nature, and
all the rest of the hardwords, of which you would have had me make an Oration,
contenting my self to end this Letter in the simplicity of familiar language,
and telling you acording to my custom, that I am perfectly.

SIR, Your, etc.
Dec. 3. 1642.
THE SECOND BOOK.
LETTER I. To Monsieur Menage.
SIR,
IF your passion be as true as it is eloquent, and kindle as great a flame in
your own breast as it casts luster in your words, with the favor of Socrates,
I am the most happy Lover that ever courted beauteous souls. Within a little
space, I have found a thousand rays of that first, and sovereign Fair, which
all the ancient Philosophy sought after: and you can so well represent what you
happily conceive, that had you given me no more then this picture, I should
have already received too much. But it is not your intention I should only be
happy in figure: you do not design to bedeck me with a new nothing nor make a
largess of false money. Your Colors are solid and your appearances essential:
and without Question you have professed to me the fervency of your love in the
Ornaments of your language, to no other end but that I may see truth is not
always plain and poorly clad, but that she has her feastivalls, and actions
of Ceremony. Can any thing be imagined more gallant and yet more passionate
then this devotion of yours, and those vows which you continually pay, in the
Church where we first saw one another? The secrecy and the solitude which you
fought out to enjoy, apart from witnesses, the paper which Monsieur Chaplain
lent you, obliges me to cry out Honey soit qui mal y pense, and advertize the
profane people, that virtue wears sometimes the countenance of vice, and our
Muses cease not to be chaste, though they are voluptuous. But what shall I say
to your shutting the door, and fortifying your self in your chamber that no
body might disturb you in the possession of a dozen of lines? The long, and
greedy kisses, you bestowed on the paper that wore my name, and the other
almost sensual pleasures, to which your spirit, yielded it self, when you read
my testimony of your merit are far from the actions of a dissembler, and can
never possibly seem such to me though I saw them only written, and in the
Relation I received. The fabulous Pilades and Orestes cannot be so lively
acted, nor the two Pythagoreans in the story. For my part, I having some
familiarity with Hermogenes, and a little acquaintance with forms and Ideas,
do maintain there is no Rhetoric but the Amorous, that can speak in that
style: and that is the true, and natural strain of noble affection. Mine being
more strong then handsome, I do not venture to wrappe it up in a delicate
style. I know not how to answer a Relation which I can only admire, and you
shall be contented, if you please with vulgar expressions: but such as I do
warrant every syllable of them in their most Rigorous signification, protesting
to you that I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Nov. 5. 1639.
LETTER II. To the same.
SIR,
YOu are not contented only to bestow your own affection on me, and place me in
your heart: you labor for me elsewhere, and cease not either to acquire or
preserve me illustrious friends Is it true which you write of Monsieur the
Ambassador of Sweden, and am I happy enough to be esteemed by him? I speak
this to you as religiously as if I touched the altars whereon we swore our
friendship: My ambition was dead, but you have restored it to life again, and
I should have the same ecstasies as you, were but my blood as subtle and
spiritful in my veins. Who would not think himself glorious by his esteem, of
whose birth our Age has cause to be proud? He is a Living one, whom the
President Jannin opposed to all the dead Grandees of Antiquity, and had Holland
brought forth no more then this learned head, our dear friend is to blame: she
had deserved alone all the laurells he would dispoil the rest of. For Messieurs
du Puy you cannot believe what good you have done me, in telling me they
always love me, and that my sloth has not forfeited their favor: For though
Monsieur L' Huillier has engaged for me, and undertaken to preserve me in
their remembrance, yet I should not have left all to him, and been deficient in
a duty, which is paid them in all Languages, and from all places of the Earth.
Nevertheless if you please to associate with that admirable Monsieur
l'Huillier, and act jointly in my name, who makes any question but they had
rather hear you, then read me, and that my Agents would be valewed more then
either I or my Letters? Oblige me therefore to let them know, Sir, but this
from your eloquent mouth, that they have not cherished a savage, and that he
who received their favors is a Denizen of the civilized world, capable of
gratitude, and who both knows and is sensible of a benefit bestowed on him. If
it were not almost as hard to bring me to Paris, as to bring Paris hither to
me, I would willingly ease you of this Commission, and be my self the bearer of
my complement. In truth, though Paris have many allurements to make it be
desirable, and though the Majesty of the State be not only contracted there in
the person of the Prince, but diffused into as many parts as there are Courts
of Justice; yet all this greatness, and all this Majesty cannot tempt me to
return thither again. It is not the Louvre that attractes me thither, it is the
Closet of those excellent brothers: and the fortune I seek, has nothing in it
but pure, spiritual, and learned: I am neither Courtier, Lawyer, nor Usurer. I
am ignorant in all knowledge of these professions: but out of all that
ignorance, there is found a certain animal, extremely free and indifferently
reasonable, who has not been disliked by Monsieur the Ambassador of Sweden,
who has formerly been acceptable to Messieurs du Puy, and whom you may now
prize to them, at what rate you please. I do not implore you to enrich the
definition of me, to value me at more then I am worth: I only beseech you not
to forget what really I am master of, and to persuade even your self, (for
with you I have most need of your good offices) that I can love without
interest: that my tenderness is firm and constant, that I am a Violent that
lasts, that is, that I shall be all my life, with passion,

SIR, Your, etc.
Sep. 30. 1639.
LETTER III. To my Lord the Marquess of Montausier, Governor and Lieutenant
General for the King in Saintonge, Angoumois, etc.
My Lord,
SInce it is infinitely beyond my power to return a suitable answer to the
favorable Relations I received from Monsieur Chapelain, what can I do but
despair as to my acknowledgments of so many solid effects and sensible
obligations as I have received from your goodness? You take too much care to
preserve that which you cannot lose: my passion is the most unprofitable thing
you are Master of; it is withal the most assured. The mischief is, that
having reserved nothing of my self when first I made you the gift, I have
nothing now left to offer you; and I very well perceive that at the same time
you intend to show your own power and my disability. I was immediately drained
of my complements, but your favors are inexhaustible: and whosoever shall
understand that your imprisonment in Germany did not bereave you of the means
to oblige me there, will not wonder that your Government of Angoumois affords
you occasions to do it. During your confinement you entertained your solitude
with me in your thoughts: In a time of melancholy you conceived me capable to
divert you, yea my only name and image have served to do it: and as remote as I
was from you, I made such rays of joy stream into your soul as caused an
admirable and glorious spring in it. I preserve my Lord, the bundle of those
excellent flowers it brought forth with much care: I bedeck my self and flatter
my vanity with them. I look upon them as the fairest token of remembrance that
Polybius could have wished from his Scipio, and Paulus Jovius from his
Marquess of Pescara. It is not without some design of Heaven, or some good
presage that this Marquess is come into my mind. Since you are not less brave
then he, it is just you be not less happy. The Victoria Colonna of our age
must complete your felicity, since virtue has begun it. There are no wishes to
be made for you, after these. And though the present I have received from you
be something more obliging then the grant of Exemptions and Protections, or
then the Majoralty of Angoulesme and that of Saints which you have conferred
at my instance; yet I think my self sufficiently grateful, if I prognosticate
with success the possession of a good which you esteem infinitely higher then
all others. It has hitherto been in vain desired: God has refused it to the
prayers and devotion of men: But without doubt, you are elected in the secret
of Providence to be the happy possessour of it. Believe me, my Lord: I have
been inspired more then once, and I tell you in the name of Heaven, and in the
language of my Oracles, Tua tua erit, et sua te propter esse desinet. Tu certe
dignus es quem ipsa Minerva praeferat and virginitati and fibi. I dare not add
any thing to these high words, and cannot better conclude my Letter then with a
Prophecy. I am ever passionately,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Apr. 25. 1645.
LETTER IV. To the same.
My Lord,
YOur remembrance is not a bare token of your civility: You remember me in
terms that persuade me although they come from a suspected place, and that I
know, at Court words are not much used but to disguise intentions. You use them
with greater integrity, and more faithful to the intent of nature. They are
the fair interpreters of your soul; and in your Letters, the representation of
the thing is no other then the thing it self. You love, my Lord, where ever you
have said it; and your word gives me firmer assurance of my good then my
possession of it. I repose confidence in that, who have reason to distrust the
decrees of Jupiter, and in whom so many Oracles have proved liars. I am not a
little proud to find room in a memory, which usually is stored with Orders from
the King, and determinate resolutions of the Council. But I am much more
glorious in being beloved by a man that looks on all Employments, and charges,
beneath him who makes serious profession of Probity and honor, whom the Court
has not been able to effeminate, nor War to exasperate. I think I have said
all in this. For is it not a little miracle to escape without flying, from the
contagion of a corrupted Age; to have more true strength, then custom has
violence; to know how to manage fury, and mix the Man with the Lion; to be
virtuous, rational, wise, amidst the tumult of unchained passions? And in this
place you must, if it please you, pardon me the liberty I am about to take, and
permit me to demand of you, whether you always intend to employ Reason to a
use that seems so contrary to her? Will you ever exercise an Art so mortal to
the quiet of the World? Shall the wise, my Lord, and virtuous be any longer
injurious to the ruin of mankind? It may be, a milder season will succeed
this, and heaven may be reconciled to earth; possibly the future reserves some
good days for us, and all our feastivalls are not extinct: In case it should
be so, you will have leisure to let us see you in your government; and that is
at least one fruit of the peace which I hope to gather on the bank of our fair
Charante. I do not tell you in her behalf and as her Poet, that the Rhine and
Danow make her jealous: I speak of my own head, that I impatiently expect the
honor of kissing your hands, and am more then any person in the World,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Jan. 7. 1646.
LETTER V. To Monsieur de Puy, Counselor to the King.
SIR,
SInce your books are your mistresses, and I am the cause of an eighteen months
absence (having detained them here so long) I believe you have put up many
unprofitable vows for their return, and they will come to your hands at the
instant you are making imprecations against me; so long a stay from their own
home, and the opinion which they have at Paris, that all on this side the Loire
is Gascon, may have rendered my fidelity suspected to you, and given you some
reason to fear that the Romans had much difficulty to themselves from the
Barbarians. Yet here they are, Sir, as sound and entire as I received them from
Monsieur Girard: and I pr^test I have borne such respect to them, that, had it
been possible, I would not have touched them but with satin fingers. Every
thing that comes to me from you, and that wears the Livery of Monsieur de
Thou, satisfies me immediately of its price and merit: and if I did but see
that mark on an Almanac, or on the works of the Count Vi Ma, I should
restrain my self from terming them pitiful papers. You may judge by this in
what consideration I held your Hubertus Fobietta, and his excellent company?
Since the bastards of Vandalls and Goths, if owned by you, should be treated
honorably by me; you may believe, Sir, that the same warrant did not permit me
to dis-esteem the true and magnanimous Nephews of Remus. Monsieur Menage who
knows my resentments in this particular, and the perfect value I set upon your
virtue and your brothers, will tell you in more Courtly manner, what I only
write you in the style of the village. He will choose out words, which shall not
extenuate as mine do, the greatness of my passion and gratitude. If there be
any necessity of it, he shall bind himself by oath to you; he is good, and my
friend enough to do it, that I am not less then he,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jul. 15. 1642.
LETTER VI. To Monsieur the President de Nesmond.
Sir, my dear Cosen,
I Am so good a husband of that portion I conceive I have in your favor, that
I would not willingly ever touch it; and had rather pass for a bad friend, then
make a custom of recommending suits to you. But discretion must not be so
scrupulous as to violate Society, and one may suspend the rigor of his
principles without forfeiting the reputation of constancy. I thought I was
obliged to offer that to Monsieur Couvrelles which I had refused to an infinite
number of Suitours, and I have entreated him to deliver you this Letter from
me, to the end an action not usual with me, might be a token to you of his
extraordinary virtue. He is a Gentleman, whose noble extraction has been
improved with excellent education, he understands his own profession, and that
of other men too. And although Politeness and Purity do seldom meet together,
yet he has both the knowledge of the Court with the innocence of the Country.
I have heard him commended by the greatest persons of this Kingdom, and I make
no Question but you will be one of his illustrious approvers: after you have
had an hours entertainment of his discourse. I most humbly beseech you, Sir, to
do him this favor; and dismiss him back to us as soon as you can, with the
satisfaction he promises himself from your justice. He is one of those that
civilize our Barbarism and represent us your great world: so that consequently
conceiving my self interessed in my own particular in the supplication I have
made to you, I redouble it in this place with a little fervency, and protest to
you with much truth, that no man can be more then I my self,

Sir, Your, etc.
May. 10. 1638.
LETTER VII. To the Same.
SIR,
Whatever infirmity it is that confines me here, it is only Madam Desloges
power that withholds me from causing my self to be conveyed to Paris, to be her
solicitour there to you: But she will not employ all the right she has over
me, and whereas she may command me a journey, she is contented to desire a
Letter from me. I have granted it to her, as a favor which she does me, or I
rather which I do my self: and I write it to you with as much concernment, as
if my own good fortune depended on the success she promises her self from your
justice. So the thing has changed its nature: it is not her business I
recommend to you: but my own interests which I put into your hands, and
prosecute in another name. I account it superfluous, Sir, to tell you at this
time, of a virtue the most acknowledged and celebrated in the World. It would
not only be a st^fling of a great subject in too close a Room, and bringing the
Genus Demonstrativum to a strait, but it would look as if had a design to mix
some thing of ascititious in a cause which I esteem wholly my own, and as it I
had a mind to be little beholding to you, when I make many importune instances
and allegations. I have not any such cunning design I should be very loath to
diminish the worth of your benefit by the reflection on any other merit. But on
the contrary I declare to you, that of the many obligations I have to you both
of new and ancient date, this will be the most considerable beyond compare;
Whereof I shall be more sensible and for which, principally you shall be
entitled My Benefactour, as I all my life time will profess my self,

Sir, my dear Cosen, Your, etc.
Aug. 15. 1639.
LETTER VIII. To the same
Sir, my dear Cosen,
YOu have obliged me with so much goodness in the affairs of others, that I
cannot doubt your assistance in my dearest and most sensible interests. It is
true, I am ashamed that I never come before you but with the countenance of a
suppliant, and that I never write any thing but b^gging Letters. I would at
least once in my life, offer you my devoirs more nobly, and without blemish to
the purity of my passion by this troublesome mixture of business that
accompanies it. But on the other side, me thinks, it would have something of
Pride in it, to be unwilling to owe you much; and your protection is so gentle
that I am not troubled to be more yours every day, by some new title which you
acquire over me. Whom should we invoke in our calamities but him that
effectually hearkens to us? and to whom shall we address our prayers, but to a
power that is beneficent to all? but to the tutelar Saint of our Province, and
our peculiar Protector? Preserve us therefore Sir, from the dreadful
harrasses of Barretry that menace us. Which after it has defrauded us of what
our lawful right was not strong enough to maintain, would now snatch that
from us which the remorse of our judges has left us. I do not accuse their
integrity, though I cannot commend their judgment, I only say, to clear them,
that oftentimes falsehood has a better appearance then truth. I see very
evidently the fictions of Lawyers are more dangerous then those of Poets, and
the Sophisms of Normandy harder to resolve then those of the Latin Country. If
you pleased but to discourse upon this matter with any of our Commissioners, I
make no question but being inspired by your words he would receive a new spirit
for the good of our business, and the effect of his inspiration be immediately
infused on all his Associates. The reverence of your virtue, would make them
consider more exactly the goodness of our cause, you --, and will be the chief
Author of the consolation we expect. I conjure you, to do us this favor, and
believe me always,

Sir, my dear Cosen, Your, etc.
Nov. 20. 1640.
LETTER IX. To Monsieur de la Nauve, a member of Parliament in the Court of
Enquiries.
SIR,
HItherto I have solicited you in favor of my friends, and never for my
self: At this time I must do it for one that is nearer to me then my self, and
I recommend something more then my own cause, since it is that of Monsieur
Chapelain. I draw so much advantage from his friendship, and so much profit
from his example, that if I have any comfort in solitude, or any goodness in a
wicked age, I owe him both. He made me a Philosopher, and he detaines me from
being a savage. I cannot be indebted to him higher then that, nor tell you more
of him after I have said, he alone is my Socrates, Aristides, and my Phocion. I
beg justice of you in the name of those three, concentred together in this one:
In the name of virtue injured in his person: in the name of all civil men
interested in his cause for the sake of an honesty so pure and exact, nay so
rigid and scrupulous, that we may with advantage parallel it with those of the
first times. These are high words, I confess: yet they are not sufficient for
my purpose, and my thoughts outgoe them, though my expression be forct to
stop here. That expression which did not dislike the King of Sweden, and made
the Duke of Weymar desire that I should speak of him, does afford me nothing
that contents me, when I should speak of my friend. I find it weak in the
testimony I now give of him, and think I render him this office but
imperfectly, though it be with the utmost of my affection, and with as much
fervency and zeal as I am,

Sir, my dear Cosen, Your, etc.
Sep. 10. 1640. Pardon my precipitation: I had in my Letter forgot a fourth
Grecian, in whose favor I am bound to solicit you: with their permission I
will add, Homer to Socrates, Aristides, and Phocion. You will perceive more in
the verses I have caused to be copied for you, and which I sent lately to
Colummiers, whither Monsieur the Duke of Longueville had carried Monsieur
Chapelain to spend some few days with him.



LETTER X. To Monsieur de Morin, Counselor to the King in the Court of the
Edict of Guyenne.
SIR,
THere is a certain Spirit of Barretry and a she devil of Lawsuits which fills
the world with disorders. The Poets were overseen in not reckoning her among
their Harpuies and Furies: they ought to have made her one of their mischeivous
deityes, and should have given her terrible Talons, and armed her with Torches
and Serpents. You know, Sir, this enemy of humane quiet, has tormented our
friend a long time: but, it may be, you do not know that she will torment him
eternally, unless you compassionate his miseries, and become his absolute
Redeemer. I can neither doubt of your affection to your friends, nor your
influence over the minds of the judges: I have had too particular experiences
of them, and Suitours have formerly given me thanks for carrying the causes I
have recommended to you. That which troubles me a little, is an apprehension
lest my Letter should not find you at Bourdeaux, and that we should by your
absence lose the advantages your goodness makes me hope. Yet on the other
side, this apprehension cannot make any deep impression for there is some
probability that at least in the middle of February, or the Latter end of
winter, your Campaign may be ended. It has lasted longer then those of any of
our Generals: and unless you mean to pass in the Hall for one that has left
the Bar, there is no question but you will be by that time returned to resume
your long robe. If it be so, our cause will be better by half: for though we
have many contrivances and Engines, yet what use are they of, without an
ingineer that understands how to manage them? I conjure you to be the spirit to
animate and infuse heat to the rest, and do me the favor to believe that you
shall never oblige a Suppliant more of readier gratitude, nor more truly then
my self,

SIR, Your, etc.
Feb. 14 1641.
LETTER XI. To Monsieur de Monrave, first President of the Parliament of
Toulouse.
SIR,
DId not friendship justify whatsoever is her own action, I should this day be
guilty of a strange error, and it would seem a sort of riddle; that one that
was recommended to you by Monsieur Maynard should now recommend Monsieur
Maynard to you: for his first complement it would be (if taken literally) a
very peremptory piece of extravagance, the History of Tholoze would record my
address to the Prince of the Senate, but not much to my commendation, and
those which treat of the doctrine of Manners would quote it in the Chapter of
Good-Carriage as a prodigy newly happened in the rational world. This would be
the consequence, Sir, were my action measured by the rules of common Morality:
But according to the priviledg^s which are granted to us by a more sublime
Philosophy, conceiving my self dispensed with from the rigor of formalities,
and licensed to fall immediately upon the point, I do not see any more
remarkable, nor that concerns me more then this we now treated of: And since I
find my own interest involved with that of my friend, I most humbly beseech
your allowance in this particular, that being moved by a natural principle,
and without further deliberation, I may pay what I owe my self. I will not
prejudice your time of public audiences with my addresses. You shall be
suffered to act the God on Earth, losing my self in the crowd of affairs
which ascend with you into the Tribunal. I shall patiently awaite your
descent: and not engage my self in the throng of Suppliants, or expose my
weakeness to those popular tides and tempests which I so much dread. A man
accustomed to serenity who is tro^bled at the least view of any commotion, will
solicit you, if you please somewhat more conveniently. I will choose some
propitious and favorable hour: and could I upon some day of rest slip into
your gardens under the robes of Monsieur the Bishop of Vtica, I do not think
you would be strong enough, though you have all the fortitude of Cato and
Phocion, to resist what I would procure him to tell you in favor of our cause.
This worthy Prelate was formerly my sword and buckler in the Kingdom of Scotus
and Albertus Magnus: and if my name is yet remaining in the nature of things
after so many conspiracies against it, and so many designs framed to surpress
it, a great part of the obligation is due to him. From whence I conclude that
he seldom speaks but he persuades: for if he have for my sake, tamed the most
savadge Doctors of Christendom, the Phalarisses and Dionysiusses of the
Schools, it is probable he will not have much difficulty to recommend a person
effectually to you who already is in some favor with you, and an intercessour
from the Muses to their Apollo. When I call you by that name; I conceive I
speak most appositely: you inherit it from Father to Son, and it is not a new
title, that you have brought into your house. Oracles have ever been delivered
from thence by two different Divinities, and I do not look upon it only as a
Vein of Purple, but also as a Nursery of Lawrells. Upon my conscience, Sir,
and if I have any skill in Laurels, those which I saw by Monsieur Maynards
means are the most lively and verdant, and goodliest to weave into Chaplets,
that have this long time been gathered on the Latin hills. But is it possible
that Monsieur your Father, that is a Frenchman of this latter Century writ
things so pure and Roman? Can it come to pass that a Poet of our Age should be
so powerfully possessed with the Genius of Antiquity? Were I not assured that
Virgil was not acquainted with Saint Sernin, and Saint Papoul, I should
attribute that excellent Poem to him, in which there is no Hemistick but bears
the Character of his style; and if he could possibly have lived till this time
till some enchanted Castle of an unknown Island, I should believe he had been
baptized in the year, one thousand six hundred and ten: and affirm that
Virgil being lately converted to the Christian Religion, had made Hymns to the
Images of Toulouse. But we must not ascribe that glory on a Spectre which is
due to a blessed soul, and such as in the place where he now is may preside
over all compositions and studies. We may take him for one of our Patrones both
in prose and verse, and for one of the tutelar Saints of our Art: if he
continue (as it is credible) to love those exercises in the other world, which
were dear to him in this; He will Questionly take part with the Orators and
Poets that are now all in confusion; he will side with the interests of our
public society, that implores either your justice or favor. To this most
powerful recommendation, and request made immediately from Heaven, shall I
dare to annexe my poor and frivolous labors? they are two discourses, not
disapproved at Court, and which you will read perhaps with some delight though
such as I entreat you to look upon only as written at the instance of a friend.
He will present them to you from me with a comment of his own, and beside
relate you the occurrences of the desert where he has been, since your
curiosity does not contemn what passes in it: and when you have seen in what
manner you are celebrated there, and in what veneration I hold your virtue, he
will not fail to give you his testimony of my zeal and respects, and assure
you that I am, and will ever be perfectly all my life,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jan. 7. 1643.
LETTER XII. To Monsieur Huillier, Counselor to the KING, etc.
SIR,
I Will take some other opportunity to commend your eloquence; but what you
write me of the fourteenth of March, is so affectionate and obliging that at
this time I can only praise your goodness. You draw glory from an adventure
which is much more glorious for me then you. The Lady that treated you as my
favorite in the walks of Luxembourge has done me an honor in which you have
so small a share, that it was humility in you not to have rejected her
Complement. I receive it of her, as a favor addressed directly unto me, and
which so pleasingly tickles my vanity, that if I were at Paris, I would
entreat you to carry me to her to thank her for it. I cannot be known to the
world by a definition that delights me more then this, This is he that is so
great a Lover and admirer of Monsieur l' Huillier. What a goodly property is
this to distinguish me from an infinite number of writers of scurvy prose, and
bad verse, as well as I! Do not mistrust the verity of my words; for were I of
worth enough, to recommend men by the passion I have for them, or if I durst
give attestations of their virtue as Justus Lipsius used to do; after I had
treated you with many magnificent superlatives, I would inform all present and
all to come, that you are one of my dearest and most violent inclinations; that
I am the rival, but a very zealous one, of those blessed Chaplains, Menages,
etc. who possess you in my absence. That last word enforces a sigh from me.
Why should we grow old in a friendship altogether abstracted and separated from
matter? Without any sensible society, and animated by word of mouth? without
hope to see one another again until the resurrection? ever remote above ten
days journey? For less cause then this, the honestest among the Poets have
made imprecations against Fate, and railed at destiny: But we must not add
blasphemy to our bad fortune. I will comfort my self with your Letter, for the
happiness I am deprived of in the loss of your conversation, and will wish you
more such adventures as those in Luxembourge, that from time to time some fair
tongue may advertise you that I am more then any person in the World,

SIR, Your, etc.
Apr. 3. 1644.
LETTER XIII. To Monsieur de Gomberville.
SIR,
THe Holy Scripture calls Death the Kingdom of Silence, and the Land of
Oblivion. Let us evidence that we are not yet of that Region. Let us make use
of our faculty of speaking, and the convenience of a post, at least, once in
ten years. Let there appear some sign of Life in our friendship: either by a
little motion of the heart, or by half a word of remembrance in an old
Formula, to ease the pains of Rhetoric; or by that ancient and famous Si
vales been est, ego quidem valeo. The only advantage I have of you, is, that I
have given you the onset, for I am sure you wish me well: and God forbid I
should ever reckon your good will, or indeed any thing of yours in the number
of things corruptible. Length of time has no rust that can waste the affection
of Philosophers: those people go strait to eternity and perfection; and
particularly you, Sir, who continually dive into the chiefest and profoundest
Ideas; and purge things from all the impurities and defects that attend them.
Since you can make finer worlds, and better then that we behold, without doubt
you have in your self the principle of that perfection, which you communicate
to your matter. There is no probability, that the father of Demy-gods is
subject to humane infirmities, or that you want generosity after you have
bestowed so much on Polexander, Phelismond, and many more absolutely believe
the truth of this Article, that I made no scruple to promise your favor to the
Cavalier that delivers you this Letter, upon the assurance I have, that it is a
gage which he will find where I left it, and which you have kept securely for
me after so many years. Thus they lived in the golden Age, and I beseech you to
believe, that with all the franknesse and sincerity of that Age, I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Sep. 4. 1643.
LETTER XIV. To Monsieur Arnould Abbot of Saint Nicholas.
SIR,
FAther Narni is not now at Paris, and you have continual respondence at Rome:
I believe therefore, I may without presumption accept the book which you offer
me with so much civility. Our friend has writ the express terms, and way you
took to do it: which I find so generous and obliging, that though the present
be very rich in it self, yet I do not esteem it more than them. I look upon
them as a liberality more your own then the first. They make me remember with
delight the first charms you used to win my heart: and amidst the lightning
and thunder of the Apostolical Preacher, me thinks, I behold again the
sweetness and serenity of your countenance. Yet this is but a faint
representation of the things which I have lost: I am deprived of an infinity of
happinesses by my remoteness from your presence: but withal I very well
understand the wretchedness of my condition, and the greatness of my losses.
Nothing is able to comfort me for them but the honor I have of your love, and
the favor you will do me, if you please, to believe me with all my soul,

SIR, Your, etc.
May. 13. 1639.
LETTER XV. To the same.
SIR,
YOU are always either doing or procuring me good: you intercede for me, when
you do not give; and my riches flow from your goodness, either as from their
fountain or in their channel: I call those things riches which you sent me
from Rome, because I now know no other. My soul being cured of ambition, and
having never so much as been sick of avarice, neither the employments nor
dignities of your world can tempt me in the desert: I am no way pregnable but
by the spirit, and covetous only or goods purely spiritual. So that I judge I
have received more grace from Monsieur the Cardinal Bentivoglio in the clause
of a Letter, then he could have done me by a load of Bulls, though the ring of
the Fisher had been the Seal of them. How dextrous is this Prince in winning
men! how learned in the art of obliging! what delight there is in presenting
him! It is a way to see him do miracles, to make him change the smallest and
vilest things that are offered him, into great and precious. Upon reading the
words he has written to you concerning me, me thinks, Sir, I am no more my
self. I believe I am one of Augustus Court, and my verses are as vigorous as
those of Virgil; I imagine I have been crowned in the Capitol, I know not how
many Ages before Petrarch received that honor. In the ecstasy I am transported
to, by so high a Generosity, and which has made so low a descent, it is
impossible to grow higher without running into extravagance. And that is done
already, unless you please to style that Enthusiasme, which they who speak
properly would call Frenzy. But supposing there be a reasonable fury, yet the
motions of it not being in their right place, when in a Letter, I intend to
reserve them for my Latin compositions, and a Hymn to the God which has
inspired me. In the mean time, be pleased to be my intercessour to him, and
besides, my security in another place that the person to whom I confess I owe
much, may not doubt upon your word, but that I am very grateful. But you ever
do more then I entreat you: Indeed, you love too nobly; your cares are too
punctual, and your good offices too passionate. How shall I behave my self in
this confusion, into which your generous friendship has cast me? I can only
assure you, Sir, that of all those you love, there is none who reverences your
virtue at that height as I do, nor who is more perfectly then my self,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jul. 20. 1642.
LETTER XVI. To Monsieur Sarran, Counselor to the King in his Court of
Parliament.
SIR,
I Conceive my self injured by your excess of modesty, and I look upon your
humility as bad usage of me. Indeed you treat me too much after the fashion of
the Country, in demanding the causes of our new acquaintance with so much
reasoning and curiosity. Though I am a villager, I am not so scarce of
intelligence, but I know some thing from time to time, and have a little
commerce with the world. At least I can be instructed by common fame; she flies
hither sometimes and brings us the names of the Gallant, Wise, and Learned
which the world esteems. You are, Sir, one of those illustrious ones, whom I
know, by report of the public voice, and by a testimony that never flatters.
And although Monsieur de Morin were nothing to you, and you were not the great
confident of the great Salmasius, yet you have parts essentially your own, for
which you very well deserve to be regarded. Your virtue entirely pure, and
separated from all adherences shall ever be a most worthy object of my passion
and respects. You alone can furnish me with commendations then, for more than
one Senator, and to make above one Elogium; and do you think it strange yet I
should account highly of you? To be Priest to severe Themis, and yet not omit
sacrificing to the Graces, who are less rigid; to receive equal benedictions
from the Catholic people, and the Hugue not nation: not to be less Grecian or
Roman then French, and to be able to deliver your opinion both among the
Areopagites and the fathers Conscript, with the same facility as in the Court
of the Edict; Is all this, Sir, but a trifle in the barbarism of these latter
ages? Are not these qualities that ought to oblige me to se^k your friendship,
and to offer you a little present, to gain my self the possession of a very
great happiness? It is not necessary to speak disadvantagiously to you of my
present estate. I will not by undeceiving you, rob my self of the fruit I
gather by your error. I will only tell you, as to that amity which I sought,
that it was long ago in my wishes, and I shall be no unjust possessour of it,
if it be sufficient to be as I am with all my soul,

SIR, Your, etc.
Oct. 20. 1644.
LETTER XVII. To Monsieur the President Maynard, Counselor to the King.
SIR,
MEnelaus was contented with the declaration of Greece in his favor; But our
friend of Quercey, looks for more. He conceives all the Earth be concerned in
the accusation which he charges on his wife; certainly, he is much mistaken,
and is not thoroughly acquainted with mankind. Men jest at misfortunes of this
nature, in the person of Socrates and Cato, I mean such men as otherwise love
Socrates and Cato very perfectly. They are violences if they be not Tragedies,
for they compel people to laugh, unless some capital crime be involved in
the trick of youth, or there be poison mingled with the love. In such cases,
indeed the business is beyond raillery. The delight of laughter is changed into
detestation and abhorrence; and these two things, as Aristotle has noted,
afford no room for good language. Out of these cases the public does not
take the injuries of particulars to heart, one half of the world serves for
pastime to the other; what Titius calls violating the sanctity of the Laws,
and defiling the purity of Marriage, Seia calls it sport and recreation. Yea
she is so confident of the merit of her action that she says it was but
justice to prefer an honest fellow before a Sott. When women delude their
husbands upon the stage, is there any spectatour so severe but applaudes it,
and g^ves his approbation to that which passes? all the people favor the
Malefactresse: there is no body but would save her from the danger she has
fallen into. Yea, even the Fathers Conscript, and Roman Matrons are not of his
side that suffers the injury. I can lead you to honest Quintilian, where you
shall find in the Chapter De Risu one of these sage Romans, seated on the
Tribunal. Ask him what he thinks of a man that is surprised with his
neighbors wife: he will give you no other answer but this, that the injured
person was deficient in point of diligence and labor. You may see by this,
that our frined of Quercy's complaints are such as do not move pity, they are
evils no more bemoaned then the Megrime or toothach. Let him therefore
conceal that which he can discover only to a jeering and unpittying world; and
how just soever his cause be, yet restrain him from getting such a victory, of
which the Garland would dishonor him. I wish him the patience of Marcus
Aurelius, since he has not the good fortune of Brutus. You are acquainted with
Portia and Faustina, and know, Philosophy is a remedy, that cures all kind of
sick persons. I recommend to your care the dispatch to Tholose, the Letter to
Monsieur the Count of Clermont, the copy of the Poem which Monsieur de --. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Sep. 10. 1630.
LETTER XVIII. To the same.
SIR,
I Have watched these five and twenty years; or to speak more Historically,
have slept ill these five and twenty years. I have sought all remedies
imaginable, but have been diligent to no effect. Since Physic has failed me,
I am fallen into superstition. I pray to him whom our Predecessors admitted
into the List of Deities, and who yet has Altars in the works of some of our
modern Poets. I address to him in the language of Tibullus, Huc ades, o bone
Somne, veni dulcissime Semne,
Et mea furtiva lumina claude manu.
Somne veni, en volucres tibi dulcia carmina dicunt,
Invitat placito te vaga lympha sono;
Te violae, te lilia pulchra, tuumque papaver,
Teque vocant plenis Rhetica vina cadis;
Nec tamen ipse venis: quidnam mitissime rerum,
Tam surdum precibus te facit esse meis?
Non Divos violavi ullos scelerisve nefandi
Conscia perpetuus men's mihi tortor adest.
Ille ego sum Phoebi, si nescis, Somne, sacerdos;
Nutriit in tenero me pia Musa sinu;
Et Citharam dedit; Et dulces tibi condere versus
Jam meditor propere jam modo, Somne, veni.
Ni properas lethi sopor ingruit, et mea saevus
Lumina perpetua claudere nocte parat.
Ergo, age, Somne, gradum celera, ne fama vagetur
Immeritum culpa me periisse tua,
Nam si nulla meae tangit te cura salutis,
At parcas famae, si sapis, ipse tuae.
And after that, in the language of Petrarch,
O Sonno, o de la quieta; humida, ombrosa,
Notte placido figlio, o de mortali
Egri conforto oblio dolce de mali
Si gravi, on do you la vita aspra e noiosa,
Succori al core homar, che langue, e posa
Non lave, e queste membra stanche e frali
Solleva: a me to invola, o Sonno, e l'ali
Tue brune soura me distendi e posa
Ou e'l silentio, che'l di fugge, e 'l lume?
E lievi sogni, che con non secure
Vestigia di seguirti han per costume?
Lasso, che noan ti chiamo, e queste oscure
E gelide ombre inean lusingo: o piume
D' asprezza colme, o notti acerbe e dure,


In English thus, Sweet Sleep, thou pleasing Son of quiet night,
The sick man's ease, the joylesse man's delight,
Afford my wearied heart thy timely aid,
And supple limbs thy want has useless made:
Come with thy powerful Rod, come touch my head,
And thy soft wings over all my body spread.
Where is sweet silence fled that shuns the day,
And gentle dreams which thy commands obey?
O cruel nights! Deaf sleep, in vain, in vain
I sing, and flatter thee to charm my pain!


You see by the conclusion of this Sonnet, that I invoke, but am not heard:
that he who has been called the gentlest of all the gods, is ever cruel to
me, and that he perpetually rejects my prayers and my devotion. He will not be
persuaded by my words, nor yet by better then mine: He derides both the Latin
and Tuscan I had borrowed from two such rich persons, to endeavor to mollify
him. At all adventures let us make one prayer more to him. Let us try whether
Malherbe's language will succeed better with us then that of Tibulius and
Petrarch. But I must pray, Sir, in your name, for mine is too odious to him.
Oblige the god Somnus, either by an Ode, or a paite of Sonnets, or three
Epigrammes to relent of his cruelty, and deal more favorably then he is wont
with your poor friend. Get him to allow some good hours in the night, for it
would be too much to demand whole nights. Let him pour upon my eyelids at
evenings, one little drop of that precious liquor, in which he plunges my
Laquay over-head and ears. If he will do nothing, and continue peremptory in
his rigor, then you have liberty to alter your style; and to pass from
invocation to blaspheming him. You shall threaten him to degrade him of his
Divinity, to beat down his images, and set fire on his temples; to take away
the Wife Homer gave him, and to grubbe up the Wood which Statius planted for
him; to deprive him of all the pretty names, all the Epithet-Titles, and in
general of all the honors he has received from the Poetical Nation, since
the reign of Orpheus, to that of Monsieur de Grass. I beg this comfort of
you, that I may be revenged, if I cannot otherwise be satisfied: I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Dec. 81. 1645.
LETTER XIX. To the Chloris of Monsieur Maynard.
Madam,
We are indebted to you for the rarest things in the world. Monsieur Maynard
sings them, but it is by means of your inspiration: and it must be
acknowledged that you have either infused new spirits into him, or awakened a
faculty that lay dormant in him. Since he is your Knight, he is become our
Master, and his strength has increased by half, in the last Stanzaes that he
writ. He is raised above the view of France, in the sublimity and lostiness of
his strain: He leaves Italy behind him, I mean the witty and eloquent Italy,
even in the judgment of the eloquent Cardinal Bentivoglio: and it would be the
greatest infelicitie, that ever happened, if he should not win you, with such a
-- as has vanquished a nation victorious over all the rest. Believe my
counsel, Madam, I know assuredly that your reputation has raised jealousy in
the Closets, and diverse Calistaes and Clorindaes are envious of the praises of
Chloris. I lately saw a dispatch from Court which speaks of a Widow in this
Country that gives out, she is Chloris, and swears the amorous stanzaes belong
to her. Give the world, Madam, the satisfaction of a truth which is so
important to you, and silence the tongue of a presumptuous counterfeit. Secure
your glory and praises with speed; and, in a word, take possession of the name
of Cloris by a Solemn act which neither Cloris nor Menander can undo again,
if they would. I wish each of you a long and perfect happiness on condition,
that pleasant life be ever fertile of good Verses, and that the Prophet do not
grow so drowzy in the arms of the Nymph, that he forget to prophecy. He must
utter Oracles according to his custom, and chant his enjoyments as well as his
hopes. But to this he must have your yes, so that I want only your consent to
have your Epithalamium; and in the behalf of all France, I beg a Poem of
you, that cannot be made without you, and profess my self,

MADAM, Your, etc.
Aug. 20. 1643.
LETTER XX. To Monsieur Costar.
SIR,
It is not to do a favor to a virtue not common, to esteem it extraordinarily
as I do. When I praise Mademoiselle de Dampierre, I am just, but not liberal.
The Law of Nations would exact the like duty from me, to the person of a
Spanish Lady in the heat of a proclaimed War. So that you must not take her
upon my testimony: that is too much beneath her merit. But my suffrage must be
added to the other commendations that are due to her, and confess that she is
endowed with modesty and all the other qualities that beget pride in her sex.
She made you a strange request, in desiring you to persuade me to forget that I
had ever seen her Letters in the hands of a Lady that feasted me with them two
hours together. Your way, Sir, to effect this must be by the help of Sorcery:
you cannot make me forget two so happy hours, and so dear, to my remembrance
with less then making me lose my memory. Have you learned either Magic, or
Physic enough to reduce me to that condition? Have you as much as will send me
a disease like that of the ancient Orator, who having known all things forgot
them all to his own name? You see what is the demand of Mademoiselle de
Dampierre. I am confident neither you nor I, are able to do any thing in it. I
shall ever be the same I was, ever steadfast in my judgment and affections,
ever an admirer of Mademoiselle de Dampierre, and the excellent things she
writes, and ever passionately,

SIR, Your, etc.
Apr. 25. 1640.
LETTER XXI. To Madam de Villesavin.
Madam,
When I tender you my duty, I have no other design then to tender it in
intelligible language, and not to pass for a man of the other World before a
person of this. Yet you are so good, you would persuade me that I write you
Letters, and that I am eloquent without any intention of mine to be so. You
profess to admire, Madam, what I believe you could not endure, but out of grace
and indulgence. If so favorable words were not accompanied with more obliging
effects, I should conceive some suspicion they proceeded from the spirit of the
Court, and that in that part of the Kingdom it was their manner of mockery.
But the craftiest way of derision not being the style of truth, and
consequently not yours, I beseech yo^, do not confound me any more by
commendations that amaze me. I might be vain enough not to reject them in
things I did ever pretend to; but what Color can there be, to admit them in
this, where they are no less beyond my ambition, than out of their proper
place? No, Madam, my soul discovers her self to you in the simplicity of her
first thoughts, and you may easily perceive she is not naturally a Rhetorician.
They are my very thoughts that speak to you, and the Art of fine Lang^age has
nothing to do with the passages of my heart. We do not study our passions. I
have not learnt to love either by Greek or Latin, from Aristotle or Cicero: and
though I could not write with any kind of Ornament, yet I should not cease to
protest with a great deal of truth, that I am,

Madam, Your, etc.
Jan. 4. 1641.
LETTER XXII. To Mademoiselle de Scudery.
Madam,
COuld I have obtained one moment's dispensation from my indisposition, I had
told you long since that I have neither humility enough to reject the praises
you bestow on me, nor presumption to assent to them. To believe them with an
Historical faith requires a very strong Imagination; and yet to be offended at
so obliging a Fable would speak an ill nature. The mean herein which I intend
to choose shall not be to your disadvantage. I will consider your excellent
language as purely yours, and not with any reference to my self. Thus they
shall still have their true effect, and I shall ever be convinced by them; that
is, Madam, of the beauties and perfections of your soul; of the Eloquence that
gives those praises, not that to which they are directed. Pardon my
distrustful humor, I cannot believe you are of the same opinion with your
Letter, nor that my Relation to Menander is of that strength you speak of.
Possibly it may move you because you are compassionate of other men's
misfortunes, and your goodness interesses you in all the adventures of
innocence. In this respect, indeed, I may deserve your favor, and your worthy
brother too might justly take me for one of those objects that need his
assistance. He can defend with as much valor as assault, and his bucklers are
no less impenetrable, then his other arms are piercing. The piece of his
which you sent me, me thinks, retains that fatal solidity. The greatest
enemies of shows and Wit-feasts, will not hereafter be able to violate them,
under such a protection. Pleasure shall by his means acquire a good repute,
and by h^s favor we shall be merry without scruple, in spite of the Sad and
the Severe. I could say more to you, if you were desirous to examine me
concerning your book, or take an account of my studies. But this is no place
for Comment, or Preamble: and the noble assemblies which are not ungrateful
will on all sides proclaim so loud the glory of their defender, that it is
probable a voice so weak and remote as mine, would not be observed in the great
shout of so many acclamations. It shall suffice me, therefore, to tell you
without any dress of words, that I am not void of gratitude for so complete
an obligation: and that it being impossible the present I received should be
richer, Monsieur de Scudery has found out an expedient to make it more
acceptable, by entrusting you to send it. With his permission, I thank you with
all my heart, and will ever be, if you please to suffer me,

Madam, Your, etc.
Jul. 25. 1639.
LETTER XXIII. To Monsieur de Villesavin.
SIR,
AS I am not importunate, so I will not be ungrateful. The study of wisdom
which teaches to beg nothing, teaches how we ought to owe; and though it has
taken away my desire of getting, it has not extinguish't my acknowledgment for
benefits when I receive them. You are one of those generous persons, who take
pleasure in obliging: But how grateful soever I am in my heart, I might
appear somewhat too reserved did I any longer conceal how I am engaged to
you: I must at length, Madam, fall to an open publishing of your goodness and
that of your memory. The first expected not my entreaties to recommend my
interests, to Monsieur the Sur-intendant, and the other minded you amongst the
great crowd of the world, that there was a certain Somebody in the desert, not
unworthy your protection. This I know not who has yet some motions of a
rational life left, enough to distinguish his repose from laziness. He is by
some chance or other illuminated still with a bright ray of light, and his
retirement is not altogether his burial. -- Vouchsafe me the honor to believe
it, and that I am ever passionately,

Madam, Your, etc.
Dec. 12. 1639.
LETTER XXIIII. To the same.
Madam,
I Do not strain for fine words to compile you a handsome Letter. Hyprocrisie
has so adulterated all that kind of Merchandise, that I am conscientious of
charging my self with it, and had rather proclaim my good fortune aloud, then
seem to doubt of it by servile complements. Instead of thanking you after a
pitiful fashion, or beseeching you timorously, I tell you, Madam, you cannot
be indifferently generous; you are resolved to take care of a contemplative
person that has none of himself: and you intercede for a bashful man, that
cannot beg; you can persuade pay-Masters to expedition and change their lying
To Morrowes into true To days. I have said much of you, Madam, in a few words:
but what can I say of my self, but this? that instead of all the virtues of the
time present which I could not compass, it shall suffice me with you that I
have one of the time past which I brought into the world at my birth, and to
be, as I am, with all fidelity,

Madam, Your, etc.
Feb. 4. 1639.
LETTER XXV. To the Reverend father Pitard, Provincial of the Jesuits in
Guyenne.
Reverend father,
YOu have done me a great civility in granting the request that was addressed
to you in my name. But because one favor draws on another, I am willing to
believe you will add this second I now beg, to the first which I have already
received, having left the Reverend father du Creux at Angoulesme; for my sake
be pleased to suffer me to enjoy the advantages of his neighborhood and permit
him at convenient times to make a little journey hither. It will be an action
becoming your charity to take some care of so barren and dry a solitude as
mine, and to send your Angels into the desert to comfort such as are weary of
themselves there. I beseech this favor once more of you, out of my mere
necessity of rational commerce, or to say better, of Philosophical
conversation, least perhaps the first word give offense to the Coridons of my
Parish. Such Equivocall words have heretofore pulled great quarrels on my
head, but I think one may speak securely to you, especially in matters so
innocent as these. I am resolved never to meddle any more with such as are
dangerous. Do not fear I will discourse to you of the Intrigues of Princes
Court, or the war betwixt the Barberini, against the Farnesi. I will only
tell you news from Parnassus, (for my diurnall takes notice of none elsewhere)
that the Tragedy of Mauritius has merited the esteem and applause of all the
learned in this province. There is not one of them but says, it is pity so
handsome a Composition should dye within the walls of your College; The
Author is persecuted by an infinite number of people to extort Copyes from
him, and, as ill luck would have it, you have allowed him no Secretary to
transcribe his Originalls: so that the Publication of it, is begged of you by
the general voice; and herein I am but the delegate of the learned nation to
your Reverence, etc. I am,

Reverend father. Your, etc.
Octo. 20. 1642.
LETTER XXVI. To Monsieur de Barreaux.
SIR,
HEre is no discourse since your departure but of you. My father, whom you
elevated into Patriarch Laban, and whom you so elegantly thanked for the
present he bestowed on the world in begetting me, is in continual admiration
of your Eloquence. He protests, those hours he past with you, are the best
part of that age he is now drawing to a period of. Your adopted mother values
her fruitfullness at a lower rate then her fortune, and does so often mention
her son at Court, that she begins to raise jealousy in him of the Country;
for the widow, that holds up so stoutly against Time, and whom you thought not
over-wrinckled, she does with much contentation remember the pleasant rapture
you delivered your service in. It is true, she did not accept it, but yet she
dares not deny, that in the very minute she gave you audience, there came into
her mind a thought much less severe then she usually harbors, and what ever
she says, Si non pertasum thalami, tedaeque fuisset, etc.

I know, these kind of widows do not relish very pleasantly with your
palate, and you are no great approover of fidelity to the dead. But yet what
say you of your virtuous Cosen, according to whose example my sister conformes
her self, and of whom I speak in the Characters of Renowned Ladies?

Et cineres lachrymis rigat, atque accendit amore,
Et tota in mortem fertur, nec jam amplius ullum
Esse diem, vitaeque putat caelestia dona.
Viva tamen superest, ut sanctam diligat umbram
Jgne pio, nudumque colat post funera nomen,
Aut conjux aterna viro, aut aeterna sacerdos.
I say nothing of the Evening Walk, the remembrance of which you are obliged
by oath to consecrate in your verses: Nor do I mention Diana, nor her
Companions; nor the Satyrs that stole them away, nor the green mountain, nor
the Bathes of the Gods, nor the Miroir of the Stars, nor the other pieces of
our walk. You are to write me intelligence from your Muses, and acquit your
self of your Word: yet to make you remember it the better, I am in the mind to
send you some verses, that entreat the performance of it from you. They were
made in the same place of the Meadow, where you promised yours at the setting
Sun, and the god of CHARANTE. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Oct. 12. 1641.
LETTER XXVII. To the Reverend Father d'Estrades, a Divine of the Society of
Jesus, and Superior of the Confessors Cloister in Bourdeaux.
Reverend Father,
Were I happy enough to be near you, our friendship would be one of the
goodliest things in the World. You would render me worthy of it by making me
better then I am. I should reap all the advantages, and you would bear all the
charge; for a little docilenesse and good disposition which I might possibly
contribute to it, you would lay in common a perfect virtue, which is now your
own propriety: For this is it I mean when I call you my perfect friend. And
speaking of friend, pardon the repetition of what I have formerly expressed, I
do not mean a Companion for Commerce or good-fellowship, nor a perpetual
admirer, nor one that punctually pays visits the next morning after he has
received them, nor yet one that can write three answers to a single Letter. I
mean a witness to the conscience, a Physician of secret griefs, a governor in
prosperity, a comforter in declining fortunes. You are all these and something
more: but the misery is, Reverend Father, you being at so great a distance
from me deprives me both of the more and the less: it debars me the practice of
all the good you have done me. I may perhaps think, when I set forth from
hence, to meet you perhaps at Rochel, when some holy necessity has removed you
a hundred leagues from thence. If I travel those hundred leagues to see you,
you, it may be, will give me the slip the same day I arrive there; and
Monsieur the Archbishop of Bourdeaux may come to take you from thence with his
Navy: And yet more, you will go to sanctify the War in AFRICA or ASIA, if
either the Churches good or the KINGS service require it of you. So that this
corragious piety and magnanimous zeal, which you profess, oppose all my good
designs and are the cause that I have no probability to hope for you, but by
the Treaty of --, that is, the restitution of all, that War has usurped from
us. My impatience is to no purpose, we cannot enjoy you sooner: for you, and
peace are two gifts of God, which he will send us together. But when you are
sent, I beseech you, let us be they that shall receive you, and not the
Gascons, nor the Rochellers. After so many journies, and expeditions it is fit
the Crown be the center of your rest, and that its extent circumscribe the Plus
Vltra of your ambition. You cannot choose out a retire of a more lucky Omen,
that will afford you greater serenity and glorious days, or less interrupted
silence to your devout meditations. When this comes to pass, you may easily
believe, so glorious a neighborhood will give me much occasion of pride, and
that I will endeavor my utmost to improve a friendship so beneficial as
yours. The fresh assurances you are pleased to give me of it by words that
speak the zeal of ancient Christianity, are new chains that bind me yet closer
to you, and force me, Reverend Father, but with the delight of those that
receive liberty, to be, if possible, yet more then I was,

Octo. 8. 1639. Your, etc,

LETTER XXVIII. To Monsieur de Voiture, Counselor to the KING, etc.
SIR,
I Am not minded to write you a Letter? I am too religious an observer of our
old wont, and fear to put your civility to too much trouble; For that, per
adventure, might oblige you to another. This scrowle requires no more of you
but your mark without writing or an impression of your Seal, Vt nescio quae
agrestis Musa tuto adeat nostrum illum
Illustrissimum,
Qui Regum solet adversos componere motus.
Qui Gallum, atque Aquilam conciliare potest,
Et Marti dare vincla, and terris pellere diras,
Et Sanctum optatae condere Pacis opus.


If you are nor very confident I love you, honor you, and esteem you
infinitely, you are very ill informed of what passes in my heart, and your
familiar spirit does not give you a faithful account of the things that are
done a hundred leagues from you.

Esto mihi tu Sol testis; tu, Dia Carenta;
Vos Nymphae, Number me Veneres laudare pudicas
Victuri, urbanosque sales, artemque placendi,
Audistis, solidumque altis in rebus acumen,
Et bona vera animi, cum, me dicente, vel ips^
Costardus siluit, facundior ille nepote
Atlantis licet, et Victuri maxima cura
Costardus, etc.
LETTER XXIX. To Monsieur de Lyonne, Counselor to the KING, and Scretary to
my Lord the Cardinal Mazarin.
SIR,
I Am affected by you, without having the honor of being known to be so. I had
no designs of requesting any favor from you, and you have taken pleasure to
oblige me. I but now understand how much I am bound to you, and you forbid me
to testify my acknowledgements. This is not, Sir, the manner of common
goodness, and I confess the rarity of it, has surprised me. I Questioned at
first whether this action were done at Paris or in the fortunate Islands; the
corruption, of the year one thousand six hundred forty four, or the purity of
the Golden Age. However it be, I must not permit you so much advantage over me.
The prohibition you make me is noble and honest, but my obedience to it will
not be so. It seems you would be so highly generous as to make me appear
ungrateful, or as if you had a design to purchase glory with the loss of my
reputation. This is indeed, too much, and your generosity must be measured by
charity and moderation. Accustom your self to magnanimous actions as much as
you please; profess a sublime and difficult virtue; but leave me at least the
easiest and ordinary duties; the last and meanest member of that society
wherein you have thought me fit to be enrolled; I mean, Sir, that of receiving
and oweing thankfully, that which binds the poor as well as the rich, and
whereof I conceive my self able to discharge my self, since the heart is
sufficient to do it. I have one yet good enough to be capable of such a
rational resentment: and if I cannot by my merits warrant the testimony you
have given of me to his Eminence; yet I hope by my passion and respects, to
maintain the happiness I enjoy in your favor, resolving to be perfectly as
long as I live,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jan. 7. 1644.
LETTER XXX. To Monsieur Colletet.
SIR,
I Will neither violate my oath by writing Letters, nor injure our friendship
by returning you no answer. Therefore, if you please receive this in the
Quality of a Ticket, and so I shall acquit my self of what I owe you, without
prejudice to an other obligation. What can I say to that excellent present
which you have sent me? Your Muses have always some new favors for me, and
your Poems are the daily recreations of my mind. But you over-valew the
testimony I have given of them, which expresses my intention as imperfectly, as
it does their merit. Believe it, were I the Apollo of the Poets, and were to
distribute their Chaplets, you should not receive one of the faintest verdure,
or made with the least care. For the Collection you speak of, notwithstanding
all the pains I took, I cannot easily give you satisfaction in it. Since our
Scevolaes dyed, our Abels have been almost ever sick: and if there can be any
other who can purge the Municipall Orators and Poets of their old and scurvy
signification (as I know one that can) who is so grave and serious, that he
would hardly be brought to let his mind stoop so low as matters of joy; your
Collection may then me made without us, or to use the phrase of your Letter,
your body may rove up and down the Country freely, there is none to oppose you.
But I beseech you, do not complain of the smallness of it; the biggest are
usually the worst and we have lately seen that a whole Army of Banditti were
not worth one Company of a Low Country Regiment. I proceed further; I shall
fall unawares into the inconvenience which I counsel you to avoid; at least,
this Billet would be a Giant amongst others of that name, and might hazard to
be reckoned in the number of Letters. That must be carefully declined, and
therefore to take away all likeness and resemblance, I shall choose not to end
with Sir, and your most humble servant, though there are not many gentlemen
whom I esteem more then you, nor any person more your servant then my self,

Jul. 20. 1639.
LETTER XXXI. To Monsieur Conrart, Counselor, and Secretary to the King.
SIR,
THe loveliest solitudes are those about Paris, and you have the happiness to
be a Courtier in the morning and a Hermit after dinner. This is the way not to
be tired with either kind of life, and prevent nauseating by change: for my
part, I am here confined to one of the futhermost corners of the earth, eight
long days journeyes distant from your polite world, and so consequently
reduced to gather a simple satisfaction with my self, which I can almost never
do; or if at any time it is only by conversation with the dead, who yet do but
repeat me over the same things. The condition of Madam Desloges is little
better then mine, and unless it be in her own Closet or her family, she sees
nothing that can please her. But she is more to be commiserated now then any of
the years past. Besides the melancholiness of Limosin she apprehends all the
dangers of Breda, and according to her account it is on her alone the Spaniards
make all their sallies, and shoot into the trenches of the Hollanders. I lately
left her in a fit of these fits of discontent that made her tremble at the
opening of every Letter she received, for fear she should find a son or a
nephew dead in it. Yet in this deplorable estate, she remembered you with
comfort, and you were the subject of one of our longest conferences. You were
read over and over a dozen times. I showed her the description of your
retreat; and she requited me with the sight of other fine things of your
making; and this was our result for you, that there is good sense in Paris as
well as at Athens and Rome, and that it is possible to invent happily and
express those fancies with success, without the help of Greek or Latin. If I
use both of them more then ordinary, I do not think this foreign abundance any
great credit to me; but rather a reproach of my own sterility. It is, in
effect, because I am forced to borrow from others, having exhausted what was my
own; and wanting strength, I have need to lean on something to support me.
However it be, it is no small matter to please you, whether as an Original or
a Copy; and since you assure me that my writings are your most pleasing
divertisements, I fully resolve to be a Scribe still, though there were no
other Reader in the world but your self. So that I intend to fall to work again
this winter, and keep and maintain the authentic Privilege you have obtained
for me, who am always most perfectly,

SIR, Your, etc.
Sep. 18. 1637.
LETTER XXXII. To Monsieur de Souchote.
SIR,
THough I had lost the use of my hands, and had not wherewithal to maintain a
Scribe; and though I had made a second oath, with intention to observe it
better then the first, yet I should not cease to love those persons to whom I
did not write. Your goodness has made you one of that number, and to justify
this you may please but to consult your own memory. Do you remember the day
when I made over my affection to you by a solemn act? it was in the presence
of the God of the Seine, and the Sun of the meadows aux Cleres was witness
to it: you assured me you were contented with that form of gift, and that you
would not desire I should send you any new titles to it by the Carrier or the
Post. This is the reason of my long and obstinate silence, you may term it
laziness as long as you please, but you will injure me if you give it any worse
name; you would derogate from my friendship, if you imagine that it is enclosed
in my Letters, and you mistake one thing for another, if you lay inconstancy to
the charge of a man that is steadfast even to obstinacy. I love and esteem you,
do not question it; and had I as much good fortune as good wishes you should
see I am as zealous in essentialls, as I am cold in ceremonies. For the two
Lists you speak of, your absent friend is author of both one and the other,
and consequently, the complaint you make to him upon occasion of them is more
gallant then reasonable. I had no hand in the distribution of the Copies; and I
believe Monsieur de Campaignole, who was the chief manager of that little
affair, did not think of all my friends. But, I beseech you, what matters it,
that an Almanac out of date, and some scribled sheets of paper were not
presented to you? The author himself in body and soul, his whole Library, all
his Learning, Eloquence and Hyperbolies are yours, that is, I am absolutely,

SIR, Your, etc.
Nov. 15. 1644.
LETTER XXXIII. To Monsieur de Bois-Robert Abbot of Chastillon.
SIR,
YOu are very well informed of what happened here as my Lady Duchess of --
traveled through this province. What ever judgment may be given of it in the
place where you are, and whatsoever interpretation they may lay on a casual
action, I can assure you on my knowledge, that in all that business there was
nothing less then interest of State. It is a pure Hypothesis of that Chapter
of Aristotle's Rhetoricks where the generosity of the young people is opposed to
the circumspection of the old, and honor to reason. Cavaliers will ever be
obsequious to the beauteous sex, and not deliberate of safety or danger when
the question is of serving them. They talk so frequently of the Empire and
Sovereignty of Ladies, and have their heads so full of Romanzaes and strange
adventures that they believe they can atchieve whatsoever was done in the
reign of Amadis: they think they are obliged to follow the mode of Gallantry
though contrary to all the reasons of policy, and that they may at least tell a
suppliant Princess.

Etenim ipsi Dii negare cui nil potuerunt
Hominem me denegare quis posset pati?
You will do me a pleasure to send me word of the consequences of this
business, and believe me ever, I beseech you,

SIR, Your, etc.
Sep. 15. 1640.
LETTER XXXIIII. To the same.
SIR,
I Know very well, you are cured of that sickness which you have walked through
so many provinces, and which has bred me so many disquiets. But my friendship
is not satisfied with that; I would understand that you are confirmed in
health, and that you have recovered your pristine strength. For this purpose I
have entreated Monsieur de -- to survey you curiously when he delivers you this
Letter, and send me word whether your eyes are clear, or your face well
complexioned; But especially, I have desired him not to require any answer from
you, for I would not my curosity should prejudice you nor have you discerned
any secret interest in my passion: reserve all your fine words for discourse at
the fine Court, that takes delight to give you audience Quaeque te imprimis
habet inter instrumenta honestae et eruditae voluptatis. But now concerning
Learning, my sister just now sends me word that you have a Kinswoman writes
books, and that she has received one of her making. According to this rate,
every one of your race is learned as well the females as the males: So that I
must no more value you severally: Nor yet arrest my esteem upon your dear
brother that heroicke Madcappe, that Citizen of I know not how many Kingdoms
and Commonwealths, that Quartermaster General to Alexander, Caesar, and the
rest of the Conquerours, as honest Monsieur de Malherbe used to call him; Et
merito; namque ipse Deus qui far per auras
Jussa Jovis suevit, minus orbem novit utrumque,
Nec Sol plura videt Nerei spacia alta, suisque
Terrarum quicquid Nereus complectitur ulnis,
Ille tuus capit et frater, Populosque, Ducesque,
Totamque augusto rerum sub pectore molem,
Invidia vel test, atque aequo gestat Ibero.


These last words are a granted truth: for a Spaniard speaking to me concerning
him, told me he was so well acq^ainted in Persia that he could tell the sign
of every Inn in it, and that he knew every bush in the Country of the great
Mogul. I have repeated them often since, and am never weary of speaking of you,
and of what --. But I was induced to be pleasant a little, in the description
of that Illustrious Debosht that you might partake of my mirth. You see I
represent him in the style of Marus Varro who mingled prose and verse, and
Greek and Latin together in this manner. He was one of the joviallest fellows
of his time, however our friend -- accuse him for the greatest Pedant that ever
lived. But our friend is too delicate that he cannot endure the miscellany of
Idiomes; no not in the Kyrie and Christ eleeson: though otherwise he be a very
good Catholic. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Nov. 1. 1640.
LETTER XXXV. To Monsieur the Abbot of Beau-regard.
SIR,
I Am glad you are so happily deceived, and that the defluxion into your eyes
has not done you so much mischief as it threatened. You were afraid of an
eternal night, and it has been but an Eclipse of four and twenty hours; You
had bid adieu for ever to that light which was next day to return to you
though Homer heretofore was blind, and Cupid be so still, yet it is not
necessary you should resemble them in this, for without loss of your goodly
Eyes you can make goodly verses, and strike love into either sex. I am one of
those, I protest, whom you have wounded deepest, and you set me in a fire from
the very first minute of our conversation. The World is full of false Friends.
Towns, and Commonwealths are made up of these honest kind of Cheaters, and
into what place soever your Geography can lead me, I am sure I shall not find
what you have brought me hither; I mean affection without interest, a fidelity
without stain, with all the goodness and freedom of the Golden Age. And, to
represent me a more lively picture of that happy Age, instead of Rivers of
milk and honey whereof your Ancestors talked, you have taken a course to send
me mountains of Sugar, and Sweetmeats, and to feed me with Viands which I
value little less then Ambrosia. Indeed I am something fearful of the carriage
of them, by reason of their delicacie, and the rough hands of the Carrier's
servant who never heard any one speak of the Golden Age, nor its delicacies.
But were they all spoiled by the way, I am already extremely obliged to you for
your liberal intention. To remember me before you came to Orleans, and in a
place where you had so agreeable occasions of distraction, was to have placed
me in your soul among the choicest objects of your thoughts, and given me
timely notice that I am unworthy and ungrateful, if I am not all my life,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jun. 10. 1642.
LETTER XXXVI. To Madam de la Chetardue.
Madam, my dear Cosen,
I Will not eat your favors without a testimony of my gratitude. You have
feasted me these four days, and either there are no pleasures in taste, or I
find them in your Cheeses, They are not only Cream, well-Housewifed, but a
quintessence hitherto unknown: they are some I know not what miraculous things
that with a tartness which bites the tongue, afford a sweetness that fills the
mouth. It must needs be that God loves you who has bestowed such a Land on you
as flows with Milk and Honey. He did not heretofore treat the Jews his
favorites better, and these were the Riches of the Golden Age. But in places
where such Riches are to be had, good Cheer should be confined to them,
without seeking after any other kind of abundance. You ought long since to have
put down hunting, and purified your Kitchen; For what a shame is it to live
with Murder and Cruelty, amidst such innocent sustenance? I cannot set too high
a rate on them, nor too much thank you for your Present^ and what ever you
please to say, I cannot think they were the labor of any of your Country
Mopses. Such counterfeit hands know not how to labor in things of that
delicacie. Questionless the Nymphs of Vienna had a hand in them, and it is an
invention of theirs: which you have sent me for a rarity. If this conceit seem
Poetical to you, so is the subject of it too: It might make a piece of a very
good Eclogue, or be drawn into a corner of a Pastoral. But I have never learnt
to rhyme. It is fitter for me to quit this language of Fables, to assure you in
true and serious Prose, I honor your virtue so highly, that though you had
given me nothing, I should have thought my self nevertheless indebted to you
much: And were you not my benefactress, I should not be less, then I am,

Dear Cosen, Your, etc.
Sep. 14. 1639.
LETTER XXXVII. To Monsieur Senne, a Divine of the Church of Saints.
SIR,
I Had need only of two earthen basins, and I have received a whole Closet of
rarities. I desired but enough to supply necessity and simplicity, and you have
added Ornament and superfluity. This profusion is not to be allowed in a man
that every day preaches against luxury: They are exorbitances which would
deserve reformation in any Commonwealth more severe then ours. I speak this
without any manner of aggravation, for you know I have utterly renounced
Hyperbolyes. Neither the Buckler of ACHILLES described by HOMER, nor the other
rich descriptions of the rest of the great Poets, neither the Thesis which the
Father D'orleans formerly dedicated to Monsieur the Cardinal de la Vallette,
not all that ever I saw of greatest variety and History in the world, is so
much as what you have done me the favor to send me. And yet you are pleased to
say notwithstanding, to extenuate the merit of your present, It is but clay.
You who know Tertullian calls clay Sororem nobis materiam, and that Kings and
Emperors are molded out of it: It is not only in Vessels of the like stuff,
as you write to my Niece, that Antiquity offered incense to their gods; but the
gods themselves were made of it, and you remember that verse which says,
Fictilibus crevere deis haec aurea Templa.

I could, if I please, allege Prometheus in Lucians Dialogues to you, and
Agathocles in Ansonius Epigrammes. I have also two passages in Pliny on the
same subject, and three in Pausanias: But let this text of scripture suffice,
if you please, and I will only tell you that by your favor, Thesauros habemus
in vasis fictilibus. Is it not true Sir, that I have altered my custom
strangely, and am not I become a terrible Rapsodist? It is a disease our dear
friend the great Doctor of the short robe has infected me with. He is the
cause that for these six months I have not spoken in the vulgar tongue, and he
has beaten so this gibberish into my brain, that I do not think Petrus Valens
is more of the University then I. The importance is, the ancient innocence is
preserved there still, and the dissimulation of the Court has no admittance. Do
not doubt therefore, I beseech you, but that I am in earnest when I have a
better conceit of my self for your liberality, and when I profess my self,

SIR, Your, etc.
Aug. 10. 1638.
LETTER XXXVIII. To Monsieur de Morin, Counselor to the KING in the Court of
the Edict of Guyenne.
SIR,
AS I would not be accounted ungrateful, so neither would I proclaim my
debaucherie? What shall I do therefore in this strait? I dare not openly name
the present that I have received from you, and let any one know, I have a Load
of Muscadine in my house without hazarding the good reputation of my former
life: I cannot commend your liberality, but I must at the same time accuse my
own intemperance. Some expedient either of Rhetorique or Poetry, which you
please, must be found out to free me of this intricacy. Without mention^ng that
scandalous name of Muscadin, I will say with your leave, it is a present fit
for the Duke of Saxony; it is the Sovereign Remedy of sadness and ill thoughts;
the true Nepenthe Homer sung of; an admirable wash for pale complexions, a
device to make a man valiant in an instant, utter Oracles immediately, speak
unknown languages even to Monsieur Salmasius: In a Word, Sir, I will say it is
a load of Enthusiasm and inspiration which you did me the favor to send me.
But on the otherside, what will our severe and peevish friend say, if he
discover my excesses through these high and magnificent words? What opinion
will your brave and learned ones have of me when they hear I draw up bottles in
Battalia, and they are told my Library is stored with them? It will be to much
purpose, to allege the honest Passerat for doing the same thing: his
authority is not owned out of the College, nor indeed in it by the deba^ched
Students. It is better for me, after my ancient wont, to have recourse to my
old Rome, that never failed me at a pinch: and I confess I should be ruined in
my honor were it not for the example of old Cato, whom I oppose against all
our sober Modernes. You know how dry and stiff his virtue was, yet he sometimes
moystned that drought, and soaked that stiffness. Nay, who knows whether that
iron virtue were not pregnable by so gentle a force? I would not swear it, for
peradventure had Caesar during his abode in Gallia Narbonensis thought of
sending him as good Frontiniack as this which I have received, this surly
honest man might have been sweetened by that excellent wicked one. But to change
our subject; I have at length found out the three pieces I promised you on Ale;
which were strayed among my papers. Do not you think this desertion of my
subject pretty sport? I do, in earnest, intend to be the founder of a new
Proverb: and if I may be believed it shall be said Ale for Frontiniacke, as
well as Copper for Gold. The pieces you see are short, and consequently I have
much more time to drink then you to read. Quem vero nostrum tuo judicio
beatiorem credat Ilotta? Vtrumque, praestantissime Morine, nam et Philosophari,
sed paucis, ut Neoptolemus apud Ennium, et multum bibere amat, ut olim Pater
Eunius.

Francisci Gujeti In Cerevisiam.
Triticei latices, mensis Berealibus apta
Munera, sed Cellis tetra venena meis,
Quae vos sacra tulit tellus, quae numinis irae
Aemula lethaeis pocula finxit aqvis?
Qui vos odit, amat musas, Bacchumque Cyprinque;
Et superos odit, si quis amare potest.
Vos vitiata Ceres temeratis devovet undis,
Nais, et adversis Cynthius horret equis.
Cui sapitis, nihil ille sapit, dignusque suillo
Jure sit, et socios glandis habere sues,
Qui bibit, irato tentabit Apolline carmen,
Arcadicosque dabit rusticus ore sonos.
Hinc Batavi, fumis Cerealibus ebria turba,
Carmina tot Musis inficianda vomunt;
Et miseri placuere sibi, gaudentque prosanas
Frondibus aeternis implicuisse comas.
At deus e Pindo crassae deliria gentis
Ridet, et has poenas impietatis habet;
Ducite damnatos, gens Barbara, ducite succos,
Nectareus nobis proluet ora liquor.
Hugonis Gratii pro Cerevisia.
Humor dulcis aquae, sed igne coctae,
Quam succo Ceres imbuit salubri,
Qui corpus vegetas nec impotente
Commotam furias vapore mentem,
Quo potu fruitur Batava tellus,
Neptuni domus horreumque mundi,
Et quotquot populos mares ab alto
Caeli culmine conspicatur Arctos,
Ipsae te sitiunt novem Sorores,
Nec Permesside proluuntur unda,
Ex quo Graecia Barbaro sub host est,
Nec Bacchi cyathos amant puellae,
Sed Rheni vahalisque temperatos
Almis pastibus hauriunt liquores.
Durae mentis, iners, merumque rus est,
Si quem Basia non movent Secundi,
Et quos Dousa canit parente major
Coelo sidereos rotante cursus,
Et quae spicula Baudio vibrante
Non unum sibi destinant Lycamben,
Et quos dat numeros nihil vetustis
Cedens vatibus Heinsii Thalia.
At me (senti^) larga cum sequatur
Vini copia, frigidique fontes,
Heu Mufae fugiunt, Venite quo^dam
Dilecti latices: Nec esse crudum,
Nec contra decet, ebrium Poetam.
Erycii Puteani De Cerevisia.
Defaecata nunc, quam expectas, Cerevisia est, atque itinerispatiens. Faxo
igitur instructam hac hebdomade cellam habeas. Bina vasa sunt: alterum ejecit
florem, ut fieri solet; alterum sordes tantum, ut non solet. Hoc enim peculiari
nos modo agimus, ut subsidente pinguiori materia, vires liquor diutius servet,
and alatur velut a faece. Scire aves? Testam, poculi instar, sed aperto et
collo et fundo (ejusmodi fere vascula sunt, quibus urbani passerculi nidos suos
and pullos credunt) Testam, inquam, gutture in os dolii immisso, tanquam
infundibulum, statuimus, in quam se foeces bulliendo attollunt nec ejiciuntur.
Cogitur enim e testa in dolium redire spuma, unde surrexerat, and posito velut
fervore densatur ac mitescit, limi instar, humore supernatante. Testa demum
aufertur, vas clauditur, and Cererem velut Bacchum stringit. Non enim Dea hic
Deo cedit, aut in sexu vilior natura est. Isidoru^ sic quidem Cerevisiam quasi
Cereris vim olim definivit ipsumque adeo Germanorum potum Tacitus, hordei
liquorem, in similitudinem vini corruptum. Sed an corruptum? Quod igni
coquitur, corrumpi certe non potest. Deinde bibitur, sapit, nutrit; imo ut
scias vim vini inesse, vincit virum ac deponit. Obiter haec indicare volui, ut
non ingenium tantum utriusque Cerevisiae distingueres, quam mittemus, sed and
usum. Aetatem illa melius feret, quae flori suo incumbit, and substrata fomenta
habet: Altera ante senium magis allubescat. Fruere utraque, nos ama, and vale.

THE THIRD BOOK.
LETTER I. To Monsieur Salmasius.
SIR,
MY admiration is not within your jurisdiction, give me leave to speak of an
extraordinary merit in terms that are not common, and allow as much confidence
to truth as to flattery. Having seen such a multitude of your excellent works,
so many goodly and choice things, I must needs say there is nothing so vast,
and bound-lesse as your learning. I except neither the extent of the Ocean, nor
the depth of the Abyss. I will maintain, that your soul is of another kind
then ours, and you know more then can be comprehended by a humane capacity.
They that think it sufficient to call you a Genius, do not express you in your
full latitude: They omit some thing that is essential, and forget two words
that should attend the first. You are indeed, a gentle and amiable Genius: one
of that charitable order that love and help men; and have as much goodness as
knowledge. You possess the virtues of urbanity in the same degree of
perfection as you do the advantages of wit, whereof I have an eminent instance
in my hands; and I perceive Sir, by the Letter so extremely modest, civil and
obliging which you have favored me with, that the French gentleness and
courtesy has retired with you to the neighborhood of the North, into the
Country and among the Sons of Neptune. You are in all regards the grand enemy
of Barbarism, and always the absolute favorite of those Goddesses, called
Mansuetiores, even to the excluding the graces and Venus; yet I must confess
your sweetness has a pungency in it, and your honey is not without a sting.
The inclination that moves you to do good to all, is nevertheless fatal to
some; you sometimes wage war; and if necessity require it, you do it to the
extremity with all the forces of reason and all the Artillery of Authority. Woe
be to counterfeit Learning, and Error puff up with presumption when they dare
make head against you* As you protect the weak, so you chastise the Tyrants:
and it must be acknowledged that unless you had come in to our assistance,
there would in a short time have been no liberty in a State that has been
hitherto esteemed Aristocraticall and --. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jun. 15. 1643.
LETTER II. To the same.
SIR,
ALI things will be at the best pass in the world, provided you be well, and
that the defluxion your Letter tells me of, be not obstinate in tormenting you.
It would be a strange irregularity, indeed a notorious injustice, if it mistake
the Abstemious for the drinker, and that you with your water and diet-drink
should suffer the punishment which one of my acquaintance has escaped with all
his Sack and Frontiniacke. I beseech God render every one according to his
works! at least that he do not deal with Temperance more severely then with
Excess, and that your designs be no longer interrupted by the surprises of
this vexatious disease, which sometimes opposes the resolutions of the Prince
of Orange. May you give light and ornament to the world for many periods of the
Suns motion. Be not weary in doing good to mankind, and enriching our Age with
the treasures of your wit, instructing them that are now alive, with them that
are yet unborn. You will without question find equity and gratitude, both in
this and future Ages. Rational Learned men, who invoke you in the difficult
tracts of Antiquity, and in the Quicksands and Rocks of History, will not
refuse you their oblations after they have propitiated you with their prayers.
For my part, I owe you more then all the rest, I shall promise you as religious
an acknowledgment as any, but I dare not say any thing that favors of the
profane medley which I have blamed. I will not speak any more of Infinite,
Genius, divine, etc. (they are the words that fell from me in my last Letter,
and your modesty disapproves.) It shall suffice me to tell you in the plain
Language of men, that I am more then any person in the world,

SIR, Your, etc.
Apr. 25. 1644.
LETTER III. To Monsieur John Frederick Gronovius.
SIR,
I Was transported with joy at the opening of your Letter, but upon observation
of the date and that it was written from Paris, I was reduced to a more calm
and serene gladness. This little Abridgement of your Odysseus composed in a
place of security, restored my mind to its former tranquillity, and appeased my
inquietude. For indeed I began to have doubtful apprehensions of you, I was at
the same time afraid of Heaven, Earth, and Sea; that is, of sickness,
imprisonment, and Shipwreck. But now the cloud is dispelled, and if I were one
that committed the faults which I have reproved, or mingled two Religions
together, I should pay my vows to Fortune; I should offer a victime to
Mercury: and give thanks to the other Gods that preside over traveling abroad
and returning, for the conservation of a Head that is so infinitely dear to
me. But we must not withhold our acknowledgments from the author of the mercy.
Let us be grateful to your good Angel, or rather to him that put you in his
custody; and confess, that if you had been minded to pass through Hungary and
make a voyage out of the Christian world, he would have tamed the Barbarians
for your sake, Posuissentque effera Turcae Corda,
Jubente Deo.


But you have done better, not to hazard your self upon such an occasion, and
to be contented with the view of the frontitiers of a Country, wherein you
would not have found many Libraryes. I am of opinion, there are but very few
Turks Rhetoricians or Philosophers: you would hardly have met with any
solution of your doubts amongst a people that hold forth ignorance the
fundamental Article of their Religion. They take the most vulgar operations of
the Mathematics, for Magic, and believe Printing, and Clocks, inventions of
the Devell. So that I extremely approve your stay in Italy, and the desire you
had to understand and observe the deportment of the most rational People of
the world. But why do not you speak of Rome as well as Venice? Do you only
esteem the Nephews of Antenor, and make no account of the sons of Aeneas? I
should think father Strada might merit as much your curiosity, as father
Fulgentio; and you ought not to have slighted the Legitimate heir, or rather
the very soul of Tacitus, to run after the shadow and relics of father
Paul. You make no mention of the Court of the Princes Barbarini, though it is
most certain that all manner of virtue is welcome to that Court, though it
come from Hamborough or beyond the Elbe. The Muses are lodged in that Palace,
and he whom you Gallants call Jupiter Capitolinus may justly add to his titles
of Most good and Most great, those of Most learned and Most generous. He
speaks the Language of Oracles even when he does not speak ex Tripode, and
makes himself familiar with men. And it is possible, had you written that
Elegy ad Romam, which you have written ad Venetias, the good Pope that
understand, the making of verses might have returned you an answer which is
beyond the skill of the Duke --. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Oct. 1. 1640.
LETTER IIII. To Monsieur Rigault Counselor and Master of the Library to his
Majesty.
SIR,
I Confess my sin but do not repent of it: I am the most vain of all men
Living; but how is it possible to be humble with all the glory that you give
me. After such rich tokens of your amity and esteem? commendations bestowed by
you, are in effect, something more glorious then Statues erected by a public
decree and carved by Phidias. When I consider with my self, it is the dear and
last confident of the great President de Thou, who is also my intimate and
perfect friend, you can not believe what advantage I draw from the mere
imagination of so illustrious a society. As often as I think that it is a
Patriot of old Rome, and a Christian of the Primitive Church which whom I
converse, I fancy my self immediately transported back into former ages, and
am sometimes become companion to the Sulpitii or Scevolaes, and at other times
to the Tertullians and Cyprians. That which you have sent me to confirm my
opinion of one of those good fathers, is most worthy both of you and him. And
should he return from the other world himself to give an account of his
thoughts, he could not justify them better. But because they may seem
somewhat harsh and strange, (at least to the nicety of women and ignorance of
children) and appearing in French cast a general fright on all unlatin'd
people, I could wish you had taken the pains to transfuse them out of the
vulgar tongue into the learned, and add this new benefit to all the old
favors which Tertullian has received from you. I could desire too, Sir, (but
in the same manner as Brutus did) that you would give me the Christian which
you once promised me. I mean that Christian of the Heroic times of
Christianity, one of those gluttons of Fasts and Martyrdomes, as your African
would have called them. I should be infinitely obliged to you, if you would
please to dispatch this present to me, and if at the opening of a packet from
Monsieur l'Huillier, I found but three leaves written with your hand, in the
style and vigor of your Prefaces, with this inscription on the front, Rigaltii
Christianus ad Balzacium. Permit that admirable Monsieur l'Huillier to
importune you for it in my absence, and me to burden him with the solicitation
of a business, that lies nearer my heart then you can imagine. Besides his own
strength and power in persuasion, he shall be assisted, if it be necessary with
the last part of my Apologies, to Menander, a volume of my Discourses, two
volumes of Letters ad Atticum, and some other such Records (that is the only
word of Barretry I am Master of) that shall all combine to demand the like debt
from you. When you have paid it, we will talk more civilly. It shall then be a
benefit or a favor, and I shall be glad to be yet more firmly then I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Nov. 27. 1644.
LETTER V. To Monsieur the Abbot of Guyet.
SIR,
YOu entreat me a great benefit to my self when you desire my company. I
understand what advantage a man that has but good ears may gain by it, and I
should have a soul too stubborn and flinty, if it would not be mollified by the
remonstrances you use to me. Though I am one of the most rigid Anchorites that
live in the Desert, I must confess, you have shook the firmness of my vow, and
the society of one of your merit is a violent temptation to incline me to
Apostasy. A solitary life has indeed its charms and delights: But who can
choose but grow lean, when he is brought to that pass as he has no aliment but
his own juice? And how commendable soever the commerce with books be, yet every
thing considered, is it not an unburying of the dead, and oftentimes a
descending into their Sepulchers by deep and melancholy meditation? A man had
almost as good work in the mines. He runs the same fortune, and hazard, and
brings back no better a countenance, nor eyes less sunck in his head. They are
living books that illuminate the mind, without prejudice to the sight, and you
are Sir, one of those excellent and agreeable books. What delight then is in
such volumes as can answer and reply! they save the labor of scrutiny and
choice, by presenting things pure and simple: they have something of more power
and life then reading can possibly be capable of. And though your three great
favorites, Terence, Horace, and Virgil, be my ancient inclinations too, yet I
confess I never accounted them such honest fellows as when I heard them speak
out of your mouth. But what shall I say of the incomparable things I have heard
from your self? What Oracles have you delivered in my presence: or to speak
more plainly, what admirable verses have I seen you make and recite? By your
favor I once had them among my papers, and should have kept them still, if
some curious hand had not pilladg'd my Cabinet. Be pleased to make me a second
present of them, if you desire to have me believe my own not displeasing to
you. Let Monsieur Menage prevail with you; and I shall know you esteem me in
earnest if you send me your Gold for my Copper. After so many famous Wits, once
in my life I ma^e use of the fable of Glancus and Diomedes; but besides this, I
do not offer you any thing fabulous. My protestations are not Poetical, and I
profess a sincere truth, when I assure you, that I am passionately,

SIR, Your, etc.
Oct. 28. 1644.
LETTER VI. To Monsieur Heinsius the Son of the Sr. Heinsius.
SIR,
YOUR Excellent Verses are seducing Spirits that come to tempt Anchorites they
had like to have destroyed the merit of many years solitude in a moment, and I
confess I had an inclination to review the world that produces such admirable
things. But the temptation was not long; according to the usual manner, second
thoughts were wiser then the first. The consideration of my honor retained me,
and I bethought my self it would be dangerous to administer you an occasion of
undeceiving your self, and supposed it was not the best of my prudence to give
you a nearer Prospect of that, which owes all its beauty to distance of place,
and the passion of Monsieur Menage. It is more advantageous to me to preserve
the good opinion you have of me by my absence then to do my self an ill office
with you by my presence. There is no Question but you would still seek me after
you had found me; and perceiving nothing in my person either worthy of my name,
or your curiosity, you would call Fame to an account for her testimony of me,
and Monsieur Menage for his love. Possibly I might in former times have had
something in me that would not have displeased; But heretofore is not now. Age
that never comes alone, does oppress me with so many diseases, that lesser
ruins then I feel would serve to crush far greater Ornaments then I was ever
capable to receive from some little Art, and weak Naturals. Time effects
strange Metamorphoses. The Monsters of this world were the miracles of the
past: and such a She as has been placed amongst Temples and Altars, and shown
for miraculous, has now no other place but a Chimney corner, and hides her self
to avoid frighting of people. That Famous Wrastler that flung all men in the
Lists of Exercises is now the poor bed-ridden Paralytick whom all the World
commiserates. I am not yet reduced to so deplorable an extremity: it threatens
me, and I am drawing near it. I want strength and the quickness of my
apprehension fails me: I have begun to dye in my memory; and I lose my soul by
little and little. Though the Siren of France (for so you are pleased to call
me) is not altogether dumb, yet she is become for the most part hoarse, and
Rheumatick and at her best has so scurvy a little pipe that she has not voice
enough to lull asleep the drowsiest mariner in your Country. You, Sir, are in
the flower of age and in the condition to charm not only Ulysses companions,
but himself: I mean, you can equally please the People, and the Wise; bestow
pleasure on the ear, and give satisfaction to the mind. At four and twenty you
have atcheived whatever an exquisite education can add to an happy birth: and
that flourishing youth is attended by so great a number of other gifts from
Heaven, that I unless I armed my heart with more then a triple plate of
brass, I could not hinder so many Venusses and Graces from making impression
upon it. Those which I found in the Hendecasyllables I received, would have
tickled a soul that were the most enemy to Verse and Music in the world, and
would have tamed the most savage beast in the desert. You do me the favor to
believe me more humane and reasonable; and consequently you cannot doubt the
esteem I have of a present which I cannot rate high enough. I will only say
this little to you, and deliver you my opinion of them. They are so soft, so
amourous, and charming, that I believe they would hinder me from feeling the
stroke of the hardest, most virulent, and cruel Iambicks, that Monsieur your
father could discharge against me, if I had provoked his indignation. Do not
repent, I beseech you, that you have made me happy: prolong my good fortune by
the continuation of your favor. Which I beseech of you from my heart, and will
be, while I live passionately,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jan. 15. 1646.
LETTER VII. To Madam the Countess of Brienne.
Madam,
YOu do injustice to your Academick, to submit his book to my censure. I adore
the mysteries in it, though I cannot comprehend them, and have no mind to use
the liberty which you have given me. I should render you but a slender account
of a Science wherein I am but at the Accidence. I scarce understand visible
objects, and the outside of nature: and for what is above it, I dare not
attempt to climb up so high. My curiosity is not so presumptuous and I wholly
refer my self to the Sorbonists concerning superior things; Expect not here,
therefore, from me a precise judgment of what I cannot reach. I have not
discovered the depth of the book: It is true, Madam, the outside and surface is
very beautiful and is precious. I am ravished with the sound of the harmony
which is made by matters I cannot comprehend: this way of writing would have
amazed the Philosophers whom it had not convinced. And had Gregory of Nazianza,
shown such a piece of work to his friend Themistius, questionless it had
wrought upon him He would have admired the appearance and outside of
Christianity though he could not have beheld the secret and interior part of
it. They are not words printed and read on the paper, they are felt, and
penetrate even to the very heart. They live and have motion; and I perceive
something of the vigor of the Primitive Christians and the style of that
Heroic age wherein the same virtue animated speeches and actions; conveyed it
self into the Wit and Courage, and bred Doctors and Martyrs. Will you please
Madam, to tell me the sincere truth? Has not he that appears in the front of
these Chapters, been at the Oracle of our Ladies Cloister? Has he not been
inspired by our excellent Abbot? In earnest, I conceived I had known his style.
I observed traces and impressions of his wit in several passages and exclaimed
with Virgil, These are his eyes, his hands, his Countenance.

Your Doctor ought not to be offended at my suspicion: I do not injure him in
saying he has the vein of an extraordinary person. So noble a resemblance is
an infinite advantage to a mediocrity and there is nothing low in imitation of
the highest Idea that can be aimed at. If my conjectures be well grounded,
solicit that Grand Artist to sit close to his work, and follow it openly, and
let the Oracle speak it self without an interpreter. Besides your high merit
herein, Madam, from the Church, you will have more encouragements to maintain
that understanding piety nobly, which the Oracle himselse told me was in you.
You will have something more to lock up in that rich cabinet wherewith you
dazzeled my eyes the other day; and whose workmanship I valewed not at a less
rate than the matter. I do not question you care in the choice of what you
admit into it; for a Poet says that a prison of Gold and Emeralds should
retain none but Gods, or Demy-gods, etc. I am,

Madam, Your, etc.
May. 5. 1645.
LETTER VIII. To Monsieur Conrart, Counselor and Secretary to the King.
SIR,
IT is true, I affect silence better then noise, but who ever told you I loved
it above music? Who informed you, I preferred my lumpish, and stupid indolence
before your lively and subtle pleasures? As many persons would do me a pleasure
to leave me to my rest, so you oblige me in disturbing it. There is no slumber
so sweet, but is infinitely recompensed by so welcome a voice as yours.
Besides, what is written at Paris and related at Court, may very justly awaken
the attention of a contemplative dreamer, although he meditated upon the banks
of Seine. So that you need not question, but I shall readily forgo a calm
much more serene then mine, and a River that glides much more gently then ours,
to regard that uniform rapidity, and orderly torrent which rushed from the
mouth of Ulysses. The style and work of your friend present me with a certain
Resemblance of it, and I confess I have not often seen a thing so Impetuous,
and yet withal so Regular. But Rules are best learned by Time, and Study gives
Art to the least fortunate natures. There is that secret force in him which
animates his words and comes immediately from Heaven, and that with grandeur
and Majesty.

This person has Received a very ample portion; and if these be Elogies which
he dispenses in this manner, they seem to be uttered in the same tone as if he
were making Laws or pronouncing judgments. He adores indeed, but it is with
Confidence and familiarity; whereof one is the companion of a good conscience,
and the other proceeds from love. Such as are not of his opinion may term him
idolater and inamorato, as long as they please, without moving his passion; but
they cannot with justice accuse him either of hypocrisy or flattery. He
speaks his belief; and delivers nothing slight and low, because all his
conceptions are above mediocrity. Although I am become an implacable enemy to
every thing that has the resemblance of a Paneygrick, yet I am pleased with
this for that very reason. His mind being wholly possessed with his subject, is
not so taken up in contrivance of a Harangue, and scanning over common places,
as to make himself intelligible, and represent his Ideas. Every thing seems
natural and his own; even the ornaments which he borrows; and there is no part
in it but is free, yea servitude it self triumphs. That servitude, I say, which
cannot but provoke envy, and seem glorious and noble in the eyes of all. How is
it possible to hold out against such a violent manner of writing, which has a
compulsive power disguised in the Art of persuading? And do not you seem to
desire my approbation, in the same fashion, that one of young Caesar's Captains
demanded the consul-ship for his Master? This, said he, laying his hand on his
sword, This shall do it, if you will not. There is therefore no room for
deliberation* I must ne^ds grant you what you have already forced from me, and
I cannot enhance the worth of my esteem by the difficulty of obtaining it,
since it is no longer in my power to refuse. This is of the kind of those armed
requests that are attended with a strong party of reasons and Rhetoric; and
such a couragio^s eloquence as leaves neither indifferency to the will, nor
liberty to the judgment. If I understand any thing, there would need no other
to preach up the C^oisade effectually, whereof it speaks; and I doubt not, but
if the people could apprehend it, it would save the Princes a considerable part
of the charges of the War. There is too much humility in him that owns it, to
submit it to my censure; and it would be too great a presumption in your most
humble servant to accept an office so full of envy. Besides the offense the
Count would take, which has already explauded it, I remember the Original cause
of the miseries of Troy, and the example is too dangerous to admit a Country
swain the second time to be judge of supreme beauty. It is enough for me to let
you know, that I am one of those that easily receive her wounds, and that I
sometimes pursue even her shadow and resemblance --. It Is not the course of a
strong affection to p^y into little defects, and examine the sli^ht
imperfections of the thing it loves. If there be any in this I am not in a
condition to observe them; and you may please to inform your Doctor Candido,
that he has made me an interessed disciple. I beseech your endeavors to
continue me in his favor. And for this, Sir, which I am so neglectfull of, and
I find so faithfully preserved by you, your self are the cause that I do not
much fear its loss. You give continually, and yet never remember that there is
any indebted to you. It is pleasure to you to bear all the burden and charges
of friendship; and your affection is far more active, then my sloth is torpid
and languishing, Yet I can not in conscience acquit my self of shame for it;
and I must confess it a great miscarriage, that you should never be weary in
conferring obligations and favors upon me, both in my own person, and the
concernments of others and I so backward in the testification of my
acknowledgements, that without somewhat of divination, and a great deal of
Faith, you cannot be assured that I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Dec. 9. 1640.
LETTER IX. To Monsieur Corneille.
SIR,
I Found a strange alteration of ease and recovery upon the receite of your
Packet, and I cannot contain from proclaiming the miracle in the beginning of
my Letter. Your Cinna restores health to the sick: He causes the Paralytick to
clap his hands, and gives speech to the Dumb, much more to a Rheumatick. I had
indeed lost my speech with my voice, and being repossess'd of both, by the
virtue of what you sent me, it is just that I employ them to your glory, and
publishing the soverainty of the remedy. Yet you fear you are one of those,
that are over charged with the Majesty of the subjects, whereof they treat, and
you are not satisfied that you have brought strength enough for the support of
the Roman Grandeur. This modesty does more please then persuade me, and I am
bound to oppose it on the behalf of truth. You are too nice an examiner of a
composition that has been called excellent by the public voice; and though it
were true, that you had discovered a little disparity of weakness in some part
of it, yet this ought to be a secret between your Muses and your self, since I
am confident it would be for ever imperceptible by any other. The weakness
should be rather charged on our expression and the incapacity of our language,
then your conceit, and the defect imputed to the inconcinnity of the
instruments, not to want of skill in the Artist. You have shown us as much of
Rome as is possible to be seen at Paris without any prejudice by the removal.
It is not a Rome of Cassiodorus, forlorn and -- as it was in the age of the
Theodorus. It Is a Rome of Titus Livius, and as magnificent and pompous as it
was in the time of the first Caesar's. You have even found that which she had
lost in the ruins of the Commonwealth, her noble and magnanimous fierceness.
We meet with some tolerable translators of her language and expressions, but
you are the true and faithful Interpreter of her spirit and courage. I proceed
yet higher, Sir, and tell you, that I know you are many times her Tutour, and
admonish her of decorum when she has forgotten it. You are the reformer of
Antiquity, where it wants either Ornament or support. In those places where
Rome was but of brick, you rebuild her with Marble; wherever you find a void
interstice, you fill it up with a Masterpiece; and I have observed that what
you supply to the History, of your own, is ever transcendent to that which you
borrow from it. The wife of Horatius and the Mistress of Cinna, which are two
daughters of yours and purely creatures of your brain, what are they less then
the principal Ornaments of your two Poems? Is there any thing of the
production of good antiquity in the weaker sex, that is comparably vigorous
and strong to these late Heroesses, which you have brought into the World; to
these Roman Dames of your begetting? After a fornights time, I am not satisfied
with surveying the perfections of her that came hither last. I have astonished
all the Wits of our Province with the sight of her. Our Orators and our Poets
speak wonders of her. But a Doctor of my Neighborhood, who is ordinarily upon
the high strain, speaks of her indeed after a strange manner. The first day he
was contented to say that your Aemilia was the Rival of Cat^ and Brutus in
their zeal of Liberty, But now he goes far higher. Sometimes he swears she is
possessed with the Genius of the Commonwealth, and at other times calls her
the fair, reasonable, holy, and adorable Fury. These are strange words indeed,
concerning your Roman Virago, but yet they are not destitute of reason, and
foundation. She does in effect inspire the whole Conspiracy, and diffuses heat
to the party by the Fire which she raises in the breast of their General. She
endeavors to interest all the World in her revenge? and would make a sacrifice
to her Father, which were too great for Jupiter himself. She is in my opinion a
person so excellent, that I think I speak not too much to her advantage, when I
say that you are more happy in your issue then Pompey was in his, and that your
daughter Aemilia, is without comparison of greater worth then his Grandchild
Cinna. If he had more virtue then Seneca could imagine, it is because he fell
into your hands and had the benefit of your care. He is obliged to You for his
merit, as to Augustus for his dignity. The Emperor made him Consul and you
have rendered him an honest man. This you have effected by the Rules of an Art
that adornes and refines truth; that allows favor in imitation, and that
sometimes proposes to it self the apparent and sometimes the true good. I shall
say too much if I add any more. I will not begin a Dissertation but end a
Letter, and conclude with the usual protestations but most sincere and true,
that I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jan. 17. 1643.
LETTER X. To Monsieur Costar.
SIR,
YOu write me strange news concerning the Doctor that is fallen into disgrace
for having spoken too liberally of Grace. Certainly your Theologues are men of
no ordinary temper, since they speak of the affairs of heaven as if they were
Councillors of state in that Kingdom, and declare the secrets of Jesus Christ
as freely, as if they were his Confidents.

They conceive their news as certain, and deliver it as affirmatively, as if
they had not only slept in his bosom with St. JOHN. But even as if they had
watch't in his heart and soul, and there were none of his intentions hid from
their knowledges. Do you not think there is laughing enough at their brawls and
contests; and that the Church Triumphant is offended at them. For my part, I
conceive the modesty and discretion of our ignorance would be more pleasing to
God then the presumption and insolence of our Doctrine; and that he better
approves of a peaceable silence, and contentedness, then of a war of bitter
words in which it is very difficult to save our charity. You remember that Ode
of Ronsard, which Galandius once esteemed worth the Duchy of Milan, the
beginning of which is, Errant par les Champs de la Grace
Qui penit mes Verse de ses Couleurs.


A person, which you know, tells me, that unless Monsieur the Coadjutour
redouble his prohibitions, it is to be feared there will be store of these
Errants, and that Grace will make Bedlams of more then one of these subtle
disputers, who examine the question with too much curiosity. I approve your not
declaring your self on either part, and the Neutrality which you resolve to
hold to, notwithstanding, the person you know, cries as far as he can see
you, that media via nulla via est, quae neque amicos parit neque inimicos
tollit. But yet I must tell you, that this Neutrality which I consent to, must
not be altogether dumb, and that I consent not to it, saving upon condition,
that you give an account of it to the Public, and justify it by a large and
eloquent Manifesto. The Cavalier, which your Letter mentions thought to have
been the bearer of mine, and to have had time enough, to keep his Court with
you at Paris before the beginning of the Campaign. But here arrived a Messenger
to tell him that his Brigade was commanded to -- and so he is necessitated to
depart hence directly thither. He would have been glad to have entertained you
with some news of me, and not unwilling to have seen the fair St. Germans.
Nevertheless in this last unhappiness, his comfort is that he goes to serve
under a Prince, that performs things of greater admiration and excellency,
etc. -- I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
March. 2. 1645.
LETTER XI. To the same.
SIR,
THe book which you have sent me from Monsieur Scarron, is a present very
acceptable to me, and which I have reason to prize at no mean rate. At the
first perusal it served me for Physic and relieved me from a fit of the
spleen, which had quite overcome me, if that had not come timely to my succor.
I hope it will effect much more upon frequent application. Possibly it may cure
me of my seriou^ pensiveness and my melancholy Philosophy; and I shall learn
to turn Chancery Bills and Processes into rhyme, and become buxome by
contagion. He is indeed an admirable Infirm. He enjoyes something that is
better then health, I mean dull and material health, for you know the
Arabians describe joy to be the flower and spirit of a quick and active health.
Since you are desirous to know the several thoughts which I have had of this
infirm, and require a particular Chapter of them, I tell you, Sir, that he is
a man either the g eatest dissembler, or most patient and constant in the
world. I look upon him as one that bears witness against the tenderness of
mankind, or else pain treats him with more courtesy then she does other
mortals: It may seem the Tormentour has conspired to flatter the patient.
When I see him laugh in the middle of his pains and tortures, I cannot but
think the disease does rather tickle then pierce and pinch him. In a word, I
affirm, that the Prometheus, the Hercules, and the Philoctetes of Poetry, not
to mention the Job of Truth, did utter high expressions in the violence of
their torments, but never jocund and pleasant. And that in several places of
Antiquity I have met with constant, modest, yea and wise griefs too, but never
any that were merry and blithe but this; nor was there ever before heard of a
soul that could dance the Saraband and the Matachines in a Paralyticall body.
Such an eminent prodigy deserves the consideration of inquisitive Philosophers.
History must not forget it, and if I had a fancy to be an Historian, as I am an
Historiographer, I would record it for none of the least miracles of our times,
which have not been unfruitful in the production of great ones. It Is not my
design to diminish the glory of the dead, with whom I have had some friendship
too. But there are different degrees of glory; and though the quality of
Apostle be a Title not a little considerable in a Christian family, yet it must
be acknowledged, that the Marty^dome of the Son has somewhat more rare in it
then the Apostleship of the father. What thoughts would your Seneca have had
concerning him, who sometimes took so much pleasure in treating of the like
subjects, and so often sought occasions to do it. Is it not true, that that
rough and haughty virtue, which he has so much commended, and which vaunted it
could be at ease in the Bull of Phalaris, and say all was well, was, but the
bare shadow of this virtue, so sweet and humble, that can put in practice the
Paradoxes of the other, and yet boast of nothing at all. Let us conclude
therefore in honor of the Queen's infirm that there is either Ecstasy or
Possession in his Malady, and that the soul does her affairs apart, without
being concerned in the matter. Or else that he has an extraordinary courage
and vigor, and that the soul wrastles with the body with all the advantages
the greatest strength can have over the greatest debility.

Aut caleste aliquid, Costarde, Astrisque propinquum
Morbus hic est, superoque trahit de lumine lucem;
Aut servant immota suum Bona vera serenum,
Statque super varias virtus iliaesa ruinas.
Post tot saecla igitur tandem, gens Stoica, Regem
Cerne tuum: Fasces tenero submittite vati
Sublimes tragicique Sophi, Zenonia proles;
Nec pudeat decreta humili postponere socco
Grandia, and ampullas verborum, and nomen Honesti
Magnificum, ac veras audire in carmine voces.
Scarro aeger, Scarro infando data praeda dolori,
Non Fatum crudele, Jovem non clamat iniquum;
Jratis parcit superis, sortique malignae,
Et patitur saevos invicta mente labores,
Jucundumque effert dira inter spicula vultum.
Nec simulata gerit, personam indutus honestam,
Vel mista ridet, veluti Mezentius, ira;
Sed purum, and sine fraud and laxis ridet habenis.
Dicam iterum, neque sat semel est dixisse triumphos,
Qui laeta, ingeniosa, aegro de pectore promit;
Qui ludit Caeum, Enceladum, vastumque Typhoea,
Terrigenasque alios, festivo carmine fratres:
Qui sedeat licet aeternum, mirabile dictu,
Perpetuas agitat Pindi per amaena choreas;
Proximus ille Polo, Fortunaque altior omni,
Scarro meus, mihi namque tuum, Costarde, dedisti,
Magnus erit Rex ille sui, quem prisca coronet
Porticus, and rigidi vox imperiosa Cleanthae,
Ni seclo invideat nostro rigidusque Cleanthes,
Priscaque Dijs Divumque Patri se porticus aequans.
I know not whether the miscellany of this Chapter will Please you. But I will
take care at least, that it do not offend you with its length. Therefore I give
you the Goodnight, and rest unfainedly,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jan. 1. 1645.
LETTER XII. To Monsieur Grandillaud, President in the Presidiall Court of
Angoulesme.
Sir, My dear Cosen,
EIther I have no judgment in handsome things, or those which you showed me are
such in perfection. But the bare sight of beauty is not satisfactory; I must
obtain the enjoyment. Therefore be pleased to remember your engagement and give
me the possession at my ease and with a true and full pleasure of that, which
in passing before my eyes has only inflamed my desires and disturbed my quiet.
It is great pity, and I am infinitely sensible of the loss, that an Eloquence
I dare term sovereign and which would do honor to Paris, should be bounded
in the precincts of an inferior Court, and have no larger Sphere then a little
corner of this great Kingdom. One of the Ancients would have termed this the
putting of a Pilot into a Cock boat; and another would have said, it was to
show a treasure in a place where it could not be seen. As for me, I only
confirm what I have already said, and remain in expectance of the effect of
your promise,

Sir, My dear Cosen. Your, etc.
Jan. 3. 1645.
LETTER XIIII. To Monsieur d'Argenson, Counselor to the King and Intendant of
Justice in Saintonge.
SIR,
I Am determined to forbear my importunate caresses, and will no more offend
you with stroking and embraces. Since your virtue is so delicate as not to
endure the perfumes and flowers which it merits, it is necessary to comply with
the strangeness of your humor, and you must be obeyed though it be with
injustice. So that you shall neither receive incense or Chaplets from my hand;
notwithstanding I cannot pass it, without protesting against the violence
which you do me. I will complain of the loss of my liberty, and inform the
world, that it is no fault of mine that I am not just. I am perfectly so, Sir,
as far as the will and endeavors. Your jurisdiction does not extend to the
secrets of my heart, and you cannot hinder the devotion of my soul, although
you do with so much severity prohibit me the ceremonies and outward worship. I
question not but you will find my expressions very high, when you are the
subject, which yet do not seem such to me. My words, I conceive, may be drawn
from holy things without offending Religion; and your verses being related to
it, I look on it as a piece of divine service to read them. Since the Muses
which supply you with such excellent inventions are not false Deities, the
honor which is given them goes directly to Heaven; and we adore the inspirer
of Prophets and Sybills, when we admire a Poet so chaste and pure as you. Be
pleased to admit this truth, which is compatible with their modesty, and
represents you some shadow of my intention. If you would allow me to display
it, what should I not say of the early achievements which I have seen, and of
that prudent and grave youth, which reproaches my gray hairs? But the orders
which I have received from you are of too strict a tenor, and you will be so
punctually obeyed, that I cannot so much as publish your Elogium in Epitome.
All I can do in a person so commendable, and that is offended with the effects
of his virtue, is, to esteem him perfectly in my heart, and to be, as I am with
all my soul,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jan. 5. 1646.
LETTER XIIII. To Monsieur Colletet.
SIR,
I Am at a loss, what language I should use to please you in commendation of
your self and your works. Great titles have been profaned by being conferred on
undeserving persons, which they have obtained and still wear out of a frollick
of fortune. Excellent, Admirable, and Incomparable, are terms of every day;
and if I should treat you with the Epithet of Divine, I should only give you
the relics of Rossett^ and Mailles, who have been saluted in that manner by
poorer Poets then themselves. I have determined at length to seek out no new
terms at all to express you my ancient passion, and the esteem I have ever
had of your person and productions. I will content my self to read them so
often, as to be able to give you account of every verse; and to tell you, that
this tickled me with delight, and the acuteness of that touched me to the
quick, I was wholly transported by another, and such a whole scene charmed me.
You may perceive I have no need of Bellerose to inflame me, and they receive
applauses at a hundred leagues distance from the Theater. Yet I do not deny but
the voice and good action have life in them. You know what the rival of
Demosthenes said in that particular, and if I had been present at the
representation of the piece which I have read, there is no question, but I
should have made my self hoarse with the violence of exclaiming, Euge, Belle,
etc. My admiration is more calm upon my paper, though not less true; and I am
as really, Sir, though without much noise of complements,

Your, etc.
Jan. 5. 1641.
LETTER XV.
SIR,
I Have a great design of making you a magnificent acknowlegdment; and such as
might be answerable to the civilities of your Letter, and according to the
degree you have placed me in amongst the Latin Poets, with that too
favorable, -- Tibi carmine ab omni
Cedetur jurique tuo Natura relinquet
Quis vatum esse velis.


But what hopes is there in contesting with you in point of generosity and
gallantry who are then at Roane, when you are no longer at Paris, that is, who
change one Court for another, and never go out of the great world? So that I
shall only tell you, that without pretensions to the glory of which your Letter
has pretended me, I receive very much honor from the four terms of war
which you bestow on me; and from the first as well as the other three. Although
the style of Statius be not that, to which I would frame mine, yet his strain
is none of those whose imitation I account vicious. I am not so delicate as
those Gallants on the other side the mountains, and I have always blamed the
Capricio of that Venetian Gentleman, who to ingratiate with Virgil, burned the
woods which he had composed in his youth, because they were sprung from the
Nursery of Statius. He would not have Posterity ignorant of his bad humor, and
has therefore preserved the memory of it, in an Epigram which begins thus,
Has, vulcane, dicat Sylvas tibi villicus Aymon
Tu sacris illas ignibus ure, Pater.
Crescebant ducta e Stati propagine Sylvis,
Jamque erat ipsa bonis frugibus umbra nocens.


Perhaps that which was an effect of cruelty in this Gentleman of Venice would
be in me an act of justice, if I condemned my verses to the fame fate that he
did his. And indeed I am so doubtful of their goodness, that unless our
Master, Monsieur Menage swear to me that my apprehension is ill grounded, and
after that confirm his Oath by the testimony of our other Masters, Monsieur
Bourbon, Monsieur the Ambassador of Sweden, I shall have a belief that you
and he do only abuse me with your applauses. I shall imagine that you have a
design to make your self sport with the gibberish of a Country versifier.

Qui linguam violare Remi temerarius audet,
Somniat and Thuscum Tiberim and Saturnia Regna,
Accola Santonici Oceani; viridisque Carentae
Potator, procul a doctis, vetus exul, amicis.
However it be, there is no sort of pastime but may be allowed in the
Commonwealth of good Letters, to two persons which have deserved so well of
it, as you and Monsieur Menage. And as to matter of raillery, it is no great
hurt to suffer somewhat from the Historian of Mamurra and the father of the
stage. I would signify by this last word, that you may be Aristophanes when
you please, as you are already Sophocles, but I should never be offended with
your mirth. The war which you make upon me, instead of hurting me shall
afford me divertisement. You cannot be otherwise to me then a gentle and
agreeable Persecutour; nor my self, though ill treated by you, any other then,

SIR, Your, etc,

LETTER XVI. To Monsieur le Prieur Packet.
SIR,
YOu have given life to me, as well by the great care you have taken of
Monsieur Costar, as the good news you have signified to me of his recovery. I
beseech God it may have a long and fair continuance and that the loss, which
we were in fear of, do not happen but to our Nephews.

May I never know Thyrsis has ceased to be:
Heaven keep that day for our Posterity!
But you must contribute your part to the favor of the Stars. Preserve us I
entreat you our treasure, and be not weary of a fervice which I envy you. It is
so noble and so glorious that the Muses and the Graces themselves would not
disdain your office. Without question they would always write, if Monsieur
Costar would always dictate to them. I recommend him to you once more and
remain,

SIR, Your, etc.
Feb. 1. 1642.
LETTER XVII. To my Lord Sequier, Chancellor of France.
My Lord,
I Have heard you would not permit the publication of a book, newly made
against me, though the harm I had thence received had been small. My
obligements to you for the favor cannot but be great; it being a very
particular care you have for the quiet of my life, not to suffer the least
noise to disturb it. I know not, my Lord, whether you may not seem to have
treated with too much delicacy, one who makes profession of Philosophy. It is
enough the public authority shelters me from the tempest without defending me
from the wind and dust; and that it protects my hermitage from the violence of
salvage beasts without beating off the flies, and other importunate Insects
from me. But, my Lord, the goodness you have for me goes beyond the limits of
ordinary justice: you would not only I should enjoy a calm repose, amidst the
agitations of all Europe, but were farther willing the world should have some
respect for my retiredness, and that being eloigned from the society of men I
should be placed without the reach of detraction. And yet it pursued St. Jerome
even to the Grott^ of Bethelem, and to the foot of our Saviors cradle, it even
there found him out, though, as himself tells us, he endeavored to lie hid; if
that insolent had no consideration for so admirable a sanctity, nor for a place
guarded by Angels, no wonder a vulgar innocence, retired into a village ill
fortified, should not find a very favorable entertainment. But to pass from
the purity of manners to the high qualities and endowments of the soul, if from
time to time there have been bold revolts against the heads of Arts and
disciplines, and if within the memory of our fathers, it has publicly been
said at Paris, that Aristotle was a bad Sophister, I think my self civilly used
in that place that they content themselves to call me a bad writer, that grand
Blasphemer of the name of Aristotle, as well by his pen as by his tongue, was
(as you know) Peter Ramus, who though of our Religion, passed for an Hugue not
in the Massacre, and dyed the death of the Rebels and the Factious: in effect
some have thought, God permitted it by a just judgment and that the tutela^y
Angel of Learning took the color of the cause of faith to revenge the injury
by him done to reason. There is this day living in Germany a tyrant Grammarian,
an enemy of universal truths, an accuser of Cicero, who not long since has
printed his Animadversions, wherein he is so impudent as to arraigne his judge,
and to dispute the praecedence of the Prince of Latin Antiquity: insomuch, My
Lord, that the consent of all Mankind, confirmed by a possession of eighteen
ages, is not Title sound enough to secure the reputation of that Roman against
the Pedantry of this Barbarian. If then it availes not virtue that she has
been consecrated by time, and crowned by the people to preserve her inviolate
from the attempts of particular persons there is no show of likelihood, I
should move their compassion, amongst so many injured Hero's, or that I should
have respect shown me, when Aristotle and Cicero are not in safety. An
ordinary man ought not in justice to complain, if he undergoeth the same
destiny with extraordinary persons, neither would it be handsome in me to
petition, you would reform the world for my only interest. I know not, My
Lord, but that this petty disorder may be of some use to the Common wealth; and
it were to be wished that malice would always amuse it self in things of so
small concern, to the end it might never intermeddle with affairs of greater
moment. Those who have employed their talent, in perverting the sense of my
words, and falsifying my works, had otherwise perhaps been busied in forging
wills, and coining money. And he who now only desires an Imprimatur from you
for his book, had I not been, might have sued to you for a Reprieve, or Act of
grace. It Is much better, injustice should spert it self with my books, then
that it should have ought to do in civil society; it is much the lesser
inconvenience, that injurious persons should transpose words, and alter
periods, then that they should remove the Landmarks, and ruinate the houses of
their Neighbors, it is, to say the truth, the most innocent employment vice
can have; and I do not think the Commonwealth a little beholden to me, that I
have for these ten years set a-work a number of retchlesse idle fellows who
apparently would have proved dangerous Citizens, if they had not chosen to be
ridiculous Censurers: it is very well if the heat of their souls exhales this
way; if their intemperance finds this vent; and that, to avoid their rage,
their folly may be licensed, leave them then (my Lord) this exercise; they know
not what to do with their time, and will employ it worse if you will not permit
them to use it thus: suffer their turbulent youth to spend its fury upon an
insensible subject, and to combat dead words which are neither capable of
grief nor joy, so long as they present themselves before you in no other
quality then as Gladiators of the Pen, be not sparing of the Kings grace, and
remit somewhat of your severity. If the thing were new to me, it is likely I
should not find my self aggrieved that the first Pamphlet that libelled me
should be stopped in the press, but now that there is already a fair Library of
them got together, I am well content they should increase and multiply and take
pleasure to behold a goodly heap of stones which envy has thrown without
hurting me. The reproach of some persons is not resented by me as shameful,
because I esteem not their praise for honest. I do not trouble my self to go
begging of voices or making Cabals, that I may be approved by all sorts of
people. I have what I desire (my Lord) if I have your approbation; as that
which proceeds from an un-erring principle, and an understanding perfectly
clear. God had endued you with a sovereign judgment before the King had
bequeathed his sovereign justice into your hands, and you were all po^^rfull
in reason before you were so in authority. I will have no recourse to this
latter, because I know the former is not altogether my enemy, and am more proud
to have pleased you, then I should be satisfied should you have prescribed all
my adversaries the advantageous discourses you have held with me upon diverse
occasions, your Picture which you were pleased to give me last year as the
gage of your affection, those rich works of yours which you have formerly made
me partaker of, I mean those writings animated with the soul of State and full
of the grandeur of your Master, which appeared to me so transcendently above
the force of the present age, and so worthy the Roman Majesty; in a word (my
Lord) every moment of that happy afternoon I had the honor to pass with you
in your Cabinet, are Privileges for which I have dearer considerations, then
for what you have denied to the Ape or Fantasme of Philarchus. I dare not
mention what other obligements I have to you: in that particular you have
enjoined me silence, with a belief your favors would go less, and receive
alloy in their purity, should my acknowledgments wait upon them; it is not fit
however, you should oblige me from having the intentions of an honest man, nor
deprive me the liberty of grateful thoughts. You have forbid the publication
of my thanks, but have not impeached me from acquitting my self in the secret
part of my devoire, or, at least from being in my soul always,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Oct. 30. 1636.
LETTER XVIII. To Monsieur Menage.
SIR,
I Have at length retriv'd the Letter, which was lost in the confusion of my
Papers. I entreat you do me the favor to show it to our father Bourbon, and
tell him it was written by a Father much more ancient then he. Tell him
moreover that this Father understood neither Greek nor Latin; but the late King
Henry the Great had a good esteem of his French, his capacity and honesty. He
even desired to have him near him, and had he not been tied by affection to
the service of a meaner Master, whom he would not quit for a greater, it is
possible your friend might have been son to a Secretary of State.

Diis aliter visum, atque illi meliora dedere,
Silvesque irriguosque hortos camposque patentes
Atque Aulae contemptum and nullis otia jussis
You see that my Verses do confirm, what you told me in Prose of the
tranquillity of my life and the beauties of my habitation. But although I could
add all the delights of the Golden Age to this quiet of the village; though I
should dote, or, to speak more nobly, though I should meditate in an enchanted
palace, which Ariosto had built with his own hands; in a word Sir, though my
desert were as fair as your Language, it were not possible for me to be happy,
if I were there without you. There is no felicity for me in the absence of two
or three persons, whom I see no more; and I mark those days with black, which
would otherwise be most pleasing and agreeable, were not my heart in another
place. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
12 May 1644.
To Monsieur de Balzac, from his father.
Dear Son,
SInce I first began to solicit you, to present the public with the fruits
of your industry, twelve years are insensibly slid away, and my own as much
augmented, being already entered into the 89th year of my age; and though it be
now time for me to employ all my thoughts upon well-dying, rather then any
other subject; yet, as it is intaild upon humane weakness to desire a farther
reprieve, and prolongation of our days, I must confess my self in that, not
to differ from other people, nor to be yet weary of my life. But withal it is
most true, I desire particularly to live that I may enjoy the content in my
extreme old age, to see, before I leave the world, those fair works of yours
published, which I have already viewed in writing. It seems to we (Dear
Son) that you cannot reasonably deny me this last satisfaction I demand from
you, and that, should you farther harden your self in your denial of my
request, your Excuses would savor more of Melancholy then Modesty. If the
desire of being praised by men cannot tempt you, at least that of pleasing me
ought to make some impression upon your soul, and I am willing to believe that
in this occasion, you will have some consideration of my person, who despoile
my self of my paternall authority to transact with you by Entreaties and
Remonstrances. I know well, you are abundantly rich in things of rarity and
value; but to keep them close prisoners in your Cabinet, is to be covetous: and
I desire you with as much affection as is due to the goodness of your nature,
which never yet refused me obedience, not to let me continue longer in a
languishing suspense: content the impatience of an urgent suitor, who is in
haste to accomplish that remains for him to do on earth. And in the first
place (Dear Son) send to the press with what convenient speed you can, the
two books of your Apology; which in my judgment are admirable, and which I have
read, and reviewed many times, and always with a new pleasure. You owe this
not only to the glory of the public and your own reputation, but also to the
honor of our family, and to my particular interest; to the end you may
disabuse certain people who were induced to believe, upon the credit of a
false witness, that you have not always had an high esteem for me, nay more
that you were unwilling to allow me a place amongst reasonable creatures. Thus
was it foolishly concluded by the ridiculous subtilty of the Doctor, who
designed to set us at variance, but that is beyond the power of School-niceties
and distinctions to compass, and there is no piece of Sophistry whatsoever can
induce me to think ill of you to the prejudice of a multitude of good offices,
my old age has received, and daily does receive from your assistance: for
which I beg of the Almighty always to preserve you in his favor. I am your
assectionate Father,

To serve you, Guez.

LETTER XIX. To Monsieur Maury, Doctor of Divinity.
SIR,
YOu might possibly in the sheets which you published, have obliged a person of
greater dignity and eminence, but none more acknowledging of your favors, or
passionately adoring of your virtue then my self. I have such a particular
esteem of that unspotted virtue, that although your Verses are extremely
handsome, and your Prose no less, yet I prefer the solid before the glorious;
and confess to you that it is neither the Orator nor the Poet, but the
Honest-man that is the object of my passion. I am not a little sorry, that I
cannot with truth give that Title entire to him that you lament in the Printed
Leaves, and that I have cause to complain of his dissimulation and improbity,
not to say of his treachery and perfidiousness. It is a History which I shall
recount to you in person. I think Heaven ordained the occasion of it some years
since, to the end I should not dye with sorrow at present. I should have been
utterly incapable of all consolation, if I had lost Monsieur de -- in the year
sixteen hundred thirty seven. At least, I should have spared no pains and cost
in the search of Gold and Marble in all places to render honor to his memory.
But the violation of his faith dispenses with me for that care; and having been
injured in such a degree, all that I can do is to give him room in my charity,
and to pray God for a poor Deceased, who were it not for that action, would now
have been one of the Demigods of my Closet. The freedom whereof I make
profession will not permit me to play the dissembler with you, and I have
discharged that into your bosom, which lay so heavy upon my heart. I had
hitherto complained only to the Trees and Rocks of my Desert, and my grief
should have been still secret, did it not concern me to justify my silence to
you, and to assure you, that it is not without reason that I bear not a part in
the consort of your Funeral Elegies. -- I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Feb. 20. 1643.
LETTER XX. To Monsieur de Flotte.
SIR,
I have been almost drowned in an inundation of Rheum, and I am not yet dry
from my shipwreck. I have great dread of the return of the tempest and that the
clouds are not dispelled in good earnest. Notwithstanding, without further
expectation of a more assured calm, I will make use of this tolerable moment,
to rejoice for it with you, yea and to give you my thanks for it too. I have it
in effect, by your gift, and you have restored me the use of my eyes and my
soul. It Is by the reading of your Letter, and Monsieur le Fevre's book, that I
renew the commerce, which I had intermitted with all handsome Letters and good
Books. The receite of that you sent me, has done me more good then you imagine.
They are not scare-crows but Arms which you have furnished me withal. Your
Volume is my Arsenal; and I do not doubt, but when I have finished the Lecture
which I am entered upon, I shall be not only more polite and stored with fine
Notions, to make my self regarded amongst my neighborhood, but also much
stronger and fortyfi'd with examples and reasons to defend the Rights of my
Country. In the mean time be pleas d to suffer me to remind you of some less
serious Subjects which I have long expected of your-enriching and embroiderie.
I desire of you in the first place the History of that exemplary death which
happened in the Palace of Guise in the year sixteen hundred and eighteen. The
Dialog^e of Austin, when he was dying with Monsieur the Almoner (who exhorted
him to dye like a Christian, and b^unted all his Divinity against the hardness
of his Turkish soul) will be none of the worst passages of the piece. But for
the little that you will excite your mi^th in tickling your spleen, you will
make wonders o^ his Testament, and his taking leave of all the Pots and K^ttles
one after another. Policy, which is my Mistress, and the speculative Sciences
my dear friends, must pardon me, if they please, that, I love this sort of
Relations better then those of Botero and Antonio Perez. Amidst the Hostility
of the two parties, these should be the Gazettes inviolable to both; and if
they had leisure to laugh in Germany, there is no Question but they would
afford equal pleasure to our enemy Picolomini, and Torstenson our Allie. Let
my request prevail with you to exercise your self in these ^xcellent ways of
writing, and do not suffer the graces of your discourse to expire with the
sound of your voice. Preserve us the memory of your feasts after the example of
Plutarch and Athenaeus: And to the end your good cheer may last after the
Table is taken away, and all the Compositum may taste it, I mean the whole man,
prepare us a volume of novels, which may deserve to be termed even by the sober
Monsieur Chaplain, the Ragousts and delicates of the Wit. Provided they
contain no fo^bidden ingredient as there is in some of those of Boccace. I
promise you a public remerciment for the pleasure you shall give me, whereof I
have so great need. I beseech you consider of it, and be pleased to believe me
always,

SIR, Your etc.
28 December. 1641.
LETTER XXI. To Monsieur de Silhon Secretary to my Lord the Cardinal Mazarin.
SIR,
MOnsieur Chaplain has informed me of your zealous goodness, and the heat
which you testified in my little affairs. They are obl^gations of which I am
infinitely sensible, and I consider them much more then all they can produce of
profitable and advantageous to me. I have need of my pension^ but I cannot l^ve
without your friendship; and having assured me of the continuation of it in
your last Letter, you have given me much more then I shall receive from the
Exchequer. Yet I shall not make you a studied thanks for it, nor put my self to
the trouble of providing Rhetoric to send th^ther whence it comes to us. You
perceive the very bottom of my soul; and know that I preserve you in it with
what is most precious and dear to me; with my Heroes and my Heroesses; my
Masters and Mistresses, (if I have any.) It is a clear fountain, you need not
doubt it, and is not at all soiled with particular interest. Therefore, Sir,
you may draw out the acknowledgment that is due to you: But withal, expect
something from it which you have newly inspired me with, and I owe to the
reading of your last work. The fair Ideas of our excell^nt reasonings which
remain still in my soul, have left a se^d and principle of beauty in it which
has already germinated some thing, that possibly w^ll not be displeasing to
his Eminence. I do not design to pass with him for a maker of Pan gyricks:
But I can make it appear to him in time and place, and in matters of
historical certainty that an honest man, of a good persuasion, can relate
truth with no bad grace. And of this your self are an undeniable instance, Tu,
Silo, sacro Sophie quem Nectare pavit,
Qui pleno rerum pectore verba facis;
Qui cautas Regnandi arts, dubia omnia ^octus,
Terrarum dominos optima sola doces:
Nec falsum nec inane sonas, velut Aulica turba,
turba etiam ducibus plaudere sueta malis.
Hic quanquam haud aequo tua per vestigia passu,
Scilicet V^be procul, sort nec art parem,
Me tamen and Rectum and Very secreta latentis,
Secura invidiae quaerere mente juvat.
Very diva potens Sophie, mihi Numinis instar,
Tu, Silo, auctores, vos sequor, este mei.


I did not think to conclude with Verses, but the first begat the rest, as
chance made the first. I will not complain of that chance, but rather call it
my good fortune, if it has given me the means of expressing my meaning to you
better, and represented me in a more noble manner, as I am perfectly,

SIR, Your, etc.
19 Feb. 1644.
LETTER XXII. To the same.
SIR,
I Shall perhaps one day have the courage to attempt to speak something of his
Eminence. But for the present you must know that my Muses have been more daring
and active then I my self. Their Verses have got the start, and left my Prose
behind: If you do not approve that I separate and make a distinction betwixt me
and my Muses, I must take another course to express my self You will perceive
by THE ORACLE OF THE GREAT JULIUS that I performed my devotion more then a
year since, without vaunting of it to any one, or recording it with the
Booksellers. You will also see by consequence that I am a better Frenchman
then a Courtier; and that in the actions of my duty, I oftentimes content my
self with the testimony of my conscience. After the Oracle, there f^llowes an
Epigram, which has already appeared in the place, where you are, but in a Copy
that depraves my sense in diverse place, and transposes my words almost
throughout. That which I now send you is the most uncorrupted, and you may give
it what Title you please. I would have made one that might have served for an
Argument to the Epigram, not forgetting the sickness at Fontain-bleau, Et cum
post gravissimum illum morbum melius se haberet Eminentissimus Princeps, etc.
but that you are no friend to Asiaticall Titles: for are not we bound to know
all that happens to a person that presides at this day over the affairs of
Europe? who is so necessary to the general good of the world? who, etc. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.

LETTER XXIII. To Monsieur John Frederic Gronovius.
SIR,
BEing in the Low Countries you are in the suburbs of Paris, at least you are
nearer then I to the true France. I believed you upon the confines of the
furthest Almany, neighbor to the King of Denmark and in suite, or upon terms
of accord with him. So that I shot a hundred and fifty leagues beyond the mark,
and perceive that he that caused me to write last year to Monsieur Gronovius
Chanon of Hamburg was pleased to make himself sport with my pen and your name.
He imposed upon me with a fable to draw a Letter from me, upon which I think he
will neither find credit at the Bank nor Courtesy among the Croates, if he
should fall into their hands. But I am sorry I have cause to complain of a man
of your country, and am constrained to ask, What is become of the German
candor and sincerity? I beseech you let not this word scandalize you, for at
the same moment I answer my self, that it is retired into your breast. And
though War should have wasted all; though it should suffer neither Virtue nor
Civility upon the face of the Earth, yet I am assured you would not cease to be
good in the general ruin of good manners. You can love and oblige your
friends with tokens of so ardent and passionate a remembrance, that I should be
more cold and flinty then the rocks of desert, if I did not kindle at your
fire, and feel the points of your words. I wish to God, Sir, I were nearer to
you to make a greater benefit of my fortune and draw more profit from so
advantageous a neighborhood. You have made a book de Sestortiis; but I should
then begin to reckon by Talents, I should flow in abundance on all hands, and
beside the natural riches of your wit, you would entertain me with the
Treasures of Antiquity. I expect the promised Titus Livius, and in the mean
time I send you one of his children I mean my Roman, attended with some other
Treatises of the like nature. They will demonstrate to you whether my soul be
full of Titus Livius, and if by his assistance I have framed a sufficiently
high Idea of the ancient Commonwealth. I have written to Paris to cause
another discourse to be sent you, in which I conceive I have pleaded the cause
of the people, with all the respect that is due to the Majesty of Sovereigns.
I have principally in it endeavored to avoid the style of a Declamation; for I
can neither endure that Orators should be Parasites, or Eloquence the slave of
Greatness. Male sit illi per quam male audiunt nostrae deae, and quam nos
quoque laudavimus. But I ask pardon of God for it, in all the prayers I make
to him: And I think my repentance is effectual, since my choler is stirred
even at the most just and lawful praises. It would proceed so far as to
suppress Nazarius, Mamertinus, Latinus Pacatus, and many more. If the Adagies
of the Doctor of Rotterdam happen to be printed again at Leyden, I entreat
you to cause this to be inserted for my sake, As very a liar as a Panegyric or
a funeral Oration. I should continue this discourse to you were not I thronged
with a crow'd of troublesome businesses that beset me on all sides, and enforce
me to defer the rest to another time. I am with all my soul,

SIR, Your, etc.
7. March. 1644.
LETTER XXIIII. To Monsieur de Belleveue Villotreis Counselor to the King.
Sir, My Cosen,
IF I did not know you to be no less true then eloquent, that excellent Letter
which you writ me, would make me suspect the cruelty of your gowt, not to be so
extreme as you represent it. It is difficult to preserve the f^eedome of the
mind amidst the pains that besiege it, and assault all its Organs. And to
effect this, the soul must be absolute mistress of the body, and very much
unloosed from the matter. But that l^berty is not attained without help and by
the sol^ strength of nature. You are obliged to Philosophy for it, although you
give her so little thanks for the good offices she has done you, and te^l
wonders of her unprofitablenesse in your Letter; notwithstanding, it is she,
that bears up in your heart, and does not permit you to suffer as vulgar souls
do. Instead of the child sh cries and womanish complaints of others, she
inspires you with strong and masculine expressions: she is the cause that rage
is reasonable with you and gave you that serene moment in wh ch you have
renounced her so elegantly. I could accuse you of ingratitude in her name and
undertake her cause against Romances, to which you are reconciled only to
despite her. But that which you do is accompanied with so good a grace and in
such a persuasive manner, that it is not possible to be of any other side but
yours. You can never employ a bad reason, not even when you plead against
Reason, and conclude that Ari^sto is an honester man then Aristotle. I do not
wonder at the favor you do the Poet, to the prejudice of the Philosopher: You
are interessed in the cause of good Poets, and in truth there is nothing more
excellent then the Eclogue you have done me the favor to send me. For the
deceitful Nymph, or the Nymph of Madrid which I had put into your hands, I
confess she is no longer to be known, since she has been under your care. I
am astonished at the beauty you have given her, and cannot be satisfied with
considering her dress and ornaments. From whence I observe, that an excellent
education is able to correct the defects of a less happy birth, etc. I am
passionately,

SIR, Your, etc.
25 Feb. 1645.
LETTER XXV. To Monsieur Menage.
SIR,
I Am devoted to your glory, that it does not trouble me to be poor, provided
you have wherewith to exercise your liberality. Monsieur Chaplain gives me
notice of half a shop that you are sending to me, and that there is need of a
wagon for the conveyance. Certainly it will be enough to make me a great
Doctor, if I be not wanting in capacity. I hope to make some profit of the
long communication, that I shall have by your favor with Monsieur the
Ambassador of Sweden, Quem mea non totum Bibliotheca capit.

I am much taken with his Hendecasyllables; wherein I have found the just
strain that I sought for in that kind of Verse, which is they must be somewhat
inferior to the strength of the Heroic, and yet have nothing of effeminate,
as some judge they ought, who enervate their sweetness even to softness. But,
to tell you the free truth, the Elegiacks of our friend are quite another
thing, and carry him from --. Otherwise, he is not the first that disliked the
taste of Ale, and bestowed Poetical maledictions upon it. This false Bacchus
has been cursed long since, and disowned for the true son of Jupiter. Do not
you remember the Epigram of Julian the Emperor.

(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
You see, the poison of our Celtes was the beverage of them of those times, but
it is because the Celtes afterward came to the knowledge of planting Vines, and
learned to husband their vintage. And thus the two passages may be reconciled:
it is true the Greek is contented to testify his aversion against Ale, without
railing on the Bards or the Druides. The Latin might have done so too, and I
am sorry he has offended so many honest men of our friends. But because it
would be too great pity to maime a body so well shaped, let us persuade him to
put Hinc Morini in the place of Hinc Batavi, and abandon those remotest of men
to him, according to the testimony of Virgil. If he be not content with those,
let us give him in prey all the Spanish part of Flanders, upon which he may
make war without violating the sanctity of our Alliances in hurting our
Confederates -- I am with all my soul,

SIR, Your, etc.
1 October. 1639.
LETTER XXVI. To Monsieur du Herrier, Canon of the Church of Beaucaire.
Sir,
I Have many great obligations to my father besides those of my birth; but I
think I owe him very much for giving me your friendship. It is a present so
rich and rare, that I know not whether it was possible for him to have made me
another of equal value. There is a sterility of those things in all parts of
the earth. There are scarce found two men, but I see interest and traffic on
both sides, and in a great nation it is very difficult for me to discover
affection and persons that love. You are one of those extraordinary goodnesses,
whose love is pure and generous, and without an eye to advantage. No body has
business in the desert, or drives a trade with Hermites: Nor can I repay your
civilities with any thing but my good intentions, and return you only a weak
and fruitless passion, for that efficacious friendship of yours which has been
so ingenious to oblige me. You may speak of it with as much modesty as you
please: But as for me, I put it in the number of goods that are not subject to
the infelicity of the times nor to the outrages of fortune. Being possessed of
a true friend in your Province, I account my self more wealthy then if I were
owner of those three parishes, which the Countess Alix, gave to the great
Grandfather of my Grandfathers Grandfather. So that I comfort my self for my
poverty in Angoumois, in that by your favor I am not so in Languedoc; and I
cannot have lost any thing in this Country that is equivalent to what you
preserve me there. If my health permit me to make the journey I design, I
shall declare my resentments more particularly, and swear to you, if it be
necessary upon the Tombs of our fathers, and by the Genius of our common
Country, that I am and will be passionately, while I live,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jan. 30. 1640.
LETTER XXVII. To Monsieur Costar.
SIR,
IF it were in my power to make verses as often as I would, those which I have
now in hand, should bear the Title of Soteria and begin with Estis Io Superi,
nec inexorabile Clotho,
Volvit opus --.


But you know well that inspiration is not in the will of the Prophet. That
spirit from on high is sometimes long a coming; and the good wind does not
blow at all hours; but oftentimes there is a necessity of a fortnights
attendance only to pass from Calis to Dover --. I cannot obtain from my self
either so much faith or patience; and therefore I shall without further trouble,
tell you in the language of poor mortals that I bewailed you verissimis et
calidissimis lachrymis. Notwithstanding I could also tell you, if I pleased, in
the language of the gods of Olympus, that made a thousand exclamations for your
loss against them, Et Socii immeriti mortem indignatus acerbam,
Crudeles Divos, Fatum crudele vocavi.


Monsieur de -- was the first that arrested the torrent of my blasphemies and
qualified the violence of my grief. He enjoined me to hope well: But Monsieur
de -- came after him and did much more, by bringing joy to my hope. At present,
since I see by your Letter to Monsieur le Goust, that you are not contented
with health but pretend to strength, and represent your self rather as a
Champion that is ready for a combat at barriers, then one that is only well
and sound, I know not if --. This shall be the subject of one of our
conversations, when you will do me the honor to come hither, where I expect
you in April, Cum Zephyro, primisque rosis, and hirundine prima.

I am eternally with all my soul,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jan. 2. 1642.
LETTER XXVIII. To Monsieur Gira^d Commissary and Canon of Angoulesme.
SIR,
YOu have extremely obliged me by letting me understand some news of your self
and our friends, Monsieur de -- is always the best and most obscure of men. He
speaks continually in the Language of the Druides and leaves Pharamond and
Meroue far behind him, etc. In earnest he has not sent me a Letter but a
Riddle, and if I should return him an answer, I might perhaps do it to his
meaning, which I know is very good, but not to his words, which I cannot
understand. Notwithstanding the murmurings of your presumptuo^s Poet, I cannot
repent of that expression, from the reign of Orpheus to that of Monsieur de
Grass. No body can dispute the Crown of Parnasse to that excellent Prelat. For
besides that he makes admirable verses and his Bishopric rimes to his
kingdom; that kingdom being a holy state as well as the state
Ecclesiastical, no secular ought to take it ill, that they are Prophets or
Divines which command in that Country, etc. As for the news of this village,
the Gazette of it advertises you that --. I might be a very honest man if I
should endeavor to get a complement, to end my Letter with; but you would not
be so, Sir, if after 36 years of amity and confidence, I had need of
complements to persuade you that I am, more then any person in the world,

SIR, Your, etc.
Nov. 20. 1646.
LETTER XXIX. To my Lord the Marquess of Montausieur, Governor and Lieutenant
General for the KING in Saintonge, Angoumois, etc.
My Lord,
I Have been a languishing patient these six months, and at present I cannot
say that I live, but only because I am not quite deprived of sense. Yet Heaven
has taken care of me in this condition: Some angel that does not hate me has
inspired me with the charitable thought, which you had of honoring me with a
Letter. The receipt of which has awakened me out of my languishment to a fuller
enjoyment of life, and mitigated those pains which were worse then death: It
has restored my strength by giving me courage and confidence. For, how is it
possible I should think my self ill, as long as I am well within your favor or
dare to complain, with your friendship, in your esteem, and which is yet more,
your admiration. You see here, how I follow the Language of your Letter,
although I confess this last word is not suitable to me among the rest. But I
am not to doubt how it came there, since the haste of your departure for the
Siege of Dunkirke was the cause that you were not curious of proper words, but
served your self of such as came next to hand. There is nothing besides the
Sun, the Ocean and such great works of nature that are worthy the admiration of
wise men, and yet you are pleased to profess that you have that passion for
mine, which are so small and inconsiderable in all regards. You give my Verse
the name that is due only to those of Prophets; Wherein my Lord, the honor of
your judgment cannot be saved but by the interpretation of your words; and you
cannot admire any otherwise then as people do Dancers on the Ropes and such as
make dangerous leapes. I hazard my self as they do, and raise my self from the
ground into the air, and in other places precipitate my self again, and
generally practice an Art which I do not understand. This is my work when I
make verses. I abandon my wit to fortune, and leave it to be dealt with at her
pleasure, and lead it whither it cannot go alone. So that there is but little
commendation due either to the Artist or his design. Fortune and casualty must
be thankt for the success. That good goddess must have all the merit of an
action, to which I contribute only the temerity of venturing and the boldness
of beginning without knowing what will become of it afterward. However, since
you approve my lucky attempts, I am minded to deliver them from ruin; and
resolve to present you with them in full daylight with the advantage of
Impression, as soon as I am able to dress them up for it. But if I durst, they
should avoid all other eyes, since I seek no Theater out of your Cabinet. I am,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Oct. 25. 1646.
LETTER XXX. To Monsieur de Mere.
SIR,
IF I should tell you that your Laquay found me sick and your Letter cured me,
I should be neither guilty of poetical invention, nor oratoriall exaggeration,
I should be a faithful Historian, and render you a true account of what passed
in my Chamber: You are not ignorant of the great opinion I have of the
accomplishments and perfections of your soul; but perhaps you are to be
informed that though you had no merit at all to compel me, yet I could not
possibly forbear to love you. This affection of mine without question comes
from above and the stars have some influence on it. I am sensible of a secret
violence that constraines me, and it is most true that I never see or think of
you, but I feel a kind of soft delight that tickles my soul. So that the favor
you do me in rendering me happy is but justice, to my strong and constant
affection. Since I find there is a necessity of loving, I am glad of my good
fortune that I have a correlative in the knot which is a happiness I have
sometimes wanted. I shall say no more concerning my self, who am proud of being
your favorite, and come to speak somewhat of my papers, which receive no less
glory from your esteem then I do from your goodness. It is no small matter to
have pleased a person, who having none but sound passions, can relish no other
but true pleasures. The Testimony of one that is clear sighted ought to be
preferred above the guesses and hear-sayes of the whole people of Blind men.
Since you have wit and judgment in perfection there is none that can justly
dispute the title of a Judge to you in the works of the mind, and that far
before such Doctors as are remarkably defective in both, who employ knowledge
against Reason, and accuse Aristotle of all their bad opinions. Yet your
sentences are much to my advantage, and you are very liberal in your praises
of my papers. And what boldness would it be to contradict a Gallant and a
Philosopher together; it would certainly be rather rashness then modesty, and
therefore I am with docility and respect,

SIR, Your, etc
Aug. 24. 1646. But, be pleased to remember, Sir, that there is another
consideration, never to be violated, and that you have promised me to oppose
the combination of the Grammarians against the Poets. Since I am an admirer of
Monsieur Chaplain, I think Monsieur -- would do well to be so too, and yet do
himself no prejudice; and he will always find more safety in believing us, you
and me, then in relying on his own sense.



LETTER XXXI. To Monsieur Moricet, an Advocat in the Parliament.
SIR,
YOu are guilty of a great injury against your self in distasting the fruits
of your labor, of which you ought in justice to be extremely satisfied. They
are rare and exquisite, and if you continue to feast me with them, I know not
whether I shall not envy you the benefit you do me, and I be your friend
enough, not to become jealous.

Non tamen invideo, miror magis, and tibi pulchram,
Haud aliena mihi est cum sit tua, gratulor artem,
Qua Seium Seiamque and me tuearis, Amice,
Si quis adhuc surgat Philarki ex ossibus hostis.
The Post of Friday brought me news of our Monsieur de Peirarede, whose name
is become so great that it has filled all Paris, and the Celtes begin to
admire the Aquitanes. Or if you please to have it in another fashion, and in
the phrase of a Poet, the God of the Seine is astonished to hear the singing
of the Muses of Dordonne. For my part, I am wholly ravished with their last
composition; and if blessed souls could be recalled with the charms of
excellent verse, I do not question but that of the Duke of Breze would descend
from Heaven at the hearing of these, Tu Nube serena
Stellato fulgens apice, and radianto corona,
Ad tua Sacra veni, quae multo Regia luctu
Concelebrat, sacrique Chori, sanctusque Senatus, etc.
Aspice ut ipsa gemens, ingenti adfixa feretro,
Horridaque and laceris luget victoria pennis,
Quae quondam tua castra, tuas comitata triremes,
Hesperio toties mutas dum sanguine Pontum,
Deseruit tua signa semel: Nunc caedis acerbae
Invidiam lenire velit, fatisque malignis
Imputat, infandaeque excusat crimina cladis, etc.


Have you ever seen any thing more noble and more pathetick then this poor
victory afflicted with the death of that brave Duke? What a sight it is to
behold her with her robes torn, and her wings broken, doing penance for the
fault whereof she conceives her self guilty; to see her hanging and as it were
nailed to that great Hearse, which she bathes with her tears! she cannot be
comforted for the misfortune arrived at Orbitello, and would readily lay the
blame upon bad destiny, she, etc. But I contain my self, and you shall not
know the rest unless you come to learn it here. I expect you some day of the
following week, and am passionately,

SIR, Your, etc.
Dec. 4. 1646.
LETTER XXXII. To Monsieur Girard Secretary to the late Duke of Espernon.
SIR,
I Send you the Stanza which shamed my memory in our last conversation, and
whereof I could repeat no more then the four first verses.

Che giova posseder cittadi and regni,
Et palagi habitar d'alto lavoro,
Et servi-intorno haver d'imperio degni,
Et l'archi gravi di molto tesoro;
Esser cantate da sublimi ingegni,
Di porpora vestir, mangiar in oro,
Et di bellezza pareigiar il sole,
Giacendo poi nel letto tutto fredde and sole?
Monsieur de Frangipane recited this handsome stanza admirably, and was wont to
call it Divine: but as there is no Divinity, which does not meet with impious
and sacrilegious persons; so I have seen a Grammarian, that would not approve
that the Poet should give robes of Scarlet to Queens and Princesses, like
Cardinals and Counselors of Parliament. He judged the verse of the full
Coffers of less dignity then the rest, and that the two words fredde and sole
which end the last are transposed, because it is being alone that causes cold,
and therefore it ought to precede. My servant will deliver you the new book of
Monsieur de Priezac, and the judgment of Cardinal Bentivoglio. You see from
hence, that the most sufficient are also the most just, and that Italy begins
to esteem the Barbarians. Let us take part in the glory of our excellent
friend, and --. To persuade the Cardinal Bentivoglio, is to gain at once and
in one person the Senate and order of Cavaliers, the Learned of the university
and the honest people of the Court; Rome, Florence, Paris, and all the rest. So
that we have a friend, that is universally approved, and France an Author,
that deserves the praises of him that receives those of all the world. I am
passionately,

SIR, Your, etc.
Jan. 3. 1640.
LETTER XXXIII. To Monsieur Conrart Counselor and Secretary to the King.
SIR,
I Have with delight surveyed the beauties of the printed pieces which you did
me the favor to send me. But is there nothing else for me to read? and is it
not possible for me with your assistance to obtain the sight of some secret
stanzaes whereof I have heard wonders? They are of Monsieur de Serisay's
making, and you know he once loved me a little, as I had always a perfect
esteem for him. Yet I dare not address to him in this occasion; being I cannot
think my self in a condidition to receive of his favors, in that he has not
accounted me deserving of the least token of his remembrance. You may please to
know that he came lately into this province without making so much enquiry as
whether I were in it or no. The neglect is great, and would be a very sensible
injury to a person less accustomed to suffer then I. But I have gained a habit
of patience, so far as sometimes to believe that my friends have reason on
their side, when they do me wrong. I had rather acknowledge my unworthiness,
then complain of their injustice, and suppress my resentments then publish my
disgraces. Nevertheless, be not you weary of doing good to the undeserving and
obliging those that are out of favor --. Since he is at present as devout as
he has been always virtuous, you may tell him (for the obtaining those
desired stanzaes) that it is from Paul the Hermit or St. Hilarion; that they
were requested of you. I conceive he has not an opinion good enough of the
modern Anch^rites: and possibly his coldness for me proceeds from that of my
zeal, and the little progress he has seen me make in piety --. Yet I have had
commerce with great Saints both on this and the other side the Mountains and
Monsieur de Lorme will test fie to him, that Monsieur the Abbot of --. I am
with all my soul,

SIR, Your, etc.
March. 12. 1645.
LETTER XXXIII. To Monsieur Girard Secretary to the late Duke of Espernon.
SIR,
YOu must not think the promotion of Monsieur the President Seguier causes only
a particular festival at Cadillac; but will be public and universal within
these four days. The king has done a good deed to all his Realm, and the
year must not be esteemed happy so much for the purity of the air or the
fruitfulness of the Earth as for the election of excellent Magistrates. I
rejoice at this news as a subject of the Kings, which is the principal regard
wherein I consider it; but I have besides a second right to be glad, and that
is, out of the interest I have in the raising of a modesty, that is known to
me, and the happiness I apprehend to me in the prosperity of a person, of
whose probity I am perfectly assured. I know he has preservatives against all
the poisons of the Court, and a reason not to be corrupted by all the presents
of fortune. There is nothing of so high a value for which he would forsake his
virtue. He would have been as resolute a Martyr under Nero as he will be a
profitable Minister under a just Prince. The preservation of a life of a few
days is not sufficient to induce him to stain that which must remain in the
memory of many ages; and the least blot upon his honor would be less
supportable to him then the effusion of all his blood. He understands that in
the administration of justice, he is not to make laws but only to pronounce
them; that he is the dispenser not the Master of power; and that soveraingty is
in the Law and not in him. And these are the reasons, that in every cause he
takes cognizance of, he considers his own, which must one day be heard before a
greater Tribunal. He judges, as if Posterity were to review his decrees
hereafter, and the time present were subordinate to that to come. Having
seriously meditated on the condition of humane affairs, he esteems them at
their just value, and adds nothing to their worth by opinion. He hates neither
riches nor authority (which was the fullen humor of the Cynicks to hate every
thing that was lovely.) He but serves himself of them according the doctrine of
the Academy and the Licaeum, who did not account them impediments of the
Sovereign good, but helps and conveniences to virtue. I have heard him reason
in this manner, and so drawn these conclusions from his principles. In a
conference I had with him some years since, he seemed to me yet better then I
rep^esent him. So that I could not suffer you to rejoice alone, nor read his
Elogy in your Letter without testifying to you that I was of that belief
before I read it, and there was nothing new amongst the excellent things you
told me. The Doctor that is a defyer of all Beauty, may, if you please, see
the answer I send to the objections which he made against it, etc. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
March. 1. 1633.
LETTER XXXIIII. To Monsieur L'Huillier Counselor to the King.
SIR,
I Burn with the fire, I have met with in your Letters, and I have got a Fever
with reading them. But is it possible that change of air has not been able to
cure you, and that you continually bear that heat and amorous inquietude in
your breast. Is it true, that having been your beloved in France, I am still
one of your idols in Lorraine? Must I believe, that you divide your self
equally between L' Calista and Amyntas, and that the Mistress has no
advantage over the Favorite? if I were happy enough for this, I would not
change my fortune for that of those whom the Court adores. But I cannot doubt
of my felicity since I have your word for my assurance, so that the Court has
nothing to raise envy in me; and in the possession of a thing so pure and firm
as your friendship, I have nothing to do with their smoky and sophisticate
incense, but scoff at their frail and ruinous altars. Many times a whole
people is not of so much value as one man, I mean a person so perfect as you,
who might deserve to be a Magistrate (for it is too little to say, a Citizen)
in the Commonwealth of Plato. He that chants me in the Closer, and preaches me
up in assemblies, he that is the cause that the good and learned Monsieur
Rigault, places me by the side of his Greeks and Romans; preferrs me sometimes
above them, and revolts against holy and venerable Antiquity infavour of a
modern Author. Yet I beseech you, Sir, that the other Monsieur who is learned
but not good, know nothing at all of this. He would not endure my good fortune,
and your favors would draw his persecu^ion upon me. It would be very difficult
for you to protect him, whom you have lately crowned from being beaten down;
and it is better for me to retake my place amongst the people, and renounce a
crown so full of envy. But if you will not permit me to do this act of
humility, yet at the least, let me have your consent to an expedient which I
have just now considered of. I will either keep the Crown in my Treasury, or
only wear it in secret, to avoid offending the eyes of the Public I will be
any thing you would have me in your Letters and your apprehension, but I will
not pretend to any other glory before the world, but to be passionately
affected by you, and as I am, with all my soul,

SIR, Your, etc.
June 14. 1645.
LETTER XXXV. To Monsieur de la Thibaudiere.
SIR,
IF I had had wherewithal to write to you, when your laquay arrived here, I
had dispatched him fifteen hours sooner then I have done. But ill fortune
would have it so, that Totila, who keeps my hands, had carried them abroad to
the Town. So that I was constrained to expect their return to give arms to
my choler, and let you know my resentments. Do not conceive that I dissemble
and play the part of a Furioso. I am offended, and more sensible of offenses
then you believe, since your References are not ended I disclaim to have any
thing to do with your Elogies; and since the points of Law hinder me from
enjoying you, I do not only curse the fury of Barretry but even blaspheme the
Goddess Themis. I also fall foul on another Goddess, which you would never
suspect and call Ceres the maker of noise because Virgil called her the maker
of Laws. This Epithet has incensed me against her for your sake, and the
perplexed confusion of suits makes me hate the Legislators. Three weeks are
past since, I began to break all rule and regiment of diet, that I dine always
in alarm, and imagine every moment when you should arrive. The Ladies are
come hither on purpose to attend your coming, and to assist me to discharge the
honor of the house. But in the mean time in great contempt of the Ladies and
them, you render Oracles at home to Sempronia and Maevia, and give audience to
Titius and Seius, etc. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
May. 12. 1638.
LETTER XXXVI. To the same.
SIR,
I Proclaim your probity every where, and always allege you, when the
discourse is of a faithful man. Yet the month of July is past, and I have your
hand and seal here which accuses you of being not yet come. You promised me to
bring plenty with you, and to surround me at the same time with temporal
goods, and spiritual riches. I will believe, to speak your language, that the
inward man is clear of all this, but the exterior is not at all acquitted. I
have seen neither the Cheeses nor the Gennets; neither Verse nor Prose; neither
the Chancellor Bacon, nor the President d'Espagnet. I know not what to
conceive of it seeing the exact and punctual regularity whereof you make
profession, and I will dispatch a man on purpose to know the truth. I would
cause him to go with this Ticket, being bound by Oath to write no more Letters:
But he protested he would not present himself before you with empty hands. He
told me moreover, out of his familiarity with me, that he would allow me to
make a sermon or an Oration, if I were so conscientious as not to dictate a
Letter to him; and he has thought himself to draw two pieces out of his
Register, presuming you will take delight to read them, because he does so to
copy them. If Monsieur -- I should be glad, he may be partaker with you: you
know I have a most particular esteem of his judgment, and that a young Cato is
worth a whole senate of Gray-beards. That which makes me not to hope ill of my
French, is, that he did not judge my Latin barbarous, and that the
inartificiall simplicity of my verse found favor in his eyes. Having fallen
casually from the mouth of him that made them, they ought to have died in the
secrecy of him that received them: But their good fortune has been greater
than their merit; and since that time they have almost persuaded me to think my
self a Poet. Being approved by a person, that is not less of the Court of
Augustus, then of that of Lewis the thirteenth, his approbation has encouraged
me to a new heat; and the honor which he has done to five or six straglers is
the cause that has induced me to form a Body of sixty and more: which I beseech
you to present him, with the two pieces of the Register, etc. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Aug. 4. 1638.
LLTTER XXXVII. To Monsieur de Bois-Robert Metel, Abbot of Chastillon.
SIR,
YOur Letter of the sixth of the past month, gives me no new knowledge; it
confirms me only in my old opinions. You are always the father of courtesies,
and the common good of the whole world. But you are principally necessary to
the learned world, and the Common wealth of good Letters. Were it not for you,
the Orators would be perpetually exclaiming in their Orations, against the
Times and Manners; and the Poets would do nothing in their Verses, but curse
Apollo and the Muses. The good offices which you do them with his Eminence,
temper their bad humor, and give them thoughts less violent. So that, to
consider things from their Original, there is no Ode nor Panegyric at this
day, whereof you are not the first Author; and Posterity will be obliged to
you for all the Latin and French of our Age. But beside the Panegyric and Ode
--; etc. I beseech you in the mean time to secure the affair; and since you
know that times consumes things as it ripens them, continue me your care and
diligence both for the one and for the other assignation. I am passionately,

SIR, Your, etc.

LETTER XXXVIII. To the same.
SIR,
I Am astonished at the design of Madam de Motteville concerning me. I did not
imagine my name was known to so excellent a Person, and there was so muth
goodness at Court as would oblige without importunity. As it is a favor above
the common Standard; so my resentments must not be in an ordinary measure. But
do not you counsel to depute that office to your most reverend Lordship? Since
you know better how to set it off then I, and that she has been excit^d to a
good action only by the inducement of her virtue, she will not refuse to
continue that goodness at your entreaties, which are attended with the force of
so much eloquence. Your last Verses seemed to me very excellent and natural;
but I have known long ago, that you are none of those violents that take our
Goddesses by force, quique in Parnassum irrumpunt diis hominibusque invitis.
Were it not for you, the comparison of Cleopatra would be no longer in the
world; which now cannot perish, being she finds her preservation in your
memory. The care you have taken of her is an evidence of her predestination,
or if you would have me speak less Theologically, there is no appearance, that
I should neglect that which is now more yours then mine, and which you judged
worthy to be kept a long time in the Cabinet of excellent things, so I call
your memory, Sir, etc. I am always pe^fectly,

December. 26. 1644. Your, etc.

LETTER XXXIX. To Monsieur Conrart, Counselor and Secretary to the King.
SIR,
MY melancholy corrupts the greatest pleasures of my life. I am unsatisfied
with the sweetness of light, and nothing in the world would content me, if I
had not two or three persons in it, that are to me instead of all. You are a
part of this little world, which I esteem so dear; I have chosen you with the
refusal of the Sun and the Court; and in the most gloomy and sad nights, only
your Idea framed in my imagination gives me sensible comforts. Therefore what
will not your Letters do, which are so sincere and amorous; and infinitely more
your presence, which your Letters promise me? But there is no longer a Madam
Desloges to invite you to the Village; and to hope such a visit but from the
like attractive, is beyond the belief I have of my desert. Nevertheless, it is
perhaps a design of your goodness, and you have resolved to make me happy. If
there needs no more but the good interval you speak of to bring me that
felicity, I shall presently betake my self to my vows to the goddess of Health
for it. I will compose her a Hymn, to obtain a months release from your Gout.
And to speak my conscience, she will not more oblige me in restoring me the
vigor of my first years, in giving me a second youth, yea in giving her self
to me, then in granting me those thirty days of so dear a society. They would
be days of which I should make benefit every moment, and would requite me for
all the time I have lost amongst pretenders and false friends. My spirit which
is corrupted by the neighborhood of bad examples would be restored to purity
by your excellent communication. You would purge me from all the errors of the
people, and the defects of the Country. You would make me live in earnest. The
life of the fortunate Islands or that of the Elysian fields; those which the
Poets spin of Gold and Silk would be but low resemblances of it --. But I must
repress my course. Poor men are never more sensible of, and more afflicted with
their poverty, then when they have dreamed of riches. I am to the utmost of my
power, and without reserve,

SIR, Your, etc,
Apr. 25. 1647.
FINIS.
FAMILIAR LETTERS, OF M. de BALZAC, To M. CHAPELAIN.
The First Book.
LETTER I.
SIR,
IT is out of doubt, nothing of Alarm has yet been apprehended by us from
Paris. Nevertheless it is true, that a Gentleman of quality informed my
father, of the Prince's indignation, and the complaints of the Queen his
mother: But the Queen is of too great goodness, to have given that rigorous
command, which is reported to us; and there is not much likelihood, that the
Prince should say at Brussells, he would set my house on fire, if he came with
his Army into Guienne. This burning would indeed somewhat more displease me,
then that which my Book suffered, by the courageous Marquess d'Ayt^na, Houses,
as you know, are not printed; nor can there be more copies of them made at the
same time. But I am very averse from believing, that those words fell from the
lips, of the son of Henry the Great; an action of that kind, would not be the
fairest part of his History: It is not the manner of Eagles to stoop at Flies.
We are too inconsiderable objects, for his high and redoubtable displeasure.
And what presumption would it be in a man, that is not appointed with a hundred
Arms, nor of strength enough, to pile Mountains one upon another, to esteem
himself worthy of the vengeance of Jupiter, or at least, of one of his sons? I
expect some of your news by the Post on Friday, and remain,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac. 1 June 1636.
LETTER II.
SIR,
IT must needs be, that either I did not deliver my self well, in the
Conference I had with your friend, or he ill understood my intention. For I
desire nothing from Doctor B. but the honor of his good opinion, which he has
solemnly promised me; nor from the Sorbonne, but the enjoyment of the peace
they accorded me, in the most ample form that I could request. It would be very
strange, if I should be enforced to the further trouble of Negotiation and
Ambassadors, to treat that old Peace anew. I believed that affair to be as
well dead at Paris, as it was buried in oblivion at Balzac. The homage which
the Faculty required of me, I have already rendered them; and was assured, that
the Gentlemen were therewith satisfied. Hereafter let us visit them as our
Friends, and cease to solicit them as Judges. I conceive Doctor B. repents
himself, of having treated me too civilly; perhaps he expected, I should have
taken an attire of mourning, and suffered my hair and beard to grow down to my
girdle, to the end I might have presented my self before him, in the fashion of
an accused person, and an humble suppliant. His Doctorall severity must not
proceed so far. And I entreat you, tell your friend, that it is not reasonable
to oppress people with formalities, which are to no purpose, and never have an
end. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 15 June 1636.
LETTER III.
SIR,
YOu are not ignorant, that in the affair of the Sorbonne, I comported my self
with the docility and flexiblenesse of a Novice: And although I had as much
reason to maintain my opinions, as they to oppose them, yet I forbore to make
use of my right, or defend my self against my fathers. My submission will
possibly one day be proposed for Imitation; and I would fain believe, that for
the future I shall be left to my undisturbed quiet. In former years, I was of
the number of those thirsters after honor, to whom, both days and nights were
rendered restless, by the desire of conquest. At present, I am altogether
another person; I love rather to sleep in the silence and calm of peace, then
to be wakened from my repose, by all the Trumpets of Victory. Let us keep close
to the Pater noster, and determine our selves, with the other pieces of that
nature: There is none but God, that can speak fitly of God, because there is
none but God that knows God; All that men of themselves speak concerning him,
is no other but stammering, incongruity, and soloecism, in the language and
science of Heaven. And you are not to learn, that, De divinis, etiam vera
dicere periculosum. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 20 June 1636.
LETTER IV.
SIR,
I Am not much troubled to be dead at Paris, provided that I live at Balzac;
the Letter I writ you about eight days since, has given you assurance of this
truth, whereof a flying report had caused you to doubt. Though I be not of much
value, I perceive, you would have had a sensible regret of my loss; and I am
greatly satisfied of your affe n. The only resentment I have, is, that your
judgment does not appear so favorable to me, as your inclination, and that you
refuse me that agreeable fruit, which I aim at in all my actions; I mean, the
contentment of having pleased you. You make scruple to pronounce upon the
Letter, which I write to an Achilles of the cause, because a Thorsites of the
same cause has told you, that it displeased him to whom it was sent. I have
learnt the contrary from himself. And besides the civilities of his Answer, he
has caused a thousand complements to be made me in person, by a famous Hugenot
of this Province. The comparison between him and Hannibal, both of them sworn
enemies of Rome, did him honor, and, I know, was not displeasing to him. The
word Finesse could not any ways disgust him; in the place where it is, it
signifies only address, knowledge, and subtlety. The finenesse of a language,
and the finenesse of an art, are terms of no bad sense. And if I had said,
that such a Captain, by some certain means, had finely concealed the weakness
of his Town, it must needs be, that this Captain were more rude then a Gascone,
and that his bravery extended to a dislike of good reason and prudence, if he
took it ill, that I spoke of his finenesse. As for Hannibal, I am most
confident, he was of no such humor, he did not account himself affronted, by
the recital sometimes of his stratagems and sleights; fot it was no more, then
to intimate to him, that he not only knew how to overcome his enemies; but
that he could also overcome them by mockery and sport. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 30 June 1636.
LETTER V.
SIR,
THe objections of Paris are insupportable, and the interpreters of the
Fauxbourgh of St. German, take all my words to a contrary sense. I perceive,
that to avoid being contradicted, it is necessary that I give over speaking. If
I am so unhappy as to injure my friends, when I caresse them, reason requires,
that for the good of civil society, I change my solitude into a prison, and
chain up my self for the safety of my friends. Will the world be always thus
unjust and impertinent? and will there never be any other, to judge of the
productions of the soul, but lumps of flesh and matter? I think I cannot call
them beasts by a more civil expression. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 8 July 1636.
LETTER VI.
SIR,
I Received two of your Letters by the same Post, which gave me knowledge of
some news, whereof I was before ignorant, and confirmed the relations of
others. I am always of your opinion, and particularly, concerning the King of
Sweden- I wish only, that he had not so much of the German in his countenance,
and that in this great country of faces (as Queen Margaret sometimes called it)
he had more brown, and less yellow; more of shadow, and fewer rays. And this,
to the end that he might nearer resemble in his outside, Caesar and Alexander.
His pourtrait would please me much better; for as to his actions, they are all
Greek, and all Roman: And I see nothing amongst them, that might not become
the days of the Hero's. The Panegyric which was made him, seems to be obscure
and entangled, and in ea deprehendas vitia degenerantis Latinitatis. The style
of this man was more commendable twenty years ago, he has learnt to write ill
by writing continually, and is grown a Jade in his Carier. They that have a
greater stock of judgment then of imagination, are not subject to these
inconveniences; Their eloquence becomes ripe without corruption of their
speech; And I am well assured that the good wine you tell me of will never
loose its strength by age. A thousand salutes to our dear friends. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 15 July 1636.
LETTER VII.
SIR,
I Do not conceive that my exile must be eternal, but hope to see Paris once
again unless you forsake it, and Rome also if it be thither that your destiny
calls you. But, I beseech you expound me the riddles of your last Letters, and
do not constrain me any more to divine. I have no fancy to those reservations
of prudence, which give me much trouble, and do you no service. Our commerce is
most innocent; and being no dispersers of dangerous news, let us defy all
informers, and commissaries, if fortune be resolved to try you, I wish it may
be by something that may deserve your yeeldance to the temptation, With all my
soul, I pardon that cruel Goddess, all the injuries she has done me, on
condition she will treat you favorably, and have consideration of your merit,
I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 20 July 1636.
LETTER VIII.
SIR,
I Am not forward to dislike the freedom you are pleased to use with me. But I
beseech you, to allow something to my melancholy, and to bear with the
irregularities of an indisposed spirit. I am proud of the esteem you make of my
discourse, notwithstanding I am unsatisfied, whether that esteem be real, or
only a means you take, to appeafe the humor you conceive you have provoked.
Should you offer your wisdom to me crude and undrest? perhaps I might find some
difficulty to relish it. But being, as it is, accompanied with so great
goodness, there is no Rhubarb can have a bad taste, with such a mixture. I
presage some news, that troubles me already, but I believe it advantageous to
your benefit. The Secretariship of an Embassy to Rome, was the first step to
the fortunes of Cardinal d'Ossat. Yet if Fate have so decreed it, you must bid
adieu to the Maid of Orleans, and the Epick Poem. I dare not mention my own
concernments. It is certain, this voyage will be destructive to many fair
proposalls, that I have made you. I was in full expectation to have seen you
here, where I should have constrained you, to have passed the remainder of the
Summer with me. But I am too unfortunate, ever to enjoy you; and fortune will
detain you at Rome, though but on purpose to despite me. Let me know, if you
please, whether your departure from Paris will be suddenly; and, before you
leave it, take special order for the security of our commerce. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 1 August 1636.
LETTER IX.
SIR,
THe kinsman of Vercingentorix knows not his own desires, nor discerns his
advantages: He is very culpable to contest with you, concerning a charge, which
he ought to reestablish, in favor of a person of your merit, although it had
been, as he pretends, suppressed. I am very glad to hear the change of you remote
employment, for one nearer us, which gives me hope to find you at Paris, when I
take a journey thither a purpose for a visit. Which when I have formed, I
shall account you in my debt for another, and think it not impossible, to draw
you hither to eat of our Muscates, and meditate upon the banks of our river.
The excellent Provincial, of whom you send me news, has you continually both
in his heart and mouth. The acquisition you have made of this man is most
firm, and you need not doubt it. It will not stand you in much care, travel,
or industry, to preserve him. The amity of those people whereof you tell me, is
of another nature. It is of little value, and very much trouble. What great
pity it is there should be Asses, which should require as much guard and
observance, as Lions. I esteem my self happy to be sixscore leagues distant
from that sort of men. And which is more, I account their absence into part of
the revenue of my House. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 8. August 1636.
LETTER X.
SIR,
IT is rare that I am mistaken above once, for I give but little credit to the
esteem of great Persons, nor to the Testimony of the People; so that I am not
dazeled with the name and dignity of two men whose strength and weakness I
have been acquain^ed with, these ten years. The first, is all memory and
fancy; for judgment, that must be sought otherwhere: for in fifty Conferences
that we have had together, I could never discover one small glimpse of it: A
great personage in Greek, Hebrew, and Arabic! but no body in the vulgar tongue;
the sport of Cavaliers and Ladies, and a mere Doctor Gratian to you and me, as
often as we desire the divertisement of a Comedy. The other is less tolerable,
for he will not be flowted so familiarly, nor license the company to leave him,
when they desire; for other matters, you may take my word that he is but a
pityfull Orator, as I took that of Monsieur Malherbe for his Poetry.
Heretofore he endangered my life with three great Manuscripts, or rather three
great Engines in folio, whereof One was called Overtures made at St. Martin's
after Easter etc. Another, at the Entry of Princes Governors, etc. And the
third, an Argument or Plea for the King, etc. Monsieur can bear witness of my
patience and the persecution of this man. He has many times come into my
Chamber at break of day and never departed till he carried night with him. You
may imagine, if during that time, I could be possibly at my ease, and if I had
not had a better market with a fit of a feavour of four and twenty hours then
with so much Pedantry and Fustian Galimatias, as I was enforced to hear, and
must needs make semblance to approve. Nevertheless he continues in the repute
of a man of sufficiency, acquits his charge well, and is employed in
Negotiations and Treaties which he brings to effect: he has a happy memory, a
lively imagination, and the gift of impudence, even in a degree more eminent
then has Monsieur De. ****. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 15. August 1636.
LETTER XI.
SIR,
DO not cause me to languish in the expectation of a good, whereof your last
Letter gave me a promise; and send me that Ode which must accomplish the
felicity of a happy man, and add a Crown to his other Crowns, to speak in
the phrase of our Monsieur De la Thibaudiere. The stanza's of Monsieur **** are
not in my opinion, of the excellentest sort of his productions. There are some
verses which I cannot relish; but it may be the fault lies in my palate. Is it
not strange that this framer of stanza's should exhort me to adore that deity,
who has so long time derided both my vows and my incense? I am not so
pertinacious a Courtier, and I resign all my hopes and my pretensions to him.
If he receives good words at present, I have heretofore had solemn offers of
love and friendship. And if he is told, you shall have this; oaths have been
passed to me that I should have that and more; yet nothing ever fell into my
hands. He that promises these wonders, is very rich and very powerful, I do
not question it; but I also know, that he understands not either to judge of
verse, or acquits himself of his promises: insomuch, that unless he cut his
purse, he runs the adventure of being but ill paid; and if he be not
advertised of the good things that are in his verses, he will never take the
pains to observe them. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 20 August 1636.
LETTER XII.
SIR,
THe discourse of this Country has been no other for this month, but of the
spiritual works of Monsieur Godeau. I can scarce believe that he has wholly
forgotten me, and I think that fai^e present will at length be sent me. However
it be, he has too great an opinion of my patience, and will not treat me in
manner of a person of a keen appetite. I am much more forward and diligent
then he; for I send you this morning, that which I understood but last midnight
you desired to see. You may know by Monsieur de la Hoguette that this Madam
d'Anguitar is no ordinary person. She is extremely admired by those that see
her; and though she be but seldom visible, and allows the greater part of her
hours to none but her self; yet her rare merit justifies her from any ones
exceptions at her solitary humor. She is a light that shunns the eyes of men
and seeks obscurity. People speak not of her but by conjecture and divination.
She meditates, she studyes, and enjoyes her self in her Cabinet; yet she
cannot always so well shut her door, but fame finds an entry, and reports us
the tidings. That rambling goddess repeates to us continually some pleasant
things which she has gathered from the mouth of this Sedentary divinity.
Whereupon we make our benefit; and Monsieur De la Thibaudiere keeps the
register. In a short time you shall see the Collection with his Commentaries. I
am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 30 August 1636.
LETTER XIII.
SIR,
YOur Letters are my sweetest consolations, and I receive none, from which I do
not find good, eight days after. In your paquet I met with one of our banished
friends, it had been unript and sealed again before it came to your hands. It
seems if it had carried any matter of danger, and which smelt of the bad air
of Brussells from whence it came, they would not have been contented, to have
only opened and reclos'd it. These curiosities are not at all commendable. But
I desire no further light in this business, and you would disoblige me if my
complaint come to any other ears. My proceedings have been misreported to you,
nor have I stripped me to my shirt, according to your information. Indeed I have
changed the nature of that fortune that fell to me in partage, and received
money in lieu of land; but my revenue is not at all straightened thereby. The
house which my father built, and would pass for magnificent at Paris, deserves
to be r^tain'd; my brother is more capable of the care that it requires, then
I; so he shall have the propriety, and I will partake of the accommodation with
him. I am ravished with the esteem you make of the Letter, to Madam d'Anguitar,
she has caused copies of it to fly throughout all Guienne; and I am not able
to make it any longer a secret. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 8 September. 1636.
LETTER XIV.
SIR,
Will you never cease to be thus credulous to my prejudice? this is the second
time that your easiness has done me injury: I am wholly a stranger to that
great and intimate friend you tell me of, and my memory does not afford me any
representation or shadow of him; if I have ever seen him, I took no regard of
him, it was either in a dream, or in a crowd; or perhaps it was one day, that
my sight was not well cleared, and I brought no attention to the objects that
passed before me. So it is, that whether I have forgotten this great and
intimate friend, or never knew him, that his name never came into my memory, or
immediately vanished thence, I utterly renounce his friendship. You may please
to know once for all, that the passion I have for you, is in no common measure,
nor such as will permit me to be in neutrality. I am none of those sages, that
love with so much reservednesse and circumspection. I approve sometimes of
breaches, open declarations, and Ligues offensive and defensive. And if this
person were not an incognito, but my own brother, that had attempted your
mischief, I should never be induced to pardon him, unless it were only at
your intercession. I am,

SIR Your, etc.
Balzac, 15 September. 1636.
LETTER XV.
SIR,
YOu must indulge my humor, that I cannot at present be serious with you. The
pleasant news of your Letter has transported me into such an excess of
jollity, that it is not in my power to refrain smiling. You tell me, you are
received by favor, into the Academy of good wits, and I would fain understand,
who received the good wits, that received you? upon what grnund is their
authority established, and whence have they the approbation to be current? What
are those great personages, that have done this especial grace to Monsieur
Chapelain? from what new discovered Countries, are these extraordinary men
arrived? who, that they may confer honor on Monsieur Chapelain, must needs be
of somewhat more worth, then Monsieur the Cardinal of Perron, and than
Monsieur the President de Thou? Tell me yet further, I beseech you, what is
that you call, Director? and that which ******? What ever wonders you may
relate me thereof, you will scarce persuade me, and I shall find a great deal
of reluctance, to adore the rising Sun you speak of. Some have given me
intelligence of it, as of a fatal Comet, that threatens us, and a terrible
thing, and of more dread, then the holy Inquisition. They write, that it is a
tyranny, which must be established over all wits, and to which it is required,
that all makers of Books should yield a blind obedience. If it be so, I am both
a Rebel and a Heretic, and intend to list my self on the side of the
Barbarians. This is a great word, but most true. You are the only person I can
allow, to be sovereign of my liberty. And if there be no means to live
independent in the world, I entreat you, let me not be enforced to acknowledge,
either in Verse or Prose, any other jurisdiction but yours. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 22 September. 1636.
LETTER XVI.
SIR,
I Crave your pardon, for my over great credulity; forgive me, I beseech you,
my fears and my alarms. I am in dread of all sort of yoaks, and Tyranny casts
me into fear, even in the histories of Athens and Syracuse. I was ill informed
of the nature of your Academy; without question, the picture that was sent me
of it, was not drawn after the life. You have done me the kindness to
undeceive me; and I well see, this new Society will be none of the least
glories of the Kingdom of France; it will raise jealousy, and perhaps envy, in
Italy. And if I have any skill in drawing a Horoscope, it will in a short space
become the Oracle, of all civilized Europe. I am glad that Monsieur the Keeper
of the Seals, and Monsieur Servien, are admitted of it. But I should be also
contented, that some others, which have been named to me, were not; or, at
least, that they had no deliberative voice. It would be well, if they satisfied
themselves with placing the chaires, and to open and shut the door. They might
be of the Academy, but in the quality of Beadles or lay-Fryers: It were
necessary, that they made up a part of your body, as the Ushers are part of the
Parliament. But it may be, I am mistaken in my latter news, and they which
were mentioned to me, have not received the honor that is reported; it is
probable, you know better how to choose. By all means I desire, that there may
be two Orders of Academicians, and that you remember at your first sitting, to
separate the Patricians from the People. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 30 September. 1636.
LETTER XVII.
SIR,
I Have received your Letter of the twentieth of this Month, and bestowed the
same caresles on it, that I used to the former; I kissed it, as I read it,
which is not a ceremony without example; the Cardinal Barronius performed that
reverence to all those he received from the Cardinal of Perron. Having perused
it, and done my devotions to it, I treasured it up in my Cabinet. Concerning
that other, which I ^rit to that poor Gentleman that is slain, it is glory to
me, that the Prince does not dislike it. But all the glory in the world has not
charms enough, to cause me to forget the loss I suffer of that person so dear
unto me. When he forsook Paris to run unto Death, which awaited him before
Mastricht; he came to take his horse at my lodging, where we parted with tears
and sorrow: Between us there was a sworn friendship, of the heroical ages; and
we intended to outdo Orestes and Pylades. That which I have written of him,
and you so highly prize, must be no more, then the preface of our History. What
would you then have said, of entire Volumes, and I know not how many Decades I
had designed him, if his courage, which was his ruin, had allowed me leisure
to compose them? Thus we propose mighty enterprises upon Earth, and are great
undertakers: Mais dans le Ciel on se moque de nous,
Preschoit, un jour, reverend Pere Arnoux.
But, as of old the reverend Arnauld taught,
Heaven scorns our plots, and brings our hopes to naught.


I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 6 October. 1636.
LETTER XVIII.
SIR,
I Am extremely satisfied with your Letter, and as much astonished at the
request which was made me, by our friend of Languedoc; not but that I do very
readily accord it to him, but for that I am of the opinion of that honest man
of old, who said, He had rather have an outrage done him, then an injury
offered to his reason. I never heard of so pleasant a scruple; and if I did
believe him the Author of it, I should suffer my self to abate somewhat, of the
esteem I have of him. But I understand, by what head these pretty difficulties
are brought forth, and therefore shall discover no further to you. Though the
word of illustrious Stripling, or of illustrious young man, or illustrious
youth, may afford matter of railery; you know, it is a condition of mirth, not
to be apprehended as offensive; as for instance: The appellation of Salapusium
disertum, did not put the Orator Calvus into choler; and lepidissimus
homuncio, was not displeasing to the Poet Horace: So that if our friend is
jealous, lest the name of illustrious Youth should stick upon him, he fears
what he should rather desire, and which a Roman would have received as a great
piece of honor. Perhaps he never heard of those grandes praetextati, the
Scholars of Cicero: They were of greater age then he, they commanded Armies,
and were Consuls at the same time; and after all this, did not account it an
affront, to be treated as young men. But what will he say, when he shall see in
the divine Jerusalem, that Rinaldo is in diverse places called Youth, and even
without the additions of brave, valiant, or illustrious. Such men as are
illustrious, owe a great part of their glory to time; but illustrious youths
are indebted, for near all theirs. By consequence, those two sorts of glories,
are much different, and one is fairer then the other; The glory of youth is a
light, as it were, proper and natural to it, and which it seems rather to
produce, then receive; the glory of riper age, is a light fetched from abroad,
either gotten or borrowed, which arises more out of exploits and actions, then
from the person; and has greater advantage by the length of life, then the
nobleness of the subject. But without further Philosophizing glory, it is
necessary to comply with the fancies of Languedoc, and to deal with the world
according to its humor. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 14 October, 1636.
LETTER XIX.
SIR,
MY words are not so dear to me, but that I freely bestow them on you, to deal
with them as you please; and my Stationer is not so ignorant of my affection,
but that he might have obeyed you, without expecting my answer; you have
therefore used your power over me, with too much moderation. There was no
necessity, to cause the dispatch of an Order six score leagues, for an affair,
which you might have determined upon the place, and whereto I should have
readily yielded my allowance. Since you have not done it, but spared to
exercise your right, I now send you my consent, together with a declaration to
you, that my will shall ever be conformable to yours, although it may happen,
there may be some contrariety in our opinions. Nevertheless, I cannot persuade
my self, that the scruple you propound me, is your own, or Monsieur
Chapelain's, since you are both wise with sobriety, according to the precept of
the Apostle. It must needs be issued from some head of those Refiners, whose
faculty lies in the destruction of things, already finished, and are good only
to raise difficulties, after resolutions are concluded. If it were otherwise,
and you the author of this subtlety, I believe, I should have known your
intention two months since, and you received satisfaction. But there is no
ground of likelihood for this, nor to accuse you, as the enemy of your Spring,
and its Roses. I do not imagine, that you pretend to old age, and that your
actions being infinitely fair, you would defalk the moity of their beauty, and
your glory, which has appeared to great advantage, for that you performed them
in the earliness of your youth. The number of illustrious men is far greater,
then that of illustrious youths; and Caesar wept, because he was not
illustrious till his manhood. Valerius Corvinus was called Adolescens, after he
had been Consul; and Scipio and Pompey, after they had triumphed. Yet none of
them misliked the raillery of the people of Rome, or complained, of being
treated as young men. Virgil did not think he should offend the victorious
Augustus, when he termed him, as I you: Hunc saltem everso Juvenem succurrere
seclo,
Ne prohibete --
Cicero speaks often of Brutus in the same manner, and his princeps juventutis
signifies no more, then the illustrious youth of our discourse. He calls
Hircius and Pansa, who were created Consuls the year that Caesar was slain,
duos grandes praetextaios, which is a title without comparison, more liable to
raillery then mine. Notwithstanding we never heard, that they were scandalized
at it, or that any person demanded reparation on their part. On the contrary,
Seneca the father, thought it so good, that he chose rather to design them by
this word, then by their proper names. In illo atriolo, in quo duos grandes
praetextatos ait secum declamare solitos, potui illud ingenium cognoscere, quod
solum populus Romanus par imperio suo habuit. You, that know all this, and much
more, are not, without doubt, but the interpreter of some friend a little too
nice, and you relate me his conceit, and not your own. One of these days,
perhaps, he will advise Don Garsias, and the Duke of Infantada, to change their
names, because they contain something of Garcon, and Infant. Prudence has both
its bounds, and its excelles. This perpetual circumspection, is a troublesome
virtue; and it were better to be a little heavy and blockish, then to take so
much pains to be wise. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 14 October. 1636.
LETTER XX.
SIR,
THe Ode of the Poet of nineteen years old is no despicable beginning. But
though you had not sent me the name of his Master, I should easily have
conjectured him, by the green coat which his Scholar bestows on the
goddess Flora. Such are the erroneous raillaries of our dear friends the
followers of Caporalli. Those people are neither acquainted with the nature of
our Language, nor the genius of our Poetry. They account it a fine fancy to
make the fatal sisters laugh, and to place the Pattin of Venus upon Minerva's
face. We dare not allow our selves that license, and should look upon such
entravagancies as unsufferable in a novice. It may be the Poet will reform
himself with the increase of years, and some charitable friend will direct him
to the better way. If he be apprehensive, and propound Monsieur Chapelain for
his example, whose style is so chaste and orderly, it is possible he may become
a very gallant man. But if he adhere to the advices of his Master, he is lost
beyond recovery. Let him therefore choose according to his capacity, the good
or the evil that is set before him: for if he continue in that manner he has
undertaken, I must give him this answer, that he is likely to become one of the
most ridiculous Poets of our age. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 20 October, 1636.
LETTER XXI.
SIR,
THe Letter which I lately received from Monsieur de Colommiers has comforted
me in a great measure; and the signification of the happy news of your
return, has given me assurance of a good, whereof I began to despair. So
that I promise my self the felicity of embracing you, before I leave Paris and
the enjoyment of that desirable afternoon, of which your engagement has
raised an ardent expectation. The benefit of it will be, that I shall return
into Barbary with your benediction, which cannot but carry happiness with it.
But you will do yet somewhat more; you will enable me to resist the badnesse of
the air for a long time; you will fortify me with preservatives and receipts
against the Contagion of Galimatias, Gibbrish, and Solecismes of Gascony, and
other like popular evils which seize upon our great Lords, after four months
continuance in the Country; I humbly thank you before hand, for the good you
will do me, and am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Paris, 15. May.
LETTER XXII.
SIR,
TO satisfy your goodness, and give you the account of my adventures, I shall
tell you, that I am happily arrived at my own house, and that I met with
neither War nor Enemies betwixt Paris and Angoulesme; the news of the coming of
Monsieur the Count de Brassac, had before cleared the ways of all bad company;
he is, undeniably, that Vir quis, in the first of the Aeneids, whose appearance
is able to appease a popular sedition: And you must grant me, that in his
countenance he carries some kind of resemblance of Neptune, when he grows in
choler against the winds. I beseech Heaven, that the cure of our other
distempers, be of no greater difficulty then this; and that the Croates put us
to no more trouble then the Croquans. They have done too much for good
subjects, and too little for Rebels. This is also an effect of the Kings
fortune. Under his Reign, even wickedness it self is innocent, and fury is
discreet and respectfull. We will treat of this another time more at large: I
have need of rest, and you are not concerned with Politics; I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac,
LET. XXIII.
SIR,
HAnnibal is then at the Gates, since the Enemy has gotten passage over the
River of Soame. Your Letter has made me partake of your inconveniences, and
knowing you to be in trouble, I cannot relish my own repose. If the condition
of affairs grow worse, I do not question but you have choice of sanctuaries.
The place that shall receive your flying Muses, will be ever glorious by that
honor, and shall in future ages be renowned for the retreat of those
illustrious Guests. But you must remember, that in that case, you cannot oblige
any other then my self, without doing me injury; and if there be one glance
of Peace on this side the River Loire, you will find it more serene in our
Village, then amongst our Neighbors. I conjure you therefore in all affection,
to grant me this favor which I demand of you, and come take full possession of
a small Seigneurie. The Pucelle shall enjoy her entire liberty, and be absolute
Mistress of the House. I am ready to meet you as far as Tours, unless you had
rather I should send the Seigneur Totila with my Caroach, for the more
convenience of your journey. I expect your answer, and remain,

SIR, Yours, etc.
Balzac, July 1636.
LET. XXIV.
SIR,
I must know my self better. I have not so well deserved of fortune, as to
hope the happiness of seeing you here; and I confess it no small presumption,
to have flattered my self with such a thought, but you know that great
passions are sometimes inconsiderate, and always credulous. They that have
forward desires, fall into dreams, although they do not sleep. Pardon me
therefore what I have transgressed, and live still at Paris with more quiet and
sweetness, then the state of the times, and the face of affairs seem to promise
you a month longer. For the Marotte or trifle you speak of (so you are pleased
to term the design of your Poem) I have a greater esteem of it, then of any
Scepter whatsoever. I am far from advising you to abandon that enterprise
which you have attempted with the vows and applause of all France. Nor will I
be so cruel an enemy to Posterity, as to stifle Heroes and Heroesses in their
Cradle. Seek another Counselor of your Parricides, and do not believe that I
approve what has been inspired you by your evil Angel; I am.

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 30. Aug. 1636.
LET. XXV.
SIR,
Two days since, I received the Book of Monsieur Hensius, which was Printed by
the Elzevirs. It is bigger by a third part then the Manuscript that was shown
you. Notwithstanding, it contains nothing in all that bulk to our purpose,
nothing which I could not defeat with advantage, if I were a person inclinable
to quarrel, and did not prefer my repose above my reputation. But I do not
resent matters so deeply, and have less thirst after glory then some have
imagined. It is not my design to assemble the people, and make pastime to the
spectators. And though I may pass for a Craven in the Country of Latin, I shall
not be accounted a less honest man at the House of Rambouillet. You have
goodness enough to conserve that happiness you gained for me there, I mean the
esteem of the two divine Persons. And remember them upon opportunity, that in
the quality of one sick and afflicted, I do at least deserve so much
friendship, as to be pitied. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 4 November. 1636.
LETTER XXVI.
SIR,
I Had not so great apprehensions of fear for my Paquet, as for you. It was a
long time before I heard any tidings of it, and I began to be jealous of your
welfare. We drink your health here solemnly with the Marquess of Montaufier.
And there wanted nothing either in our Cups, or our Wishes, that might make you
as sound and flourishing, as Marc Anthony, and Dolabella. It must be
acknowledged that this Marquess is a Cavalier of great worth, and very
deserving of your affection and esteem. As for me, I expect extraordinary
performances from him, and that which was told me a while since of the late
Monsieur his Brother, seems of good conceit. That Madam his Mother did not
begin her teeming but with a Hero, that she might at length content her self
with bringing forth a Man. But I adjoyn thereto, That she has been very happy
to succeed twice in so high and difficult an enterprise. I have lost the Sonnet
that consecrates the memory of the deceased, and which you bestowed on me at
Paris. Be pleased to oblige me with a Copy, and make me partaker of some of
your other rarities. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Angoulesme, 18 November. 1636.
LETTER XXVII.
SIR,
SInce you will have it so, that I must be indebted to the honest Camusat, for
the Present you sent me, you must do me the favor to return him many thanks.
It is fitting that good man be admitted of our Society, and become our Flantin;
for it would be somewhat too much, to term him Manucio. That Plantin so famous
for his understanding in his Profession, and the impression of the great Bible,
was otherwise wholly ignorant of the Latin Tongue. He did, indeed, make
semblance of skill in it, and his friend Justus Lipsius, concealed that secret
very faithfully till his death. He writ him Letters in Latin, but in the same
Paquet he sent him the interpretation in Dutch. Martial makes frequent mention
of a Bookseller Triphon, and Quintilian intreates his care in the Edition of
his Book, by an express for that purpose. Perhaps ours is not inferior to
theirs, and your testimony is sufficient to persuade me to all good opinions of
him. Be pleased to send me the name, that Cavalier Marin bestowed on him; for I
am so unhappy as to have forgot it, and, as I remember, it afforded no small
pleasure to my fancy. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 29 November. 1636.
LET. XXVIII.
SIR,
THe Princess Julia is doubly admirable, both in her person, and in your Verse.
But I am much afraid she should induce you to prove, inconstant to the Virgin
of Orleans, and that the living will cause the dead to be forgotten. You must
take heed of drawing the reproach of so great infidelity upon you, and remember
that there lies a vow upon your design, and by consequence his Holiness
himself, according to the opinion of most Divines, is not able to discharge
you from it. As for my self, I spend my leisure after my ordinary custom, I
meditate all day, and would believe not without success, because you are
satisfied therewith. If Heaven would bless me with that great benefit of
health, I should endeavor to content you after another manner, and my spirit
being at liberty, its elevations would be far more strong and vigorous,
notwithstanding you bestow the term of Sublimitie upon the last composition of
mine you received. But in conclusion, behold a passage not unpleasant. You
request my permission to dispose of a sheet of Paper in your hands, and will
not touch my Trifles without solemn license, you, that have sovereign power to
dispose of my life and fortunes. Either you are ignorant of that power, or
dissemble it; in plain terms, you are too ceremonious, and too great a
formalist, for a man on this side the Mountains. A Florentine bred up in the
Court of Rome, could have done no more. Without question, saying to me, con
lic^nza, you would have the echo answer, con authorita. To finish my Letter in
the language of the Country of Complements, Vo signoria e Padrone; although I
am in all the rigor of truth,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 1 December. 1636.
LETTER XXIX.
SIR,
THe urgency of business has drawn me by force out of my repose. I have been in
my travel, almost these five weeks; at present I am in the Province of Limosni,
where I received your Letter of the six and twentieth of the last month, and
that excellent Poem you did me the favor to send in company with it. It was
opened in the enchanted Closet, and by Madam Desloges. I was made choice of to
read it, and I can assure you without flattery, there was no Stanza that wanted
acclamation, and most of them had their applause redoubled. That which we read
of Monsieur de Grass, is also highly esteemed. Do me the favor as to assure
him of the fidelity and constancy of my passion. I believe him of goodness
enough to compassionate my afflictions, and not to require of one encumbered
with the multitude of affairs, all the civilities that a man of leisure can
render him. Without answering to the Postscript of your Letter, I would have
you understand, I have no more remembrance of my objections, and am well
satisfied with your answers. It is time to go on seriously with the great Work;
You must dispute the place with Virgil, unless it be that you honor
Antiquity, and bear respect to your Predecessor; in which, though your worth
may give you the priority, your modesty will induce you to follow. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Lambertie, 10. December. 1636.
LET. XXX.
SIR,
I Infinitely value the the person of our friend, and I should desire his
alliance with passion; but it will be difficult to accommode matters to effect
it. The young Lady's head is full of her great lineage. She has been shown
the name she wears amongst those Illustrious Names, in the History of the
Cardinal Bentivoglio, and that of the President de Thou. And from hence arises
that haughtiness of speaking Italian in French Company, and contempt of all
kinds of Burgess-ship and Professions, though clothed in Purple, and placed
upon cloth of Flowers de Lys. Her Mother had thoughts less high, and more
favorable to the long Robe. Nevertheless, I can tell you, she is solicited
every day by diverse persons of quality, and in the humor I left her yesterday,
a Counselor of the Grand Council would not serve for her Daughter, as twenty
thousand Crowns would be too narrow a fortune for such a person. At Paris, men
are poor with ten thousand Livres of Rent, but in Poitou and Xaintonge, a far
less estate is Riches. A moderate Revenue is plenty in this Country, and we
commit excess upon that which would only suffice to entertain your sobriety.
You may read an Epigram of Martial's to this purpose, in which, what ever he
speaks of Rome, is clearly applicable to your City of Paris. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Angoulesme, 20 December. 1636.
LET. XXXI.
SIR,
THe Letter I sent you in favor of Roscius, is not composed of a style suitable
to the gust of our severe friend. But I considered in what manner Cicero used
to deal with the Roscius of his time. I remember, I have seen this treated by
Monsieur the Cardinal de la Valette, and other great Lords of the Court, as a
person of honor. Can it be desired, that Philosophy should be more stately,
and disdainful then Greatness? One action of civilitie which draws not to a
consequence, is different from a prostitution every day, to which I am not
inclined to abandon my self. Only for the future, it is requisite that my
Complements be somewhat more rare. The greatest part of my correspondents write
me Letters to no other purpose, but to show the answers; and so I am made the
Martyr of their vanity, and that troublesome reputation which you and my other
good friends have bestowed upon me. Let us seek out a remedy for this evil,
and take leave of the World once for all. At least let us make a Truce withal
the Wits for twenty years, and repose our selves during that space. O happy
rest! in what part of the world dwell thou? and when shall I find thee? I
desire not but this only thing, though I have need of very many other. I wish
neither applause, nor praise, nor glory, nor fortunes, nor dignities. Quid
concupiscam quaeris ergo? Dormire. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 29 December. 1636.
The End of the First Book.
FAMILIAR LETTERS, OF M. de BALZAC, To M. CHAPELAIN. The Second Book.
LETTER. I.
SIR,
AOu are not weary of obliging me; all my Letters give you some trouble, and
all yours afford me benefit. The last of the twelfth of this month, is a
continuance of that commerce wherein I always gain advantage, and you become
the loser. For, upon the reckoning, your hours might be more profitably
employed, and on greater concernments. My small interests cannot deserve the
care you take of them. But what means is there to restrain the generositie of
your mind? This active wisdom that adjoyns good deeds to good Counsels,
transcends all the discourses of speculative Philosophers, who have treated of
the duties of friendship, You practice much more then they ever knew in
precept. They drew the Idea of perfect friends, and you accomplish the design.
I am happy to be the subject you were pleased to make choice of to that effect,
and to gather the fruit of your glory: which I do with all acknowledgments of
gratitude, and there shall never be any person more then my self,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 4 Januar. 1637.
LETTER II.
SIR,
YOur scruple touching the affairs of England, is not without sufficient
grounds. As for the term of Divine, in the place where it is, it cannot give
offense to any. It Is true, of later times it has been so debased, that I made
conscience to bestow it on Artemie, otherwise Madam the Marchioness de
Rambouillet. Nevertheless she may please to consider, that as there are false
Divinities, so there are also true, and she is of this latter so^t. If they of
the Court commit Idolatry, we are religious in the Village; and she is one of
the principal objects of the devotion of our Province. But, to clear this
matter in another respect; Are there not some Heavens higher then others? Are
there not different degrees of Glory, and Crowns of greater value? yet somewhat
further of the justice and injustice of Ep^thetes. There is the divine Aretine,
whose divinity is beyond my comprehension: But there is also the divine Plato,
whose wit ravishes the prudent Guidricione with admiration, and whom St.
Augustine, preferred above all the gods Antiquity adored. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 15 Januar. 1637.
LETTER III.
SIR,
YOur discretion makes you as happy, as the want of it renders me otherwise.
The greatest of my disadvantages are hence occasioned, and in earnest I stand
as much in need of your prudence to deport my self handsomely, as I do of
health* Such a depth of melancholy has possessed me for this fortnight, that I
am scarce sensible of breath and motion. There is nothing presents it self to
my view, but is extremely offensive. Pardon me, I should have excepted your
last Letters, which afforded me so much cheerfulness, as served in some
measure to dispell the clouds of my disturbed fancy. I received them together
with those Adviso's with which you are pleased to favor me, with all the
reverence due to every thing that comes from you to me. You will find in a
little Note by it self, what answer I return to some Objections which were
sent me from another hand. My judgment submits it self to reason, but yet
understands how to defend it self against sophistry. I am.

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 25 Janu. 1637.
LETTER IV.
SIR,
IN this miserable world, I account petty Mischiefs in the rank of Goods, and
am therefore less sollicitous to bemoan your indisposition. There wants but
little to cause me rather to congratulate with you, since it allows you
ability enough to manage all your affairs both of great and less importance,
and is no impediment to your composition of Rondeaux, in continuation of your
Heroic Poem. This is an excellent languishment, and the best qualified
distemper I ever yet heard of; mine are of a far different nature. The
greatest part of the time I am equally incapable both of action and repose,
either to pleasure others, or satisfy my self. I have been harrass'd with the
cruelty of this malady above a month, without so much intermission as to read
the Treatise of Monsieur de ***. For the Philosophical discourse, it was taken
out of my hands the same day I received it; and Monsieur de Brassac, who had
possession of it since, has not yet suffered me to see any more then the
Privilege, and the prefatory Epistle. If he should condemn me to stop there,
it would be no great injury to my patience. For to tell you freely, I have more
longing for the sight of your Verses, then for the Prose of those Gentlemen.
But that is a happiness out of the way of my Fate, since you have not
confidence enough in me, to send me one small fragment of that admirable
Masterpiece. I beseech you, let not the importunity of my entreaties give you
cause of distaste. My love shall not cease to continue in the same fervor,
although I have no hope of succeding. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 6. Febru. 1637.
LETTER V.
SIR,
HAving not yet received any News from you, I remain unresolved whether the
Latin work be Latin: Notwithstanding it be the production of an Author, that
esteems not himself a stranger to the Country of Cicero, and makes choice of
no bad examples for his imitation. It is therefore injurious to accuse the
Counselor you know of, for the father of it. For in my judgment, his
writings are of another nature. His Verses have some sound, and the confidence
of the age of Statius and Juvenal. But every part of this is empty, shallow,
and tumid, stuck thick with high words of no significance; and this harmonious
obscurity is oftentimes the cause, that the Readers suspect a Mystery, where
there is nothing but Bombast. The other piece is of more soliditie, and better
contexture. This, if you please, may serve for a universal Answer to all the
perpetual impertinencies, which shall be spoken or written against me, to the
end of the world. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 16 Feb. 1637.
LET. VI.
SIR,
IT is not possible, for the clouds of my melancholy to become so impenetrably
thick and gloomy, but that your Letters clear a passage to let in some
glimmerings of day, and brightness. They bring with them such small rays of
joy, as prisoners receive at the opening of their grates. The Epicure Colothes,
with his great Mittain, wherewith he armed himself against Winter, enforced me
to laughter in the bitterness of my pains; and I think an entire discourse of
that strain, would afford wonderful cheerfulness to poor calamitous persons.
I acquiesce in the greatest part of those advices wherewith you are pleased to
favor me. But with your permission, I shall offer my most humble Remonstrances
upon some of them, yet with no intention of being opinative against you. You
know I do not believe my own opinions for good, but when I have persuaded you
to allowance, nor have an assurance of any truth, till you confirm it to be
such. As to the rest of the Copy, instead of sending me the places to be
reviewed, it were better to sprinkle them with a parcel of fair Asterisms,
without other ceremonies. There will be great pleasure to see the Grammarians
exercise their wits upon those vacuities, and take much pains to fill them. At
the worst, the Reader will be drawn to a belief, that they are passages the
Corrector wanted skill to uncypher. It Is the easiest of all remedies, and will
spare no small labor to your self and me. I believe the Council of Flanders
would have been half wild to have incountred the like difficulty, because they
should be obliged to await at Brussells, the resolutions of Madrid. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 26 Feb. 1637.
LETTER VII.
SIR,
ALl the glory of this Province is departed with the Marquess of Montaufier. He
had begun to civilize our Barbary, and to bring Angoulesme into repute. But it
is not for us to expect that happiness, which the Court cannot enjoy, but by
the way, when his honor calls him otherwhere abroad. Being born, as he is, for
military action, he has no inclination to be detained in Closets, when his
service is necessary in the Campaign. He is, in truth, a Cavelier whom I esteem
infinitely; yet if by mishap, I have not sufficiently persuaded him of the
height of that esteem; I beseech you to confirm the truth of it by the power of
your eloquence, and give him better information then I could imagine. There
came lately to my hand, a Letter from our friend, who was heretofore only an
Abbot by his name. He certifies me, that, at length, the event has succeeded
the Prognostic, and he is become as real and essential an Abbot, as the
Abbot of St. Denis, or as he of St. Gall, of whom the Gazetts make so frequent
mention. It is sit we express to him our joy of that news by the next
convenience. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac. 7 March, 1637.
LET. VIII.
SIR,
IF some affairs had not diverted me, you should, eight days ago, have
received, what this Courtier delivers you. There are about five and twenty
Letters in all, whereof the ten last please me better, then the other; not, for
that they have any pre-eminence of goodness, but because the matter more
nearly touches my heart; and I have great impatiency, that the world should
know, in what degree I esteem your friendship, and reverence your virtue. You
have absolute power over the whole collection, and may at your discretion,
retrench entire Lines and Periods. But, I reserve, with your favor, this small
parcel to my self, which if your modesty should induce you to diminish in the
least, I immediately forbid the impression, and declare to honest Camusat, that
I have nothing to do with him. Sans plus is an Italian idiotism, without
question; but it is also French, and very frequently used by the Cardinal of
Perron. Besides, having no harshnesse to offend delicate ears, I may think I
have name enough, to introduce the usage of it my self. Trop plus, and Trop
mieux, which are often in the same Cardinal's writings, are terms which I
leave to himself, without ever being liquorish after them, they seem to be of
so bad a relish. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 17 March, 1637.
LET. IX.
SIR,
I Cannot but admire the industry, you are pleased to bestow on a work, that
deserves it so little. This piece is nothing, but the Van-currier, to the
Gross of my other compositions. And I am in fear, this paper of Satin, and the
Characters, dropped down from Heaven, will not be suitably employed to their
worth. It Is yet to engage you to a further obligation. But howsoever, though I
performed nothing more, then to give the world a promise, of your Maid of
Orleans, and that my Book served only, to give the world notice of your Poem;
I think, it would find no bad entertainment; and the good tidings it brought,
would render it agreeable to the curiosity of the ingenious. I am loath to tell
you, what you must of necessity know, that having turned over a huge mountain
of Papers, and made exact search in all my Magazines, it is impossible to find
that Piece I promised you: Without dispute, it has either been pillaged from
me, by some curious hand, or some despightfull devil conceales it. I cannot
make you sensible, how much I apprehend the loss of that thing I intended
should be yours. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 25 May, 1637.
LET. X.
SIR,
I Perceive idleness is a better Catholic then diligence. I solemnise holy
Festivalls with more devotion than you; and you are not likely to receive
Letters from me, dared upon Whitsunday, as I have one of yours. I acknowledge,
modesty is the most amiable thing in the world; and because it is peculiarly
the virtue of Virgins, you will not suffer the defect of it in yours of
Orleans. Yet there is a magnanimous pride, of which Philosophy does not
disapprove, and Aristotle relates wonders in his Ethics. If I have promised
high matters of you, your performance will yet transcend my engagements. I do
not fear being questioned by the Public, and reproached for false information.
To be surety for Croesus is not less hazardous, then to be responsible for
Monsieur Chapelain. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 6 April, 1637.
LET. XI.
SIR,
IT is rrue, that being at Paris, I sent a copy of my last Book to Sedan: And
this, without other design, then in pursuance of a customary civility, and to
avoid the complaints of a person, that perhaps expected it. He returned me for
it the complement, that I showed you, whereunto I thought my self obliged to
answer. But I fear, our friend has made him too particular a discovery, and
contrary to my intention: For, though I had seen the last year, that passage of
his Latin Libell, for which I am not extremely beholding to him; yet I
dissembled my knowledge, and forbore to vaunt of my disgrace; I would not let
him understand my resentments of it, lest I should put him to the pains of
giving me satisfaction. I am not ignorant, that satisfactions are oft-times the
seeds of second quarells; and that a vain man, yea one of much modesty, is not
easily induced to unsay, what he has spoken, but with reluctance. But what
would you say of Monsieur **** who has written me a tedious long Letter,
accompanied with a Sermon, that would hold a whole Lent?

Hostibus eveniant talia dona meis. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 15 April 1637.
LETTER XII.
SIR,
I Am glad you are well pleased with the Treatise of Monsieur des Carts, and
shall no longer question the solidity of his doctrine, since it has received
your approbation. I send you with this, his judgment on my first Letters,
stylo, ut aiebat, Petroniano. My Latin will suddenly follow, all glorious, with
the Elogies bestowed on it at Paris; with which appointments, it will not fear
to appear before the Manutii, having been so highly valued by the Bourbons. You
are extolled there, according to your merit; and you may believe, that if I
understood as many Languages, as one of our friends professes knowledge of, and
they report Scaliger had skill in, I should not content my self to commend you
in Latin and French. The accuser of Cicero, since you desire to know him, is
the redoubtable Schioppius. He has caused a Book to be printed at Milan,
wherein he accuses Cicero of incongruity and barbarism. There is but one copy
in all France, and the Sieurs Dupens did me the favor to lend it me, when I
was at Paris. This injustice offered to Cicero, would be a comfort to Scaliger,
if he should return into the world in these days. But I expect the same
Schioppius should shortly write another Volume, and therein undertake to prove,
that Cato was a wicked man, and Julius Caesar a craven soldier. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 22 April 1637.
LETTER XIII.
SIR,
I Did not understand the extraordinary merit of Monsieur the Counselor de --
and you are the first that rated him to me at so high a value. The late
Monsieur de Malherbe, was one of his particular friends, and made sometimes
mention of him, but only as a person extremely curious, much affecting
relations and stories, a great searcher of Medalls and Manuscripts, a great
professor of knowledge in strange Countries, a great admirer of all the Doctors
of the University of Leyden, etc. All this in my opinion is too little, to make
up a grand personage. I do not question, but he was also respectfull and
faithful to his friend. But there is a difference between the heroical
virtues, and those of the meaner sort; betwixt glory, and a good repute; and by
consequence, between Monsieur the President de Thou, and Monsieur the
Counselor de -- Your Letter concludes in the style of an Oracle, and sets my
wit upon the rack. These are your affronts of old, and you take pleasure in
provoking the impatiency of them, that love you. And why, I beseech you, so
many guises, so many veiles and folds, to hide a little secret from me? You
might at first have discovered the truth in its native clearness. But you
design to make me languish, and had rather I should a long time attend the
revelation of the mystery by the post, or seek it out at adventure, by
suspicions and conjectures. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 1 May 1637.
LETTER XIV.
SIR,
YOu know well how to exercise men's patience, or, to speak more properly, to
enrage it. I have had time and leisure sufficient, to study out your Riddle;
five Posts are returned, since the first proposal you made me of it, and none
of them afforded me any light to it, not so much as one word of your news, or
concerning the honest Camusat. This begins to put me in disquiet, and to beget
some of those vain fears in my mind, whereof true friendships are not
unfertile. Your indisposition of Rheum, is it become of more forwardness and
diligence, then ordinary, and has it mistaken July for December? Can there any
other accident betide you? Has Monsieur the Duke of Longueville obliged you to
follow him into Germany?

Dii meliora piis -- I know Philosophy is valiant, and that your predecessor
Socrates, was eminent in the achievements of War. Yet I would not have your
fancy incline you, to that way of getting honor, for I account all the
Spaniards, both of this and the New world, scarce worth the trouble, of putting
you only into a bad humor. I expect your resolutions of peace, and entreat
you of all love, to avoid the garb of Buffe. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 8 July 1637.
LETTER XV.
SIR,
YOur Letter of the twenty sixth of the last Month, has restored my spirit to
its former repose, by the explication of your mystery; although I had divined
it before, as Monsieur the Commissary can bear me witness. I would not be
understood, as to usurp upon you, who are immediately inspired by the god
Apollo; or to endeavor to gain the repute of a Prophet, for fear, lest that
new quality should draw with it upon me, a new persecution. I cannot have
admiration enough, at their depraved gust, that dislike my speaking of my self,
in an affair that concerned no body else, and where I could not mention any
other, without digressing from my subject. Would they have me talk of the grand
Signior, or the King of Persia? or dilate my self upon the pedigree of
Messieurs de --? I am not fit to commend these great Lords, in so mean a
manner, and Monsieur de -- would discharge that office better. But I must
acknowledge, that all the obloquies of the inconsiderable rout, do not so much
move me, as that word which was whispered in your ear, by Monsieur the Keeper
of the Library. From whence I gather, that to please, and displease, in this
honest age, are the mere effects of fortune and hazard; wisdom and sufficiency
have no share therein. And according as the physic of my Lord -- has had good
or bad operation, and that he slept well, or otherwise, he passes a favorable
or hard censure, upon whatever is presented him. This breeds in me sometimes a
resolution, to hate all mankind. And if you were not the only good and just
person, amidst this universal degeneracie, I should make a second vow, yet
more solemn and religious, than the first. In my own opinion, I never writ any
thing more modest or commendable, then the Piece now in question; and yet
because it is no, declamation of the Palace, or preachment to the Vulgar, it is
slightly esteemed: Those that afford it praise, do it with a great deal of
indifferency and reserve, because they know not how to blame it, without
rendering themselves ridiculous: Yet I suspect some ill offices from the
Antichamber, and forbear yet to condemn them of the Cabinet. Nevertheless^. He
will-believe, for the honor of the Master, that, that undeserved speech never
fell from his mouth. For if it were so, after all the respect I have given him,
I should have reason in the same place, where I speak excessively of my self,
t'write him though never so great and powerful, Barbaro, discortese, etc. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 16 July 1637.
LETTER XVI.
SIR,
THe friendship of the Court is never without an allay of envy; and if it be
true as you tell me, that I have taught the greatest part of our acquaintance
the faculty of writing, and the use of that knowledge; it is likewise a
certainty, that, the Scholars have wanted gratitude to acknowledge their
Master; and I have made as many unthankful persons, as my instruction rendered
composers of Books. These Gentlemen never return me any good office, wherein
there is not a season^ng of concealed poison. I have no inclination to that
manner of carriage, and my sinc^rity is far different from such proceedings.
I often commend them for those qualities to which they are strangers, and thank
them for favors they never did me; And there comes not so mean Rimes, or dry
P^ose, out of their Paquet, b^t I assure them that the Verses are Oracles of
Poetry, and the Prose a Masterpiece of Eloquence. The result is, my goodness
finds too bad requital, and knowing to love with so much integrity, I merited
greater happiness in friendship. I have ever made it my endeavor to oblige and
please, but yet failed to meet with suitable retaliation. And taking my History
a little higher, during the violence of the most unjust persecution that ever
malice raised against an Innocent, since the memory of man; my disgraces
afforded pleasure to some, others made semblance of compassion, but none
offered the least assistance or succor. I always except him from that number
whom duty binds me, and my reproaches do not extend thither, where I shall
never adress any thing, but returns of thanks and acknowledgment. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 22 July, 1637.
LETTER XVII.
SIR,
IF the Collection of Camusat had been published, the declaration of my vow
exhibited there in great Characters, had priviledg'd me from the task of this
day. But it is necessary that I suffer by the negligence of Printers, and be
constrained to write to Rome, since it is not yet known in this Country, that I
cannon write any longer with a safe conscience. I am fully determined to set my
self at liberty, and not to answer our Holy Father the Pope, although I should
receive a brief subscribed Ciampoli; you will therefore oblige me (if the
publication of my vow be not sufficient) to assure some, that I am sick of the
fiftieth disease that has surprised me. Others, that I am at the baths of the
Pyrenean Mountains; and the more intelligent, that the Importunate drive me out
of the world, and compel me to discontinue the commerce I held with honest
persons. I must likewise give you further advertisement, That the Seigneur
Totila is near his Marriage, and this is another reason that ratifies the
resolution I have taken: for, being destitute of hands, it ought not to appear
strange that I gave over writing. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 30 July, 1637.
LETTER XVIII.
SIR,
I Crave your remembrance, that I am already departed for the Baths of the
Pyrenees, where I shall continue the entire space of two years, although during
that time, I will not cease to write to you after my custom, from Balzac But,
under pardon, I cannot but esteem you rather severe, then equitable, to give
the appellation of sloth to that necessary resolution, which I was enforced to
take up, that I might at length begin to live, after forty years being in the
world. Were it not a misery to be the perpetual Butt of all the idle
Complements of France, and to hold up against all the makers of flourishing
Letters? A truce must of necessity be made with honest men, to avoid the
complaints of them that are not such: And I am constrained to discontinue the
commerce that was both pleasing and advantageous to me, since I cannot use it,
without often falling into the hands of Pirates, and incountring a thousand
mischiefs. You are the only person with whom I shall admit correspondence, and
because you desire it, I will commu^icate to you my remarks on Seneca. By your
order, I have again run him over these last three weeks, and that both as a
Grammarian, and a Philosopher. As he takes Epicurus for his Text, I shall take
him for mine, and my Commentary shall be neither too naked, nor with overmuch
ornament. Philosophy may be decently dressed without prejudice to her gravity.
Liniments and fucus do not become her countenance; but yet there is a necessity
of preserving her genuine color and cleanliness. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 6 August 1637.
LETTER XIX.
SIR,
I Attend the beginning of my repose, from the finishing the impression of our
Collection. When that is done, the Decree must be inviolably maintained, and
that troublesome correspondence extinguish't, which deprives me of all my time
and contentment. It is not only Paris that persecutes me, Bordeaux, Th^louse,
Aix, etc. do it without mercy, without accounting the virtuosi abroad, which
are also of the party. But when they perceive my resolutions in Print, they
will either leave me in quiet, or at least I shall have good right to remain
so. I am sensibly touched with the news of Madam d'Andilly's death, and partake
in all the good and bad success of a family that ought to be so dear to
France, and which was born for the glory of the French name. But I have an
especial pity for our friend, whose passion being unreclaimed, he accounts he
has lost in his wife, all his Mistresses, and all the contentments of this
world. He is, notwithstanding, so knowing in the doctrine of Christianity, and
has so many holy persons of his blood about him, that he is in no great want
of Philosophy of the Stoics, or any other foreign succor to defend him
against the assaults of fortune. Every one discourses, preaches, and persuades
in that House, and one Arnold is of more value, then a dozen of Epictetus. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 14 August, 1637.
LET. XX.
SIR,
THe Animadversions I made upon the Tragedy of Herodes infanticida, cannot come
under the appellation of a censure. And there is great difference betwixt
proposing of doubts, and making positive resolutions. If the good man Heinsius
has apprehended the matter to a contrary intention, I am not to blame, it is his
own error. And I am well assured, that Justus Lipsius, that read Tacitus
heretofore out of the same Chair, would have answered me as an honest man, and
not like a signor Dottor. In some places he is pleased to term me vir
disertissimus and maximum ingenium; but he has more unkind thoughts in his
breast, and has made an ill construction of my good meaning. It was no design
of mine to take advantage upon him, but rather to find him exercise, to stir up
his acuteness, and furnish him with the matter of an excellent discourse. For,
to tell you a truth, though I have cause to complain of his roughness and
intractable humor, he is in my opinion, one of the great men of these latter
ages. A Poet, Orator, Philosopher, Critic; in a word, the (...) of the Greeks.
I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 22 August, 1637.
LET. XXI.
SIR,
ALthough I am well acquainted with your dexterity, in ridding your self from
the trouble of importunate requests. Yet I have great confidence you will not
reject the suite I now make you. I desire twenty or thirty of the Verses that
please you best in your Poem, to the end that I may learn them by heart, and
rehearse them to the Echoes of Balzac, and the Nymphs of Charante. For I know
you will not allow them to be carried to the Town, and sung in the ears of
profane Mortals. The answer will be unsatisfactory, that they are all equally
your issue, and that you have no particular affection to any. Virgil had his
darlings, and so Lucan and Torqua^o Tasso theirs. They loved some place of
their Works above the rest: They had their Benjamins and their favorites. I
expect the grant of my entreaties, and cannot receive any excuses, although the
Pucelle should come to make them in person. You know I am both dumb and
paralyticall, and dwell with the Antipodes, in respect to all writers of polite
Letters. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 30 August 1637.
LETTER XXII.
SIR,
I Must not tell you, that I bear a part of your grief, I should speak
improperly; I have such resentments of the whole weight of your sorrow, as can
possibly be produced in a tender spirit, by the perfection of friendship. Your
troubles do as deeply affect me, as my own; and I cannot be in capacity to
afford you consolation, having less strength of reason, and as great a share
in the affliction. Losses and disgraces, are part of the ingredients to every
man's cup. Prosperities are not pure to the greatest favorites of fortune, and
even mourning and tears are to be seen on the side of victory. Calamities must,
if possible, be rendered insensible, and objects provided to divert them, in
want of such as might g^ve them cure. I wish it were in my power, to supply you
with r^dresses of that nature. Were my Letters of sufficient virtue, I should
be reconciled to that employment, on which I have bestowed so many
maled^ctions; and should not say any more, what I have often wished, Vtinam
nescirem litteras. My affection observes no intervall of Holy days, it is ever
active in its duty; it makes its appearance on the days of mourning, and
consignes prosperity to the desires of other friends; it abounds in heat,
though it be but of small light. You may perhaps be treated with more
complements, but never loved with greater fidelity. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 6 September. 1637.
LET. XXIII.
SIR,
HItherto your tears have been just and allowable; but if they continue any
longer, they may so injure you, as to dis-serve those persons, which have a
respect for you. I beseech you therefore, have a care, lest your melancholy
become habitual; it is the heaviest and most stupid, or to speak more
favorably of it, the softest and most effeminate, of all the passions. And if
ever any man had need of life and vigor, it is you, who have undertaken a
design, I believe, the greatest that has been this hundred years. But if you
should chance to fail in your purpose, it will not be construed either
inability or unfaithfulness, but want of convenience and leisure. I am
afraid, that Paris, with its complements, will do the Maid more hurt, then
ever England did, by all her force of Arms. I am told, that something has
passed unhandsome, betwixt the Marshall de -- and our friend, who has been
menaced, although the sacredness of his person preserves him secure. We are
here in a place, where we catch cold, whilst the Country you reside in burns
with excessive heat. May you enjoy a felicity pure and unmixt, and pass such
days, as are woven with the finest gold and silk, that ever the three Sisters
wrought, calm and undisturbed. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 30. September. 1637.
LET. XXIV.
SIR,
I See now, you are a faithful promiser, and that a man may safely rely upon
your word. The fragments you are pleased to communicate to me, is come to my
hands. But to tell you the truth, this drop does but increase my thirst: I burn
with impatiency, to have the sight of that entire body, from which so rare a
piece was taken: But while I am in preparation to court you to that suit, is it
not true, that a hundred Verses had been of no greater charge to you, then
thirty. If you would have obliged me nobley, I assure you, they should be kept
here in great secrecy, neither will I communicate them to more then one person,
who shall also oblige her self by Oath, never to remember any thing, of that I
shall recite to her. Those distates you mention, would some thing trouble me,
but that you sufficiently understand the brutishness of this age, whose
judgment concerning good things is yet worse, then that of the precedent. I
j^st now came from reading in Monsieur de Thou, the complaints made to him, by
the good man Victorius, when he went to visit him, being at Florence;
Querebatur is tum bonas litteras in Italia vilescere, habere se multa quae
publico libenter daret, sed ea plerisque non tanti aestimari, quanti
conveniret, etc. I am of his mind, that the pains we take are very ill
bestowed, and that we ought not to trouble our selves so much, in
making-pastime, for impertinent and ungrateful persons. If some ignorant
fellow take exception at the learned World, in the discourse, you may allege
those verses to him: -- Merito cui doctior Orbis
Submissis defert fascihus imperium.
I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 20. September. 1637.
LET. XXV.
SIR,
I Presume you understand the design of our Semicapro, to put me into the
Prelacy, which he imagines to accomplish, by the credit and recommendation of
certain people, whose names and existence I never yet heard of. I send you the
two wonderful Letters they writ me, to that effect, which I think you can
scarce read with a sober countenance; you will there see the management of all
bad policy, and the whole Machiavel of the Village, to draw two Letters from
me, in their own commendation. But I am determined, and that I assure my self,
with your allowance, to equal their artifice wtth cruelty, and to suffer their
vanity to expire, for want of succor. If these Gentlemen were not comprised in
my general vow, I should make a particular one for their sakes. They have as
little knowledge of me, as I have sufficient of them: And their attempt is
contrived upon me by such means, as I am hardest to be taken. It is not in my
skill, either to canvasse for voices, or beg any man's approbation. I have
forsaken those that were able to give and enrich, and shall not now begin to
court such, as can only promise and abuse. You know, Sir, I have no ambition
to raise a fortune; if I had, I should endeavor it all other ways before. The
kindness that our good Semicapro has for me, and his readiness to ingratiate
me with my Lord -- perhaps as sincerely as many others, have restrained him
from discovering such a number of subtle devices, as you may observe in the
Letters I speak of. For these friendly advices, and all the propositions of
advancement, have in reality no other aim, but two answers. But I here
solemnly protest, they shall never be Masters of their design. And if it be
requisite, I will add to my former Oath, all those Execrations of the Ancients,
which you have read in Aulus Gellius. You see the bad construction I make of
other men's good will. But I have told you a thousand times, that I am
infinitely apprehensive of all injuries, that abuse my reason. I most humbly
kiss your hands, and remain.

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 28 September. 1637.
LETTER XXVI.
SIR,
YOur Letter represents the little Father, as so jolly a person, that my
displeasure would be more vehement, if he had been an experter Mountebank, and
endeavored to beguile me with greater subtlety. It Is your happiness, to
apprehend things always on the right side; and to proceed directly to truth.
This is no groundless asseveration. We have friends of less exact judgment,
and you know, the Writer of Politic Books, is liable to be over-matcht by the
little Father, as well as he that prints them. I am redevable to this latter,
for his good will; yet I would wish him, to acquiesce absolutely in your
advice. He must not permit the mediocrity of his reason, to strain forwards,
having learned from you or me, the compass it should move in. I do not doubt
but you are surprised, even at the title of the little Father's Letter, and that
Balzac l'Orateur does not extremely please you. Although he cannot confer that
quality on me, without displacing Monsieur de Colomby, who is Orator to the
King, and usurping upon the Jacobins and Cordeliers, who are your most humble
Orators. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 6 October. 1637.
LETTER XXVII.
SIR,
THough I have no very commendable eyes, yet I perceive, the workmanship of
Mellan is far gallanter, and of better conceit, then that of the other
engraver. The good Camusa^ adds much honor to my writings, by the ornament of
so fair and ingenuous figures. What do you conceive in particular, of that
pensive and melancholy Pallas? May she not seem to be placed at the entry of
the Book with her wand, only on purpose to defend it from the fingers of the
Sophister Gorgias and Palemon the Grammatian. That which I have sent you, is of
the style which the Romans termed Attique, and has not yet fallen into the
observation of our people. Nevertheless it was of great renown, during the
times that Eloquence and Orators flourished in the world, and maintained its
credit against Cicero, even in his own days. If I were minded, I could send
you somewhat more considerable, for which I am confident of your thanks; But
that must be entreated for. I do not intend to power out all my favors at
once, having, besides, great reason to complain of your parsimonie. You have no
commiseration of the indigence of my solitude, or the barrenness of this
Desert. For how many ages are fled, since I received any thing immediately from
you? I know no more of the affairs of your Muses, then if I were the most
profane of all the Barbarians, Yet this great neglect cannot overcome my
patience, or shake that unalterable resolution I have to honor you with
passion. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 15 October. 1637.
LETTER XXVIII.
SIR,
I Am resolved to free my self from the dominion of all troublesome passions,
as well for the safety of my soul, as for the quiet of my life, and interest of
my health. I have been long since of opinion, that it is better to suffer
injustice, then to commit it; and of late have made particular reflection upon
that passage, Qui dixerit patri suo, Raca, etc. Upon which consideration, I
will for the future repay evil for good, and begin to practice with Monsieur
Bourbon, to whom I make the first overture, without holding me to the point of
honor, or remembering forepast actions. I had entreated a Lady of our friends,
to relate him this message, before I knew of the Academies interceding in the
matter, or had learnt by your Letter what forward progression he had made, both
of his own inclination, and by order of the Company; As to my self, I yet once
more assure you, That what I do, is with no other aim then the satisfaction
of my conscience, and submission to the commands of God. I seek neither Orator
nor Poet; It Is my Neighbor, with whom I would renew my charity, and Petrus
Valens might have found the same readiness to reconcliation, if there had been
the like allowableness in the cause of our discord. I am.

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 21 October. 1637.
LETTER XXIX.
SIR,
THe humility of your language, is not suitable to the most glorious Heroess
the world ever knew; your expressions are too excessively low for so high a
merit. You seem to treat her in the manner of a young Girl, and will not
permit her to discover so much as her face at the door or window. I cannot tell
if such restraint will please her, or she will be contented with all you relate
concerning her. Modesty is indeed the virtue of Virgins; but shamefac'tness
does not agree with the carriage of Amazones, and you know that she that came
to visit Al^xander, spoke in no mean style of her self. The Car of our friend
is a very pleasant piece, and it must be acknowledged, he has a genius of
excellent and taking raillery. Only, I could wish he would use some diligence
to purify his phrase. In his writings, the construction is many times
intricate, and neither things nor words are put always in their due place. For
the Acrostick Sonnet, I am much deceived, if it be not after the nature of
those of a certain fool of the University, named *** whom I have sometimes seen
with the Author of Car, and who made that famous Epitaph, wherein this Verse is
written in great Characters.

Auae manes bien-heareux de l'antique Voiture. I am, SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 28 October. 1637.
LETTER XXX.
SIR,
What judgment, I beseech you, do you make of the Election of our new
Brother, with whom I am lately reconciled? Do you believe he will perform great
services to the Academy, and that he is a proper instrument to be employed with
our other Gentlemen, in refining the French language? I have heretofore showed
you of his French Letters which are written in the style of the Bards or
Druids. And if you do not account that, S'eximer des apices de droit,
l'officine d'un artisan, and l'imperitie de son art, with other like spoils of
the old Romans, are very precious in France; he has enough to fill the Louvre,
the Arsenal, and the Bastile, After this choice, I am of opinion that our dear
Monsieur de Racan, be designed to correct the Dictionary of Robert Stevens. I
am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 6 November. 1637.
LETTER XXXI.
SIR,
YOu are so exact, to acquaint me with the last circumstances of things, that I
perceive well, you value my contentment, and would not have me a loser by my
absence. My desires to requite you, are rendered ineffectuall through want of
matter, and every thing is so dry and barren in this Desert, that I should
become totally mute, unless you supplied me wherewith to entertain the
commerce. Muscardins is allowed for current by custom, although Muscadins be
more grateful to the ear, But Usuage must have the prerogative in this as in
other things. The word is originally of Italy, and I know not what right we can
pretend, to remove a letter from the middle of it, it being not of our
jurisdiction. Although this Letter be somewhat harsh, is called the Dog-letter,
and in Muscardins, does but ill become the little mouth of Monsieur de -- yet
it still preserves its rank in the Alphabet. It has murmured, grumbl'd, and
snarl'd, securely for so many ages, and is entered into diverse words, wherein it
is not less rough and unpleasant then in Muscardins, without any man's
accusation or process. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 17 November. 1637.
LET. XXXII.
SIR,
I Received much contentment from the esteem you make of Monsignor della Casa.
He is one of my old intimates, and the late Monsieur de Roccellai, his great
Nephew brought him first to my knowledge. I have lately read with diligence all
his Writings in the vulgar tongue, and am proud that it was my chance to pass
of him the same judgment, which you out of an assured knowledge allow him. I
concur in your opinion of the Latin, of the same Author. The life of Cardinal
Bembo is a very handsome piece, judicious, and Elegant. That of Cardinal
Contareni, is longer, but not so complete, and Victorius himself, confessed it
stood in need of being reviewed to attain its ultimate perfection. The
Italian-Manuscript, which I intend to print, is nothing inferior in its nature
to the Oration made to the Emperor upon the restoring of Placentia: At least
it is so conceived by many honest persons beyond the Mountains; and some think
it was so offensive to the Spaniards, that they endeavored to be revenged on
him by the poisoned morsel that was given him. He that your Letter speaks of,
is one of them, whose persons I esteem more then their Books; and when I would
represent his worth and attractions to my self, I leave this quality out of
his Picture. Is it possible that a man wholly unskilful in the Art of writing,
and whom the King had not commanded to make Books upon pain of his life, should
quit the rank of an honest man he held in the world, out of design to gain that
of impertinent and ridiculous amongst the Doctors and Scholars. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 23 November. 1637.
LET. XXXIII.
SIR,
I Am afraid the dispatch of last month has mistaken its way and must be
retriv'd in the Registers of Totila. Not that these sort of writings is worth
the pains of being preserved, or that it is necessary my idleness should be as
exact and punctual as an Embassy: But because there is no reason to refuse
employments to those that are importunate for them, or to spare such hands as
are never weary. The Seigneur Totila is desirous of business, and cares not of
what nature, so it be of my provision and service. It is great pity he is not
retained at a salary by the Academy, that he might stand behind the Gentlemen,
Cum stylo and pugill aribus, by the side of our honest Camusat. If you would do
him this honor, I dare engage not a syllable of your learned conferences
should perish: And I can promise yet more, that he is able to gather such
things, whereon there is no hold to be taken. As particularly he might give you
relation of the Choler of Monsieur --, the melancholy of Monsieur --, the
sour aspect of Monsieur -- the gravity of Monsieur --, and the shakings of the
head, and disdainful smiles of Monsieur --. A man of all this performance, is
well able to recover a stray Letter, and if his Archives should fail us, I
expect a miracle from his memory. To be cleared of my error, I stood in need
of the last clause of your Letter. Your advices have perpetually this
preeminence, either to confirm or redress mine. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 10 December. 1637.
LET. XXXIV.
SIR,
YOu may happily as much wonder, as my self, at that Libel, which passes under
my name in the Netherlands. It is well known, I am reconciled with the House of
Austria, and in peace with all the Sovereigns of the opposite party. I had so
little thanks for my first Combats, that I am not forward to undertake new, and
have long since renounced the Philippicks, and all matters of quarrel. You may
therefore confidently refute the news of Holland, and aver that I am not the
Father of that Brat that is laid to my charge in the Low Countries. But without
this express Declaration that I make you, there can be no greater argument to
assure you of my innocence, then that the purpose of it never arrived to your
knowledge. This is not the first counterfeit that ever was in the world: And
since there has been Pseudo-Philips, false Agrippa's, and false Baldwin's,
there may well be a false Balzac, probably some idle speech-maker, that forges
Libels in the Provinces of Low-Germany. The best is, there is a true Balzac
upon his legs to scourge all his Apes, and chase away his Ghosts. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 20 December. 1637.
The End of the Second Book.
FAMILIAR LETTERS, OF M. de BALZAC, To M. CHAPELAIN. The Third Book.
LETTER I.
SIR,
I Find no remedy so sovereign to my melancholy, as your Letters. That which I
received of the fourth of this Month, has performed the usual effect; and
methinks even your heart speaks each of those lines to me, I read from your
hands. A friend of your merit is a happiness beyond value; and I cannot
comprehend the riches of my possession. The only defect is, that I am always
remote from my treasure. I enjoy nothing of it but in conceit, and by the
strength of imagination, which is indeed sustein'd and kept alive from one Post
to another, by your most pr^dent, pleasing, and most obliging Letters. The last
is as absolute in these three qualities as the rest, and according to your
custom, declares in behalf of the good Party. You have pleaded the cause of
Virgil to admiration, and I believe, that, after this, no Lucanist will be
confident enough to show his head, but every one is ready to disown his Jargon,
his Rodomentado's, and his misshapen pourtrait upon his paper. For, in earnest,
it seems to me, that in their Verses, I behold the deformed wreathings of their
countenance they use in composing them, and the pains they put themselves to,
to swerve from their own genius. The greatest part of the people of Leyden, are
of the sect of Lucanists, or at least their Allies and Confederates. If they do
not imitate all the bad, or perhaps dangerous examples; yet they ordinarily
leave the Reader to divine what they would express; and notwithstanding all my
industry and search, I could never yet attain to understand them perfectly.
Possibly it may be my fault, but it may also be sometimes theirs; and since
Lucretius and Horace, and other honest men of Antiquity, have not excluded me
their confidence; certainly these might communicate to me their secret, without
injury to themselves. They believe that clearness of expression, is the
language of the multitude; and, that to separate themselves from the profane
vulgar, it is requisite to speak like Prophets, and not to be intelligible to
poor Mortals, but by the mediation of Grammarians. I cannot induce my self to
that belief, and I am sure father Bourbon is of my opinion; although, to tell
you freely, he more then once deviates into that bad tract, whereof he gave us
caution, and has quitted his own Virgil for the Lucan, and Claudian of others.
But this I would have taken under the Seal of civil confession. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 2 Janu. 1638.
LETTER II.
SIR,
MY curiosity is satisfied, and you have done me a great civility, by giving me
so exact information of the affair of the Prisoners. I think it was feared, the
Abbot had intentions of raising a sect, and that he might be probably the
leader of a Heresy. I do not mean carnal and dissolute Heresies, like those
of Luther and Calvin; but spiritual and severe, as those Origin and Montanus
were Authors of. I could dilate much or this subject, if our Letters could be
turned into discourse, and you were either here, or my self at Paris; Yet I
will offer something to this purpose. This Man is indeed an extraordinary
person, a great Divine, a great Philosopher, and as full of high speculations
as I ever knew any. He oftentimes speaks things that seem inspired to him, and
to come immediately from heaven. Amongst others, he assured me one day, that he
saw the mysteries of the other life more evidently, then I did the affairs of
this. It is true, the demonstration he brought did not convince me, but I
believe, rather through my incapacity then his fault. If this man be deceived,
I acknowledge the same error, and it is great pity for the rest of us poor
mortals, who ought to humble our selves continually before the Throne of God. I
can never be persuaded that he pretends to the quality of Head of the Party, or
that it was any of his design to broach Opinions. For no person in the world
could appear more respectfull to the Holy See, or better satisfied of the
Omnipotence of Rome. He is otherwise a great admirer of the Writings of the
late Monsieur, the Cardinal de Berulle, and I cannot imagine what induced him
to esteem so meanly of those of Father Seguenot, the companion of his fortune.
As to my self, I confess his style ravishes me, and I leave h s Doctrine to
their censure, to whom the judgment of it belongs. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 22. Janu. 1638.
LET. III.
SIR,
OUr new friend is of too nice a palate, and that which disgusts him, is
neither harsh nor unsavory. I cannot conceive his reasons to think it strange,
that I said, If I were born a Swisse, I should approve no other Government but
that of my own Country; since the supposition I make, is to the advantage of
the Government of that Country wherein I was born. Besides, Liberty and Master
are two words almost every where opposed, Non facile libertas and domini
miscentur; and in another place, Res olim dissociabiles miscuit, libertatem and
principatum. Whereas I affirm, the change even of bad things, to be dangerous;
if he consider the preceding words, they cannot be understood of Religion. My
intention is of things, purely civil and politic. And is it not true, that in
States, there are some pieccs so ticklish and delicate, that they cannot be
touched without overturning? Tender constitutions cannot bear medicines, and
are incapable of curing; they must be left in the condition they are found, for
fear of bruising when they are stirred. A slight touch and motion, even
without violence, or the passage from one bed to another, is sometimes mortal,
to such weak bodies; yet they are able to endure a long time, if they be not
molested, but left to the care and conduct of Nature: Quiet preserves them,
though in a state of decay, and amongst their familiar and accustomed maladies.
Should they be wakened, or turned only from one side to the other, their life
being included in their insensible drowsinesse, that wakening and change would
prove fatal to them. Such are the dangerous consequences of some alterations.
When our young friend has seen as many Winters as we, he will have no better
opinion then we, of those that go about to reform the world. Let him survey the
Histories of all Ages, and he will perceive, that this zeal of reformation, has
given birth to new disorders, instead of rooting out, and abolishing the old. I
am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 20 Jan. 1638.
LETTER IV.
SIR,
THe wit and judgment of Monsieur de -- are without question excellent, and his
compositions have not that Pedantry, which is so rank in the greatest part of
our Writers. But it must also be confes'd, that in some places, his expressions
want vigor; and what he oftentimes presents in a plain dress, might be
rendered far more glorious, by a Pen that had skill in ornament, I rather pardon
him this weakness, then that which makes him distrust fidelity it self, and
fills his head with suspicions. Yet, I think, you ought not to suffer his
disfidence and jealousy, to outlive their infancy, and to gain strength by
time. As the more discreet, you are obliged to begin first, and ^pen the
passage to his illumination. Since he is sick, it is most requisite, you become
his Physician, and perform a cure on such a person, as deserves to recover. I
have here had, for three or four days, the company of Doctor -- whom I
invited, for the benefit of his assistance in my studies. In this manner I
increase my train, being a Philosopher of a quick appetite, that cannot be
contented with three Dates and four Olives, for his Ordinary. I always bear a
spirit above my fortune, and sometimes act the Lord, although there are Lords,
whose servants are beyond comparison, more wealthy then I; as for instance, the
little Hog of -- who has a revenue of above ten thousand Crowns, to find him a
years provision of Acorns and Husks. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 10. Feb. 1638.
LET. V.
SIR,
IN obedience to your order, I have writ a letter to Monsieur the Abbot of St.
Nicholas; but I much fear, it will seem after the nature of the Orations of
Gascoigne, short and bad. There is no question, the third Part of the History
of Flanders, he did me the favor to send me, is of less excellence then the
two first. But to discover my thoughts to you, I begin to have a a greater
aversion from war. A History, that relates only of Sieges, Camps, and
Battles, cannot always please a man, that has but little fancy to the
military virtues. It Is pity, that rare Wit did not choose France for his
Theater, rather then the Low Countries, where the frequent alteration of the
Scene, would have rendered his work more various and delightful. He might
sometimes have retired from the Field, to the Cabinet, and we should have seen
the Foxes of the Court, amongst the Lions of Armies. This perpetual roaring of
Lions, is a Music, with which, I confess, I am not much ravished; Apes,
Reynards, and other Animals, of more subtlety then fierceness, would yield me
better pastime, with their frisks and gambals. Puppets have their use in the
Commonwealth, you know it well; but likewise you are not ignorant, that while
the Ape dances on the Rope, that time is taken to cut the purses, of the more
attentive spectators. Be pleased to sound out this Riddle, since you have
employed me, in the explication of so many of yours. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 20 Feb. 1638.
LET. VI.
SIR,
I Desire you to understand, that such a Gentleman is distasted with me, or
rather I with him. I invited him hither upon the word of my Stationer; but by
ill fortune, he appeared not so well purified, as the Letter of recommendation
endeavored to persuade me. There are certain vapors, which proceed from the
ruins of his nose, of that noysomnesse, that they are insupportable, to the
most civil and yielding conversation. Besides, to tell you freely, he is the
most savage of all Mortals, and less capable of discipline, then Bats and
Swallows; which, if Plini's History may be credited, can never be reclaimed:
Yet, I did not fail to treat him courteously at parting, and to retrench
something from my poverty, to advantage his; but with a solemn promise to our
Ladies, never to bring to their sight again, an Animal of so unpleasing an
aspect, or a Pedant of that humor and smell. Such people, in proper speech,
are the plagues of the Commonwealth. Cataline, Cethegus, and others, though
termed so by Cicero, were not plagues, but in figure and metaphor. Miserable
are they that come near them, without being fortified with antidotes and
preservatives. Their infirmity is dreadful, and they have this advantage from
their defects, that though they be not guilty at all of valor, yet they cause
all the world to fly from them. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Angoulesm, 16. March, 1638.
LET. VII.
SIR,
IF prudence her self should write Letters, they could not be more absolute and
judicious then yours. The last I received, is to my infinite contentment, of
this number; and I have read it above a dozen times without tediousness. You
might have been an admirable author of politic discourses, and it is a great
loss, that your subject has so much of fiction. Our entire History would not
have cost you more pains, than this small parcel of it, which you endeavor to
adorn with falsities. And you might have instructed posterity, instead of being
uncertain, whether you shall happily have time to divert them. I will hope for
satisfaction to my desires, both the one and the other, from your Pen. And I
require of you at least, some conspiracy of Cataline, some Jugurthine war, or
any other considerable member, if it be impossible to obtain the whole body.
The Packet for Rome is not yet dispatched. Perhaps a fecond Abbot de Rets, will
appear, to do us the like favor. I beseech you to attend it with patience, and
not to believe in the mean time, that my affection makes me sick. You
understand my intention in this. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 16 March, 1638.
LET. VIII.
SIR,
THe Doctor that acted Hercules furens, in your presence, and the pipe you
advised him to moderate his violence with, in the dispute, are very fine
devices, and which I have a desire to rob you of, for one of the Chapters of my
Burbon. But is it possible, that the dear **** should become an impeacher of
crimes, and a preyer upon confiscations, and that he will live by the death of
others. Certainly, after this, Honey must lose its sweetness, for the taste of
Gall; Sheep must turn Woolvs, and the whole frame of Nature be everted. His
only justification will be, to allege that, -- Quid non mortalia pect^ra
cogis,
Dira fames, durisque urgens in rebus egestas?


I cannot approve those foul and unhandsom courses, to sustain life; this is
not to want Philosophy, as you say, it is to have no humanity. But there is no
redress for habitual and confirmed maladies. Such wretches have made a solemn
vow to baseness, at the Court, and are not any longer capable of virtue,
honor, or liberty. Therefore I entreat you, let the dear *** know, that I have
no appetite to serve him in this affair, and that I received the proposition
with honor, which Monsieur the Commissary made me in his behalf. It were
better to betake himself to eat Cheese and Chestnuts, in the Mountains of
Avergne, then to enterprise such practices, to subsist at Court. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 29 May, 1637.
LETTER IX.
SIR,
THe Letter of Seigneur Jean Jacques, has afforded me extraordinary pleasure,
and I am obliged to your goodness for furnishing me with such agreeable
divertis^ments. His manner of begging often brings to memory that of Paulus
Jovius, who yet used to demand with more confidence and carelessness then he. I
have read certain Letters of his, of that nature, indeed admirable in their
kind. In some of them he protests, that, if the Cardinal of Lorrain do not
cause his pension to be pa^d him, he will affirm, that he is not of the race of
Godfry, who bestowed the Arch bishop-wrick of Tire upon a Schoolmaster. In
others, he desires two Horses of the Marquess of Pescara, and for that effect,
prays him to strike the earth with a little more force then Neptune did. In
another, to a Lady his friend, he beseeches her to send him some Preserves of
Naples, for that he began to be cl^y'd with his daily food of new laid Eggs,
etc. Although our friend have not the gift of begging with so much variety, yet
it must be granted, he will receive a sufficient Dole, if he to whom he writes
procure him a Canonship of Verdun. But I beseech you, make me understand the
reason of Most Illustrious, which he gives him. Is it because he has a suit to
him; and the Italian Policy has taught him in such cases, trattalo di mester
Domine Dio, etc. The Poet Martial, who was at least as poor as the Orator
Jean-Jacques, terms a Roman Lady his Queen, because she gave him good New Years
gifts once a year, and almost every day a Dinner. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 10 April, 1638.
LETTER X.
SIR,
I was surprised at the discourse of the French Gentlemen, and I assure you, I
could not own it, till I had with much study recalled the memory of things long
since past. If I had committed sacrilege, or a greater crime, if such can be, I
should not conceal it from you, and therefore am not at all scrupulous to
confess that, which is more pardonable, and of less consequence. It is true, I
am the Author of that discourse, which does not enough fear the Thunders of
Rome, and treats the holy Inquisition with too little respect. But it is
likew^se true, that I composed it in Holland, without design of coming to the
eyes of the public by printing, and in an age that might be excused for
greater failings. Therefore having passed the space of five and twenty years,
it may well claim prescription against all sorts of accusers. Since that time,
the whole face of Christendom has been often changed, and all the Earth
renewed. The world then was not the world it is at this day: And in truth, the
great Heinsius cannot hope for much glory* in fleshing himself so unmercifully
upon Balzac in his Infancy, and triumphing with his gray hairs over a youth of
seventeen years old; and who, as then, had no beard. His cruelty has been
decry'd by both parties; and though that continuation of Antitheses, I lately
observed in the discourse of the French Gentlemen, may be tolerable in the
composition of such a scholar as I was at that time, and the babies I then
played withal, ought not to disparage the Arms I have since managed; yet I
will not put my self to that trouble, as to defend the cause of my Childhood.
I committed a folly when I was young, and the good man H^insius has told the
world five and twenty years after that I did it. Let that judge which of us two
is more culpable. I endeavored to extinguish and suppress the fault, and he
would renew it, and make it perpetual if possible. O violator of the sepulcher
of an Infant half born, or at least unperfect for the birth! O unworthy, that
dis^nters the dead! I am

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 15. October. 1638.
LETTER XI.
SIR,
LEt us never mention the -- it is the shame and ignominy of the French name.
It Is a day the Romans would have termed Scelerata, and we must call it cursed.
It is fit Posterity detest it, or rather never hear of it, and that we raze it,
if it be possible from amongst the rest, of the year one thousand -- By Jove's
command, out of old Time's Record,
Let the three Sisters raze it, nor afford
Its name a place amongst things past and done.
There are some people, only instruments of ill luck, in whose hands the most
advantageous opportunities are spoiled and perish. When the design is to raise
sieges, or lose Armies, there needs no more then to employ them. At the same
moment, all Fortresses become Acro Corinthes; and all the enemies, Alexanders.
We may conclude, that in every Country, and upon all occasions, it is more
profitable to be happy then wise, and better to win, though ignorant of the
game, then to have the commendation of playing well, and lose. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 8 May, 1638.
LET. XII.
SIR,
FAther Retavius has sent me his Genethliacall Oration, and I have likewise
received another gratulatory upon the same subject, which was pronounced at
Charenton. It resembles neither the style of Monsieur le Faucheur, nor that of
Monsieur Daille; and has nothing good besides the terms of Scripture, which
are woven into it from the beginning to the end. I do not question, but
Monsieur de Grass is framing some admirable Sonnet under the shadow of his
Orange Trees, and if there remains one drop of good blood in the veins of the
Father Bourbon, he will employ it to the honor of my Lord the Dolphin. It is
not fit he should suffer the Jesuits to have advantage in this, before the
Fathers of the Oratory; or that the Society be esteemed more really French,
then the Congregation its Rival. I have been long since acquainted with the
dowtinesse of the Abbot you tell me of. I know how violently he is transported
in heat of dispute, and since he threatened the Bastinado to a President of the
Grand Chamber, that came in company with him to visit me, I have always
extremely dreaded him. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 19 October. 1638.
LETTER XIII.
SIR,
Since the King does not approve, that men should say, Monsieur the Dolphin is
a Child of Wonder; can he, in your judgment allow, that our friend, speaking
to the Queen, should term her, his Queen? And is not this familiarity
sufficient to give him apprehensions of jealousy? It is verily admirable, what
he says of Tagus and Rhine, that their Channels would have been dried up,
unless they had received supplies from our tears; as likewise where he
beseeches Monsieur the Dolphin, to come and visit Monsieur the Chancellor. I
do not question, that if Monsieur the Surintendant, or even Monsieur Cornuel,
had given him the sum of two hundred Crowns but he also had been one, whom
Monsieur the Dolphin should have been desired to visit. This is you see, a man
very acknowledging of favors which he receives, and spares not the visits of
new born Princes, where there is opportunity to thank his benefactors. But when
the Spaniards devoured France in their imagination, what induces him to name
Quercy amongst the principal objects of their appetite, which is no more then a
member of the Government of Guyenne? Certainly it was to fit a Rhyme to Nancy;
and this last syllable was the cause that the Spaniards slighted Burgundy and
Picardy, etc. to gain a little corner of Gascony. In another place, it seems he
had forgot that there were Rivers of Wine in the golden Age, as well as Rivers
of milk; and that Jupiter who succeeded Saturn, passim rivis currentia vina
repressit. But, pethaps, he presumed to alter the Fable, for the better
conclusion of his Period, which you know is no more sufferable in Poets, then
the falsification of holy Scripture in Divines. He is otherwise a very gallant
man, and makes excellent Verses here and there. To tell you freely, nothing I
have yet seen upon this great subject, transcends mediocrity. And though at the
first view, I took the Poem of Monsieur de -- for the Tables of the Law, and
thought the finger of Heaven had not written in greater Characters, yet I must
confess to you, it did not possess me with devotion, and after I had read it, I
found my self the same man I was before. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 1 November. 1638.
LET. XIV.
SIR,
I Delivered my opinion upon some Verses, but you have passed your sentence
upon the Poet together. Your judgments are always the effects of supreme
understanding, and you know men as thoroughly, as if you had made them. If
Monsieur de Saint Blancat write our History, I could wish you would lend him
your skill, so exact, subtle, and piercing, for the making such Elogies with
truth, as are usually placed in the conclusion of every Book. This
Historian-Poet is not unknown to me, I have seen long ago, both of his Prose
and Verse, wherein he imitates two examples, extremely dangerous; I mean,
Tacitus and Statius. I believe your testimony concerning his Leucate. But if I
will believe my self, for the beginning of a History of our times, I conceive
it necessary, that he change and reform his style, before he can resemble Titus
Livius. I have the same esteem of his Poem with you, it is written in a high
strain, saving that it is sometimes overshort, and falls into the vicious
extreme. As for instance, in these two Verses, which struck me with amazement
at the first reading, and made me smile the second: Ille ore horrendum lituis
respondet aperto,
Obscuratque tubas vagitu, and tympana terret.


Good God! what a representation is this, of Monsieur the Dolphin, in his
cradle! Methinks I rather see Pantagruel there, or Garagantua, frighting his
poor Nurse, Heavens! what a voice, that drowns the noise of Drums, and renders
the sound of Trumpets imperceptible! This is indeed a fair beginning, to speak,
one day, with the mouth of Canons, Quod solum orationis genus Principi concedit
beatissimae memoriae Theophilus. I remember I have read something of near
likeness to this, in Silius Italicus, where he speaks of Hannibal, then an
Infant, and puts these words into his fathers mouth; He cries with some sort of
gravity, and I see in his countenance the portraict of my hatred and choler,
which are reproduc'd in him, and shall increase with his years.

Vagitumque gravem, atque irarum elementa mearum. Silius Italicus is very high
in his expressions, but Monsieur de Saint Blancat is many degrees above him. I
am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 20 December. 1638.
LETTER XV.
SIR,
I Much approve the Idea you have drawn, of your austere and rigid History,
being not so great a lover of ornaments and dressing, as that I would have them
enervate virility. But yet you must confess, that it is an Idea purely
spiritual, which appeared only to you in your Closet, and is not to be found
in the nature of things. Your accomplished reading cannot produce me one
example of it, in all Roman Antiquity. For I do not consider, Quicquid Graecia
mendax Audet in Historia. I have a most confident assurance, you cannot do it.
Just now, I ended the entire History of Titus Livius, who seems to me more
eloquent, if it be possible, then Cicero. As for Salust, he manifestly
transgresses your maxims, and is not contented to use good language, but he
lends it out to Marius, that is, to a Jean de Were, and imployes all his
Rhetoric in the Oration of an ignorant. The Commentaries of Caesa^, and the
lives of Suetonius, might be brought in your justification; but they have not
the name of Histories, nor, with your favor, must, what I say, be termed
Controversy. For I am in effect of your opinion, and would write an History in
the manner you design it, though I have great contentment, in reading that of
the draught of Livy. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 4 July, 1638.
LETTER XVI.
SIR,
MY intention was certainly mis construed, concerning the Gasconian Poem; I
never had any design of aspersing it, much less Statius and Tacitus; for
although I am of the contrary party to them, yet I esteem them brave and
generous enemies; I know those noble personages have conceits high and
magnanimous, that above half the world is for them, and that being only
culpable of the vice of their age, they are culpable of a vice, that has a near
resemblance to virtue. It is true, Naugerius made a sacrifice to the god
Vulcan, of the Woods he had planted, in imitation of Statius. But I cannot
approve of his cruelty, nor will I counsel Monsieur de Saint Blancat to
dispose so of his, which I have seen of the Impression of Toulouse. Besides
their worth, which is not ordinary, I have a kind of interest in them, since I
am styled there magni Balzacius oris, if, at least, his meaning is, that I have
the eloquence of Cicero, and hot the throat of Garagantua. I am for the child
of a thousand vows. All France has apprehended the matter so; It Is a word
framed by the universal voice; and without an express Edict to that purpose,
it will be no small difficulty to make us change our language. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 6 Janu. 1639.
LETTER XVII.
SIR,
I Return you the Comedy of Annibal Caro, which I have just now read over; it
seems to me judicious and plausible, yet, I conceive, I have seen better: The
moral part has more of my approbation, then the pleasant; and his Fool has not
given me so agreeable divertisment, as I could have wished. Touching the
Comedies of Ariosto, you tell me of, I read them in my voyage to Rome, and do
readily subscribe to the favorable judgment you make of them. The person that
lent them me, did not value them at so high a rate, as your friend of Paris.
Certainly, if that friend be married, he will not suffer his wife out of his
sight, but accompany her himself to repay visits. A man of that unmeasurable
jealousy, deserves a strumpet for his consort, and that his servant should set
his Library on fire, to teach him a more moderate esteem, of what he calls
himself Master. I cannot believe, I have any friends of this humor; if they
were, I should soon repent me of their knowledge, and so have given them such
testimonies, as I prize above all their Books. I speak only of Ink, Paper,
and Covers, without reference to the merit of the Authors, who are not
concerned in this sort of commerce. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 19 May, 1638.
LET. XVIII.
SIR,
I Am not so well skilled in the Greek of Florence, as to understand distinctly
the Atticism of Annibal Caro; yet I have some doubt of it, and my confused
suspicions, are at no great distance from your perfect knowledge. There is
something of morality in the Comedy, that gave me much contentment, though:
have at present lost the remembrance of it. For the rest, I refer my self to
you; only I conceive, the Cavalier Marini must be allowed the preeminence of
fancy, and I never knew so great a difference between two Wits, as his and
this; one of them is all imagination, and the other all judgment. In the Verses
of Annibal Caro, methinks I behold the modest grandeur, and decent management
of a Commonwealth; and those of Cavalier Marini represent me, the luxury and
profusion of Nero. As to Victorius, he is a person I extremely value, although
he be no great friend to Ovid, and seems not wholly satisfied with the Latin
of Virgil. We will examine this matter at better leisure, and consider the
weight of those reasons, that have induced him to such opinions. In the mean
time, you may please to understand, that I expect the volume in Folio, and have
nothing but thoughts of acknowledgment, for the civilities of Messieurs du Puy.
Your jealous friend might do well, to consult some Soothsayer, concerning the
voyage of his Book: I think he would be in as forlorn a condition, as the
desolate Alcyone, if he should dream of some unhappy adventure, that had
befallen it. I beseech you pardon my freedom, in treating such people; the
greatest honor I can afford them, is, to reckon them in the number of those,
that are sick of the disease of Tulips, or of that of Hens and Pigeons.
Although these last are sometimes more profitable, and I have had the flowers
of the one in my hand, and the young of the other in my dish. For my own part,
I should take great contentment, in losing my Books in that manner; and I can
say without vanity, that those wherewith I have pleasur'd my friends, since I
came into the world, would be sufficient to make no small Library. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 29 May, 1638.
LETTER XIX.
SIR,
MY indisposition renders all my nights restless, and yours permits you but
small repose. I cannot draw comfort from the resemblance of your sufferings.
But I must further advertise you, that my days are also painful and irksom,
and I only enjoy a few passable moments. A life of this kind, is a great
misery, and I know nothing in it, can countervail the trouble, of sustaining a
body so ruinous as mine. Long waking is sometimes without anguish but when a
man's pains never sleep, this is indeed the state of Regulus, in the hands of
the Carthagenians. It Is to endure all the racks and tortures of the Tyrants,
your Letter mentions; it is to live as I do. I am sorry, that in all this
relation, there is not so much as one word of Rhetoric, and could wish, my
complaints were less Historical; they proceed from a cause so sensible and
importunate, that I am not able to continue them, but must of necessity, for
this time, reduce all my matter to these few lines, which will assure you, that
I am eternally with all my soul,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 12 June 1638.
LETTER XX.
SIR,
HAving deprived the imaginative Poet of judgment, I have left h m nothing now,
b^t an instrument to commit faults with. You know, when the Cyclops was blind,
his great strength incumbered him, and served only, to advance the danger of
his fall. Our opinions therefore appear to be the same, though they differed in
the expression; and I conceive, that the fancy alone, in what degree of
perfection it can possibly be, is incapable of being a Parent of any thing, but
Monster^, or of treading in the right way, but by accident and fortune.
Victorius is not so debonnair and agreeable, as some persons I could name; but
he has a certain Roman simplicity in his carriage, that pleases me infinitely;
and even his negligence has something in it, of grace and comeliness. He is
otherwise a man of good blood, and has ennobled Pedantry He has employed his
whole life, in the instruction of youth, and read publicly every day in the
Schools of Florence; some volumes of his observations upon Aristotle, Cicero,
Demetrius, Phalerius, etc. are come forth into the world, with commendation of
his judgment. Monsieur della Cas^, acknowledged him for his Master; Annibal
Caro consulted him, as the Oracle of his Country; and on this side the
Mountains, the proud Scaliger styles him frequently, Clarissimus Senex, and,
Doctissimus Victorius. To conclude, he received visits from the Princes de
Medices, and Hen^y the third writ him a Letter, to desire his friendship. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 29 June 1638.
LETTER XXI.
SIR,
Whatsoever information the enemy of Car may have given you, I entreat you to
believe my affections are most constant and immutable. I have always had a
particular esteem for Victorius, although I am constrained to confess to you,
I do not greatly admire the Letters and Orations I lately read. They resemble
those Wines which are not indeed corrupted, yet their worth exceeds not the
rate of eight pence a Gallon, to use the comparison of the late Monsieur
Malherbe. He commits no solecismes, he is no Barbarian, but a native Citizen of
Rome, though a very mean Plebeian, and has nothing to render him considerable,
but the place of his birth. You cannot imagine what resolution is necessary, to
proceed sometimes from one page to another. To read the whole Book is no less
toil, then to travail over all the plains of Bordeaux afoot, and without
company. I do not wonder therefore, that it is so scarce, but rather should
have counted it prodigious, if there had been two Editions. Some of his
prefaces created in me a desire to read his Letters, which nauseated me so
much, that I should fear being sick, unless yours do restore my appetite. As I
do not approve of Salt and Pepper by handfulls, so notwithstanding my infirmity
and squeamishness, I am not so superstitious as to dislike all manner of
sauces, and always to observe the rules of a sick man's diet. It Is a health
more grievous then diseases, which obliges us to abstain from those things
which we most affect. Cicero in diverse places of his Works, derides the
softlinesse of such Orators, as have neither strength nor vigor, and are
equally undeserving both of punishment and reward: We may rank this person in
that number; you would think he expired at the close of every period, and had
no more life then one just a dying. In a word, he no ways plays the Orator
in his Orations. But from hence it must not be concluded, but he may be
otherwise learned and judicious. And even in this, although I am weary and
harrss'd with so tedious a Lecture; yet I prefer his meanness and slow pace,
beyond the loftiness and impetuosity of Ciampoli, Malvezzi, and many other
high-flown wits on the other side the Mountains. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 6 July, 1638.
LETTER XXII.
SIR,
IT was your pleasure, that the sacredness of Hospitality should prevail above
all other considerations, and I esteemed obedience my duty. No civility was
wanting on my part in Monsieur Costar's entertainment. I had his company here a
fortnight, and during that time, you were both the most frequent and agreeable
subject of our discourses. Truth obliges me to this testimony, that, I never
knew any man have a more resolute persuasion of your worth then he. Your
friendship is the highest aim of his ambition, and unless you reject his, I
dare offer my self his surety, and to be responsible for the contract. Upon
diligent scrutiny, and sounding all the recesses of his heart, I find that in
former passages, there was not so much malice as bravery, and more of accident
then design. But I can assure you, he has an extreme regret for what is past,
and acknowledges that even Innocence it self must be esteemed culpable, if it
should offend a virtue like yours. He has given me so full satisfaction
therein, that I have made him a promise of your love, and judged it of no
necessity to require of him such Remonstrances, as himself, by a Letter to you
intended. Your goodness makes me confident it will not be unpleasing to you, to
have gained a friend, and lost an enemy. He is, in reality, a person of great
merit, and has eminent accomplishments both of Nature and Education. But I must
not pass so soon from an Apology to a Panegyric, since I cannot heartily
commend him, till he be in good opinion with you. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 12 August, 1638.
LET. XXIII.
SIR,
THough nothing is able to astonish me, yet the sudden retirement of Monsieur
the President is a very strange and surprising adventure. I make you no
questions thereupon, nor will I examine whether he were immediately inspired by
the Holy Ghost. Second causes have no influence in this alteration, as unhappy
success in love, discountenance of Superiors, or some defeature of that kind,
which you may perhaps conjecture. His piety is not occasioned by discontent, or
lassitude of spirit: Neither is it the issue of a faint courage and
despondency. Nauscounesse is usually of those things that have glutted and
overthrown the appetite, and we become weary of such profession, which our
affections at first carried us with most violence to embrace. Our strength, if
unthriftily husbanded, grows enervate and languid, and with that, our spirit.
But this case affords no ground for such conceits, The continuance of so
troublesome an employment, might perhaps seem insupportably burdensome to some
other man's shoulders, though strong and laborious. But this person, had a clear
and unquestionable reputation, beyond that which his eloquence and admirable
pleadings had gained him at the Bar. His resolution will possibly be
variously interpreted, though to my self, I shall make no other judgment of
it, but civil and favorable. I would believe that he was not able to
withstand the power of Grace that drew him from the world, and that God was
vanquisher in the combat betwixt him and man. But what moves him to speak so
much of his faults and infidelities, in the Letter which he writ to Monsieur
the Chancellor? I know that was the style of St. Francis; but yet it ought not
therefore to be drawn into example, both you and my self, can sufficiently
testify, that, he never committed any excess except that of studying, and has
no debaucheries, but such as are honest and virtuous. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 1 September. 1638.
LET. XXIV.
SIR,
THe days whereon I receive your Letters, are remarkable to my small family,
by the serenity of my countenance. I am not cheerful but when it pleases you,
nor have I any contentment but that which the Currier brings me with your
Packet. You evidence an excessive goodness and charity, in satisfying my
importunate curiosities so punctually, and taking such particular care, of a
person altogether unprofitable unto you. Yet you conceive what you do, short
and deficient, and complain of the tenderness of my conscience, that I forbear
to dispatch you, after your overthrow; for to require of you the news of
Rambouillet Hostell, as you apprehend I did, were it not to oblige you to be
the greatest Historian of this Age, and to send me the relations of an infinite
number of excellent things that are discoursed every day in that fair part of
the World. You know, that Dies unus expraeceptis sapientiae traductus, peccanti
immortalitati anteponendus est. That is, in the vulgar Tongue, that one day in
the Hostell of Rambouillet, is more valuable then many Ages otherwhere; and by
consequence, the Acts of one week in that Country, considering the importance
and worth of things would comprehend more matter, than there is in several
decade of other Histories. I understand such matter as deserves to be known,
and affords both instruction and divertisement. In which respect, I am not
minded to charge you with the most precious, but yet the most weighty burden
that I know in the world. I desire but one sentence, one half of a period, or
one small word, of Madam the Marchioness de Rambouillet, in repeating of
which, it would be very difficult to determine, whether the Mother of the
Gracchi, were more absolutely Roman then she, in regard of spirit and virtue.
The Eloquence of that ancient Cornelia, was sutably extolled by them of her
times. And we must also confess, to the glory of ours, that her words are
framed with no greater proportion of solid reason and judgment, than they are
of modesty and honor. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 18 Feb. 1638.
LET. XXV.
SIR,
THe feminine Senate, that assembles every Wednesday at the house of Madam --
is, in my opinion, an odd conceit. But Cato would have termed it a disease of
the Commonwealth, which ought necessarily to be redressed; and on such an
occasion the old Romans would have sent to consult the Oracle of Delphos, what
so great a Prodigy might portend. If the Lady that is President of the
Assembly, has, as I am told, made a certain person, called -- a Denizen of
Rome; there remains nothing for her to do, in my opinion, then to espouse the
Emperor of the little Houses. I have long since declared my self against the
Pedantry of the other Sex, and professed that I could more willingly tolerate a
woman with a beard, then one that pretends to learning. It is fit the eloquent
Laday de -- be at least Atturney-Generall of this Sovereign Court; and next
her, Madam --. In earnest, had I authority in the Civil Government, I would
condemn all those women perpetually to the distaffe, that undertake to write
books, that transform their souls by a masculine disguise, and break the rank
they hold in the world. There are some that pass their censure as confidently
on our Verse and Prose, as on their Italian Dresses and Needle-works. They
scruple to say, an Heroic Poem, but always call it Epick; and there is never
any mention of the Kid, but they presently fall to discourse of the singleness
of the subject, and the rule of twenty four hours. No more at present, but that
I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 21 Sep. 1638.
LETTER XXVI.
SIR,
IN requital of the news, of the great World you sent me, I impart to you
those of our Village. Never did Nature cloth our fields with more beauty, and
delightful verdure; nor were the trees and corn more florid and promising. The
Sun does not employ all those beams, he did in April the year past, when he
burnt up the herbs in the tenderness of their birth; his hear is mild,
innocent, and supportable to the weakest heads. The coolness and dewes of the
nights succeed in their course, and yield refreshment, to what would languish
upon the earth, without their succor. But having rather laid the dust, then
made it dirty, it must be granted, they contribute no small share, to the
pleasure of those rare mornings we enjoy. I am very solicitous of losing the
least moment of them, and precisely begin them, at half an hour after four,
and so continue them without intermission till noon, during that space, I walk
abroad without weariness, and in such places, where I may conveniently sit at
my pleasure. I read Books, that do not oblige me to meditate, and my study is
with indifferent attention; for at the same time, I do not cease to listen to
an infinite number of Nightingales, wherewith our thickets are inspired. I
pass my judgment of their merit, as you do of that of Poets, in the place
where you are; and indeed, if you are ignorant of it, I assure you, there is as
much difference between Nightingale and Nightingale, as between Poet and Poet.
There are some of the first, and some of the inferior Classis. We have enough
of Maillets, and -- and also some Chapelains and Malherbes. The rest another
time. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 12 May, 1638.
LETTER XXVII.
SIR,
THe father Narni is an Orator, whom I admired in the Chair, but do not so upon
the Paper; in the little that I have read of his book, I have observed very
many poetical expressions, and cold allusions, together with certain fables
intermixed; which, as they do not please me in any place, so I absolutely
condemn them in Christian eloquence. Besides all which, I know not who can
allow him, to allege before the Pope, and the sacred College of Cardinals,
Alexander ab Alexandro, Caelius Rhodiginus, Pierius Valerianus, and other like
Authors, so little deserving of the honor he does them, and so remote from his
argument; in a word, who have nothing to do with the grandeur of Jesus Christ,
and the Majesty of the holy Gospel. I perceive hence, that the father Narni was
well born, but badly enough instructed; and that his defects proceeded from his
Masters and his Books, but that he owes his eloquence almost wholly to himself;
he speaks sometimes in a high and noble strain, and even in the Book, in which
there are so many cold allusions, and poetical expressions, and where Pierius
Valerianus is quoted, there are some incomparable passages. I must have a copy
of it, at what rate soever; and I will not want one, though I be enforced to
request it of Pope Urban, who heretofore did me the honor to caresse me. It
ought not to seem strange, that I have such inclination, for an Orator of my
acquaintance. But there is yet something more particular, that justifies my
passion: and who would now conclude, but there were some domestical interests
between us? Nevertheless, it is a real truth, that I am going to tell you;
this good man does so nearly resemble my father, that the first time I saw him,
I believed my father had disguised himself, in the habit of a Capuchine. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 20 October. 1638.
LET. XXVIII.
SIR,
I Earnestly beseech you, to have so much pity of me, as to deliver me from
the torment of this importunate person; he assaults me with Paraphrases and
Sermons, and will not suffer me to enjoy the benefit, of being a hundred
leagues distant from him. If you have no skill in Exorcism, to chase him from
haunting me, I will turn shameless, and give him some remarkable disgust. At
least, his qualities of Preacher and Paraphrast, or even those of Psalmist and
Prophet, shall not hinder me, from signifying to him in plain terms, that I
much value his friendship, but yet have greater love to my own repose. As for
Monsieur the Count, I am not so unjust, as to honor him in a less degree then
I did, because I have no reason to commend Monsieur his brother: They are two
persons, not only distinct and separate, but even opposite and contrary in all
things: One of them is the most courteous and civil, of all men living; and
the other has not his equal, in crossnesse and morosity; so that if the virtue
of their mother were not indubitable, no man would ever believe them brothers.
I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 30. October. 1638.
LET. XXIX.
SIR,
I Am redevable unto you, for the exact justice you have rendered, in your last
Letter, to our friends of antiquity; I have drawn particular instruction from
it, as from all the precedent; and my expectation was not greater then my
satisfaction. But, I cannot deny, The demand you make me, concerning Monsieur
de -- has something surprised me; he understands more of my affairs, then my
self; and it is fit he be both most-great, and most-good, since he beatifies me
in my lifetime, and by his own private authority. I am all matter, earth, and
body, and yet they sell me about at Paris, for a man made up of quintessence.
It Is a favor done me by my News-Merchant, and a virtue he is pleased to endue
me with: Nevertheless I believe, he does not report, that I let my beard grow
at length, or curtail the collar of my jerkin. I have ever so much disapproved
singularity of this nature, that although I reverence the younger Cato, yet the
uncleanlinesse of his hands, with his torn and dirty Gown, and his locks horrid
and incompt, are very far from commending him to my esteem. The action of
Monsieur the President, is an heroical exploit, which must not be drawn into
example, and infinitely transcends my capacity and endeavors. I have not wing
enough for so high a flight; nor know I how to take aim at things, beyond my
view and comprehension. But as I am short of those perfect ones, who have no
other object of their thoughts, but the felicities of Heaven, so I beseech you
to believe, that I am more remote from the number of those hypocrites, who
drive a trade upon earth with dejectedness and sour faces; I have not
falsehood enough for such carriage. I never affected to appear better then I am,
because I always loved my reputation less then truth. Had I been capable of
the cheat of devotion, I had certainly found fortune more favorable, then she
has been, and the Seigneur Jean Jacques should have treated me at this day,
with the title of my Lord. But in reality, I prefer liberty before command, and
prise my quiet, more then the dignities of others. You should see a clear proof
of what I say, if they at Court would take me into consideration, and confer on
my silence, what the Doctors canvasse for every day, by their Sermons; the
world should then know, that I am no vaunter of Philosophy, and you receive the
pleasure of having a friend, that did in earnest refuse Bishoprics. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 10 November. 1638.
LET. XXX.
SIR,
I Will not undertake to cure you, it is enough that I assure you, I suffer
with you, and have as quick a sense of your sorrows, as of my own. The person
for whom you lament, dyed like a Hero, and with the glorious consolation of
that ancient Verse; He conquering fell, and ere of life bereaved,
Paid back his foe the death himself received.


But this is that, which, in my opinion, obliges you to a double grief; that
which augments the glory he obtained, renders more deplorable the loss which
you undergo; and a meaner valor had given you a less measure of affliction.
Yet in this case, as in others, attention must be given to the counsels of
reason; and it ought to be remembered, that in the ruin of the world, which is
dissolved piece by piece, it is not requisite to bewail a small portion, that
has happened to perish a little sooner then the rest. Coloredo was ever speeding
on to the end of his days, without the furtherance of Monsieur de la Trousse;
and also Monsieur de la Trousse, although he had never met Coloredo. Death is a
necessary consequence of birth, and it is our beginning should be lamented, as
being the first step to our end and dissolution. But what presumption is this,
to preach befere the father Narni? Nevertheless, the father Narni preached
before the Pope; that is, before him that has all the Canon Law and Divinity in
his breast. I could curse those Poltrons, that forsook their Principal at his
fall, and methinks there ought to have been four French Cavaliers to have
covered him, with the bodies of four Cavaliers of Germany. The brown Nymph, in
my opinion, does not render him good justice, nor sing his high valor in a
suitable strain. I am troubled for our Monsieur de Chaudebonne, whom you call
the sick-Sage. But wisdom is no more privileged then valor; it is necessary
that even the Saints die, before they be Canonized. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 1 December. 1638.
The End of the Third Book.
FAMILIAR LETTERS, OF M. de BALZAC, To M. CHAPELAIN. The Fourth Book.
LETTER I.
SIR,
I Do not begin to count my obligations to you from this day. All that I
possess of Hannibal Caro, I hold of your bounty, and the same hand has made me
a New years present of his Translation of Aristotle, that formerly bestowed on
me the Volum of his Letters. So that we only continue our custom, you give,
and I receive. May prosperity attend my benefactor, or my bere-factor, since
Monsieur Vaugelas will have it so; and that it is not meet to interrupt an old
friendship for so inconsiderable a difference. The Italian Aeneide shall return
to you as complete and sound, as it left your Closet. Such guests, when they
sojourn under my roof, never suffer any bad treatment. Of the two Epitaphs you
were pleased to send me, I conceive one is less blameable then the other; but
there is neither of them good, and this is not called writing in Latin. You
understood this truth before me, but would not declare it so freely. It Is no
new observation to you, that as there are confident and furious fools in the
ga^be of wisemen, so there are also sententious obsurdities, that carry the
appearance of Aphorisms. The World is most frequently imposed upon by such
false lightning; and I cannot affirm, if to avoid being of the deceived World,
it suffices to be one of the Academie, I am infinitely pleased with the new
acquisition it has made of the Philosopher --; He is, in truth, a gallant
person, and is not deficient of conceit and invention, though he serves
himself most commonly of that of others. I say nothing of the other reception,
which was made on the same day, least I should seem to disparage the judgment
of my Superiors, and to give too much liberty to my own. There are some Books,
and some wits, which he cannot endure. He would suppress two thirds of all
Libraries, and the moiety of Universities. A person of such savage melancholy,
should never dream of coming abroad out of his retirement, and the pleasure
which he takes in despising all things, ought to restrain his desires of being
any thing in the world. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 4 Janu. 1639.
LETTER II.
SIR,
THe ambitious thoughts of Monsieur -- in my behalf, and the glorious offers he
many times proposes to you, cannot but give you strange apprehensions of him.
You must excuse the heat of his zeal, and make your self pleasant with all his
splendid promises. Without question, it is only an old Parchment, which they
call a Breviate, that was tendered me some ten years since; and the subscription
of several Let^ers, some whereof are from very ordinary hands, that have
carried him to these extravagant motions. He imagined, I might with justice
expect the like favor that was granted to an Advocate of Picardy, who is not
capable of returning any considerable services. But herein I dissent from my
friend; having learnt a long time since, that there is no Robe so becoming a
Philosopher as his virtue. Wherefore, Sir, after acknowledgements to you for
the good will you have testified toward me in this occurrence, and the
solicitation you have already begun; my request to you is, that you would
surcease the continuance of it, and inform Monsieur the Abbot -- that my
appetite is not suitable to the desires of my friends. I find my self so
feeble, and overburden'd with diverse evils, that even an other name annexed to
mine, would weigh me down, and a naked title, though without charge or
employment, can afford me only trouble and inconvenience. I would willingly
have written to Monsieur --, but I am wholly unprovided of matter to do it,
Neither my Rhetoric, nor my Muses, yield me any thing upon those sorts of
arguments, If I knew a maker of Complements, and Marriage-Sonnets, I would
purchase some of his Merchandise at a Pistol a line, though Pistols also are
not made in my Village. This is to tell you, Sir, I am no longer able to do it;
and you may moreover excuse me, that there was no great appearance, I should
perform civilities upon a subject of marriage, since I failed in the duties of
humanity, and afforded nothing to my ancient affections, upon occasion of the
death of Monsieur de -- It is necessary therefore, for my honor, that my
Letters be kept secret, to avoid offending such persons as I respect; and it is
of much importance, that every one be assured of my indisposition, to the end,
no body may complain of my silence. To morrow, I will send Monsieur the
Commissary, the Letter which you writ to him; I have opened it, and find it
very judicious and discreet. But discretion is the universal character of all
your writings, and you are very circumspect in the least actions of your life.
I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 27 Jan. 1639.
LET. III.
SIR,
I Perceive, Monsieur de la Brosse had not intentions, only to oblige me, but
to do it gracefully, and after a noble fashion; this is to make two favors of
one, and to understand the Art that Seneca teaches. But he is better skilled in
other matters, and I know not, if I told you when I was at Paris, that as often
as I had the honor to entertain him, I was dazzled with the rays and luster,
that proceeded from his wit. At that time, I spoke without interest. It is
requisite now, that I adjoyn my acknowledgments to my esteem, and beseech you,
to give him assurance of both. I am now falling to work in good earnest, for
our incomparable Marchioness; and you may tell him before hand, that I hope to
relate some wonders, of his Rome, and his Romans. There shall be perhaps a
little Book, divided into several Chapters, for the better consideration of
the parts; and when that is finished, I must bethink my self of another
design; for I have a work in my head, which I intend to entitle
Entertainments, and shall be of a more concise, and less oratoriall style; but
yet such, as shall not be less graceful and pleasing. To authorize the title,
I have the example of two Authors, that have passed before me, namely, Monsieur
the Bishop of Geneva, and our dear Monsieur Bardin. who imposed this name upon
some of their works. It will suit exactly with my book, it being in effect, the
abridgment and extract, of all the conversations, I have had with your self,
and other choice persons. I shall therein discourse, either with my friends, or
concerning them, and I think, that disinterressed commerce ought to be more
approved by them, then Letters of complement, which almost ever signify the
same thing. I renew my former resolution, and renounce them this last time more
solemnly then ever. Therefore, dear Sir, oblige me, by forbearing to press me
further thereunto; and remember, that for all others, except you, I am at
Jerusalem, but passionately at Balzac.

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 8 Feb.. 1639.
LETTER IV.
SIR,
I Am not at all dismayed at the digression, which you are pleased to call
terrible. The Tickets of other men seem tedious unto me, but should you write
me whole Volumes, I should account them short. And I have no reason to
complain, that you dispense your favors so liberally, and by handfulls. All
that you write is considerable, and over-payes the Reader's patience. The
greatest part of posthumous pieces, are either spurious, or very unworthy of
the name of their fathers, to whom those injurious offices are ordinarily
performed, if not against their order, at least, besides their intention. Yet
this does not excuse the feebleness and flagging style of Victorius; for his
Orations, which were not written without meditation, are more weak and dead, if
possible, then his Letters, on which it is evident, he employed no study or
diligence at all. The funeral Oration of Cosmo, deserved the height and
excellence of Oratory. But I cannot judge it tolerable, and without doubt, he
has done injury to the reputation of that great Prince, not to say, that he has
scandalized his memory. In truth, he did deserve to have been told, at his
descending from the Chair, O indignum fatum principis tui, bis mortuus est;
semel per morbum, iterum per te. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 15 Feb. 1639.
LET. V.
SIR,
YOu write me the most pleasant things in the world, concerning the greater and
lesser deities; and the array as Varro places them in St. Augustine, is nothing
comparable to yours; I esteem it, but without any benefit or advantage. And
since all the calamities those little gods can send us, are only
metaphorical, I continue in the terms of my last Letter, and am resolved to
be irreligious, rather then adore all sorts of Divinities. There is, Sir, in my
opinion, a mean between impiety and devotion; and a man may abstain from
blasphemies, though he do not undertake to compose hymns. Besides, silence is
sometimes interpreted, an owning of Religion; and they used to cry of old,
Favete linguis, in the middle of their sacrifices. I have chosen this piece of
false religion, and desire to hold my self to it; most of all, for the commerce
with the Academy, and that I have with you, which I should have kept secret,
lest the -- should think to measure themselves, by the value I make of Monsieur
Chapelain. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 20 Feb. 1639.
LETTER VI.
SIR,
TO judge exactly, and like a Master, of the Comedy which you have done me the
favor to send me, it is not necessary to be deeply learned, or to have more
knowledge, then I have of Aristotle's secrets and yours. I call that new
doctrine so, which you disclose to your favorites, and whereof our Poets
understand no more, then it pleases you to teach them. Nevertheless I shall
not forbear to declare my opinion, in expectance of your determination, and to
tell you, that the Supposez, as I conceive, are far from doing prejudice to the
reputation of Orlando, their elder brother. If I can judge any thing, there
cannot be a more ingenuous, handsome, or better contrived story, then this; and
France never yet saw any piece of this nature, that deserved to be compared
with it. It is almost impossible, to bend the gravity of our Verse, and suit it
to the familiarnesse of ordinary conversation. Neither do I much approve of
Prose upon the Theater; and Verse without rhyme, in the opinion of our friend
de la Tournelle, have little of life or pleasure. Unless you oblige the Stage
with a Comedy, We are like to have no Ariosto amongst us. But I confess, I
never perused this, but in the bulk, and without design of strict examination.
You may please to resolve me, if my first view has deceived me, and whether my
judgment be not erroneous. However it be, the concernment is not so great to
me, as to require my care: Good or bad, true or false, it is almost the same
thing now adays, and all the world undertakes to judge, though in truth, there
is nothing so rare and hard to be found, as solid and unbiased judgment.
Perhaps we spend a whole day, in the elaborating of one Period, and when we
have distilled our brains, in the framing of a discourse, which may possible be
a Masterpiece of Art, they will believe they highly favor us, in saying,
there are truly some pretty things in it, and the language is not bad. A man
had better devote himself to sleep, than to tire himself in such unprofitable
elucubrations. And I freely pardon that brave person, the resentment which he
testified against the Muses, upon the like occasion: Ite leves nugae
sterilesque valete Camaenae,
Ite, sat est, primos vobiscum assumpsimus annos.
I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 15 March, 1639.
LET. VII.
SIR,
THis paper serves only, to accuse the slow pace of your Letter, of the eighth
of this month, and to assure you, that I subscribe universally to all that you
write. I look upon my self as much honored, by the late conference which you
had with the Marquess de Montausier; he casts too many obligations upon me,
and the fresh proofs of his goodness, seem too disproportionate to my merit.
One day, perhaps, I may have opportunity to signify unto him, how gratefully I
resent his civilities, and I hope he will have no cause to repent, of having
honored a person with his friendship, who has so reverent esteem of his
virtue. I must further add to this Ticket, the report which one lately
acquainted me withal, that there passes a Libel at Paris, whereof some
conjecture me the Author; if it arrive at your ears, you may confidently swear,
without fear of perjury, that I intermeddle not with things of so foul a
nature: You know how well I love my quiet, and how generally backward I am from
all manner of writing; I am so far from supererogating, that I oftentimes fall
short of my duty. I use not to lend my words, or my choler, in the behalf of
any man. And he that passes over injuries done to himself, is not like to
revenge those of another. The relation which I have made you of it, is, I
think, to little purpose, but ad majorem cautelam, and I thought my self
obliged to give it you. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 17 November. 1639.
LETTER VIII.
SIR,
THe affair of Ariosto is, it seems, in the mouth of all people, and has
occasioned factions and parties. For my particular, I have gone in that way my
reason suggested for the best, without imagining that I concurred with you, and
I merit not your thanks, for following my own opinion. I had no other object
but truth, which, it was said of old, ought to be chosen, with the desertion of
Socrates and Plato, and in whose cause we should not scruple, to oppose, not
only the apprehensions of our friends, but even our own inclinations. Upon
this consideration, I have some hopes of the conversion of our dear, Monsieur
de Voiture, who knows, that Saint Augustine has written his retractations,
and that there are some Laws that are abrogated by others; as also that none
has the gift of infallibility, besides our holy father the Pope, when he
speaks ex cathedra. It is fit to ascribe glory to God, who alone has the
possession of truth, and is not capable either of errors or repentance. Since
the Stars and Cedars fall, who is he that can assure himself of his stability?
And is there any person so perfect, that he has not sometimes a sense of human
weakness? This ingenuous confession is almost as honorable as the victory. In
all regards, an accommodation is better then a duel; and I had rather be
reconciled with Ariosto, then be engaged in a combat against his Knight. This
Astolpho is a dangerous man, and woe be to them that incur his displeasure. As
to my self, I account his friendship as a piece of good fortune, and am very
proud of the new testimony he has rendered me of it. But that sister of his,
that writes so elegantly, and such good sense, is verily worthy of that
relation, and, in my fancy, a most accomplished and excellent person. Do me the
favor, Sir, to lend me a dozen of your words, to make her the complement I am
obliged to offer; and assure her further, if you please, that if I were the
lawful disposer of that immortality, whereof you speak, she should not fail to
have a portion. At present, my desire is, that she, and Monsieur her brother,
may have the sight of the first part of my discourse, upon Menander. It will
not likewise be unfitting, to communicate it to the learned, Monsieur de la
Motte, to the intent I may know of him, whether all our French eloquence be any
thing more, then the disposition of words, and harmony of periods. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 15 April, 1639.
LETTER IX.
SIR,
YOur difference with Monsieur de Voiture, might be the argument of no
unpleasant discourse; and we would entitle it, with your permission, The Trial
of Ariosto. Our friends Letter of defiance, would be inserted in it, which is a
piece of no ordinary invention; but then, you must be entreated to do me the
necessary favor, of keeping mine in your hands, and denying every body both the
sight and copy of it. You are indeed unmeasurable in your diligence, and your
goodness overpresses me with civilities and obligations. What prodigious
inclination is this, to receive a Letter at nine a clock at night, and to
answer it at the same time, with so much discretion and exactness! I confess
you have all sorts of advantages over me, and I am not capable of so great
performances. I will suddenly return you your admirable Italian, and only in
the mean time assure you, that I am ravished with his Translation of the
Aeneids. I conceive, we may judge principally from it, of the wit of Hannibal
Caro, and of the excellence of his Tongue. When I consider it, in this Book, I
cannot but pity ours, and have very low esteem of it, Nisi, quod ei deest de
ingenio, ut ille ait, adderemus. I have very many things to say upon this
subject, but it will be better to reserve them for a Chapter of our
Entertainments: And besides, I am not in a condition to be pleasant, being
weary and shattered with one of the most cruel nights that I have passed a
long time. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 29 April, 1639.
LETTER X.
SIR,
IF I happen to see that gallant person again, of whom your Letter makes
mention, and who is so dexterous in swallowing Benefices of five hundred Crowns
revenue, I shall contain my self from esteeming him either Phocion or
Aristides. The judgment of Monsieur de -- pace tanti viri dixerim, is
sometimes right, and not always so. The understanding of Monsieur de -- has
very narrow limits, and as the first does ordinarily attribute too much to
himself, so does the second set too high a value on the first; whether it be,
that he owe him some small sum, for which he pays him consideration in this
manner, or any other less material interest that induces him to such conceits.
They are both of them strangers in that Country, whereof I esteem my self a
Denizen, and the little acquaintance they have with the Ancients, is the cause
that they deal with so much equivocation and ambiguity in matters which concern
the Moderns. If they had only taken the pains to read the Apology of Apuleius,
or that of Saint Jerome against Rufinus, they would have learnt, that all
subjects are not capable of the same strength or ornament; and have observed
other manner of inequalities there, then in my Discourse. I will speak nothing
of those knowing Ladies, which they have drawn to their opinion, but only
this, that I conceive my self subtle enough, to be able to deceive them at
the first reading at least, as well as some bad Poets of the stage have done. I
confess, it never entered into my thoughts to choose them for my Judges, and
hence it is that they pronounced so speedy a sentence upon a man that did not
yet begin to plead. It Is you, Sir, who are the rule of Truth, and it is not
possible for me to doubt the certainty of your resolutions, so long as I have
your voice in my favor; I shall not be sollicitous, to repair a business
wherein the curious ignorance of some -- does rather make then find defects.
This person does me a kindness beyond my desires; and I could not believe, that
there was so much freedom in the Country of dissimulation. I also wonder how
the most observant of all Mortals, came to quit his obsequiousness for my
concernment, and did not rather in compliance with his friend, pronounce the
second moiety of equal merit with the first. However it be, I shall not much
lay this unhappiness to heart. The world is become so delicate, and I may say,
fastidious too, that it often disrelishes more commendable things then mine, I
cannot dilate further upon this subject, by reason of Totila's absence, whom
some affairs have taken from me. I am so infirm and helpless, that wanting his
hands, my own will only serve me to assure you, that, I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 12 May, 1639.
LET. XI.
SIR,
YOu may most assuredly believe, that my mind is in equal sufferance with
yours; and that I swallow a part of that dust whereof you speak. But besides
this, I am not without my peculiar unhappinesses, though I have likewise some
good news to impart to you. In requital of the story of your breaking up
house, you shall receive that of the death of three of my Horses, and the
sickness of the fourth. It must needs be, that either the Goddess Hippona is
strangely incensed against me, or some other pernicious Demon is grown envious
of my Promenades, and has designed to force me to go a foot, and so deprive me
of the only remaining pleasure of my life. This inconvenience is more grievous
to me then my last, which though it would be perhaps not inconsiderable to a
man that had both a grand and little Escuyrie; yet I resent no more of it, then
the present disturbance, and the trouble I shall have to move, till my poor
equipage be repaired. The want of a Caroach is a misery insupportable, to the
condition wherein I am; and though Philosophy may place it in the number of
things superfluous, yet my infirmity makes me account it amongst the necessary.
Having affirmed thus much, I will presume to tell you further, that I apprehend
more contentment, in being extolled in that manner, then by all the Elogies of
the Academy. And of those two desires of Virgil, -- qua me quoque possim
Tollere humo, victorque virum volitare per ora.
I expound the first, concerning a Caroach, which you see he places before a
great reputation. Nevertheless, Sir, I would not be misconceived, as offended
thereat; and that my disgust of the last weeks actions, draws these speeches
from me. Whatsoever I have written to you, I beseech you to believe, that I
know with what submission and docility, I ought to receive every thing, that is
tendered me by my friends. Only I think, the freedom of friendship should not
exclude discretion; and that faithful counsel is not used to be given in
public. Therefore Monsieur -- might have forborne raising himself, to be
Monsieur the Judge; and rather thought, he had been less attentive in reading
the second part, then said of it, that it was of less strength then the first,
which is only a civil accusation of its weakness. He has received the
displeasure of being contradicted by you, and Monsieur de Conrart, who have
observed no inequality in it; and therefore by necessary consequence, it can
have none. But although we should agree in the acknowledgment of his objection,
yet being, as I am, continually afflicted and in misery, I desir^ rather
consolation then counsel. Provided there be neither heresy nor incongruity in
my writings, I esteem all the rest, as undeserving the trouble of reformation.
I prefer indeed a business accomplished, before that which is to be done, and
is yet only in design.

Praetulerimque parum fortis doctusque videri,
Dum mea delectant mala me, vel denique fallent,
Quam sapere and ringi --
I have seen the days, wherein I had different inclinations; but age and
infirmities have wrought this, amongst other alterations in me. I perceive my
self become obstinate and hardened, against the greatest and most provoking
injuries, which may possibly be rather an effect of them, than of Philosophy. I
am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 24 May, 1639.
LET. XII.
SIR,
IT is not unquestionable, but Scaliger may have failed in the quadrature of
the Circle. Yet Casaubon has written excellent observations in his
Exercitations, against the Cardinal Baronius. Heinsius also will perhaps afford
us some remarkable discoveries, upon the New Testament, although he be no
Doctor of the Sorbonne. Good judgment, with understanding of Languages, and
skill in Antiquities, are the only necessary provision for his enterprise; and
if he employ them with integrity, and faithfully, our side will draw more
advantage from them, then his own. The handling of the Mathematical Sciences,
is a far different business, in my opinion, since they have no community with
the precepts of Morality; and their mystery depends not, either of the Greek or
Hebrew: They require a very abstracted speculation, and must be attended with
that subtlety of apprehension, that I conceive it not difficult to mistake the
way, in a path so obscure and narrow. Yet I think, a knowing and judicious
person, that has read all the ancient Fathers, and is skilled in all the
tongues of the East, may, with success, publish what he has gone so far to
seek, and taken up at several Ports and Countries. As to the ridiculous -- he
has something too much toleration; it is not fit he be suffered to rule so
absolutely, but must be frequently put in mind of la Berne, and perhaps that
may make him for the future more wise. Monsieur -- would do well, to extend his
charity so far, and try, if the fear of punishment may happily divert the
effect. But what prodigy is that you tell me? Is it possible, that a person,
that is indu'd with one grain of common sense, can prefer the Spanish Poets,
above those of Italy, and conceive the visions of one Lopez de Vega, to be
rational compositions. This is it that persuades me, there are sometimes false
judgments made, in the cabinets of the wisest, and that there is hazard in the
issues of the brain, as well as in the affairs of the world. I appeal from this
injustice to our excellent Marquis, who will never mistake apparences for
truth. But can it be true, that this brave Marquis should not be treated
answerably to his worth, and that he was designed to encounter, with all the
fury and hardships of the North, without allowance of necessary support. I am
fearful of the success of th^s great courage, if he fail of the assistance of
men and money. He apprehends the enemy, to be the least considerable danger he
can meet with. Famine, and want of provisions, are far more dreadful, and such
as no valor is able to resist. I would to God, all the Spaniards were at the
Indies, and all the Imperialists with the Antipodes: our friends indeed would
hereby have less matter for triumph and glory; but we should be freed from
those fears, we apprehend for their safety. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 8 June, 1639
LETTER XIII.
SIR,
I Repent me, that I made you any discovery of my losses, since you resent them
so deeply. But I receive great contentment, from those evident testimonies you
give me of your affection; and that my interests could make any impression upon
your soul, which is all Adamant in your own. Such tenderness is not unbecomming
the strength of Hero's; and, if they have sometimes lamented the loss of a Dog
they loved, you may certainly be allowed to condole with a friend, for the
death of four Horses, that were of necessary use unto him. In those days, they
would have deserved four Epitaphs; but they are now too well treated, in that
they are sorrow'd for by you; and the unfeigned tears you speak of, are more
glorious to them, then a Bucephalia, and all the Grecian vanity could invent,
to consecrate dead things to perpetual remembrance. I hope, in a short time,
to fill their places with others, because I cannot live, and be without them;
and that my weakness is of more reality then your tears. When I relate you my
afflictions, I borrow no Rhetoric, to represent them in a larger proportion; I
am an Historian, and make you a faithful narration. I cannot consent to you,
that the use of the Caroch is but a shadow of exercise; there is not indeed
such violent agitation, as in other sorts, yet there is a continual motion,
that contributes enough to the advancement of digestion. Besides, I receceive
the air on all sides, and my eyes a^e refreshed with the beauties of the
field, as often as I discharge them from the employment of reading. My
infirmity makes me wish some other carriage, of more gentleness and ease; and
the Gestatio of the old Romans, is exactly such, as I stand in need of. Were it
not to provoke the tongues of people, I would provide me a Pulpet, and cause my
self to be carried by men, instead of being drawn by horses. The person of whom
I told you, and whose character you have so sutably delineated, is departed
from this Province, with the curses of the whole world. If the Tax be
continued, all this Country will be turned into an Hospital. For my own
concernment, I have great reason to commend his civility, for that he had a
more merciful regard, to all such as I recommended to him. But I fear, in a
little while, it will be necessary to recommend my self, and that Orators and
Poets will not be esteemed as privileged persons. You well remember the field
that was taken away from poor Virgil, and the complaints that he makes
thereupon in his Eclogues. If one that I know, had foreseen this imposition six
years ago, his Letters should have been dated from beyond sea, and he would
have provided for the security of his Peculium. However things go, I exhort all
the world to patience; but I find every man in the depth of despair, and cannot
imagine any remedy, to our present sufferings, unless Heaven appear by
miracles for our succor, to accomplish the good intentions of the King. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 20 June, 1639.
LET. XIV.
SIR,
I Am not minded to enter the Lists, in the quarrel of the Rabbis, especially
when I must encounter with you for my adversary. They are peeple, with whom I
have no acquaintance, and such as, if you please, I shall believe more fools,
then your Letters represent them. But, Sir, if I remember, it was not upon this
empty and trifling reading, that I chiefly grounded the learning of Monsieur
Heinsius. Besides the Oriental Languages, which they report him skilled in, he
is of great natural endowments, and has exact knowledge in solid Antiquity,
and the Philosophies of old; and yet further, such sagacity in matters of
Criticism, that his conjectures seem sometimes to approach near divination:
Notwithstanding, it is possible he may decline in his old days. And it is a
common word amongst his Orientalls, that Vinegar is the son of Wine, and that
Time begins to prey upon things, as soon as it has brought them to their
perfection. But let us relinquish those Gentlemen, the Rabbis, and give me
leave to desire some knowledge, of the affairs of our friends. Be pleased to
make me understand, how Monsieur d'Ablancourt is at this present employed, and
if he intend not a Panegyric, in honor of his eminency, having caused others
to display all their eloquence upon that subject. He is a person of
sufficiency, for whatever he will undertake, on whom I have bestowed my heart,
and my esteem, and who must not be forgotten in my Entertainments. Let me also
know, if Monsieur -- has finished his Treatise, of Counsels for War, whereof
you gave me notice. There being at this day a Prince of Orange, and a Duke of
Weymar in the world, does he not fear the misadventure of that Doctor, that
discoursed of the same matter in the presence of Hannibal, and employed all his
Rhetoric, to make himself ridiculous? These Princes are indeed more polite,
then that Barbarian was, and our friend more expert then the Sophister; and
therefore I consent to the continuation of his work. I most humbly kiss your
hands, and am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 6 July, 1639.
LETTER XV.
SIR,
IT is infinite pleasure unto me, to see you Philosophize upon the argument of
friendship; all your subtleties are not less solid, then delicate and
agreeable. You have discovered the most secret recesses of your soul, and it
must necessarily be, that you have thoroughly studied your inclinations, since
you are so perfect in the knowledge of your self. Certainly you know an
excellent person. And what unhappiness have I, to be separated from you by so
many Towns and Champians: Is it the will of Destiny, to keep us always apart?

Nec d^bitur veras audire and reddere voces? These violent desires do
frequently transport me, and I should undoubtedly content them, if it were
possible to see Paris without approaching the Court. But I acknowledge my
weakness the obstacle. The great light blinds me, and I lose my breath in the
crowd of the World. I forbear to describe you the desolation of our Village,
which has lately been almost devoured by the Regiment of the Lord --. Monsieur
the Abbot of Bois-Robert, will perhaps give you some relation of it. I shall
only tell you that this injury committed against the Muses, might well deserve
an Eclogue in the strain of our friend Colletet. If you please to offer him the
subject, I do not question but he will manage it answerably, and readily lend
me his resentments. He has obliged me in many other matters, and I conceive
there is nothing which I may not expect from his friendship. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 4 August, 1639.
LETTER XVI.
SIR,
SInce the return of the last Post, I have received that which you were pleased
to deliver to the Messenger, and shall account it to the number of my former
engagements. I cannot sufficiently admire your Jesuit, his daring wit, and the
magnificence of his expression; What Enthusiasm has possessed him? Without
dispute, he is one of your great friends, or at least one that has propounded
you for his pattern; and I am confident, your Ode for Monsieur the Cardinal,
was his first inspiration. I shall say nothing where I have met with most
strength or weakness in his Poem, but forbear at this time to exercise my skill
in Censure. Only I assure you, I never yet saw a more happy imitation; and yet
further (which I would have pass for Oraculous) that if Monsieur Chapelain be
the instructor of the Father le Moine, the Father le Moine will prove one of
the great Personages of these later Ages. I mentioned to you, a few days since,
the Letter which I writ to Monsieur the Abbot of Bois-Robert, concerning
Monsieur de -- I send you a Copy of it enclosed, because I deem it expedient,
that you should know the whole History of Balzac, wherein I do not doubt, but
your affection has made you somewhat concerned. I am, likewise, more perfectly
then any person in the world,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 18 August, 1639. In closing of my Letter, I am told, that Monsieur --
did prohibit his Troops to quarter at Balzac. But either his commands had not
Authority enough, or his Captains were unmindfull of his orders. For our
Village was wholly sacked before ever the Party approach't it. But this injury
must be forgotten as well as many more, and we must rest satisfied with the
little subsistence they have left us to be so.



LETTER XVII.
SIR,
I Have read with very great consolation, the two Letters of our dear and
incomparable friends. I should have said, with very great joy, if in the
condition wherein I am, I could be sensible of that delightful motion of the
soul. But I find such drooping and languour upon my spirit, and my body so
infeebled with the restless nights I have lately passed, that there is no news
of goodness enough to awaken and divert my melancholy. You may well perceive,
that if this were not the obstacle, I should dispense with my vow for this
time, and not borrow your words, though more eloquent then mine, to testify to
those worthy friends, that I esteem their Amity amongst the dearest blessings
of my life. The prudence and matter of that of Monsieur Hobier, is admirable,
as well as his style pure and uniform. I think, Sir, the definition of vir
bonus, dicendi peritus, was made expressly for him, and that all his words are
marked with the character of virtue. I have proceeded no further yet, then his
Preface, which deserves an attentive perusal; and, wherein I have stayed with
pleasure. We will speak therefore another time of the life of Agricola, and at
present, to pass from a part of Tacitus, to Tacitus entire; be pleased to let
Monsieur d'Ablancourt know, that I have so high an opinion of his French
Version, that I am ready to maintain against the Doctor Heinsius, and the
Jesuit Strada, that it far excells the Latin, whereof they have so closely
affected the imitation. Had I a Neighbor of his sufficiency, we should surely
accomplish considerable designs, and in our learned walks employ our Criticism
to great advantage. But it is not meet for a poor Anchoret to conceive such
high thoughts, and my maladies raise fear in all the world. They are indeed
excessively violent, and I assure you, you are imposed upon by all such as give
you any information of my health. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 30 Aug. 1639.
LETTER XVIII.
SIR,
YOu reproach my pusillanimity with a very good grace, and your French seems to
tell me thus in Latin.

Sydera quis mundumque velit spectare cadentem,
Expers ipse metus? Quis cum ruat arduus ether,
Terra labet misto coeuntis pondere caeli,
Complosas tenuisse manus? solusne remotus,
Otia s^^as ages? --
To which I answer, that knowing my self one of the most impotent and
unprofitable members of the Commonwealth, I cannot yet discern wherein I may
be serviceable to the present necessity. And nevertheless, If I heard that you
were in danger at the end of the world, I should immediately fly thither,
either to your assistance, or at least to be your companion in the common
ruin. Therefore, if my advice be of weight with you, you shall accept the
command of a company of Cavalry, unless you rather affect the charge of
Lieutenant Colonel, in the Regiment of our excellent Marquess, I am ready to
to list under your Ensign; and if you forbid me, I will play the valiant in the
same Tongue wherewith you upbraided my cowardice, and tell you, Vtrumne justi
persequemur otium, Horat. Epod. 1.
Non dulce, ni tecum simul?
An hunc laborem mente laturi, decet,
Qua far non molles viros.
Feremus? and te vel per Alpium juga,
Inhospitalem and Caucasum,
Vel occidentis usque ad ultimum sinum,
Forti sequemur pectore?
Roges tuum labor quid juvem meo,
Imbellis ac firmus parum?
Comes minore sum futurus in metu,
Qui major absentes habet.
You observe, how I borrow the Enthusiasme of an other, and make my self a
Poet with Verses that belong not to me. The cause is, for that they better
explain my intention, then I can do my self, and represent my thoughts to you
in their nakedness and sincerity. I have nothing more to adjoyn to this, but
only that you are pleased to make your self merry with saying, that you have
drawn much Constancy from my Writings; you that have more in your breast, then
Seneca, Boethius, Lipsius, or the Keeper of the Seals, du Vaire, have published
in all their Volumes. A friend of such worth, is able to uphold me with comfort
against all the injuries of bad times. I have added this Epithete to time but
of late, and if Monsieur -- had not taken assay of me, I might have still been
entire, and able to have told you, D'ogni oltraggio e scorno,
La mia famiglia, e la mia greggia il^ese.
Semper qui fur, ne strepito di mart
Ancor turbo questa remota part.


But I am now enforced to change my ditty; and were my resentments as quick and
delicate, as formerly, (though some, as I have told you, would persuade me they
are) I should endeavor to repay the rudeness with such a revenge, as should
acquit my courage, and afford our Province some mirth, in the midst of their
distresses. But we must comfort our self with the multitude of sufferers, in
the same cause, and admire the Heroes of other Ages, who took care of men of
learning, and protected them in the general desolation. Possibly another time,
there will be found some, that will judge us worthy of this honor, and make us
objects of their heroical generosity. You see what course I take to palliate
our miseries, and so, Dum careo veris, gaudia falsa juvant. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 29 April, 1639.
LETTER XIX.
SIR,
I Have this day received a Letter of Monsieur de -- whereof I send you a copy;
I could have wished less commendations from his Rhetoric, and more favor
from his Captains: But since his commands were ineffectuall, and Monsieur the
^uke de la Rochefaucaut, was partaker in the common saccage, it is meet our
Province should abate their vanity; and I forbear to trouble you any further,
with the lamentable story of our grievances. Having already given you so exact
narration of my misfortunes, it is but equitable to inform you, of the good
requital I received by this last Post; it is a Letter from Monsieur Conrart,
which makes me the proudest man upon earth; and if there be remaining any
shadow of humility in me, yet I triumph at least within doors, and keep
holy day in my Closet. To tell you the truth sincerely, I never yet saw a
Letter, more ingenuous, rich, and noble: and for that you speak of it, as if it
had never been in your hands, I thought my self obliged to send you a copy of
it, to the end it may become the common subject of our admiration and applause.
Does not this Gentleman make you recall to memory, the first Nephews of Remus,
who were wealthy, without having pillaged the Gold of Asia; and learned, before
they understood the Language of the Greeks: They were, I say, rich, with their
own possessions, and learned with such knowledge, as was peculiarly their own,
and unborrowed. It must not be suffered, that posterity be ignorant of this
wonder of our age. And if my writings have that strength of constitution, to
survive the ashes of their parent, (as he is pleased to imagine in my favor)
he may be assured, it shall never be, without making them bear some eminent
testimonies, of the esteem I have of his great worth, and the friendship
wherewith he has done me honor. The father Palavicino gives me no
satisfaction, concerning the Comedies of Ariosto; and the grande Positivo,
whereunto he requires our belief, is more then one degree above my
apprehension. I cannot discover more excellency in the great Poem, considered
in its kind, then the Comedies have in theirs; and as to the point of
regularity, you know there is no comparison. It may be therefore, that
Palavicino is a great Scholar, but this part of learning lies out of his road.
To be a native of Italy, is not a sufficient qualification, to create a man
Dictator in the Commonwealth of Literature; witness the Poet of Luca, for whom
Camusat lately printed a volume of Verses, which, in my opinion, are far short
in value, of the paper of the Impression. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 24 September. 1639.
LET. XX. From Monsieur Conrart, to Monsieur de Balzac.
SIR,
I Advertise you beforehand, that I intend no excuses in this, for my not
writing to you; it is rather a protestation to assure you, that I shall give
you no further trouble in that kind, but leave you in repose, to employ your
only care, in advanceing the immortality of your own glory, and that of your
friends. Nevertheless I have imagined, that after a silence of above a years
durance, I might happily oblige you to the reading of a few lines, provided I
did at the same time oblige you, to return me no answer. This is now a favor
which I request of you, with as much passion, as I used heretofore to obtain
your Letters; the esteem I bear them, is in as high a degree as ever; but I
content my desires with those, which you write to Monsieur Chapelain, as well
as if they were addressed to my self, and I have found the device to imagine
them such, and that I make you all the answers, which you receive from him. So
that, without loss of time to you, in regard of me, or of my prayers and
importunities, we enjoy a mutual commerce, which puts you to no trouble, and
affords me a great measure of delight and contentment. I have had a sight of
the remarkable judgment you passed, upon the Supposez of Ariosto, wherein I am
much taken, both with your equity, and your address, and have equal
admiration of the profoundnesse of your capacity, and the politenesse of your
wit. Never was seen a Judge so well accomplished, and so little prepossest; nor
a sentence more just and better grounded. There needs no rigid and severe
decrees, to constrain it to execution, every one acquiesces in it without
resistance; and even those that accounted it their glory, to have never
yielded, have thought themselves obliged to a ready approbation, of what you
ordain. I have read, with no less contentment, that handsome Apology, which is
in the keeping of Monsieur Chapelain; it has been the subject of diverse
Academicall conferences; and all that saw it, after they had surveyed all the
perfections of it with wonder, could find no other fault in it, but its
brevity. I assure you, there was scarce one lecture of it, but drew these
expressions from the Auditory. When will it be our happiness, to see complete
Volumes of such excellency, as this Discourse? And why cannot we prolong the
life of this incomparable person, the Author of it, with the like facility, as
he renders all those immortal, whose names deserve a place in his Writings? I
had intended to finish my Letter here, but this last word induces me, to make a
request to you, for a speedy sight of your rich Miscellanies, wherein we shall
unquestionably behold, all the beauties of Art and Nature, in the height of
their glory and luster, and the pomp of ornament, so delightfully accommodated,
with the genuine and simple comeliness, that the contexture, though of nothing
but natural and supernatural, will appear most graceful, without either
disorder or contradiction. Eloquence will have there, so dexterously contrived
all its force and artifice, yet without making show of any, it will
notwithstanding animate the whole body, with such motion and action, as will
ravish all the world. Suffer us not to languish any longer, in expectation of
our happiness; and be pleased to believe, that amongst all those that desire
the accomplishment of it, there is not any more perfectly then my self.

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 10 Sep. 1639.
LET. XXI.
SIR,
YOu shall be no better obeyed, then Virgil was of old, when he sentenced his
Aeneids to the fire. I cannot be won to burn your Letter, although you should
ordain me to do it, by an especial clause of your Testament. Notwithstanding,
your desire may prevail with me, for secrecy, and the wise person be suffered
in the guilt of his folly, without knowing our opinions of the action. Your
perspicatious reason, has discovered the true cause of his prodigious
inequality, and the article which you write me concerning it, deserves to be
inserted in a convenient place. This may be effected without difficulty,
Suppresso authorum and paraphrastarum nomine; and you may entrust Monsieur --
upon my interest. I will not descend from a Thesis to an Hypothesis. I knew,
long since, that man is an Animal, composed of contrarieties, and that such a
person is reasonable to day, who has no assurance of being so to morrow. Some
man may have great dexterity and conduct, in his affairs, as for instance, the
Marshal -- and yet be void of all sense in his writings; and another, as the
Lord Madelenet, may compose Odes in Latin, in competition with those of Horace,
and French Verse, after the rate of Du Monin. Your -- affords an authentic
demonstration of this truth, and as far as I can judge, there is a greater
difference between him and himself, then there is between him and another
person; I speak only of his Poetry, having yet seen but one sort of his Prose,
concerning which, I must tell you, that if he choose me for his example, I am
as unhappy as he, of whom it was said, Multas fecerat simias, nullos filios. I
am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 4 October. 1639.
LET. XXII.
SIR,
I Have very tender resentments of your loss, although your gain could not
have promoted the conclusion of the War. Since Brisac has wrought no advantage
to it, I am no longer of belief, that peace is in the power of men; Heaven must
of necessity become engaged in the affair, and it must be the work of God, and
not ours. Yet let us not, in the mean time, abandon our selves to grief, nor
despair of the Commonwealth, although after a Battle of Cannae. At the worst,
we may save our selves in the Sanctuary, that Philosophy has built for us,
against the misfortunes of the world; I mean, the Philosophy of Plato, for I
know you affect not that of Chrysippus; and I accord with you, in dislike of
that step-dame of the passions; (as one terms it) which in order to the
design, of making a true wise man, that is, living and sprightly, represents
him no other, then a dead and insensible image. This kind of Statues are more
suitable, for the ornament of the Porch, then for the uses of life; and, as I
conceive, there is between hardness and softness a middle temperament, which
is called Firmness. The Piece that this Post will deliver you, contains
something perhaps not impertinent to this argument. I have some weak
apprehensions of its beauty, by the persuasion of some here that think it fair;
but Monsieur Chapelain having not yet pronounced upon it, I am wholly
unresolved in what quality to esteem it. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 20 October. 1639.
LET. XXIII.
SIR,
LEt us leave the dead, to the company of those in the same condition, and
suffer me to congratulate with you, for your new acquaintance. I never yet saw
the face, of Monsieur the Ambassador of Sueden, though I have long since had a
particular esteem of his endowments; and had not he turned the Institutes into
Verse, and published some other pieces of the like nature, I should have yet
had a greater veneration of his worth. As for his humor, of affecting the
behavior of a stranger, I am not much displeased with it; we are all
Barbarians to one another, and there is a sort of civility at Paris, which I
more disgust then all the rudeness of the North. The Poet of Luca, of whom you
have no knowledge, is a -- that has made an infinite company of Verses, at the
rate of a hundred for a penny, as your Marin used to speak; and all de communi,
in the term of the University. I have not discovered one grain of salt in two
or three great Poems, which I had the patience to read. Whereupon I have bidden
him Adieu for eever. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 4 November. 1639.
LET. XXIV.
SIR,
SHould I credit your Relation, I must use much virtue to restrain me from
vainglory. My Writings deserve not the commendations, they have received at
Rambouillet Hostel, and the honor bestowed on me, seems more properly the due
of my Lord the Cardinal de la Valette. But, in the mean time, where was the
dear Monsieur -- that constant and perpetual admirer of F. N. C. whose
disposition is so sweet, that honey and sugar are bitter in comparison? * * * *
* * * * * * The gravity of our other friend, is also rare and admirable; and I
believe, the Areopagus never saw any thing more sober and composed. Be pleased,
Sir, for my sake, to call my Consolation a Discourse; for, besides the
propernesse of the Title, and that it is Oration ad Cardinalem, (there being
some much shorter in the Books of the Ancients, especially in those of the old
Greeks) you know, I detest the name of Letter, cane pejus and angue. Yet it is
necessary the Muse of the Fennes have a Copy, since you ordain it so, and I
have no power to disobey you. But this must not be drawn to an example, and you
must bear with me another time, if la signora Principina, o la signora -- write
to me, and I return them no answer. What misery is this to be obliged, to make
Elogiums upon all Books that are published? It Is certainly to be in a worse
condition in Prose, then the Auratus poeta regius was, who did with a good
will, what I do by force, and as condemned to. I have with sorrow understood
the death of poor Monsieur Arnaud: He was indeed a person of great worth, and I
lament the case of the Gentlemen his Brothers, who are very deserving, and for
whom I have ever had a most sincere affection, but full of respect and
reverence. Shall we never see a happier time then this? nor furious Mars once
secured in chains? Quem das finem, Rex magne, laborum? I speak of the
Catholic King, for as for the most-Christian, we know he desires peace even
in the midst of Victory. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 8 November. 1639.
LET. XXV.
SIR,
I Never pass judgment on any thing, but I sometimes declare my opinion. Your
Sonnet seems to me of perfect excellence, and the Edict of fame, which is
executed by a hundred people at the same hour, is proclaimed, is without
question an Inspiration, for which you are beholding to your Muses. I would
have this understood, without prejudice to what we shall say of it at another
time. But what means Seigneur Jean-Jacques, with his dreadful Title of
Panglossie. If he account himself Master of forty Languages, he exceeds
Scaliger by three and twenty; and the soul of Parnassus must be commended in
the Tongue of Biscay, and base Bretagnie. This is to make wild Music in
Apollo's Hill, and to bring Barbarians into the Holy place, with no less
crime, then theirs that opened the passages of Italy, to the Predecessors of
the King of Sweden. Do me the favor to know of Monsieur Conrart, if Monsieur
du Moulin has lately printed any of his Sermons, for I should be glad to see
his manner of writing upon all occasions. I ever had a great passion for the
merit of the excellent Monsieur Conrart, and desire the continuance of his
favor, as absolutely necessary and essential to the conservation of my life.
Give me leave, Sir, at least once a year, to request of you some news
concerning Monsieur, de St. Cyran, Monsieur le Maistre, and the unfortunate --.
I extremely resent the loss of our poor Camusat; and it is an Article that I
had forgotten in my former. He had a great portion both of honor and virtue,
and had he grown old in his Profession, he would have restored it to its
primitive glory. But Books must also one day perish, as well as those that
print them: Debemus morti nos nostraque. I most humbly kiss your hands, and am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 22 November. 1639.
LETTER XXVI.
SIR,
ALthough at present, I want the assistance of Totila, I shall not forbear to
write to you in as good a fashion as a weak hand and a bad pen will suffer me;
and to let you see my intentions in the least disorder I am able to represent
them. Be pleased then, Sir, That I thank you with my uncomely writing, for the
fair present you have conferred upon me. I mean the Robe of a Consolatour,
wherewith your favor has invested me, and raised me as it were a statue
between those of Seneca and Plutarch. These dignities are indeed very dear unto
me, because they assure me the esteem of such a person, who possesses reason in
a sovereign degree, and so is consequently free from error in his judgments.
But is it possible, that you have discovered a Vittoria Colonna at Paris, and
that that Marchioness of whom we never heard before, is equal in merit to her
of Rome? It is no longer questionable, after you have affirmed it, and we must
reverence her excellent qualities for the future, and acknowledge the justice
and favor she has done us in the affair of Phylarque. To confirm her in her
opinion, I desire she may have my Apology, in the form as I lately revised it.
But, Sir, my principal ambition is to satisfy you alone, whose least scruples
give me more trouble, then all the declared hostilities of all the Doctors and
Academies of the world can do. You may judge from hence, if I esteem and allow
the curiosity of Monsieur de Scudery, who intends to rank you amongst his
Illustrious persons. I only desire that he would be careful of placing you
with suitable companions. For besides the great Poet, which I acknowledge you to
be, I account you also an eminent Counselor of State, Secretary, and
Ambassador; in a word, a person most accomplished in all things: And I never
give any other Character of you, to those that demand of me, who that perfect
friend is I have at Court, and of whom I make all my glory. Et haec non animo
adulatorio and ad aulicas arts composito dicta sint. Jure tuo habes testem,
qui si sciens fallat, etc. The rest another time, for at present I am able to
proceed no further, but remain,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 1 December. 1639.
LETTER XXVII.
SIR,
I Am but ill affected with the deportment of the Italian Paricide; and the
Muses Balzacides do no less distaste it, then the Putean's. The pious offices
which he renders to the memory of his friend, gave me infinite contentment, and
I have testified as much. But I cannot endure that he should drive a Trade with
them. It must needs be, that he has little knowledge of our Court, since he
addresses himself to Scholars to be his Soliciters, and to gain him
kindness from a man they never see. He is yet more strangely mistaken in the
choice of his subject. For you may believe, that if he escape being derided for
his Panglossie, he will at least receive but little thanks for this. Monsieur
the Cardinal may willingly bear with his Panegyricks, and pay him for some of
them; but he is not concerned in a Funeral Oration, for people that he never
heard of. It seems, the famous T^pler is come back to drink at Paris, and that
he could not be long absent from the center of his Luxury, I beseech you, Sir,
let me know from him, where Monsieur Maynard is, for whom my curiosity is
uncessant. If you also happen into the company of Monsieur de la Pigeonnier,
you will infinitely oblige me by desiring of him, the Manuscript Works of the
late du Vivier, which are in his hands. I think he will not refuse you; and if
you will do me the pleasure to send them hither, I shall return them with
speed, and before he can imagine they are gone so long a journey. This du
Vivier had a pretty way of raillerie, and because it may be thought I had some
share in his death, I believe my self obliged to perform some duty to his
memory. He writ me word by the Messenger from Blois to Paris, that he had lost
his Father, and that himself should infallibly follow, unless I comforted him
for that affliction. I was negligent, after my custom, and rendered him not the
office he required at the time appointed. As for him, he made good his word,
and the following Messenger, by whom I intended my answer, told me the person
to whom I addressed it, was no longer of this World. Behold a fatal
sloathfulnesse, and which may give warning to all people that write to me in
that manner, for I know at length I shall become incorrigible. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 15. December. 1639.
LETTER XXIX.
SIR,
YOu may be assured by my former Letters, that I have received yours, and that
the Elogium of your Marchioness is not lost; if it were she, that sent you so
many Notes, they might be tolerated with patience. But the persecution of the
other is insupportable, and I swear unto you, I would never have said a good
word of her, if I had known she did so perpetually assassinate you with her
Writings. I should have begun long since to deplore your fortune. The -- would
needs heretofore play with me at that sport, but I was more valiant then you,
and acquitted my self of her courageously. She made a thousand false thrusts,
and I received a whole Bushel of Tickets, but without losing one jot of my
dumb gravity. This is the way to treat Ladies of that kind, whether they be
Muses or Fairies; or, which you love better, Sybils. You see my old practice, I
am ready to do worse in case of necessity: It Is not because I am full of
employment, but for that I am so discontented, and weary with the continued
torture of my maladies, that I know not on which side to turn my self. I am in
great fear for Piedmont, that is, for you, and a little Nephew I have there,
who may possibly be trodden down in the crowd. Our friends are of great worth,
but the Princes of Savoy must not be neglected; and there being brave spirits
on both sides, I apprehend a terrible slaughter, unless Heaven avert it. I am
proud of the good opinion that Monsieur Spanheim has of me; for he is a person
whom I infinitely esteem. If there be any thing of his abroad, besides the two
Books which I have already seen, I beseech you inform my Stationer of it, and
let him send them. Otherwise, I never make any uncivil request, nor desire to
see that which is kept secret. Hence it is, that I mortify my curiosity with
my discretion, and am contented to know, that Monsieur le Maistre can make
nothing but what is rare and excellent. You are wholly silent concerning my
affections, I mean, Monsieur Conrart, and Monsieur Menage. Be ple^s'd to let
t^em know, I have still the same passion for them, and be confid^ntly assured,
that I am more perfectly then any other in the world, I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 20 December. 1639.
The End of the Fourth Book.
FAMILIAR LETTERS, OF M. de BALZAC, To M. CHAPELAIN. The Fifth Book.
LETTER I.
SIR,
I Saw yesterday the Duke of Rochefoucaut, who told me many things, and amongst
the rest, that your Signora Vittoria takes the little man we know, for a little
fool: It is the more likely to be true, because the number of that Order is
very great; and yet it may not be so, because the Court oftentimes condemns a
man, for a wry mouth, or one simple look. I understand from the same Author,
that Moses saved, was the delight and passion of Monsieur and Madam of
Liancourt. Besides, I have received the book of Holstenius, and the Tyrannique
Love of Monsieur de Scudery; by the reading of which, I must confess to you, I
am still warmed and agitated. It Is true, there are some few things in that
piece, which I could wish he would alter, and himself may take notice of them;
but the rest are in my opinion incomparable, which move the passions after a
strange manner, which make me shed tears in despite of me, and are the cause,
that the Kid and Scipio are no longer my favorites; perhaps it is, because we
ordinarily judge, in favor of things and persons that are present, and forget
what is past. However it be, I shall not be displeased, that Monsieur de
Scudery understand, he has done what he would with me, and has taken me down
from my altitude of Philosophy, to range me amongst the common crowd. But I
beseech you, Who is that gallant person, whom you call Monsieur Sarrasin, and
who calls himself, Monsieur d'Arbois? The name pleases me, as well as the
remembrances, and I yet honor the memory of that precious liquor, which I
sometimes preferred before that of Spain or the Canaries. Setting aside
raillery, Monsieur Sarrasin is an excellent Doctor, and distributes many things
after a most agreeable sort. I will be beholding to you for the rest, if you
please, and understand from you, Qui genus, unde domo, quibus aut mihi venit ab
oris. I could heartily wish he had the same sentiments for me, I have for him;
there wants but little, that I do not this very hour demand his friendship; I,
who otherwise am far enough from searching out acquaintance. But this will one
day happen, my mind so gives me, and I shall willingly lay hold of an
occasion, to let him know, what esteem I have of h s deserts. But would you
think it possible, that Monsieur the Duke de Rochefoucaut had never heard speak
of our Monsieur de Peiresk? and that many other, not ignorant or barbarous
people, know him no more then he? You see by this, his reputation was good, but
that it was the Italian Signieur, who enterprised to make it great; and that
his Panglossie was rather an effect of his own solicitations, then a voluntary
devoy^^, made known to the people. I would the Duke of Weymar could find as
good a friend, and who would take as great a care of his memory. It was he who
ought to have been celebrated, in those forty tongues, and who merits the name
of Hero, which we have given so good cheap, and which title many people
unworthily hold of our grace. I speak not here of his first marvails, nor
intend to compile his History. But I demand of you, if the History of Alexander
himself, is imbellished with a fairer year then that, in the circle of which
he gained three Battles, took three Towns, and made prisoners three Generals?
Yet my muse has revealed to me, he wronged himself, by performing so much in
so short a time; for he put a fallacy upon death, who believed him older then
he was, taking the last fifteen months of his life for an entire age, because
in stead of counting the Time, death reckoned the Victories. You see, I have a
little elevated my style, in the end of this Letter, and have somewhat
forgotten that plain familiar way, we have obliged each other to keep in our
privacies; but you are much more faulty in that then I, and inform me by all
the Courriers, of things which seem extremely studied; if they have fallen
negligently from your quill, at least they have been collected with much care,
and the art of your expressing them, is nothing inferior to the sense. Suffer
this protestation which I make betwixt us, and know, there is not any person in
the world I esteem so much as you, or any who is so perfectly as my self,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 8 Jan. 1640.
LETTER II.
SIR,
DO not give your self the trouble hereafter, of answering my questions, and
resolving my doubts; I should be very sorry, the profit and honor I receive,
should incommode you. Write me, if you please, but a single monosyllable, and
treat me as briefly, as the Lacedaemonians did Philip, I shall be satisfied;
provided you sign that syllable, and it contain news from you. Your last, of
the 21 of the past month, brought me abundance, for which I return you my
acknowledgments, and desire you to believe, that if a little favor is capable
of obligeing me, I must needs have a perfect recognisance, of that fair
profusion you are pleased to enrich me with. The Tomb of the Duke de Weymar, is
worthy of himself and you; and of the three verbs you have noted, I am of your
opinion for the last, against the two competitors. Je tracay seems to me more
warlick, then j' ebaucheray, and is less historical then je fonday; that
holds forth enough, and the other, it may be, would too much. The invention, as
to the rest, is incomparable, to say, that the last victory of the great
Gustavus, was carried by the Duke of Weymar, and that he died in persuit of an
Empire, is in four words to consecrate his memory, and to endowe him with the
most compendious and highest praise, he could receive. Since you are of
opinion, that the reading of the Apology, would not be altogether disagreeable
to your excellent Marchioness, I shall cause a new copy of it to be written
out, and will send it you so soon as it is perfected. Make me understand, I
beseech you, what that ridiculous mode means, of certain people, that at
midday, and when no cloud obscures the Sun, cause themselves to be served with
Torches. And tell me, if you please, which pleases you best of de la point du
jour, or du point du jour; and whether you approve the pronounciation of Paris,
which cuts in two the Monosyllable, eu j'ay eu ila eu, and which renders Rome
and Lionne as they are writ, when all France besides pronounce them Reume and
Lioune. As for the other affairs, do not at all marvel, at the judgment I made
of the piece, which made so much noise in the world; I only read it once over,
and in haste; but I must confess to you, it touched me sensibly. Therefore I
yet persist in my opinion, that Monsieur -- is a great Poet, and -- a most
important Grammarian. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 20 Jan. 1640.
LETTER III.
SIR,
HOw great are your goodness, and your justice! and how signal a pleasure
have you done me, in not signing the condemnation of the man of Champagne? What
you have writ me upon that subject, is drawn out of the most subtle reason, et
ex ipsius visceribus veritatis, as the Gentlemen our Masters say. It is most
certain, our Courtiers take too much license, and stretch their jurisdiction a
little farther then they ought; If they cannot bear with our young Doctor, who
has sacrificed to the Graces, in what fashion would they treat the rude
Heinsius, if it should please him to enter into the Cabinets? with what hisses
would they persecute the base Crassot, and the unpurified Demsterus? Who would
be able to save from the lash, poor Frederic Morel, and Theodore Mareile, those
^wo famous Anti-Courtiers, who at every turn, fall from the clouds into the
mire, and speak a language so far from being common and intelligible, that it
is scarcely human or articulate: Those two were unpolished and rude, and yet
had the value set upon them, of an unfashion'd Diamond; the rough hardness of
their shell, concealed many good things, whilst the fair outside of our refined
Writers, covers nothing but froth and wind. Speak your conscience to me, have
you a greater esteem for the remaining ruins of Queen Margaret's Court, and
the Princess of Conty's, or that which is issued out from the School of
Scaliger or Lipsius? For my own part, I love the Pedants in Greek, better then
the Pedants in French; and the knowing youth of this Gentleman ought to be
preferred, before the aged sufficiency of --. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.

LETTER IV.
SIR,
YOu have made a happy alteration, in the Tomb of the Duke de Weymar, it is
worth an Egyptian Pyramid, and the Eagle ready to fall under his blows, is
not a change of small importance. I have sent me the Translation of the
Parasite, which is barricado'd with such a company of bad Verses, that I was in
a mind to have arrested my curiosity there, without passing farther. He is
certainly a rare fellow, to elect and pick out himself, for the Guardian of the
French Honor, and the abaser of the pride of Italy.

En Cor Zenodoti! en jecur Cratetis! I am sufficiently persuaded of the merit
of Monsieur de Petrese; but I spoke to you of his reputation, and you know
well, that there is a certain donum famae, that all learned men do not
possess, and which renders those who enjoy it, not only considerable to the
Nobility and Gentry, but to the common People and Artizans. I have not reviewed
the book you sent me, but neither do I think the first judgment I made of it,
was precipitated; at the least, I have a kindness for the Author, and conceive
he is not enough regarded; he has, I know not what, of grave and noble in him,
which extremely pleases me; I speak of his person, and not of his first
writings, in which, I acknowledge, he has too much played the Captain: But who
is he that has not his failings, and his tricks of youth? There is not that
thing in the world we can praise, without exception, and all men generally have
need of grace. Shall I see nothing of our dear Monsieur de Silhor's, to quicken
my appetite? and shall I never hear the good news, that fortune at length has
some remorse, for ill treating his virtue? I expect the relation of this with
some impatience, as I shall the occasions of letting you know, I am
passionately,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 16 Feb. 1640.
LET. V.
SIR,
I Interest my self very much, in the praises Germany bestows upon you, and
congratulate the good success of your Sonnet; I am resolved to quote it every
syllable, in a Chapter I am now studying. And that you may know, your friend is
a Weymarian, as well as you; I must let you understand, that that Hero, a
little before his death, made an enquity after me and my studies, with such
care, as well testified, he attended somewhat from them: Monsieur Feret his
Secretary, a person of much worth, writ this in a Letter to Monsieur Borstel,
from whom I heard it. I never saw in Italian the conspiracy of Giovan in
Ludovico Count of Triesque; but assure you, the French Translation of it is a
piece, I do not much admire, and the Epistle is but coorse. I am now far entered
into the quarrel of Annibal Caro, but have nothing changed my first sentiment,
and I still esteem him an honester man, then his Antagonist, though perhaps the
other may be the greater Clerk. No Grammarian I ever yet saw, has that
address and force of this Modenois, either in this, or in the Commentaries he
made, upon Aristotle's Poetiques; yet it must be acknowledged, he sometimes
sins through his too much subtlety, and that he is an enemy of mankind, who
cannot bear the merit or reputation of another. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 1 March, 1640.
LET. VI.
SIR,
Whatever inclination the party you know of, has to slandering, I cannot
choose but think him a brave boy, nay, a gallant man, since he is now enriched
with a beard; if I love him not with that sacred friendship I have for you, at
the least I can afford him such a passion, as shall nothing incommode me, and
yet extremely satisfy him. I will put him in the number of Mountebanks, of
Perfumers, Viollists, makers of Ragousts, and all those Artificers of pleasure,
which are virtuosi in Italy, and who, as you know, Delectant Copetane, non
amantur. That generation of people were banished from Sparta, but were esteemed
amongst the Sybarites; and for my particular, I regard them, because I have
need of mirth, and am not displeased. I have no obligement to love them,
because I desire to love few. They are the cure of my distempers, and the cause
I suffer not out of my self; at the least, they spare me those alarums, which
ordinarily torture true friendship. For Monsieur de Voiture, he is always
himself, that is, always a most excellent person; and if at any time it has
been said, Nature was never greater then in little things, let us convert that
to the advantage of his Tickets, and prefer them before Volumes of Asiatique
Authors. I desire from you the continuation of his favors, and entreat you to
assure him of my service. There are few persons in the world I esteem so much
as him; but amongst those few, you are always to be excepted. The
Metamorphosis was lately sent me, which I read without much attention; but in
that tumultuary view I had of it, I remarked many gallant things, and perhaps
the obscurity of certain passages in it, proceeded only from my carelessnesse
in the perusal. I say nothing to you of the invention of the fables, but for
the manner of expressing them, it seems a little too far strained, and puts me
in mind of that ancient Orator, who could not give the good morrow without a
figure. But what will you say of the other party, who enjoynes me to read a
much larger piece, but of a far lesser merit; he may as soon persuade me to dig
in a Mine, as oblige me to it; you know the rest, and I remain,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac. 15 March, 1640.
LETTER VIII.
SIR,
IN earnest, your Sonnet is one of those noble pieces which command attention,
and which are esteemed more the renth time, then the first. I was never
acquainted with all its excellencies till this day. I am very far from the
comparison of the coal, with which you are pleased to smut it, and much fear I
shall want words rich enough to ennammel it; yet I shall not fail to enterprise
that, though I have only Lead to set it in. And be pleased to know, (without
pretending to thanks for it) there is no work of mine in which you shall not be
seen on the right hand, and on the left; The Copy you did me the favor to
send me, is most exquisite, and that way of writing pleases me much more then
the way of some other Ladies, famous for their Letters: they preach and declaim
a great part of the time, and their Letters in folio are no other then gross
bodies ill animated; in lieu of which, all in this piece is full of spirit, and
which smells not of the lamp. By what I understand, our Gentleman of Rome means
to change his name into as many shapes as ever Tabarin changed his Hat; and by
consequence he will always be idem and alter? he might with as much decency
run naked through the City, as commit such a piece of folly; and if he had any
charitable friend by him, he would catch him by the throat, rather then let him
go out into the streets so bedawbed with Names and Lordships. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 25 March, 1640.
LETTER VIII.
SIR,
I Agree with you, that Castelvetro is a Grammatical Philosopher, who seeks
after truth with address, and imployes reason to the best advantage.
Nevertheless, he sometimes drives it on too far, and I could reprehend him
more justly in certain things, then he has done my friend. It Is the Seigneur
Anniball whom I term so, and I conjure you to employ your Agents of the street
of St. Jacques, to procure for me his Aeneids in quarto, together with his
Dialogues of Speron Sperone, because I want them all. Monsieur the Duke de la
Rochefaucaut, told me of some new Work of Monsieur Descartes. I am much
troubled concerning him, having heard nothing of him a long time, and the
father Mersennus, is to blame for his silence. The late Monsieur the Marshall
de Schomberg, showed me sometimes the Letters of Madam de Liancourt, which he
bedewed with his tears in the reading. I did not remember to request a Copy of
them. He would have been ravished in making me the present, and we should now
have been comparing them with those of Vittoria. In the design I have to treat
of our language, Prose and Verse, and our honest men, and witty women, I should
have been glad to allege some word or line of hers; and this perhaps would be
the only fit manner of making her worth known unto the world hereafter. Apage
enim Authors Faeminas, ipsa quamvis divum Regina ita de se loquatur apud
divinum Poetam, Author ego, etc. I expect your resolution, whether the Duke of
Weymar's Verses were Dutch, French, or Latin, and remain,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 10 April, 1640.
LETTER IX.
SIR,
THe incomparable Monsieur de la Thihaudier, has now left me to my former
solitude, after the enjoyment of a weeks happiness, during which time, I
received your Letter of the twenty sixth of the last month, for which I beseech
you to lay aside all jealousy; for he neither saw the superscription on the
outside, nor understood the least syllable within it. I am not one of those
that make a secret of every thing, and much less of those that divulge
Mysteries. Though my freedom be directly opposite to the servitude of
Courtiers, yet I desire it should be discreet, and not injurious to my friend
or my self. This advertisement, may, if you please, serve for all, and you may
sleep in assurance as to this particular. If for the future you do not look
upon me as a Confessor of the short Robe, your diffidence of my taciturnity,
will accuse you of doubting the power of Philosophy over the minds of men. But,
Sir, you have sent me so lively a Portraiture, that I could easily bear the
want of the Original, if he should save himself the trouble of coming hither.
He is at present a quarter of a league from Niort, with Monsieur the Abbot of
Lawardin. Monsieur de la Thibaudier tells me, he has mountains of Collections,
and that he reads no Author, either ancient or modern, without making
Observations upon him. Being judicious and pol^e, I doubt not but he will one
day impart you some of the rarest things in the world. The Metamorphoses of the
Crown Imperial, and the Celestial Lionness, have sufficient grounds and
resemblance, and the first cannot be made for any other then the King of
Sweden; nor the second, but for Mademoiselle Paulet. But the invention which is
in hand, is not so exact as might be imagined. The Sun may be Rival to all
Shepherds, as well as to Daphnis; and a Lover of all Shepheardesies, the same
manner he is of Phillis. I do but half explain my self, because I want leisure
to say more. Yet I believe you understand me well enough, and our opinions will
be nothing different. I am without reserve,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 25 April, 1640.
LETTER X.
SIR,
THe favors of Monsieur the Count de Fiesque, are no new things to me. It is
long ago that he took pleasure to oblige me; and he was one of the first
Protectors of my writings Even at Rome it self, where the Monkish faction
exercises its Tyranny, and threatens the Inquisition to those that are not of
their judgment, he declared himself openly for oppressed truth against
triumphant calumny. He is therefore interessed in my Cause; and as one of our
friends of times past, said, Me pariter servat, judiciumque suum. I am
extremely obliged to him for this noble constancy, and beseech you, Sir, to
testify my acknowledgements unto him; to which you may add, if you please,
that I have a perfect esteem of his valor. I take valor here, in the most
large and comprehensive signification, and include in this one word, an
infinity of excellent qualities, natural and acquired, civil and military.
But this is not a place to make his Elog e in; we shall one day find one more
public and eminent to declare our gratitude. I am also much obliged to
Monsieur L'Huillier, in cujus sanctissima memoria exul aut etiam damnatus ad
bestias, libenter acquiescerem. I do in a manner comfort my self of all my
misfortunes, when I consider the goodness which this dear friend has for me.
He affords me the honor of his love, and he may be assured, he has not a more
faithful and passionate servant in the world, then my self. Monsieur the
Abbot de la Rochefoucaut, has one of the Messieurs d'Esprit with him, who does
me the favor to give me a visit sometimes of three or four days. I have found
report mistaken in the worth of this person, and he is so knowing and
judicious, that his abilities have but few equals. He is otherwise a great
admirer of virtue, and speaks of you as is fitting to be heard favorably of
me, although he should not otherwise tell me the finest things in the World. I
know no person more worthy to be the elder Brother of him that is with Monsieur
the Chancellor, whose merit is likewise generally approved of all the Court.
Madam, the Marchioness de Rambouillet, is more liberal of her favors to me
then I deserve. I remember well my engagements to her, but I desire a little
respite, being otherwise encumbered and overcharged. I shall ever bewail the
death of Monsieur de la Valette, and Philosophy wants remedies to comfort me.
Time it self is not able to do it, because he goes about the work too slowly;
and so I shall pass the remainder of my life in sorrow and regret. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 1 May, 1640.
LET. XI.
SIR,
I Think the modesty of Madam de Liancourt, which you praise so much, was not
greater then your humility. You speak almost in the strain of young novices.
This would be good in a general Confession, at the feet of a Father of the
Oratory; but to write to me, that you have no merit, and that it is I that set a
value upon you, cannot be received without an incivility to the public, in
flattering a particular person. I pray God pardon you, my dear Sir; yet a
superfluity in your Complement may be suffered for this time, although in the
judgment of Monsieur de --, it be not any where allowable but at Table, where
I agree with him, that Entertainments are of the essence of good cheer, I
confess the conversation of this Gentleman pleases me wondrously, being mixed
of the world and books. He brings in such a proportion of serious and jest, as
serves exactly to keep the mind, betwixt loosnesse and study, in the agreeable
mean that partakes of both. If I had known, his Letter would have been
troublesome to you, I should have hindered him from writing; but I conceived,
that twelve lines of your style every day, would not put you to much pains.
Besides, to tell you true, the sending of Spanish gloves to Monsieur de
Voiture, pleased me so well, that I was desirous to see a Ticket more of the
same air. Monsieur de Thou has sent Monsieur Girard the relation, of the death
of Monsieur the Cardinal de la Valette; he desired to be interred at Toulouse,
in a Church, where the bodies of three Apostles, and many Saints, are reposed.
I observe in it also diverse other evidences, of a true piety; and this I
confess it is, wherein I find some consolation. At least it is the only
comfort I will admit of, in so great a loss. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.

LET. XII.
SIR,
THe last Post made me rich, and you have been liberal, as well of your own
presents, as of those of another. The Letter of Monsieur Silhon, to Monsieur
the Cardinal Bentivoglio, is very full of admirable conceits; it afforded me
not only divertisement, but instruction, and his judicious reflections, upon
the most eminent places of the Italian Book, are Master pieces of an absolute
workman. You would proceed from liberality to magnificence, if you could often
make me the like presents; and they should be better received here, then the
platform of the building of Monsieur de --. What a strange sight is this, and
what is the meaning of this republican, to raise his vanity from the structure
of his house, knowing it was a crime in one of old, to have built his a story
higher, then that of his neighbors? Madam Desloges had informed me before, of
this important news, and told me more, that this Builder was of great note in
his Country, and very powerful with his Master. We shall see what he desires
of me, for there must needs be a Letter with the Packet; and he protests to
Madam Desloges, that he has writ me diverse others, which notwithstanding never
came to my hands. You surprise me strangely, in telling me, that the old
Doctor, whom we have always so much loved, is but a refined cheat; he preaches
nothing else, but fidelity, freedom, and sincerity; I know, that oftentimes
deceits are practiced that way, and some people commend truth, to the end they
may lie with less suspicion. I know there will be always Pharisees in the
world, always Salusts and Seneca's, who will hide corrupt manners under fair
speeches.

O vita fallax, abditos sensus geris! Or if you will, with Cicero, Frons, and
oculi persaepe mentiuntur, oration vero saepissime. We must observe the carriage
of this gallant man for the future; and beware, that his finesses take not
advantage of our simplicity. Be pleased to send me your opinion of an Italian
Author, called Davila, who has writ the History of the Civil Wars of France:
Is he comparable to the Ancients, as I have been told? is his language pure,
and his mind dissinteressed? are his Politics solid and judicious, etc? All
this, Sir, in the familiarity of your ordinary style, and without any
meditation. I have received news of our good Monsieur Maynard, who will be
here in few days, if he be a man of his word. In the mean time, oblige me with
the delivery of a Letter to him, from Monsieur the Commissary. Of many Verses
wherewith he has feasted us, I send you ten, which are not indeed of the lofty
strain, but such, whose style seems to me very sweet and natural.

To Phillis afflicted.
THink not (fair mourner) I can e're be tired,
To see that sorrow which so sweet appears.
What Artemisia could be more admired,
Or wash a Tomb with such becoming tears?
May curses that Philosophy pursue,
Which with tame precepts shall your grief subdue.
All your regrets and sighs so graceful are,
And force my heart by their victorious charms.
Those clouds of sorrow are both bright and fair,
And love from them takes more triumphant arms.
I most humbly kiss your hands, and am with all my soul,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 15 May, 1640.
LETTER XIII.
SIR,
THe Post has faithfully acquit himself, of all that you entrusted him with in
my favor, for which I confess a new engagement to you; but more eminently,
for the two most prudent, most exact, and, according to your custom, most
obliging Letters. The gift of Urbanity, which you congratulate to Monsieur de
la Thebaudier, will be undoubtedly pleasing to him. I have sent him your
Letter, but I had near forgotten to thank you for it on my own part: And
surely, Sir, it is fit I do, since I am as much interessed in it, as he; and
you therein amplify my small merit, with your accustomed exaggerations. I am
very sensible of these testimonies of esteem, because they are also evidences
of love, and the heat where with your words are animated, is too natural to
come other whence, then from your heart. But, Sir, what are the intentions of
our dear Monsieur Esprit? his civilities fill me with confusion; he either
mocks me, or is good and generous even to excess, as well as Monsieur his
elder brother, who is not contented to excuse the poverty of the Village, but
also mis-imployes his good language, in commendations of the bad cheer,
wherewith he was received. I treated him only in the fashion, of the good man
in the Georgicks: Qui dapibus mensas onerabat inemptis. and made him no other
complement, then that in the same Author; Aude hospes contemnere opes and te
quoque dignum, etc. Notwithstanding, he would have the whole family charged
with all these favors, which are so empty and leight, and whereunto only his
acknowledgment gives a a body. How easy is it to oblige persons, that act by
noble principles! It Is I, Sir, that am infinitely accountable to them, for
their generous affection; and since I am destitute of all means to declare my
gratitude, by my actions. I conjure you to assure the two brothers, which are
at Paris, that I love, esteem, and honor them all three perfectly. I return
you the catalogue of Italian books, wherein I see not any thing of value. Is
this the rich Library of the curious book-merchant? I much pity the hard hap of
his widow, if she be such as she is represented to me; and if I were one of
those Grandees, that loved the husband so well, I would not suffer her to
perish for want of relief. But they are of that sort of people, who think, they
give all, when they give shadows and appearances; and had rather go to the
obsequies of the dead, then assist, to the upholding of his ruinous family. I
am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 22 May, 1640.
LET. XIV.
SIR,
I Have a perfect esteem of the merit of Monsieur -- but I confess, his book
less pleased me at the second, then it did at the first reading. You shall
know the reasons of my sentence, if we happen to meet once more in our lives;
and it shall be on the side of that fair bed, wrought with Tulips, where we
will treat of this matter, and several others, if Heaven hear my prayers.

Et me fata unum patiantur degere mensem,
Anspiciis, Capelane, tuis.
I am confident, the Bulls you speak of, will not be the cause of this voyage,
although he that makes the Briefs at this day, has said these twenty years,
that I was not unworthy of the favors of the King, sed haec fuere; and he
obliges me too much, to leave me to my repose and liberty, which I prefer above
all, that greatness is able to give me. I find that true every day, which you
write me of Davila, and the frequent concurrence of my judgment with yours,
gives me great cause of glory. I only adjoyne to it, that it is a great shame
to our Nation, to be instructed of their own affairs from a stranger, and that
France has not yet been the mother of a French Historian. I have seen a second
Lapidary on the Duke of Weymar, which I cannot commend, though it be ascribed
to a person whom we love. That which you tell me of the other is most true, his
eloquence is wholly founded upon common places, and has nothing at all of
Cicero. I am,

SIR, Yours, etc.
Balzac, 1 June, 1640.
LET. XV.
SIR,
I Should not think my self in my wits, if I did not extraordinarily esteem
those Messieurs that bear that name by way of excellency. But further also,
considering my obligations to them, if I loved them not, (permit me to tell you
in Latin) Mihi robur and aes triplex, circa pectus esset. The strength that
Philosophy confers on us, being not contrary to the tenderness into which
humanity softens us, I make it my glory to be one of those tender and sensible
ones, that have always their hearts wounded, and their souls captived to
incomparable virtue. When I have discovered it in any place, no ceremony or
complement is able to restrain me, The possessors of it cannot quit themselves
of me at their pleasure, and there is a necessity of loving, that joins me
inseparably to the thing, that I account amiable. Our Monsieur Esprit de
Verseuil, and yours of Paris, shall not doubt of this truth, and they shall one
day see, that I do not content my self with a secret resentment, but make
profession of my gratitude. It seems you have shown all our friends the Letter
of Monsieur de -- He would be very much mistaken, if he thought, I would raise
me a Trophie of the praises that he gives me, and be still greedy of those
Viands, whereof I surfeited long ago. You need not fear lest his profusion make
me slight my vow, and bring me new desires to write Letters. It was with much
Religion, that I said vae literis, and pronounced a curse upon my ancient
Trade. And in case you doubt of it, I confirm all the maledictions in this
place, that I have so often and solemnly bequeathed unto it. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 10 June, 1640.
LETTER XVI
SIR,
ALl that I received of yours, and the Roman Frenchman's, has satisfied me
above measure. Although his mind be famished with Benefices, and sick of
Ambition; yet he has otherwise amiable and deserving qualities. Let us not
exact more of poor mortals, then the proportion of their fortunes will allow.
It is not a crime to be no Philosopher: All of that profession have not equally
abandoned matters of interest. There have been some that have made as
importunate supplications as this, that have received denials and affronts, and
insinuated into the favor of the Pages of the Syracusan Tyrants. I took
delight in all the Papers which he sent me, and should have taken much more, it
they had not obliged me to the return of answers. We have to do with an urgent
man, and who understands not what it is to give. He lends only upon usury, and
trafficks in Prose and Verse, in the one and the other Tongue. He is so
rigorous in the observation of punctualities, that he will never be wooed to
pardon my omistions. Yet I must beseech a little expectation from him, and some
of his mercy in consideration of my infirmities. He that told you the other
day, that he had not aes triplex circa pectus, may notwithstanding have it
circa frontem. For, indeed I see no other remedy to defend my self from these
favors that are done me, which I esteem cruel, and should be happier in the
neglect and oblivion of all the world. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.

LETTER XVII.
SIR,
YOur last Letter has taught me nothing new, it only confirmed me in the high
opinion I had of the strong constitution of your soul. Nevertheless I discover
through it a very excellent and commendable infirmity; I mean that tenderness
whereof you tell me, which renders you sensible only of the losses which you
suffer of your friends. These are such, Sir, as in these days are accounted
none; and how many people are there on every side of you, that had rather have
lost eight hundred friends, then eight hundred crowns; they value them no more,
then they do men in Turkey, that are to be sold; and I know some, that would
easily forego their most dear and faithful intimates, at fifty crowns a-piece.

O curvae in terris animae and coelestium inanes! In stead of requiring
consolation, you ought rather to rejoice in the possession of the virtue, which
is contrary to that ignoble vice, and congratulate your health in the time of a
Pestilence. I am fully satisfied, that the ruins, upon which the ancient Sages
held themselves immovable, would not be more dreadful to you, then them, and
that you could behold with a countenance, no less serene and unfrighted, all
the Shipwracks and burnings, and other hostilities, wherewith fortune
enterprises upon Philosophy. I would gladly continue this Discourse, and acquit
my self of what I promised you by the last Post; but my attendance on a great
company with me, will not afford me leisure. I am confident, you will allow the
excellent wit and language of Monsieur the Duke de la Rochefoucaut, as also
that of Monsieur the Prince of Marsillac his son, to be sufficient and lawful
causes, of referring you to another time. Yet I must not end here, without
telling you, that I received about three hours since, a rich present from
Monsieur de la Menardiere. All that I could do since that time, was, to read
the discourse at the entry of the book, wherein I confess, betwixt the
strength of his reasoning, and the solidity of his doctrine, I perceived so
quick and glorious appearances, and in so great number, that I yet remain
dazzled with them. Did I yet practice the writing of Letters, I would not fail
to testify to him, the resentments I have of so dear a favor. But it is
possible, I shall one day render him some more considerable act of my
gratitude; and I hope, that after I have studied his book, it will furnish me
wherewith to allege it. Par vero mumus ne a nobis unquam expectes,
praestantissime Capellane, sed si per egestatem nostram refer gratiam non
licet, ingenui saltem animi erit profiteri per quem profecerimus. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 22 June, 1640.
LET. XVIII.
SIR,
I Have solemnly renounced Hyperbole; it is a rock, which I look (...) upon
without trembling, and fear more then Scylla and Ch^^^dis. Yet you think, I
take pleasure to fall upon it, and that I am more then ever the hyperbolicall
Doctor. I perceive well, Sir, where the occasion lies. I shall be in combat all
my life, with your perpetual humility, and there is need of a process to make
you receive your due; I will not cease to tender it to you, in the best coin I
am able, and shall not scruple to perform that justice, to the most faithful
of my friends, which I rendered to my most enraged adversaries. Monsieur Costard
will without doubt be transported with joy, for the receipt of the excellent
present you sent him, and you shall not fail of his thanks; which
notwithstanding I shall know sooner from you, then from him, because there is
no commerce from hence to Niort, and the fifteen leagues that separate us, are
less favorable to our entertainments, then the distance of a hundred 'twixt
Angoulesm and Paris. All your fears give me not less disquiet, then they do
you. But I hope, the God of Hosts will be on our side, to the end of this
Campaign. It may be, the excellent Hymns will prevail with him, and then I
doubt not, but the Prince of Monsieur Chapelain will obtain greater favors
from him, then he of Monsieur Faret. Battles are not always fought at the
times of appointment, and I have observed in the Histories of all ages, that
the great events which determine the fate of great affairs, do happen less
frequently, according to design, then by accident and occasion. Our
enterprises here below, are derided from above; and we are but the engines and
actours of pieces, that are composed in heaven; Homo histrio, Deus vero poeta
est: He is, Sir, a soverain Poet, and you cannot refuse the part, which he
appoints you to bear in the Scene. It is meet we comply to his orders
concerning us, and submit our selves to the direction of his providence.
Nevertheless I dare promise you this time, that you shall have no need of your
supreme virtues; and my genius prompts me, that your Muses shall yet a long
time sing the triumphs of Monsieur de Longueville: These are the vows which
are made for him and you, by,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 1 July, 1640.
LET. XIX.
SIR,
YOu are the last of the good and magnanimous, and if there be yet any
generosity upon earth, we man say boldly, it is lodged in your breast, and
discovers it se^^ ^n your words. Those which you have written to Monsieur
Costard, in answer to his Letter, have so wholly satisfied me on every side,
that I know not which most to esteem, either the prudence and freedom that have
dictated them, or the wit and courage that breathe in them. They would even
reclaim Tigers to civility, and to inchant Dragons. Quid fiet de homine, ut
Romani loquebantur, humanissimo, cui est consuetudo cum mansuetioribus musis?

Non obtusa adeo Costardus pectora gestat. I doubt not, but for the future, he
will be one of your great admirers, and knowing you, as he does, bestow his
heart upon you, which is one of the most noble and constant, that I know. I
account myself happy, in having contributed something to this incomparable
friendship. Being both of you of such eminent worth, it was requisite to the
glory of either, that you should be no longer indifferent. I have yet seen no
more, then the Epistle of our friend, wherein I was ravished, to see the Verses
which he cites from you. This is termed, Praesenti tibi maturos largitur
honores,
Ornandasque tuum per nomen suscipit arts.
Do me the reason of a most humble acknowledgment, for the other, wherewith he
begins his discourse, with that excess of gratitude, pro ingratissima mihi
olim gratia. If one had given him the Consulship, what would he not have said?
For one Panegyric that Ausonius made, he would have made a dozen; and if
Domitian had offered him the honor of a dinner, he would have flouted the
feasts of Jupiter; he would have said, He scorned his Nectar, and had no need
of his Ambrosia. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 10 July, 1640.
LET. XX.
SIR,
SInce the Letters which you write me, are benefits which I receive, and those
I return you, are the acknowledgments which I render; you may well perceive,
that it concerns me not to leave you one only moment in doubt, of the
gratitude of my soul. The happiness is, you are neither a hard friend, nor a
proud benefactor. Although I should fail, your indulgence would seek reasons,
to justify my offense, and you would accuse, not only the Post, Totila, and
Rocolet, but also fortune, the stars, and destiny, rather then believe me
culpable. You need not doubt, but I am much interessed in the great news of
Germany, and intend to make a bonefire for my own particular, as soon as your
Prince shall have deserved those of the public; I pray Heaven he may become
the Liberatour of Christendom, and that I be his Prophet, and you his
Historian. But indeed, if a man may be a Prophet and a Poet, at the price you
speak of, they are charges of a very cheap rate, and the places of the Sages
did not cost more, in the time of Cleobulus and Bias, when there needed no more
to have one, then to have said, (...), or some such like quodlibet. If Monsieur
Menage does me the honor of a visit, I will receive him with open arms, and my
hermitage shall be ever esteemed glorious, for the receipt of such a guest. I
have no knowledge of the Abbot of Aubignac, nor ever heard of his Question of a
dozen hours long, neither can I tell who are those Candidati tam infeliciter
ambitiosi; you will oblige me, by giving me a little light herein. If any one
have done you injustice, I will declare it to just posterity; and the Judges
that shall condemn my friend, shall not be less execrable, then those which
acquitted the enemies of Cicero; Cum nempe violatae Religionis reus, Religioni
and Legibus illusit. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 10 June, 1640.
LET. XXI.
SIR,
What is the design of your Rheum, to set upon you in the month of July, and
not to be contented to make war against you, in the midst of winter, which is
the true time of its Campaign, ut optime and ingeniosissime scribis? You may
with reason reckon it, with the other prodigies, which we have lately seen, and
those that are still in being. And since your phlegm has such an extraordinary
inundation, you may be suffered to accuse the stars, and complain of the
dispensations of Nature. As for me, let Rivers forsake their Channels, and
overswel their banks as long as they please; let the Dog Star die with cold, if
he will, and let it freez and snow upon our harvest; I know, the worst evil is
already past, and the succeeding disorders will ever be more supportable to me,
then the first. But, Sir, you are good company for a sick person, and it must
be confessed, that the clouds of your rheum, do nothing at all disturb the
serenity of your mind. Could any man speak better of the affairs of Germany,
and the peregrinations of your Theseus? or with more humanity accuse the
miscariage of our new brother of the Academy? Is it possible for earnest and
jest, to be more agreeably tempered upon the farewell of Monsieur de Colomby to
them, or upon the curses that he bestows on the present age, and the small
understanding there was, between him and Tacitus, even at the time of their
greatest familiarity? You become what person soever you please to act, and
there is an equal mixtu e of prudence in all your performances. I have seen
within a few days, a man whom you much prized to me, in two very different
postures: And at the conclusion of his Poetry, which pleased me extremely, I
fell by misfortune upon these Verses, which made me sick at heart, and
wherewith I am somewhat conscientious to sully white paper.

Cum spueret vestrum alteruter gravis exquecrearet,
Plurimus and rauca conspergeret omnia tussi;
Nulla horrescentis vultu asper signa dedissem,
Cuncta ferens, vos aetatis namque ante tulistis
Plura immunda meae, cum cultus nescius infans,
Foedarem toties in canis humida strata.
As I would not have a Poet bear too much upon the wing, and be always soaring
above the clouds, so neither would I have him suffer himself to fall into the
dirt, and much less into some other matter more unclean. Fracastori^s descends
and abases his course, when he pleases; but this man creeps and wallowes in
these six verses, as if he took pleasure in ordure. I do not know Monsieur
Hedelin any more, then I knew Monsieur the Abbot of Auhignac; but I shall be
forward to begin our acquaintance, by the way which you have marked me out. You
must therefore do me the favor, to send me the pro and con, and believe me
always,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 1 August, 1640.
LET. XXII.
SIR,
I am happy in being beloved of you, and I would not change this good fortune,
for that of all the favorites in the world. This is indeed a magnificent
speech, but the loftiness of my words is neither without reason nor example.
Your Horace goes beyond them, when instead of the favor of Kings, he
appropriates even Royalty to himself, and says, he is more happy then the
King of Persia, by a less enjoyment then mine. With how great goodness have
you received the trouble which I put upon you? How many souls receive light
from your fire? And what is it that you do not for a man, that can only requite
you with vows and wishes? You cover me, Sir, with shame and confusion, and I
know not how to answer your last Letter, but with bowing my head, and laying my
hand upon my mouth. This religious posture must serve me instead of the thanks
I owe you, and of those I should tender you for the savor of those excellent
persons which you have engaged to undertake our affairs. I am not more yours
then I was before, quid enim perfecto addi potest? But I am, as I conceive,
more then any person in the world.

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 12 Aug. 1640.
LETTER XXIII.
SIR,
I Send you here with the Letter of a gallant man of my acquaintance, which he
desired might be communicated to you; and I must tell you, he is persuaded upon
my words, that he is a Master Artist at writing of Letters. It is therefore a
just judgment of God, that I am now persecuted with the impertinences which I
formerly commended, and that my flattery reaps the thorns which it self had
sown. He seeks occasions to write to me, and when he cannot devise any, he
purveys for them abroad in all the world. He also injoyns me to return him an
answer, upon I know not what penalty; and requires, besides all this, gratiam
celeritatis, as if it were a business of expedition. He shall have neither one
nor other, neither answer nor diligence. I will preserve the liberty whereof he
would bereave me; and if he proceed to molest me, make another oath more solemn
then the first. What an imprudence is it, to exact golden Letters of his
friends, to demand of me Rhetorical flourishes, and cosi va discorrendo, to the
intent he may read me in assemblies, and make a Proclamation of our secrets?
You can testify for me, that I am far from engaging in the Trade of a
Declamer, which I shall ever studiously avoid. I beseech you let me know, who
that person is which takes himself for Scipio Africanus, and treats his friend
with the name of Laelius. His presumption certainly deserves severe punishment,
and I doubt not but one of these days, the fancy will be in his head to
profane the names of Agrippa, Mecaenas, and Hephestion, in bestowing them upon
some miserable scoundrel, to whom himself will be Augustus and Alexander. That
Vida, whom we esteem so much, and in whose favor Scaliger the Son has
written, Qui de Hieronymo Vida aliter sentit quam de summo ac perfectissimo
Poeta nugas agit. This Vida, I say, is the true Author of the villainy you have
seen. It is in the Poem which he addresses, Gelelmi Vidae and Leonae Oscasalae
Manibus. But we must leave all other matters, and give you a recital of the
Heroical enterprise of a gallant man, which passed through this Country, and is
going in quest of Truth, and good Wine, by Sea and Land. To this effect, he
designs a Pilgrimage to Monsieur Des Carts, in imitation of that of Apollonius
to Hiarchas: Nevertheless he will put off truth, and Monsieur des Carts to the
next year, and not pass the Sea this Campaign. But his other design deserves
the knowledge of the whole world. He departed from Paris on purpose to come and
see the Sun rise and set at Balzac, and so forwards, to eat all the Melons and
Figs of Gasconie; and from thence to take the way of Languedoc, and keep the
Vintage of Frotignac. Alexander had never so rare a thought: The Conquest of
the Indies is nothing in comparison to this expedition, and you must be more
sparing hereafter in relating to me the voyages of your Theseus. You must
further know, that his first speech to me, was concerning you, in such manner
as I would have all the world speak; and this introduction has so well pleased
me, that although he had drawn after him, Maenades, Sileni, Asses and Panthers,
I could not have shut my Gate upon this extraordinary train. As I had finished
my Letter, he that is the subject of it, came hither upon the Gallop, and gave
me a second visit, matutinam, siccam and sobriam. But yet I must tell you, that
this sobriety is not without some consideration of interest; and that he did
not forbear his breakfast, but for fear it might be prejudicial to a great
dinner which attended him at Angoulesme. So that even his abstinence has
intemperance for its object, and is nothing at all agreeable to that of the
ancient Fathers in the Desert. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 14 Aug. 1640.
LETTER XXIV.
SIR,
THe great importance is to know, that I am your Favorite; for it is most
certain you are a King; and if you will not believe me, hear the Oracle that
tells you.

Rex est qui posuit metus,
Et airi mala pectoris;
Quem non ambitio impotens,
Et nunquam stabilis favor
Vulgi praecipitis, movet;
Qui tuto positus loco,
Infra se videt omnia.
If you desire any more, behold, Sir, a second Oracle, or the confirmation of
the first.

Men's regnum bona possidet
Nil ullis opus est equis,
Nil armis and inertibus
Telis quae procul ingerit
Parthus, cum simulat fugas:
Rex est qui metuit nihil.
There is nothing herein which is not proper to you, and you are the Sovereign
next Monsieur de Longueville. But it is true, this Noble affection gives you
some disquiets, and you fear all the blows for so dear a person, which you
would contemn if they were directed against your self. The Sonnet of the
Italian President, and the Letter of the Cavalier of twenty years old, are very
agreeable to my palate, and you have obliged me with a feast of two so rare
presents. But how many lustres are gone? I had almost said, Ages, wherein we
have seen nothing of your Muses. I know well, that Carmina proveniunt animo
deducta sereno. And there is scarce any thing but Vows made in a Tempest. But
yet you might have put those vows in rhyme, and told us in Music, that singing
could not be exspected from you in your present estate. As for me, nothing
disturbs me from my Trade. Neither pain of body, nor affliction of mind, hinder
me, from sending you almost by every Post, something of my workmanship. My
Enthusiasm being past, and my last Latine-Letter sent, some have assured me,
that it was an incomparable piece. Behold, a great word for a Courtier, not
very familiar with your Apollo, and a Doctor in the vulgar tongue. I have not
so much faith, as to believe my self presently a Roman Citizen, because a
Provincial told me so; it is you, Sir, who must clear me up this truth, and if
you please to associate Monsieur the Abbot of St. Nicholas, in the judgment of
this important affair; I send you a new copy to be delivered to him. He is,
without doubt, rerum nostrarum acerrimus and integerrimus judex, possidetque in
supremo gradu, ut Magistri loquuntur, facultatem judicatricem. Do me the
favor, to observe and mark all the faults, to the end I may correct them; for
it is a dangerous thing to speak a dead language. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 4 September. 1640.
LET. XXV.
SIR,
I Have much exclaimed against the delays of messengers, and truly not without
cause, since they deprived me of an extraordinary contentment, and hindered me
from the enjoyment of Monsieur Menage; his Book would have made Justus Lipsius
jealous, and put Lambin in despair. It astonishes me, and I am confident,
satisfies you, though you express nothing thereon, to leave me the entire
liberty of my judgment. It is true, I have a great inclination for this grandis
praetxtatus. But if I were his professed enemy, I should confess, that his
subtleties are very solid, and his doctrines exquisite; he draws out of
fountains, remote from the common roads, and which the people have not yet
soyled. But who would think, that in critical questions, and those upon the
Heautontimorumenos of Terence, there were any room for courtesy and offices of
friendship? and that I should see my self amongst so many Authors and
Scholiasts? It seems he did not reprehend me in the beginning, but with a
foresight of rendering his commendations of me less suspected in the
conclusion, nor correct me, for taking the conception of Hercules for his
birth, but to the end he might say, that the faults which I commitate common to
me, with the infallible Heinsius. You are too good, Sir, and know the way of
gratitude too well, to leave me in areer in this particular, and there are no
words but yours, that can sufficiently express my resentments. Be pleased to
grant me them, in this occasion, and preserve me that precious friend, in the
same manner as you bestowed him on me. But must I not hear, that you are
returned into the way of the Hostel, of Monsieur the Ambassador of Sueden, and
that you are a better Courtier in Summer, then in Winter? Visit that excellent
person, and become his Confident. You may possibly see that incomparable
History, which he keeps prisoner so many years, for there are near thirty past,
since the Author of Infanticida writ to him, in these remarkable words: Ita
munus molestissimum sustinuisti hactenus, ut quaecunque in Republica jam
restant, aliud agendo sustinere possis; and quod fidem superat, tanquam in otio
absolutam patriae Historiam occupatissimus scripsisti. Quam qui olim legent,
obstupescent, salvo Taciti splendore and augusta Majestate dici aliquid
floridius potuisse. I have read his Book, de jure Belli and Pacis, which is of
very great learning; and a long time since his Mare Liberum, and lately two
Tragedies, and some other sacred Poems; but I have lost the volume of his
Verses, printed at Leyden, which I would gladly regain: He has also composed
diverse other pieces, whereof I beseech you to give my Stationer a catalogue, to
the end, I may want none of the works of this great personage: I have a
particular esteem of all that comes from him, and besides the solidity of his
learning, the strength of his reasoning, and the graces of language, I observe
therein a certain character of honesty, which persuades me, that excepting our
Religion, from which he is unhappily a stranger, he may be confided in, for all
other things. You do very much honor to my extravagance, in calling it
Enthusiasm, and I did not take my self to be of so jolly an humor. It Is only
in your presence, that my melancholy leaves me in repose; and had not I been
to write to Monsieur Chapelain, I should not have so much as remembered the
voyage of the new Bacchus. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 20 September. 1640.
LETTER XXVI.
SIR,
I Pardon our friend his pedantry, if he be assured of the Prelacy, and has
City-security for it. He, near whom he would be placed, has sometimes the
outside and appearance of an honest man, but the bottom of him is a certain
cheat. It Is a folly to depend upon any thing from him, though after
protestations, both by word and writing. My indefagitable Scribe has labored
for you this week, and will by all means have you see my last Latin, because
it seems to him well writ. I do not oppose his will, since it costs me nothing
but consent, nor complain of the pains he puts himself to. Let him kill you
therefore with this so often recocted crambe, provided you do not cease to be
otherwise in health, and that it cause not the return of your rheum. Never did
any business find more protection, then that which I recommended to you, and
we are principally indebted to you for the good success. You have obliged
Monsieur de Voiture, to contract his gravity in my favor, that Monsieur de
Voiture, that never speaks without persuading. You may perhaps think, that I am
providing him an accurate complement hereupon; I had indeed once resolved it,
but I lately read in my Stoic Philosophy, that a wise man ought to have a
friend, to the end, he may not want one to sacrifice his life for, if need be.
So that upon this ground, it is apparent, that neither you nor he are yet fully
discharged toward me. You have not yet been solicited to Marty^dom, and since
you owe me your life and your blood, can you account to me a visit in a coach,
and a dozen words? I presume, you did not expect this anti-complement, and will
confess, that I do not take things after the common biasse. This it is to be
one of Zeno's disciples, and to have commerce with those lofty souls of
Antiquity, whose very extravagances are noble. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 30. September. 1640.
LETTER XXVII.
SIR,
I Cannot tell, if I should at present admire the Oration of my Lord della
Casa; but it is true, that I did formerly admire it, and had a design of
publishing it with Notes of my own making. This desire is not yet passed, and I
beseech you to procure a very correct Copy of it, to the end, that when I send
you mine, you may, by comparing them, judge which of the Manuscripts is the
better. In my opinion, this Florentine was perfectly judicious. He had seen the
Idea of the highest Eloquence: and I cannot agree to the sentence of Monsieur
Guyet, who wholly condemns his Latin. Only I think, the advantage is on the
side of the Tuscan, which is more free and natural. I have reviewed my second
Apology, and shall send you them both to be presented from me, to Madam the
Marchioness de Sable. I think it will be convenient, to make the Dedication of
them to her: And though there are many points of Learning treated therein,
above the ordinary capacities of Women; yet my address cannot be reproved,
being made to one that transcends the generality of that sex. Besides, I have a
great example to justify the action; and you may possibly have observed, that
Diogenes Laertius, directs his speech to a Lady of his time, in the Lives which
he has written of the Philosophe^s. Notwithstanding, he speaks not only of
their actions, and manners, but also of their sects and opinions. Our other
incomparable Marchioness shall likewise find a ready obedience from me. I will
publish the virtue and achievements of her Fathers, and her brave Romans; and
I hope she will be satisfied with something more then my forward compliance to
her commands. If I were capable of joy, I should have received it very sensibly
from your last approbation. You are in effect almost the only man whom I
desire to please, and I am ready to say, that omnes cogitationes meae ad te
referuntur, and in te consumuntur. Therefore I conjure you to love me, if you
would have my sad life sustained yet longer by any comfort, and believe not
that I labor either for Fortune or Glory. You are the only end of all my
pains. But there is yet one thing which I would obtain of you, that when I send
you either my Latin or my French, you would not advertise me of my faults. Not
for that I think my self infall^ble, or you incapable to c^rrect me. But
because I am not solicitous about my errors, and do not take things so much to
heart as I have done formerly. If a solecism escape from me, I think I should
now let it run as far as it pleases, without putting my self to the
trouble of overtaking it. It Is a favor therefore of chance, if I make any
thing considerable at the first attempt. I am.

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac 8 October. 1640.
LET. XXVIII.
SIR,
I Have obtained at length, what I desired so passionately, I mean an
authentical Declaration of my favor with you. I possessed the thing formerly,
but I wanted the Title. Now I am provided of a necessary Piece to justify my
possession, and let any one hereafter adventure to dispute it with me. But do
not think, Sir, that I account it in the number of Goods honest and
unprofitable. I find in your friendship, pensions, benefices, offices,
dignities, and generally all the advantages that favor can expect from
Royalty; since I find in it wherewith to slight all those graces, and having
made me a present of your self, what did ever Hephestion receive from the King
his Master, that was comparable to what you have bestowed on me? You must
either confess that you know not your self, or agree with me in this truth,
and that there is no rationally ambitious man, that is not of my opinion. But
since we are upon the Chapter of excellent friendship, is that of Monsieur
Silhon, in as high a degree of heat toward me, as I left it at Paris. If it be
so, as I cannot doubt it, I am doubly happy, and I beseech you to assure him,
that he has not a more faithful servant then my self. As for you, dear Sir, I
have no more to say to you, only do me the honor to believe, that in receiving
you, I give my self to you, and could wish I were of some value, that you
might not be wholly a loser in the change. I am,

SIR, Your etc.
Balzac, 19 October. 1640.
LETTER XXIX.
SIR,
I Have received so great contentment from the Letter which your friend writ
you, as was incapable of addition by a second complement. I did formerly
apprehend the inconvenience of this excess, like that of two dinners on a day;
and you know, that there is satiety even of the best things. He is indeed a
very gallant person, and agrees with your description. Oftentimes what he
speaks, deserves to be alleged. But is there no means of obtaining of the
Ingenious answers which he recited to you? it is indifferent to me, whether
they come from deliberation, or are delivered upon the place; whether they be
born in the company, or brought from home, provided they be ingenious. It is
not of true jeasts, that the Poet said, Turpe est difficiles habere nugas,
Et stultus labor est ineptiarum.
It Is of those Equivocations you know of, and other studied fooleries, which
bad Buffoons fetch as far as the end of the World. I am an enemy to sour
faces, and affected gravity; and therefore I leave you to consider, if my
thoughts agree with yours concerning the Ambassador. Fruatur, per me, superbia
Titulorum.

Ad populum phaleras; ego te intus, and in cute, novi. What are his intentions,
with his Arminian Divinity, and Schism upon Schism? I could wish he were cured
of this malady, quem sacrum jure nomines; and that some good Angel would
reduce him into the right way. The Chancellor of Sueden, who does not trouble
himself with controversy, ought to perform this good office, and enjoin him
upon penalty, of being ill paid by his States, to discover the Treasure which
he hides; I mean the History which he keeps secret. Be pleased, Sir, to know of
him, what is his judgment concerning that of Father Strada, and let me know
yours, upon all the Spanish Comedies; for those which I have seen, have much
displeased me. I render you a thousand thanks for your excellent Verses, which
are besides, prudent; and speak you not only a Poet, but a Politician. You
have found out the delicacy of a Sonnet and this is a perfect body, whose parts
are all admirable. I envy you that meditation de l'Empire, and facin de
regner. Had not you regard to the sacra fames auri of Virgil, and an other
passage in Aristotle, which he alleges of one Jason, Qui nisi regnaret, sibi
esurir^ videbatur. I never yet saw any thing of so happy conceit, nor so
happily expressed; I congratulate with you for it, and am more then ever,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 1 November. 1640.
LET. XXX.
SIR,
I Am very ill satisfied with the proceedings of the shee-Pedant, as our friend
Thibaud terms her; if she did not give order to her Gentleman to lie, he has
ly'd of his own head. I have been long since distasted with the husband and the
wife, and think, I should lose the words which I should spend upon them;
therefore I am glad of the right I have, to blot them out, and imitate the
revenge of Virgil, who punished those of Nola in this manner, and put Ora jugo
where there was Nola jugo. Sed de his hactenus, Masculo and Faemina, marito and
conjuge, paedagogis. You are very injurious, to desire Monsieur -- to write to
me; he would do me no pleasure, in being persuaded by you: For though his
Letters are admirable, yet it will be necessary, that I give answers to his
admirable Letters. Monsieur -- has shown me four long sheets of his. If she
should treat me in that manner, would you condemn me to do the like? Truly, you
are a strange person! I bestowed my self upon you, and my soul is joined to
yours; and would not you have me keep my fidelity, and do not you consider,
that all other communication would be reproached to me? Beasti me with your
judgment, upon my Lord della Casa, and the approbation wherewith you authorize
my design. I will undertake the work with all speed, and will not forget what
I owe to the incomparable Marchionesses. If you see Monsieur Menage, I entreat
you tell him, that the German Gentleman, recens Papinii Commentator, passed by
this way yesterday, to see me; and spoke of him and his works so
advantageously, that it is beyond the power of my rhetoric, to add any thing
to his Elogy. I am,

SIR, Yours, etc.
Balzac, 15 November. 1640.
LET. XXXI.
SIR,
I Remain your favourit, during your good pleasure, and I hope, I shall never
do any thing to forfeit that title. But, if you please, do not take me for a
follower of Chrysippus, for if you do, you will have cause one of these days,
to accuse me of lightness, and to brand him with apostasy, whom you once
termed novice. You will see in my second apology, how I have quitted the
Cassock I had taken, and in what manner I had been rebellious against the old
Stoicall fathers. Yet I conceive, if I remember well the words of my Letter, I
spoke plainly of that proud Philosophy, without much declaration for any side.
I am indeed of a Sect more gentle, or, to speak truer, I am of all Sects, and
nequid tibi dissimulem, sine lare and familia in Philosophia vagamur, and cum
nostro Flacco, Nullius addictus jurare in verba Magistri,
Quo me cunque rapit tempestas, deferor hospes.
Our friend's Latin seems to me very handsome, but his flattery is
insupportable; and as that honest man of antiquity, exclaimed against Homer's
Jupiter, because he favored the Barbarians, so this new Author displeases me,
because he sooths up such people, as are not worth his pains. The Letter I writ
to Monsieur Heinsius, was neither long nor short, and therefore there must be
something more in that, that was told you. For the German whom I mentioned to
you the other day, called Joannes Fredericus Gronovius, had the like discourse
with me; and I know not, if some officious unknown person, has been disposed to
make himself pleasant with him and me. Mascardi is dead, and we shall all die
as well as he. But was he so eloquent as you speak of? I have seen nothing of
his making, except some Academicall Orations, which were shown me some fourteen
or fifteen years since, and I confess, that I found his Italian Prose as
poetical, as that of Ciampoli. A thousand services to Monsieur de Voiture, and
all our other friends. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 24 November. 1640.
LETTER XXXII.
SIR,
I Should be more sick then you, if informing me of bad news, you did not
likewise give me hopes of better for the future: But you are in the mean time
in your bed, and the Physicians give your rheum the appellation of a
Rhumatism. For the love of God, dear Sir, have a care of your health, whereof I
have more need for my life, then of my own, and consider me in your person.
Would not that superstitious course of diet do prejudice, to the nobleness and
gallantry of nature? and do you think, the humors would not revolt against an
abstinence, that endeavors to bring them into absolute subjection? I do not
approve such rules of living, except for such decayed bodies as mine, which are
incapable of all action, and overwhelmed with the least burden. Since you are
not in the like condition, you ought to take an honest liberty, and indulge
your self sometimes a more geniall fare; I conceive, your blood would by that
means become more pure and clear, and that all the seditions in the Microcosm,
would be appeased and tempered thereby. But, Sir, you speak very pleasingly of
your malady, your rheumatism is eloquent, and every thing flourishes in your
hands. This gallantry which is mingled with your pains, is an infallible sign
to me, of your approaching recovery, although you had not otherwise given me
assurance of it; and it cannot be said, there are any sick people of so jolly
an humor. Monsieur the Duke of Rochefoucaut, did me lately the honor of a
visit, and intermitted for some hours the great fishing he had, in our fair
Rivers, that washes five or six of his Teritorries, which contain twelve large
leagues of our Country. You were mentioned in our conference, with all the
elogies and admiration, due to a supreme virtue. He brought with him a Lady of
his kindred, whom I had a little before complemented, for a present which she
sent me. I imagined, you wo^ld not be unwilling to see the Letter which I writ
to her, and that the soft and delicate style, will not be less pleasing to
you, then the sublime. But the main is, to know, if a Rustic is able to
distinguish of delicateness, and without mistaking one for another: It is your
part to clear this doubt: In the mean time, I expect with impatience the news
of your health, and am with all my soul,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 10 December. 1640.
LET. XXXIII.
SIR,
I Have been ravished with joy, at the evidences of your recovery; but you
ought not to have attempted so much already, and should have managed better
this first favor of Nature. Four lines would have been enough, to have quieted
my mind, and given me the information I desired. But you know not how to keep
measure, when there is occasion to oblige; and you account your favors
defective, unless they exceed. How few friends are there like yours! and yet
fewer Philosophers, that are able to retain contentment of mind, in the
afflictions of the body, and loss of estate! I know such a Monsieur -- that
would have murmured against St. -- for less then a rhumatism; and the damage
of eight hundred crowns, upon the calling in of money, has rather
inconvenienc'd, then troubled you, which would have put Seneca into a fret,
though inconsiderable to his fortune. You may enquire concerning this of Dion,
and he will assure you, that there is a great difference between the flourishes
of Theory, and the decretory weapons of Experience; between a Sage upon the
paper, and a Sage upon occasions. But yet, Sir, I conceive, this ought not to
render you disaffected toward others, nor your force hinder you, from having
pity on the feeble and infirm. You must suffer men to hope, and desire still
at this day, as they have hoped and desired ever since the beginning of the
world. And though covetousness be not of so great antiquity, yet you must
remember, that you live not in the heroical times, but in the dregs of the
year, sixteen hundred and forty; and that heretofore, one of your predecessors
was commended, for showing that favor to the world, which he would not allow
to himself. Monsieur -- pretends to the Prelacy: What is there you find so
strange and criminal, in his pretensions? are they not the same, with those of
the greatest part of the Preachers at Paris, who do not much attend to the
Greek Ecclesiastical History; nor the example of St. Isidore of Pelusium. The
worst I see in it, is, that he has discovered himself to a mocker, and declared
his design with more freedom, then the hypocrisy of the Court permits. But
is he not in the bottom of such stuff, as Patriarchs and high Priests are made
of? and do not you remember, that in the place where he is, there is not so
poor a Surplice-wearer, but has an eye upon the Papacy, and p^ayes to God for
the triple Crown. Has he not at least as handsome a name, as the Signieur de
Simeonibus, whereof he makes mention in his Letter, and which I dannot remember
without laughter? Does not he well deserve a title, in partibus infidelium,
since he is so desirous of a Diocese, that any would be welcome to him? This
ambition does not prejudice civil society, and may be suffered in a mean
virtue. He may have it, without hating his Prince, without violating
friendship, and without being either a bad Frenchman, or a bad Roman. And
therefore, Sir, though you handsomely reproach my indulgence, I shall crave the
liberty to continue it, I know not how to declaim against so many
imperfections, purely human, seeing such a world of monstrous and gross crimes
I should have to combat, if I would undertake to be a Reformer. Quod ad
Eminentissimum Bentivolum attinet. You have all the reason in the world to
blame me, and I confess, I am the most rustic Provincial betwixt this and
Paris. Nevertheless, since you have already performed the complement, to which
I was obliged, I shall rest there. I am not able to add any thing to the
perfection of what you do, and will only tell you, that they are happy faults
whereof you are the amender. I wish to heaven, you would as liberally acquit me
of the rest of my debts, It would be a charity worthy of your riches; and I
leave you to imagine, if my creditors would have cause to complain of their
payment. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 20 December. 1640.
LETTER XXXIV.
SIR,
ALl was very agreeable in your Letter, till the conclusion; but that bad tail
has stung me, and I have much fear of that news, which would afflict you to
the utmost, if true; be it the will of heaven it prove false, and that your
friend be rather victorious, or at least that he be living. Life is a recruit,
whereby Marius regained the power which he had lost, and our admiral the
Armies which were defeated. Having that left, there is something remaining to
requite all losses; the unfortunate of this year, may be the happy men of the
next: Et durare ac semet rebus servare secundis, is the most sure maxim, and
greatest policy I know, in the instability of human affairs. You see how I
preach at a venture, and answer to what you have not told me, or at least in
such manner, as to understand it; I must expect the explication by the next
Post. You might as well have specified the misfortune which you apprehend,
since there are many sorts of them; but in stead of making me partaker of your
fear, you have put me into all fears imaginable. Eight days will either cure
or confirm my trouble. In the mean time, it is fit we enjoy our good fortunes,
as well as we can possibly, and get some Poet, to make a Soterion of thanks to
Heaven, for the recovery of your health. You cannot doubt, but it is very dear
to me, and that I vehemently desire the preservation of a life, by which my own
is principally supported. If I had lost you, I should not have known what to do
longer in the world, I should have been in worse estate, then widows and
orphans, and gone to eat my heart in the deserts of the Thebais.

Ipse meum cor edens, hominum vestigia vitans. But let us leave these bad
presages, and meddle wi^h nothing that is grievous, though in detestation of
it, upon such a holy day as this. We are now in the declining of a year, during
which, your virtue has been exercised with a thousand assaults of fortune, and
yet remained impregnable. May it please God to make the succeeding more
favorable to you, and that I have fewer occasions to admire the greatness of
your courage. Be you absolutely happy in your self, and I shall be so by
reflection; for I never separate my interests from yours. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.

The End of the Fifth Book.
FAMILIAR LETTERS, OF M. de BALZAC, To M. CHAPELAIN. The Sixth Book.
LETTER I.
SIR,
I Suffer with the tenderness of women, and your actions speak the strength of
Philosophy. I acknowledge my weakness in extreamitie; but I thought you had
known it long since, and that this vicious virtue of my soul could not be hid
from him, that ought to have seen the bottom of it. Nevertheless you improve
it admirably, and make excellent discourses upon the divinity of your late
sickness. I pray Heaven, Sir, that you be no more a Prophet at that rate, and
that the inspirations from above, may possess you by ways more sweet and
easy. The agitation that torments the Sybille of Virgil, and the pains she
takes to deliver her self from the violence of the spirit that seizes her,
gives me very unquiet thoughts; and it were better to remain in a state less
raised and lofty, that were also more gentle and serene. The person that you
know better then I, gave himself the trouble to come bid me adieu, before he
left Paris, and made me solemn protestations of his friendship. I have observed
in him by experience, whatsoever you had written of him to me before, and find
in him a deep judgment, and a great appearance of virtue; so that I am
thoroughly persuaded of his worth and honesty, and that he received injustice in
the character that was formerly given of him. It is possible you may have
changed him, and that he was converted by your good example. I know you have
made many metamorphoses of the like nature, and quos probos non inveneras,
probos fecisti. I cannot tell, if the dispatches you have done me the favor to
send over the Mountains, will have a happy voyage: If they have not, I am
already comforted, and the disorders that appear on all sides, will cause
greater mischiefs then this. I dare not speak any more to you of the
continuance of my maladies, and the emptiness of my purse, though I still
grapple with my pains.

God grant that the first month of the year, be the beginning of a better age.
But I fear I shall never again see health or good times; and did not your
incomparable friendship, give me some comfort in this world, I would rather go
out of it this day, then to morrow, if it were the will of Him, to whom all
creatures owe submission. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Angoulesm, 4 Jan. 1641.
LETTER II.
SIR,
I Am ashamed to tell you, that my indisposition hindered me from writing to you
by the last Post, for methinks I scarce ever speak of any thing else. There
being only this cause that could make me fail in my duty? you must allow me to
use it in my justification. I should be sick at this present for any other
cause, but I am bound to free you from those inquietudes, my silence would
raise in you, if the Post should make two returns, without bringing you any
news of me. You may therefore be pleased to understand, that I have received
your dispatch, with the Letter of Monsieur Conrart, which could not but be
welcome to me in the afflicted condition wherein I languish. There came also a
third in company, whereof I knew almost all the contents before, and yet did
not conceive my knowledge very great. Sed nihil hoc ad Andromachen, and our
friend has not understood me. I did not desire any news of those Antipodes in
manners, as Seneca calls them, that turn day into night, and night into day, as
was the custom of Queen Margaret in our times. I would only have learnt
something of certain stranger Princes, who, as I am told, made use of Torches
as well by day as night, out of an humorous and mysterious ceremony. The fire
that was carried before the Roman Emperors, as a mark of Sovereignty, whereof
as I remember, there are extant but three Testimonies in all Antiquity, namely
two in the History of Herodian, and the third in the Poem of Corippus, has a
near resemblance with this of my present enquiry. But likeness and identity are
different things; and it is disputable, whether it were a Torch, or a chafer of
coals, or a lamp, that was so carried in state. If there be any such proud
fools, that would be treated as Gods or Idols, let us leave them to burn
daylight as long as they please, and make no further search into the
repertories of Paris, which afford us nothing new. Our Monsieur Conrart is
always an admirable person, I know not if it be possible, to find so many
excellencies any other where, as I see in every thing of his. Since he is
pleased to serve me in my Complement to Holland, I accept his offer, and
promise him, that I will not often abuse his courtesy upon the like occasions,
you can testify for me, that semper invitissimus scribo. I am

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 20 Jan. 1641.
LET. III.
SIR,
LEt us suspend our judgments for a time, and not condemn the Parricide upon
the disposition of a Pedant. Possibly this man may have visions, and has not
read what he believes he did. Nor is it improbable, that he has ill understood
his Brother's meaning, or put the innocent words upon the rack, to make them
signify what he pleases. It Is the ordinary vice of Grammarians, such as he is,
quorum proprium est male interpretari, and a mente Auctorum saepius aberrare.
As for my self, Sir, who have known long since, and think I have expressed as
much somewhere, that there is no Saint in Heaven, but has been asperss'd with
unjust calumny upon earth; I do not receive all sorts of testimonies
indifferently; and before I can believe the evil that is cast upon a person I
love, I must see it clearly, and search it with my fingers. Yet I am not
ignorant of the corruption of mankind, nor do I desire to answer, for the
honesty of all the Doctors. But to imagine that all our Societies are full of
-- and -- is beyond my skill; and I could not do it, though I should be accused
of more then rustic simplicity, and called the ignorant amongst the great wits
of the Academy. Your Jesuit of Thoulouse, is a person of rare merit, and I
esteem his dozen of Verses you have favored me with, above all that I have
seen of -- this ten years. Here is strength, wit, and clearness; It Is an
absolute Poem, and has all the requisites of Art and Rule. He delivers all that
could be expressed in vulgar Prose, but in such a manner, that the Muses
themselves could not have spoken better, if they had made use of the mouth of
Horace and Virgil. You have much obliged me in copying out that passage in the
Life of Monsieur de Peiresk, that concerns your self and me. The Historian has
done me right, in regard of my affection, to place me near you. This is to make
two favors of one. I could wish he had touched one word of our friendship, and
erat huic locus, and that in the succession of Malherbe, he had not forgotten
your Lyrick Poetry. I know he understands the mystery of writing, and his
Latin is of the best age, so that he will do great honor to the memory of his
friend. I beseech God comfort you with some good news from Germany. I tremble
at the only reading of what you write me thence, and unless fata viam
invenient, I cannot tell how your Hero can save himself. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 30 Jan. 1641.
LET. IV.
SIR,
YOur discourses are according to your custom, prudent and Philosophical; and
there is scarce a small word escapes from me in writing to you, but returns me
many periods of excellent instruction. You treat the stupid and obdurate sect
of Stoics, as they deserve, and yet do not bend the tenderness of other more
mild Philosophy, so low, as to lament the death of Lampreys, Hens, and Parrots,
ut olim Crassus, Honorius, aliique non pauci ridiculae memoriae mortales. We do
not say with Virgil, Nec doluit miserans -- Refute him by himself, and say,
Sunt lachrymae rerum, and mentem mortalia tangunt. I am not exempt from such
apprehensions as afflict you, concerning the uncertain condition of the
affairs of War. Be pl^as'd therefore to let me know what news you have
received, and suffer me not to be consumed in my own fears. Oblige me also, by
recommending me to Monsieur the Bishop of Grass, and assure him, he has not a
more faithful servant then me, nor better persuaded of his incomparable worth.
If there be any of his new Poetry abroad, I beseech your goodness to intercede
for it in my favor, who am most passionately,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 6 Feb. 1641.
LETTER V.
SIR,
THough the Greeks have a proverb, that offends the sons of the gods, yet I do
not believe, that the Counts of Dunois of former times, were more honorable
persons, then the Duke of Longueville, of the present. The last miracle,
whereof your Letter gives me relation, made me tremble in the reading; my
imagination is still unsettled, and I fear for them that are escaped, as if I
saw them yet in hazard, and amidst the difficulties of the passage. Without
question, Sir, Heaven has some extraordinary design for your Prince. Men are
not less frequently deceived in their fears, then in their hopes; and I have
observed in the Histories of all Ages, that great forces have almost ever
performed but little, and such as were inconsiderable, very much.

Nil desperandum Teucro duce and auspice Teucro,
-- Cras ingens iterabimus aequor.
But you must remember, that Teucer made this Oration amongst his cups; and
likewise observe, that it is from the banks of Bacchara, (which the Latinists of
Germany derive by Etymology from Bacchi ara) that the Nectar Rhenanum is
gathered, which may perhaps have filled your Army with Enthusiasm. But, Sir,
you return me the title of Philosopher, with too great humility, I cannot
accept an honor, whereof I am so undeserving, nor suffer you to call me your
Book, who are to me both a Library and an University. If you provoke me
further, I will term you my Tripod and my Oracle, and treat you as Apollo, or
at least as a Prophet, and a man inspired by some deity. But, out of raillery,
you know the high esteem I have of your great capacity, and the reverence I
bear to all that you pronounce, ex cathedra; I use this word, because you many
times send me the advices of others, for your own. And though I very much prize
the wit and eloquence of our acquaintance, yet I do not acknowledge them for
Judges and Sovereigns. Since you are curious to know, who the father Teron is,
whom I believed, you had known better then my self, I shall tell you, that he
is a Poet of seventy five years old: Soon after the birth of the King, he
composed two Poems of little Verses, which they call Glyconiques; and the late
King, upon the favorable applause that was given them, commanded Molin to
translate them; they are entitled, Les Couronnes, and Les Dauphins, and were
printed at Paris, the Latin on one side, and the French e regione. These two
works are indeed very commendable, and I am assured they will find your
approbation. I have seen other things of his, wherein I observed an excellent
genius; but I know, that he is otherwise inclined to idleness, and a workman,
that of all the world, loves his own trade least. I had good store of other
news to requite you with, and but for this diversion, you had not been
discharged at so cheap a rate. Monsieur de Thou, who turned out of his way, to
do me the honor of a visit, had the patience to relate them four and twenty
hours together, which were so pleasing and agreeable, that they seemed to me
scarce four and twenty minutes. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 25 Feb. 1641.
LETTER VI.
SIR,
YOur diligence depends not upon that of the Post, nor upon considerations of
the season. Whatever his speed be, and the Sun approach or be more remote from
you, I always find my reckoning, and receive tidings from you at the end of
the week; for which, Sir, I return you a thousand remerciments, and for an
infinite number of other goodnesses, whereof I perceive manifest testimonies in
all your Letters. You had formerly declared your resentments of my losses; but
indeed they were such, as were not much apprehended by me; and unless you had
recalled them to my remembrance, by ma^ing your self a sufferer in them, they
had been utterly defaced out of my memory. I have, I thank God, but little
temptations to covetousness; and it is almost without trouble or study, that I
contemn that, which the greatest part of men adore. So that my virtue has
nothing of merit, and being not engaged in combat, cannot in reason expect the
reward of Crowns and triumphs. I bestow a thousand curses every day, upon that
person, that molests you, and extremely bemoan your poor Muses, that are scared
and inquieted, with litigious wranglings atd chicanry. Sunt hae quidem
litterae, sed litterae illitteratissimae, as our Pliny terms them. I understand
so little in those matters, that I could never recommend a process, without
committing a thousand incongruities, and mistaking one thing for another. As
for you, Sir, you will not be in hazard of such inconveniences, whose skill and
capacity is universal. But I wish you a more honest employment, and more
worthy of the nobleness of your wit. I know not, if the discourse that I send
you, will be happy enough for that purpose; but I hope, you will neither
disapprove the sense, nor the words and contrivance, and that you will not take
it ill, that I endeavor to oblige a man, that relates wonders of you in all
places where he comes; he may peradventure be one of those, that we shall make
good by our kindness and benefits. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 24 Feb. 1641.
LETTER VII.
SIR,
I Know not what it is in my writings, that deserves your applause and esteem;
but I know, that all that I write pleases you, and that you read my words with
eyes, capable of all the illusions of friendship. She is the fair and innocent
inchantresse, that gives me this power over you; it is her Magic, that renders
me the only person in the world, that can overruled your judgment. And hence
it is, that that person, that is able to observe blackness in the Milky way,
and imparity even in the body of light, will take no notice of my spots and
blemishes. Since it is your pleasure to make me happy, it is not fitting I be
too curious, in examining the causes of my good fortune, or seek to enlarge the
meannesse of my worth, which would upbraid you, with the bad foundation of your
love. Rationem faelicitatis nemo reddit. But what appearance is there, that
without any design or intention, I should have uttered a line, which were
worthy of your Hero. He deserves such commendations, as are carefully chosen,
and not to be spoken of without study. You must be as solicitous of his glory,
as well as of that of his fathers; and your Trumpet would better befit him,
then our Reeds. Absit itaque ut tam illustrem materiam familiari dicendi genere
and extemporaneitate nostra violemus. The danger you tell me, our perfect
friend has been in, makes me tremble, and my imagination is hurt with all the
instruments of Surgery, and the cruel remedies you speak of, I wish him an
absolute recovery; and the Senate and people of Parnassus, who have so great
obligations to him, must wean for him, as well as for Princes, the lives of
gold and silk, whereof I have heard so frequent mention, and pray, as for their
true benefactor; De nostris annis tibi Jupiter augeat annos. I should be glad
to see the six verses of the Poet, Perewig'd with Icicles; and the Duel of the
Horatii and Curiatii, or any thing else that passes through your Territories. I
am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 1 March, 1641.
LET. VIII.
SIR,
YOur process continues too long, and your Muses are injuried, with the
delays of the Palais. Such a suit would have made me hate the world; and
though I am a man of peace, yet I should not dread a military expedition so
much, as the trouble of your cause. Nevertheless, your Philosophy will secure
you; and having both to combat with your interior resentments, and defend your
self against a visible adversary. Zeno will crown your moderation at the same
time, and Justinian adjudge you the victory. The Verses of the Poet with the
rattling beard, are such as you judge them, and accord with your opinion. The
conclusion of the Ode, to Monsieur de Bullion, is better then the beginning,
but the Amphitrite is quite contrary, and falling from its first height, is
only supported upon two bad legs; for it would be too severe to call it
monstrous, and to say of it, as of other divinities of the Sea, that, Definit
in piscem mulier formosa superne. The Wood is handsome, but not of perfect
beauty, in my judgment; and I see something beyond, whether the strength of the
Poet did not reach. The communicating of all these rarities, would deserve a
formal acknowledgment; but you have long ago commanded me, to say no more of
your favors, then that I received them. The first discourse that I sent you of
eloquence, shall be suddenly followed with a second, wherein I speak of the
critic Longinus, and of his Treatis^ (...), whereof the several parts deserve
consideration. It Is a subject wherewith I am much affected, and have great
inclination to it in my fancy, though I dare not pretend to the enjoyment of
that high Queen of souls.

Hanc qualem neque^ monstrare, and sentio tantum. Concerning the word, whereof
I desired your opinion; it is to deride me, to refer me to my self. Pronounce
upon it, I beseech you; for it is the Court that must give Law to the Village. I
am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 12 March, 1641.
LET. IX.
SIR,
YOu cannot imagine the indignation I have, against your persecutors, and the
pity I bear for poor virtue, when fraud draws her before the Tribunal of
Judges. There ought to be nothing for you, but Crowns and rewards, and so
eminent probity as yours, might even deserve to be respected by malice; but if
malice should do that it ought, it would be no longer such; the Woolves will
never be really reconciled with the Shepherds flock. And it is the order, or
rather the confusion of the things of this world, that there be Tyrants of all
degrees, grand, mean, and little; some to afflict the public, and others for
the torment and scourge of particular persons. I just now writ to Monsieur de
la Nauue, not as I ought, but as I was able, in the midst of my distempers. I
conjure him both by alliance and friendship, to take charge of your interests
as of my life; and I assure my self, you will find him not indifferent in the
business. But how am I mistaken, in imagining, that any body will consider me,
when the proposal is touching your service? Your name is cherished and
respected of all the earth, and Monsieur de la Nauue, who is a man perfectly
honest, will look only upon you, in the good justice he will do you. I have
endured a fit of more then thirty hours, and all the respite that I can obtain
from my anguishes, is only enough to entreat you to believe, that I am, as of
old,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 22 March, 1641.
LET. X.
SIR,
I Perceive I must contest no longer with you, about the worth of my words;
they shall be rated at what value you put upon them, and be accounted handsome,
since they please you. I would only desire, they were as strong, as by your
favor they are graceful, and that I had the faculty of healing with my words,
as well as, in your belief, I have that of praising; I would not deny so easy
remedies at this time, but prepare them with all the skill, whereof I am
capable, to the end they might operate more effectually, against the feavour of
your friend. It should also be permitted, to make experience in my own person,
and the Physician undertake the cure of himself: But there is no medecin, for
such old and obstinate maladies as mine; it is here, that the rhetoric of
Demosthenes, yea and the magic of Zoroaster, would manifest the weakness and
impotency of their Art. There will certainly come better times then these, and
we shall be well one day, at least at the day of the Resurrection, cum mortale
hoc nostrum induet immortalitatem, and in gloria resurgemus, by the grace and
mercy of our Lord. I think I sent you my opinion, of the Verses of the Lyrick
Madelenet; for the others of raillerie, whereof you speak, I have no curiosity
to see them. The raillery of this man, always seemed to me so cold and flat,
that it was not possible for me to laugh at it; and if I were in the place
where you are, and a necessity laid upon me to commend them, it is so hard for
me to go against my knowledge, that I should rather die at that instant. I am
astonished at what I hear, of Doctor Palemon; I believed that he lived only in
spirit, and that he was so persuaded of the immortality of the soul, whereof he
speaks so much, that he held no longer commerce with his senses: But I
perceive, he is one of those hypocritical Philosophers, who contented
themselves with discoursing of virtue, and never took further pains to follow
it. It may please God to give him better thoughts one day, and possibly he has
permitted the publication of the secret of this brave man, to the end he may
hereafter make him a great Saint. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 4 April, 1641.
LETTER XI.
SIR,
TO lose nothing in this bad age, it is the only security to possess nothing,
If you have suffered great losses, it is because you had great riches; Magnae
opes, amicissime Capellane, magnae jacturae locum faciunt. Quid vero inter opes
majus and praestantius veris and bonae fidei amicis? I will believe the person
you lament, worthy of your tears; and although his merit be sufficiently
problematicall in the judgment of the people: Yet I know the people is but a
bad esteemer of worth, and their aversion is many times, as unjust as their
love. But however it be, the King of Sweden is dead, and so is the Duke of
Weymar? and if a man outlive War and Combats, he comes at last to dye in
Feasts and Triumphs. Let us look upon all men as lost, or ready to be so, and
account every hour of our life for Climactericall. Let us expect bad news by
each Post, and conclude, that the only means to avoid being afflicted, is to
be none of this world. In effect, Sir, we must either see others perish, or
perish our selves; and therefore, what unreasonable delicateness is it, to be
in love with life, and not to be able to endure the appendances that accompany
it? and what profit is it to bewail an evil, whereunto all the world cannot
afford a remedy? I have long since left the Stoics their insensibility; yet am
not in the contrary extreme. I remember a Rhyme rhat begins thus, Thy tender
pity makes me pity thee, etc. and flouts the good nature of one of our
friends. As I do not approve the heart of steel of Zeno, and his eyes of
Pumice; so neither can I commend those that were turned into fountains, in the
Regions of Metamorphoses, or at least became blear-eyed all the rest of their
lives. This softness cannot befoll a soul of that firm constitution as yours;
so that you will not fail to maintain your place between the two extremes,
where there is honest and assured contentment. Your Predecessor, Monsieur de
Malherbe, will tell you, that King Priam, King Francis, and himself, were
comforted; and that it is permitted to every one to do the like. It Is very
true as you tell me, that the Princes do at length become weary of the War,
and that the Caducei of my Lords the Nuntio's, will have the virtue to separate
the Combatants, who are so exasperated and cruelly animated against one
another. If his Holiness be the Author of this great good, he will receive as
many benedictions as he bestows, and the Orator Jean: Jaques, shall be
commissioned to make him an ample Remerciment in the name of all Christendom. I
am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 20 April, 1641.
LET. XII.
SIR,
ACcording to your custom, you set a value upon all that I write, and find a
perfection in things that scarce reach a m^diocrity. It Is friendship that
disguises objects to you, and makes you mistake appeearances for truth. I was
indisposed when I writ to Monsieur de la Nauue; and if there were any thing in
my Letter that deserves your esteem, it ought to be rather ascribed to fortune,
then to me, who contributed no more then a good intention. This, indeed is so
pure, that I will not deny but it merits your allowance; and you must, at
least, consider it as an honest and generous inability, which having nothing
but desires to give, will never be accused of sparing them. As for the praises
which are burdensome to your modesty, I besceech you to believe, that they are
neither amplifications, nor common places. I am so thoroughly persuaded of your
virtue, that when I render the like testimony of it, I imagine thar I am
holding up my hand, and swearing before a Judge. If the Demon of Socrates did
report you, all that passed in your absence, you would know, that I never speak
of you, but I am transported, and that in this I imitate the Sybills, who
delivered their predictions with fury. Concerning the other part of your
Letter, I declare unto you, that I will not undertake to plead the cause of the
accused; and that I neither justify nor condemn at the first sight. Yet I
know, that all the witnesses against him are not so faithful as I, and that
the greatest part of advices, are like Heroic Poets, who upon a small
foundation of truth, build a prodigious structure of Lies. How many wicked
minds, are there, that wish an eternity of the War, that are only fit to
break friendships, to hinder reconcilements, and to cherish and improve the
seeds of hatred. But the business must be further cleared, and our judgments
suspended till then. I know not what to say concerning Monsieur Conrart, but
only that old word, which I have repeated so often, I shall live and dye in my
ingratitude. He is excessivly obliging, and unless I have your assistance, to
acquit me from so many engagements, I confess I am insolent; and I yield him
up my words, which are the only goods of a poor Rhetorician. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 1 May, 1641.
LET. XIII.
SIR,
YOu remember what the Crow said of old upon the Capitol, Est been non potuit
dicere, dixit erit. She is in the same note at this day; and therefore let us
hope well for the future. Let us judge favorably of our affairs in Germany,
and not imagine, that the fortune of our Army is dead, with its first General;
at least, let us content our selves with present losses, and the miseries that
arive every hour. Calamities come fast enough, without being anticipated by our
fears; as it also continues to long, although we take no pains to preserve it
in our memories. I expect the book of Monsieur de la Chamber, with much zeal
and devotion, since we are now entered upon the holy week; without doubt, he has
made some new discoveries touching the Passions, for he long since designed
them an argument for his pen, and told me, he would treat of them, as a
Physician, and in another way then that of Aristotle. He has a wit piercing and
confident, and a style not unpleasing. When I was at Paris, he gave me a view
of a great store of his exeellent Merchandises. So that to do well, he needs
understand no more, then to make a good choice, wherein the goodness of his
judgment will secure him from error. But, I beseech you, who is the Author of
the French Verities, that did me the favor to send me his books? The same day
I received them, they were taken from me by a friend; so that having not yet
read them, I cannot tell you my opinion of their worth. In the mean time, be
pleased to let him know, that I am obliged to him for his present, and give him
all the thanks I am able. I am more troubled for the health of our dear
Monsieur, the Abbot of Bois-Robert, then for my pension. If by your credit and
his, it happen to be paid, this little succor will come conveniently, to
repair some breaches of the last year: But I ought to thank none but you and
him for it, since you will procure me a thing, which was not so much in my
thoughts as to ask it. I was formerly yours by abundance of titles, but I shall
moreover be now so, by that of your most humble Pensioner. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 12 May, 1641.
LET. XIV.
SIR,
SInce I every day receive new testimonies of your affection, I am obliged to
express my acknowledgments as often. Did I not readily embrace them, I should
be an enemy of mine own happiness. Your tender inclinations are the fountains,
from whence I continually draw comfort to my miseries. But the condition of
Monsieur de Feuguiere, renders him incapable of receiving any. I did not write
you such words, as that I consented with the people, in that which concerns his
reputation; for I could never favor the injustice that has been done him, by
some persons misinformed; yet I am glad, that I have given occasion for an
apology of a dozen lines. You defend his life more vigorously, then I related
you his death; and having most judiciously alleged the examples of many
illustrious unfortunate persons, it is infinite pleasure to see, how roughly you
deal with the Beast of many heads, and interest almost all persons of honesty
on your side, against her. Every drop of blood that remains in the veins of the
old Jesuit, is clear and sprightly, and even his declining is full of luster
and glory. But is it not strange, that the name you know of, should be as
essential in Verses, as those of the Saints in the Testaments, and that it
must be thrust into all compositions, whether good or bad, and to the purpose
or otherwise? I am confident, he will be the first, that will deride these
extravagances; and as he deserves infinite commendations, so he desires, that
the praises bestowed on him be not ridiculous and impertinent. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.

LETTER XV.
SIR,
I Have read your Letter of the two and twentieth of the last month, not only
with joy but profit, and have already provided those prospectives of your
invention, which I intend to use upon opportunity of time and place. It is
indeed sometimes good, to be a creature less reasonable; and too curious
providence gives us trouble, by adding the evils of our imagination, to those
which really afflict us. But, under your pardon, Sir, I do not believe you one
of those, that use to be sick by anticipation; and to what end were your
philosophical reason, which corrects common apprehension, unless it enabled
you to contemn all that, which others fear, hope, admire, etc. I have at last
received the excellent Book of Monsieur de la Chamber, and am now about the
middle of it; I could wish it were as great a volume, as Calepin, to give me a
more durable contentment. I protest to you, I never read any thing with greater
pleasure, or that affected me more sensibly. Some others have heretofore
furnished us with pieces of brokage, and disguised translations; but he
presents us with a true and perfect Original. And if all the parts of
Philosophy were made French in this manner, non esset cur Graeciae suos
Platones, Xenophontes, and Theophrastos invideremus. I know not how I came to
omit Aristotle here; whose acuteness I also observe in it, and his methodicall
style, so necessary to the inquiry and clearing of truth. In my opinion, the
Latin of Celsus is not more graceful, then his French; Imo vero tersam and
elegantem dictionem, ipsae gratiae videntur mihi iis manibus formasse quibus,
ut vos vos Poetae vultis. Dominae veneri ministrant. As for my self, I would
willingly say something to our Heroesse, upon the subject of the Bruti,
Scaevolae, Camilli, Fabritii, Scipiones, Catones, Caesares, and Mecaenates; but
this requires more cheerfulness, then I am owner of. And unless you entreat
your God of spirit and light, to dispell those clouds and sadnesses that
oppress my soul, all that is there will languish with more night and darkness,
then is imaginable in caves and dungeons. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 15 June, 1641.
LETTER XVI.
SIR,
IT seems, the great discourse has been displayed at Rambouillet Hostel, and
you had courage enough to read it, as well as Monsieur de Voiture patience to
attend it. This is indeed too much already, and I dare not believe the rest,
nor imagine, that I merited those acclamations you speak of. Those Ladies are
for the sublimity of eloquence, and cannot relish the meannesse of mine;
Demosthenes is a more agreeable Author to them, then I, and they have rather
applauded the Text then the Preacher. I have considered what you write me of
the ironical Doctor, and I shall one of these days know, An fit deploratae
salutis, aut ad meliorem frugem redire possit. In the mean time, I will
communicate to you, what I lately read of Florent Chrestien, who was almost of
our man's humor; Adeo ut adoloscentiae annos nondum egressus, Ronsardum ipsum
jam tum insigni laud florentem, mordaci and amarulento Poemate lacesseret;
quam aetatis intemperantiam summus ille vir, qua erat animi magnitudine, non
modo contempsit, verum etiam doctissimi adolescentis ingenium exosculatus, in
amicitiam illum avidissime recepit. The difference between them is, that this
has passed his fiftieth year, and his obloquie is a disease, and not youth;
nevertheless, it is possible he may be converted, and perhaps will translate
some of our pieces, or make us honorable amends in some other fashion; we
shall see the event. I heard a report, that the Lord Paul Fiesque is at Court,
and that he undertakes the affair of the Peace; If so, I shall hope good
success, for he is an Angel in negotiations, and not a man; and I believe, all
the world cannot afford another person so pliable, dextrous, and intelligent,
as he. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 14 June, 1641.
LETTER XVII.
SIR,
I Am of late become deaf to the bruit of applause, and insensible of all the
allurements of glory. Yet I have very quick resentments of friendship, and it
is that which makes somethings precious to me, which otherwise in themselves I
should look upon as indifferent. Therefore the praises of strangers do no
longer please me as formerly. I call them of strangers, with distinction from
yours, whereof I am never glutted, tam gratum est a te laudari. All the relish
that I find in the elogies of others, proceeds from the seasoning that you
give them. It Is not Monsieur de Thou that describes Florent Chrestien so
graphically, but one of his friends. Scevola nempe Sammarthanus in aureolo
Elogiorum libello, digno, me judice, omnium Bemborum and sadoletorum invidia.
But are you serious, when you speak of Ronsard, and give him the title of
Grand? or is it only out of modesty, and to oppose his greatness to your
tenuity? As for me, I esteem him not great, except in the sense of the old
proverb, Magnus liber, magnum malum; and I have declared as much in one of my
latin Letters, which you suffered to pass, without making any opposition.
Since the thing is done, there is no place left for denial; and Monsieur de
Malberbe, Monsieur de Grass, and your self, must come into the number of small
Poets, if he be allowed to pass for great. I dare not presume to give so much
trouble to Monsieur the Abbot of Bois Robert, who could not bear it, without
notable prejudice to his health. Oblige me therefore to tell him, when you see
him, that provided he recover, and God preserve me so dear a friend, I will no
more lament my particular unhappinesses, or those of the times. If he should
hereupon offer to make me a complement of two lines, I conjure you to restrain
him from it by violence, and do not suffer, that I become the occasion of a
second malady, which would add nothing to the assurance I have already of his
affection. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 1 July, 1641.
LETTER XVIII.
SIR,
SO long as you preach in this manner, I shall take great pleasure to be of
your parish; and you need not fear I will ever complain, that Monsieur Curat is
too tedious. All that you say is extremely handsome, and the little Astyanax
smiles, not only on his father Hector, when he is going to die by the hand of
Achilles, but also upon Ulysses his executioner, as he casts him headlong from
the Tower. Nor does the Swine make good cheer only in the tempest, whilst men
are at their prayers and vows; but at the same time the knife is put to his
throat, he knows not whether he be tickled or hurt. O free and natural
Philosophy! much less artificial and dissembled, then that of the Philosopher
Polemon! We profess one sort, as you say excellently, that was discovered for
the ruin of all others. Let us follow its maxims, and the doctrine of the
Gospel, and we shall have compassion of all Sects and Sectaries. I read with
joy that article of your Letter, wherein you speak of Monsieur the Abbot de la
Victoire, and am infinitely pleased with the renovation of that society. Nobile
certe par, sed utinam per Balzacium impar. Besides the affection I bear him,
there is scarce a Prelate in all our Hierarchy, of whom I set a higher value.
His ordinary communication is, in my opinion, beyond the meditated speeches of
most of our Gentlemen. Live happy, and pity the condition of your friend, who
am destitute of the enjoyment of either of you here, and cry uncessantly to the
Trees and Rocks, as heretofore, Frustra revocabere votis.

I am with all manner of respect,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac. 12 July, 1641.
LET. XIX.
SIR,
I Have told you a thousand times, and tell you this once more, that you
always discover reason in whatever place it is hidden. I know not what opinion
Cicero had of glory, in the books that he made; but I am confident, Praise is
worth neither more nor less, then as you rate it; you have set it at a just
price, and not only the rigor of Philosophy, but even Christian humility,
might dain to taste it of your preparation. I think, he on whom people cast
their eyes, for instructor to the Prince, is the same whom they desire to
employ, in the negotiation of the Peace. These thoughts do him no injury, and
the destination, that judges him worthy of so high and important affairs, ought
not to displease him, though he have no design to undertake them. My judgment
herein shall always conform to his. And be it, that he go to Collen, or lodge
in the Palace-Royall, or keep himself in his Closet, I will believe, he could
not possibly do better then he will chose to do. Monsieur de la Mothe ie Vayer,
has taught me many things, whereof I was ignorant, and confirmed me in some
that I knew before. There cannot be a work more rich and absolute then his, and
he has infinitely obliged me with his present. I beseech you to assure him, of
my acknowledgments for this favor, and preserve me in his good opinion. You
see, Sir, it is by you, that I entertain commerce with honest men; and I am
prized by them, only according to the esteem you make of me. But there can
nothing be added to my gratitude, for your goodness, and I am more perfectly
then any person in the world,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 25 July, 1641.
LETTER XX.
SIR,
YOu may write to me in haste, as long as you please, and bestow what
appellation you will upon the things, you do me the honor to send me. Divina
responsa, propositiones aeternae veritatis; and if there were any terms more
noble, I should employ them upon this occasion. It is certain, that a genius
and judgment, are the two essential parts of a Poet; and I rest satisfied,
with all that you have told me thereupon. But having submitted my self entirely
to your authority, you would have me a little content my reason. Permit me
therefore to read Ronsard again over, for upon the last reading, I thought him
rather the matter and beginning of a Poet, then one accomplished; and in the
fire wherewith his imagination was heated, there was much less of flame, then
smoke and foot. You know the fancy of the late Monsieur de Malherbe, that
blotted out a whole Volume with his own hand, and did not pardon one syllable;
I do not approve his rigor so universal. But if all the Sonnets, all the
Franciade, and all the Odes were lost, I think, I should not need much comfort
against my sorrow. I have written in Latin to Monsieur Silhon, what I
conceived both of the one and the other; I mean, of the Martyr and the Tyrant,
Ronsard and Malherbe. Be pleased for my sake, to read that part over again, and
send me your opinion of it, to the end I may know if mine be right, and I may
hold me to it. I am ravished with the second article of your Letter, and cannot
sufficiently commend the judgment, prudence, and magnanimity, which you
manifest in the Treaty, whereof I made the overture. I hope the success will
be happy, and that you will have no cause, either to reproach my credulity, or
repent the confidence you have put in me. God forbid, I should have a design
to deceive you; I have all the moral assurances that can be had, of the faith
of another. And if I were not certain, that I bestow a tried friend upon you, I
should not be so forward, to be the instrument of the new friendship, which I
propose you; if any evil ever come of it, Dii in me convertant. I am
passionately,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 20 August, 1641.
LET. XXI.
SIR,
I Am not very healthful, and yet you must know, that amidst my grief, I have
been guilty of an infidelity, (agnosce verba tua amicissime and elegantissime
Capellane) for I have burnt with another fire then yours; you will discover it
in the Letter I writ to Monsieur Menage, which is full of passion. Be pleased
to tell him, that I have answered him in the vulgar language, for the same
reason that Statius, being to speak of Lucan, durst not venture to do it in
heroic Verse: Ego, says he, non potui majorem tanti authoris habere
reverentiam, quam quod lauds ejus dicturus Hexametros meos timui. I feared as
much for my Latin, and did not think it worthy to be opposed, to that of his
excellent Letter; although in the Apostill, I forgot my self more then once,
and delivered both Prose and Verse in that Mistress of Tongues; but according
to my custom, more out of caprichio, then design. Since he is as earnestly
desirous, to see his name in my Letters, as Cicero was to see his, in the
Histories of Luceius, and borrowes his words, Ardeo cupiditate incredibili
nomen meum etc. to signify his intention; I beseech you to tell him, that I
love him so well, that though I abhor every thing that is called a Letter, I
will for his sake print a Volume; Et quidem brevi, ut primo quo que tempore
compos fiat voti non ambitiosissimi. You have no cause to wonder, that I am a
sworn confederate, of the excellent persons you speak of. Were it your
pleasure, I would side with my enemies, if I have any yet remaining. And how
can it be, that I should not esteem goddesses upon your recommendation, who am
ready at your instance, to compose Hymns upon the Harpuies. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 22 Aug. 1641.
LETTER XXII.
SIR,
YOu ever make the two hardest parts of the argument, and leave me only the
pains to draw out the consequence. Let this glorious liberty flourish, and let
us dethrone all Tyranny in the affairs of Philosophy. You speak admirably, that
our reason ought to yield obedience to nothing but reason, and that Authority
is a yoke, which Religion only has right to impose upon the judgments of men.
Upon these considerations, I shall take the freedom, to dissent sometimes from
the Paradoxes of Zeno, to debate the opinions of Aristotle, and to question the
maxims of Aristippus, especially when he speaks Latin, to a man that
understands it not. For the Letter of Monsieur -- which I send you, I had much
ado to arive at the end of it, it seemed longer to me then the Ecclesiastes,
the Proverbs, and the book of Wisdom; yea, then that stupendous volume,
wherein he treated of the Universe, and the properties of all Plants. Is it
possible, that a man should write Letters of supererogation, to another man
that he knows not? and that the same man should have an imagination, strong
enough to persuade himself, that he knows that man, and that he received
Letters from him, and the History of the Cardinal Bentivoglio, and communicated
his own with him. Without question, this is one of my Antipodes, and of a
contrary nature to the negligent person, that never writes Letters when
civility requires it, or his affairs urge it, or even necessity seems to
enforce it; I had almost slipped a great word, nor when Monsieur Chapelain
appoints it, which is more powerful with me, then necessity it self. But you
say nothing of Monsieur l'Huilier, who is an ancient Roman disguised, and makes
Elogies, of near resemblance with those of Ovid; I would gladly see them at the
end of the life of his friend, Monsieur du Peiresk, with all the pomp and
gallantry of the Impression. I had delivered your three Italian Books to
Monsieur Girard, if he had taken my house in his passage, according to his
promise: But I hear, he was necessitated by his occasions, to go another way.
He will not be backward, to enjoy the honor of your company, and verify all
that I have said or written of him, at several times. I have added five or six
Verses to the last Latin Letter, which I writ to Monsieur Maynard, wherein you
will perceive, that I spend all my gall against the old Court of Rome, to the
end I may take away all ambiguity and equivocation. Scis enim iis temporibus
Poetae objectum esse, quod Agamemnoni maledixisset. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac 25. Aug. 1641.
LET. XXIII.
SIR,
THe pains which I endure, make my complaints perpetual; there is nothing of
the Comedian in the relation I make you of them; and there passes not a day,
but I have cause to exclaim against Physic, which affords me no redress. You
may judge from hence, if those that send me kind Letters, have reason to
require answers from me in the same strain; and if the complement which I sent
you, for the great -- is not more then he ought to expect, considering his
quality, and my distempers. But if he be distasted at it, the repose and
silence I shall enjoy, will comfort me, for the loss of a talkative and
ambitious friendship. Nevertheless, I will not yet condemn him; and its
possible, he may become one of your converts, for there is scarce any that
approaches you, but is made an honester man by it. I am obliged to Monsieur the
Counselor of Tholouze, for his Latin traduction. You may be assured by that,
of the richness of your Verse, since he returns you nothing but gold for them,
and four words for one. I never heard before of that learned Dutch Lady, and I
confess, I am surprised with her Epigram: There is in it both sense and Latin,
and the Roman Sulpitia could not have made a better, upon the equivocall
translation of Astrea. As for her Hebrew, I humbly kiss her hands. But is it
also true, that Madam -- undertakes to play the Rabbin, and that she studies
the Talmud, instead of saying her Oraisons? Truly this is excellent, and she
will triumph over the Italian and Spanish of other Ladies. The History of
Monsieur Grotius will be handsome unquestionably, and his Politics cannot be
bad. I have seen a book of his composing, de Antiquitate Reip. Batavicae, after
which I held him capable of all things. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 30 Aug. 1641.
LETTER XXIV.
SIR,
YOu receive this from the Monsieur Girard, whom I so often promised you, and
who came on purpose to Balzac to have his pasport, being not willing, as he
said, to present himself before you, without one of my Letters. I will not here
repeat his, because I do not distrust your memory; nor tell you any thing new
of him, having left him in perfect health, the last time I saw him. I will
only tell you, that he seems to me deserving of your friendship, and that in
this transaction, I give you not much less then I demand of you. Good men are
so rare, that sometimes it is difficult to find half a one in a whole Nation. I
see a great deal of complacency and politenesse on every side, but I can scarce
discover any strength or solidity. Notwithstanding, this person is no rough
Diamond, he has been cut with so much art, and by the hands of so great a
Master, who looks upon him, as one of his principal pieces of workmanship,
that you cannot but acknowledge, the fashion well worthy of the matter. If you
had not believed me upon my word, I could have produced you several great
witnesses, and alleged St. Augustine, Aristotle, and the Count Balthazar; that
is, in the vulgar tongue, Monsieur de Lysieux, Monsieur Silhon, and Monsieur de
Voiture. After all this, your approbation is necessary, without which, the
deposition of a Father of the Church, the sovereign reason of the Lycoeum, and
the extreme delicacy of the Court, are not sufficient confirmations of an
honest man. His dear brother is my daily comforter, and I cannot express to
you the advantage that I receive, from his ingenious amity. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 6 September. 1641.
LET. XXV.
SIR,
MAy I believe, that my melancholy is prophetical, and that my Grace speaks
Greek; that my praises made the iron face of the Epicure Colotes blush, and
that my Letters received the applauses of a company, that assembles twice a
day, to hiss at all the rest of France? Since you have solemnly affirmed it,
there is no room for incredulity; and I dare not suspect the least part of
untruth, where your credit is concerned. But these fine things please me no
further, then you approve them. It is certain, they had their birth in pain and
sorrow, amongst complaints and sad faces. In that miserable condition, from
which I am but seldom free, I do not fail of comfort, as often as I contemplate
your Idea, and think of your affection, and that of Monsieur de Voiture. Be
pleased to assure him, Sir, of the vehemence and constancy of my passion, and
that I esteem him in all Languages that he speaks, and that my note-books are
full of the excellent things, which he has told me. I must acknowledge, that
the thanks you intend to render in person, to Monsieur Menage, is a favor
suitable to your goodness, which is so industrious, in seeking new ways and
manners to oblige me. I shall make good my engagement, you need not scruple it.
But I must crave your assistance, to render the volume more uniform, and the
return of some of my Letters in your hands, which may be communicated to the
public, without profaning our mysteries. As I apprehend, you ought to content
the passion of Monsieur the Ambassador, who desires your Pucelle, too
violently to be refused; she will not be in danger of her honor, with so
virtuous a person; and what means have you to resist that, furtim, clam,
precario, dummodo potiar. I am eternally,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 16 September. 1641.
LETTER XXVI.
SIR,
I Am much obliged to you for those things, for which, according to your
custom, you make excuses. After an entertainment, that might befit Anthony and
Cleopatra, you are ashamed of your good cheer. As for me, it gave infinite
contentment; and could I do it honestly, and without incivility, I would
conjure you, to persecute and annoy me always in that manner. The royalty of
reason could not be more stoutly maintained, against the usurpation of
authority. And notwithstanding your endeavor, to hide and repress the power
and vigor of your eloquence, yet there breaks from you such rays and
evidences of it, as did of courage and manhood from Achilles, when disguised in
the habit of a virgin. Thus we repay the censures, which the vulgar pass upon
us; and neither the respect of number, nor the continued series of Ages, nor
the good fortune of Sects and Schools, are able to misguide us in our
sentence. That which you say of the sovereignty of Reason, and the seat of her
Empire, of her dresses and attendants, and the Grotto whither she retires, etc.
What is all this, Sir, but to proclaim a truth magnificently, and to attire
your Queen with purple and cloth of gold. But to pass from the Throne of this
Queen, to her Chariot of Triumph; that is, from your Prose to your Verse,
wherein your Virgin transcends the splendor and glory, of all conquerours of
the other sex, and is no less beholding to your Pen, than her own Sword. In
requital of your French, I have sent you some Latin numbers, which your Letter
told me you desired; but instead of six Verses, which I formerly mentioned, you
may perceive them multiplied to thirty. Perhaps they will please such as know
the Court of Rome, as you do, and have seen the ambitious poverty of its
Courtiers, where there is choice of Cavaliers of five or six sorts for
attendants, at the rate of a Julio a piece by the day; with which miserable
pittance, they quiet their eager appetites. But, as I conjecture, that which
will least displease you, is my Bacchus Laborans, who does no longer remember
that he was once a conqueror, and the three goddesses that accompany him. One,
half-learn'd, and that never heard but of Priapus, or at most of Vertumnus,
will happily wonder to see Venus in the place, that he thinks belongs to them;
but not you, Sir, who have shown me, Hortos olim tutelae Veneris assignatos,
Plauto and Plinio testibus: and meministi etiam illud Naevii.

Coquus edit Neptunum and Venerem and Cererem. Pisces nempe, olera, and panem.
I forbear to speak any thing of Neptune, because we are more then twenty
leagues distant from the Sea. The tongue of du Moustier has already discharged
all its venom against me, and he has nothing now to do, but to enjoy the
fruits of his old malice. But you remember, Sir, the place that designs him;
for methinks I speak innocently, that the pourtrait of Phylarque was drawn, by
the Painter of Heroes and Heroesses, since he styles himself amongst other
titles, the Painter of the King and Queen. If these words are injurious, I have
no understanding in quarrels or injuries. And I would ask of Socrates himself,
what is calmesse and moderation, if this be not wholly such. He that termed him
heretofore an Artificer, and his Closet a Shop, used him more rudely. But as he
made himself pleasant in appearance, with his resentments of that reproach, so
shall I do really with his despair. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 20 October. 1641.
LETTER XXVII.
SIR,
YOu see, I do not promise true Diamonds, with design of putting falls upon
you; and that I need not fear the threats of that sentence, so often thundered
out by Petrus Valens, in the Chair of Boncour; Qualem commendes etiam atque
etiam aspice, ne mox
Incutiant aliena tibi peccata pudorem.


Nevertheless, Sir, I must assure you, that the glory of my judgment is not so
dear to me, as that of my friend; and that I affect Monsieur Girard more then
you believe, upon his own peculiar merit, rather then the recommendation of
others. He is a person of extraordinary value, and you will understand him
further, in the progress of your commerce. But I am glad of the happy meeting
of Monsieur l'Huilier, in that first conference, whose name rejoices me, in
what place soever of your Letters I meet it. As for the fat person, I will
believe, that he spoke to you in earnest, and without fiction; and therefore
you may please to tell him, that he shall be more then once in the Volume, that
I am purposely composing for Monsieur Menage; He shall likewise have a room in
my Latin, and in my Discourses: And if he loves me only for putting him in
print, I think this will be enough to satisfy his vanity, and by consequence
to redouble his affection. I could wish also, that you would do me the favor
to certify Messieurs de Maire, with the help of some kind of Trunk, (for I
dare not request this trouble so frequently) that I honor and esteem them
infinitely. They are persons that have given me high testimonies of their
friendship, and from whom I have received a thousand civilities. And you know,
that the Muses, are the daughters of Jupiter, etc. and that, A brave and
generous virtue makes them hate,
Above all other faults, to be ingrate.


He, of the two brothers that is styled the Cavalier, is a Poet, and
understands Latin, in the subtlety and delicacy of it. I remember the ingenious
observations he made, upon many passages in the Poets, which I had never
considered. I importune you, Sir, to love, not a little, as mild natures do,
but violently, and with all your power,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 20 October. 1641.
LET. XXVIII.
SIR,
BY the last Post, I received the discourse and the Verses, you were pleased to
send me; I have a great obligation to you for them, but yet a greater, for four
lines I read in your Letter, then for all besides in the Packet. You were
scrupulous, of letting it come into my hands, and there was a great combat
hereupon, between your inclination, and your engagement. These words, Sir, are
infinitely obliging, although they should not be true; but being most certainly
so, they affect me very sensibly, and I declare unto you, that I am
sufficiently comforted for all my afflictions, by the preference that you give
me above all the world, in the honor of your friendship. That which the famous
Drinker told you, has freed me from my jealousy and unquiet; for as affection
is ingenious to presage ill, and ever concludes to the worst, I did already
apprehend something more fatal, then a rheum. I was in fear, that our friend
was gone a longer voyage then he promised; or, if you please, that I speak
less vulgarly, I misdoubted, that Menander, the maker of Epigrams, was gone to
find Menander the writer of Comedies; I mean only of his death, for God
forbid that I should assign him the same place of residence in the other life.
The ninteenth of this month is past, and four day would have brought him from
his own house to Balzac This is a cause of new trouble, unless he come
speedily, or make me understand the reason of his delay. The inclemency of the
season is an excuse too allowable to detain him. And though I passionately
desire to see him, yet I know not, if I ought to wish a person so dear to me,
exposed unto all the injuries of an intemperate air, and that at the age of
near sixty years: he should slight the menaces of the god Perewig'd with
Icycles, and Winter with his rattling beard, which another Poet calls, The god
of old age. My Stationer lately sent me a Treatise of Monsieur de Priesac,
wherein I have observed a great number of rarities. Whatever he delivers of his
own invention, is always good; and he appropriates so handsomely, that which
he borrowes from antiquity, that it is hard to distinguish the foreign from the
native. His style is otherwise noble, and he has nothing of the barbarity of
our Provinces. But besides all this, it must be confessed, that he improves his
art to admiration, and that as often as he has occasion to use the Civil Law,
he does it in such manner, that the most dry and thorny pieces, become
flourishing and glorious in his hands, and that even they read him with
delight; qui voluptatis tantum causa legunt, and have gust for nothing but
Romances. As soon as you meet him, I beseech you assure him of my humble
service; and moreover, if you please, that my esteem and my affection are two
separate things; and it is not for love of him, that I commend the Book of his
that was sent me. I should be glad to see the oratoriall Prose, of Monsieur de
St. Blancet; he has both wit and confidence, and si peccat, imitatione tantum
peccat. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 29 November. 1641.
LETTER XXIX.
SIR,
YOu never make any excursions, but you perform the most graceful and exact
courses in the world; or, to speak better in your own figure, you never preach,
without the extreme edification of your auditors. Non apta tantum ad
persuadendum dicis, verum omnino persuades, neque usquam a te nisi melior and
doctior, etc. If Totila were here, I would proceed further, and after my
fashion, examine your reason, and all the anti-reasons that counterfeit and act
it. But with fortune for you and your reason, I employ my own bad hand, which
is soon weary of my service. You are, Sir, to me, not only in the place of
Augustus and Mecaenas, but also of Agrippa, Asinius Pollio, Messala Corvinus,
and all the rest of that gallant and learned Court. Therefore if you approve my
compositions, that approbation alone does Crown me; and I shall say to you, as
to one of those great ones, Quod fi me Latiis vatibus inseres, Sublimi feriam
sydera vertice. Quam vero, ut de Latiis taceam, inepti sunt populares nostri?
And how groundless are the suspicions of -- when he is jealous of your
enterprises, and imagines himself worthy of your envy. I have no remembrance of
the Letter, out of which he takes occasion of such regret. But this is an
affair of great importance, both in respect of himself, and his Antagonist.
There are more opinionated fools, in the little houses, besides these
discoverers of plots and designs. Nevertheless, since we are obliged to give
every one as much satisfaction, as we are able; if, I say, the people talk so,
or the report runs, instead of speaking affirmatively, you may believe it a
sufficient qualifying, to satisfy the suspicious. For, as you know, the
greatest part of reports are not free from falsehood, and many things are told
me every day, that are not true. I am,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 24 November. 1641.
LETTER XXX.
SIR,
MY friendship is ever inconsiderable, and although it were not troublesome,
yet it is so barren and unprofitable, that it cannot be esteemed of any value,
but by one that is wholly dis-interessed from it. But as for yours, how
infinitely precious is it! I dare not engage my self into a matter, so vast and
spacious; and it suffices me to tell you; as I am wont, that it is the only
joy of my life, and all the delight of my soul. So that although I move not out
of my own jurisdiction, and am forced to deliberate concerning the journey of a
league, I shall become man enough, to creep as far as Paris, for the only
desire I have to see you; where I will appear on a sudden in your chamber; and
break out of the cloud with these words, Coram quem diligis adsum, with a
design too of continuing some time with you; but absolutely incognito, and
without discovering my self to any other whatsoever. Then it shall be, that we
will survey all the graces and beauties of the Virgin, to our wish; and I will
give him cause that shall write your life, to inform posterity, that a poor
Paralytick went from the River of Charenta, on purpose to hear the melody of
the Swan of Seine. Is it not true, Sir, that the History of the Man of Calis,
is not very excellent? And do not you believe, that I have more esteem and
passion for you, then he had for Livy. He that I termed the virtuous man,
appeared such to me, the day that I gave him that title; but another time, I
shall possibly call him by another name, because he may appear in another
shape, or I look upon him with other eyes. So it is, that I will not warrant my
courtesies, or undertake to make good any thing, except what I say of you. Non
enim hic prolixus laudator, sed juratus testis Balzacius est. The diverse
employments that Monsieur Girard has for his Master, are without doubt nothing,
but the jealous and treacherous persons, of whom you complain, and who have
detained him from giving you a second visit. His brother, to whom, with your
consent, I show all your Letters, has not failed to represent him your
discontentments, and the diffidence which you have taken as unjustly against
your self, as you express it agreeably and with applause. The rigor of the
weather hinders me from saying more to you at this time; for this winter kills
me, and I am ready to choose my habitation in the fire. I call it not only
rough and troublesome, but cruel, unmercifull, Scythian, Swedish, and
Norwegian: If it continues thus, I shall be constrained to take my leave of
you, till the mid spring of the next year. I am passionately,

SIR, Your, etc.
Balzac, 28 December. 1641.
The End of the Sixth Book.
FINIS.

